When the factory closed in 2014, was the area bought by an investor, who will use the buildings to create an international culture city with museums, theatres, apartments etc.
The international department conducts its classes in English, the first to be established in the Jutland peninsula, but it does have department which educates in Danish, like the public schools in Denmark.
Towards the end of the 19th century there was however an upturn.
It is Aalborg's most ambitious construction project in recent years.
More recently, the actor and script-writer Preben Kaas (1930–1981), who was born in Aalborg, starred in over 50 Danish films.
After the original tower was destroyed by fire in 1663, the striking new Baroque tower, based on that of an earlier Copenhagen city hall, was completed in 1779.
Employing 2,600 people, in December 2010 it was acquired by the Swedish Alfa Laval, also a specialist in the area.
It forms part of the E45, stretching from Karesuando, Sweden, to Gela, Italy.
Built mainly of sandstone in 1616, it also has a half-timbered section.
The original Church of Our Lady from the early 12th century was pulled down after the Reformation because it was old and unstable, but the 12th-century tower and the original portal with sculpted decorations can still be seen.
Considered a masterpiece of Danish factory design, it is now a Danish National Heritage site.
The church has 16th-century frescoes and an intricately carved early Baroque altarpiece from 1689 created by Lauridtz Jensen.
It features relatively unknown upcoming pop, rock and hip-hop artists.
Nibe, with a harbour on the Limfjord, is  to the southwest, past the village of Frejlev.
The company is the world's largest akvavit producer and exporter.
In the mid-19th-century, Aalborg was overtaken by Aarhus as the largest city in Jutland.
Aalborg is North Jutland's major industrial and commercial centre, exporting grain, cement, and spirits.
The Aalborg area is one of three in Denmark where chalk deposits are found (the others being Møns Klint and Stevns).
In Erik Pontoppidan's ''Danske Atlas'' (Danish Atlas) it was described as "after Copenhagen, the best and most prosperous market town in Denmark".
Established in 2001 and 2011, respectively, they both play their games in the Gigantium.
The North Jutland Historical Museum conducted a series of archaeological excavations in the 1950s at Lindholm Høje, revealing ancient burial sites.
First privately owned, the theatre is now controlled and owned by the Danish Ministry of Culture.
As of September 2013, 11 of the council seats are held by the Social Democratic Party, nine by Venstre, three by the Socialist People's Party, two by the Danish People's Party, and two by the Conservative People's Party, while three members are professed independents.
The area close to the waterfront is low-lying, with an elevation averaging about , but there are many hills in and around city, some reaching over .
82 Squadron RAF were launched against the Luftwaffe airfield during one of the most disastrous Royal Air Force raids of the war.
It was used as a dumping ground in the 1920s before being cleaned up and made into a recreational area in the 1930s and 1940s.
During the 1990s, the street was infamously a 'hang out' of two biker gangs who were at war for some years all over Scandinavia.
Aalborg Portland run by F.L.
Aalborg Tennisklub is located along the Kastetvej road in the centre of Aalborg.
Among the city's many sporting figures, Peter Gade (born 1976) stands out as one of the world's most successful badminton players.
Aalborg Airport, officially opened in 1938 because of the success of the cement industry, had in fact operated flights to Copenhagen since 1936.
On the cultural side, Jørn Utzon (1918–2008), designer of the Sydney Opera House, grew up in Aalborg; the iconic Utzon Center which he inspired now serves as a museum for his architectural designs and offers courses of study based on his approach.
Mobile and wireless communications industries have grown substantially since the 1990s, as has rotor production for wind turbines.
The harbour facilities were also improved, making Aalborg Denmark's second port.
Aalborg's old city hall in Gammeltorv, in service until 1912, was built in 1762.
Aalborghus Castle (''Aalborghus Slot'') is a half-timbered building with red-painted woodwork and whitewashed wall panels.
Aalborgtårnet is a tripod tower erected in 1933 with a restaurant on the top.
In 1999 Aalborg was for the first time one of the four host ports in The Tall Ships Race (then Cutty Sark Tall Ships Race) of that year.
Like Østre Anlæg, it once served as a waste site with landfill, and a housing estate was built on its northeastern side.
Its tower is crowned by an imposing spire.
Today it is the world's largest supplier of white cement, which it exports around the globe.
Aalborg Airport is just  northwest of the city centre, and the E45, a European route from Karesuando, Sweden, to Gela, Italy, passes through Aalborg.
In Valdemar's Danish Census Book from 1231 it was called ''Aleburgh'', possibly meaning "the fort by the stream" as  in Old Norse ''all'' meant a stream or current and ''bur'' or ''burgh'' a fort or a castle.
The park is also used by the Nordjysk Windsurfing Club and has a six-hole golf course.
The northern section is in Reberbanegade, which is in the western part of the city centre.
By 1845, there were 7,477 inhabitants, increasing to 10,069 by 1860.
Among them are Kildeparken, which hosts the annual Aalborg Carnival, Mølleparken, which contains a pond, statues, an outdoor exercise facility, and a 2.5 kilometre (1.6&nbsp;mi) jogging trail (within the trail lies the ''Lysløjpen'', a 45 metre 148&nbsp;ft gradient), Sohngårdsholmpark, a wooded area containing trails for both walking/jogging and biking and a six-hole golf course (free to the public), the Aalborg Open Air Swimming Pool, also free to the public, Bundgårdsparken, and Lindholm Strandpark.
Despite its industrial background and the factories along its waterfront, the city has gained popularity for tourism in recent years, offering a wide variety of attractions and historic buildings in addition to its museums, churches and parks.
On 11 September 1977, Aalbord hosted the Final of the Long Track World Championship for Motorcycle speedway.
Popular for its cafés and restaurants during the day, it is even busier at night with its clubs, discos and bars.
The city's main train station, Aalborg Railway Station, is on John F. Kennedys Plads.
Aalborg has a number of additional civic parks and recreational facilities.
Its prosperity increased when the merchant- and trade association Guds Legems Laug was established in 1481, facilitating trade with the Hanseatic League,
Designed in the Late Baroque style, the building with its black-glazed tile roof consists of two storeys and a cellar.
From the 1550s to the 1640s, as a result of increased foreign trade, Aalborg enjoyed great prosperity, second only to that of Copenhagen.
Aalborg is  north of Aarhus,  north of Randers, and  southwest of Frederikshavn.
Aalborg Municipality has Denmark's second highest revenue from tourism and is the only municipality in the north of Denmark where overnight stays are increasing.
In 1929 it moved to Sohngaardsholm, but 30 years later the course had to again move because of developments with the university.
Skipper Clement International School is a private school for children between 6 and 16.
ANR (also Aalborg Nærradio and Alle Nordjyders Radio) is a local radio station operated by Nordjyske Medier, owner of ''Nordjyske Stiftstidende''.
Rugby in Aalborg is represented by Aalborg RK ''Lynet'' (Lightning), established in 1964.
Despite the difficulties it experienced over the centuries, the city began to prosper once again towards the end of the 19th century when a bridge was built over Limfjord and the railway arrived.
By the 1930s, Aalborg was being promoted as "Denmark's new centre for industry and workers".
The association, Platform4, a non-profit user-driven project-oriented venue that experiments with technology (electronics) in combination with artistic genres is now located in the park.
Its efforts are focused on four areas: energy and environment, information technology, health support systems and "Arctic business".
Held for three days in the beginning of June, it annually attracts more than 200,000 people and 1200 horses.
The park is once again open to the public as a leisure facility but without rides and attractions.
Jomfru Ane Gade (literally Virgin Anne's Street) is one of the most famous streets in Aalborg if not in Denmark.
When the park closed in 2010, it was home to 17 attractions.
The pedestrian hubs of Nytorv Square and John F. Kennedy Square in the central city area are also part of the cityscape.
The Aalborg Defence and Garrison Museum documents Danish defences during the Second World War as well as the history of Aaborg's garrison since 1779.
In 2005, still owned by the founding family, it was sold to an entrepreneur who resold it to the city the following year.
The tall sculptural roofs of the auditorium and the boat-hall, both on the harbour front, and the library facing the park area and the city are set off by the lower roofs of the exhibition and workshop areas inside the complex.
In 1554 Aalborg was made a diocese and, after consideration, St Budolfi Church was made the seat of the Bishop of Aalborg.
The present course to the southwest of Aalborg was designed in 1968 by Graham Lockey and Commander John Harris as a 9-hole course, later expanded to 18 holes in 1976 and 27 in 2006.
In 2010 the club hosted the European Girls Team Golf Championships.
The tower itself is  high; but as it stands on the top of the Skovbakken hill, it reaches a total height of  above sea level, providing a view over the sound and the city.
The  Østre Anlæg park is one of the oldest in Aalborg, visited by up to 175,000 people a year.
Two additional private harbours serve the cement factory, Aalborg Portland A/S, and the power station, Vattenfall A/S.
Aalborg is the seat of a bishop within the Lutheran State Church of Denmark.
The waterfront to the northeast of the centre is being transformed from a harbour into a recreational area with the Utzon Center and Musikkens Hus.
When it was built, the residence with its integrated warehouse was on the Østerå, an inlet from the sound with access for barges.
With about 4,500 students a year and 700 employees, Tech College Aalborg offers a wide spectrum of vocational training and runs Aalborg Tekniske Gymnasium.
Sankt Jørgens Kirkegård (St George's Cemetery) was on the corner of Hasserisgade and Kirkegårdsgade.
In 1995 it merged with Esbjerg Engineering College.
The Aalborg Carnival, held at the end of May, is one of the largest festivals in Scandinavia, attracting some 100,000 people annually.
It is now known as Aalborgs Almen Kirkegård (meaning "common cemetery") and contains the graves of many of the city's most notable citizens.
By road Aalborg is  southwest of Frederikshavn, and  north of Aarhus.
Aalborg was the largest city in Jutland until it was surpassed by Aarhus in the mid-19th century.
It was later known as ''Aalborg Stiftstidende'' (until 1999).
It has sought to develop what is known as "contextual knowledge", a form of problem-based learning based around the project work conducted by students, rather than the curriculum focusing on traditional academic disciplines.
'''Aalborg''' (), also spelled '''Ålborg''', is an industrial and university city in the North of Jutland, Denmark.
Recently, the city has reopened the park to volunteers who wish to return it to operating status.
It has about 75 stores, including a large Bilka supermarket.
The KUNSTEN Museum of Modern Art Aalborg was built from 1958 to 1972; the collection consists of around 1,500 art objects, including paintings, sculptures and other media.
A restaurant in the vicinity was established in 1918 but rebuilt in 1946 following a fire.
The council is mandated to hold a minimum of two meetings per month, with meetings of a public forum format.
It was converted into a hotel in 1853, and in 2011 had 210 rooms, furnished with dark oak.
In the Middle Ages, royal trading privileges, a natural harbour and a thriving herring fishing industry contributed to the town's growth.
In the 1950s, the castle was converted into administrative offices.
Siemens Wind Power has rotor-blade production and testing facilities in Aaborg.
The largest quarry is at Rørdal in Øster Sundby ( to the east of the city centre), while Vokslev ( to the west) has also provided chalk.
In January 2011, there were some 9,200 enterprises in Aalborg, employing around 109,000 people or approximately 35% of the workforce of the Northern Region.
In 2012, 3,000 new students started at the university.
By 1930, the population had grown to 59,091, although the figure was boosted by the merging of Nørre Tranders, Rørdal Fabriksby, Øster Sundby and Øster Uttrup into Aalborg.
Able to draw on the chalk deposits from Rørdal to the east of the city, it rapidly became a major cement producer.
The centre consists of several individual buildings creating a special place around a courtyard on a platform.
Aalborg University Hospital, the largest in the north of Jutland, was founded in 1881.
The cathedral of this bishopric is the Budolfi Church, originally built no later than 1132 by Viborg's Bishop Eskil.
Aalborg has the jazz club Jazzclub Satchmo and an annual jazz and blues festival (''Den Blå Festival''), also known as the Mini New Orleans Festival.
Aalborg City Council consists of 31 members, including a mayor.
Klarup and Storvorde lie to the southeast along the 595 road, which, flanking a stretch of the Limfjord known as Langerak, leads to the town of Hals.
Telenor Denmark, part of the Norwegian Telenor telecommunications and mobile phone company, has a workforce of about 1,100 in Aalborg, making it one of the city's largest new employers.
A major exporter of grain, cement, and spirits, its thriving business interests include Siemens Wind Power, Aalborg Industries, and Aalborg Portland.
The king frequently visited the town, where he held court and stayed in the old Aalborghus.
The main shopping streets are Algade and Bispengade, the latter lying inbetween the modern Vesterbro thoroughfare and Nytorv square.
Aalborg Business College provides basic training in retail and trading for private enterprises and the public sector, with courses which cover information technology, economics, sales and communication, and languages.
Over four days in mid-August, concerts are performed on squares, in the streets, and in cafés and restaurants.
Holsøe while the present building, which opened in 1902, was designed by Thomas Arboe.
He defeated West Germany's Hans Seigl and Denmark's own speedway hero Ole Olsen.
The site was chosen in a district outside the city as it provided isolation for those affected by the plague, many of whom died in the neighbouring hospice, Sankt Jørgens Gårde.
It resulted in the death of up to 2,000 people.
There are various museums in the city.
Aalborg Teater, built in 1878 and subsequently modified by Julius Petersen, seats 870 in the main auditorium.
The Kronborg Forest on the island, covering an area of , was acquired by the municipal government in 1945.
While most productions are housed in the main hall, the building can accommodate up to four shows at once in halls of varying sizes.
It has theatres, a cinema, and concert facilities.
Dramatic growth began in the late 19th century, with an increase from 14,152 in 1880 to 31,457 in 1901.
It was burned down by the Schalburg Corps in April 1945 towards the end of World War II, destroying its centuries-old Torahs.
The city centre, dating from the Middle Ages, lies on a series of clay banks between the former streams of Vesterå and Lilleå, which used to run into the sound.
During the second half of the 18th century, Aalborg entered a further period of prosperity.
The park, dungeon and casemates, but not the castle itself, are open to the public in the summer months.
Many of the factories have now closed, to be replaced by developments in the knowledge-based and green-energy sectors.
The Fourth European Sustainable Cities and Towns Conference, held in Aalborg in 2004, adopted the more binding Aalborg Commitments on local sustainable development.
The annual Aalborg Carnival usually takes place in the last weekend of May.
The TV news channel, 24Nordjyske, is operated by the same firm.
Aalborg is in North Jutland (northwestern Denmark), at the narrowest point of the Limfjord, a shallow sound that separates North Jutlandic Island (Vendsyssel-Thy) from the rest of the Jutland Peninsula and connects Aalborg to the Kattegat about  to the east.
The city also has a wide selection of galleries and arts and crafts outlets operated by local artists.
The major university is the University of Aalborg, founded in 1974, which has more than 17,000 students.
For over 300 years, it has housed the city's oldest pharmacy.
With over 100 theatrical and musical presentations per year, it offers international stars, opera, ballet, musicals, classical concerts, productions for children as well as pop and rock concerts.
In 1865, the pontoon bridge over Limfjord was completed, and in 1869, the railway reached the city with a railway bridge over the sound to Vendsyssel three years later.
Among the most important were De Danske Spritfabrikker (spirits and liquors), De forenede Textilfabrikker (textiles), the East Asiatic Company (trading), Dansk Eternit (building materials) and C.W.
To the north of the city, villages include Vadum, Aabybro, Vestbjerg, Sulsted, Tylstrup, Vodskov, and Hjallerup.
Østerågade, once the old harbor, is noted for its merchants' mansions.
Obel's tobacco factory (established in 1787).
The university has attempted from the outset to "develop a more “relevant” form of education than was then being offered by the established universities".
See the religion section for details on churches.
Precipitation is rather evenly distributed all year around, with an average of  during October, normally the wettest month with an average 14 days with rainfall, and an average of  during February, normally the driest month with an average of eight days of precipitation, closely followed by April.
It is one of the area's major tourist attractions with over 300,000 visitors a year.
In addition to large industrial companies including Aalborg Portland, the only cement-producing company in the country, and the building products company Eternit,  many small and medium-sized enterprises have been established.
The old iron bar with a hook for scales can be seen in the portico.
The style is reminiscent of similar buildings in the north of Germany and in the Netherlands.
The church was named after St Botolph, an English abbot and saint.
Aalborg has a wide selection of shops and restaurants.
In c.&nbsp;1075, Adam of Bremen reported that ''Alaburg'', as he called it in German, was an important harbour for ships sailing to Norway.
Off the northwestern side of the city in the sound is the island of Egholm, reached via ferry.
Designed by Carlo Odgård, it was erected in 1933 in connection with the North Jutland Fair.
The new testing plant is the world's largest research test centre for wind turbine technology.
The club has won the Danish championship (Superliga) four times in recent years (1995, 1999, 2008, 2014).
The hospital has traditionally undertaken research but from the beginning of 2013 it has had a formal collaboration with Aalborg University.
Other sports associations include the women's handball club Aalborg DH, the rugby club Aalborg RK, and Aalborg Cricket Club.
Kunsthal Nord, established in the centre in 2009, arranges up to five exhibitions a year of all forms of contemporary art, especially of local origin but also from other parts of Denmark and beyond.
In 1994 and 1995, excavations at the site of the Greyfriars Monastery resulted in the creation of the underground Gråbrødrekloster Museum in the city centre.
This church was considerably smaller than the current one, as it was merely a parish church.
These companies have become global producers of wind turbine rotors, marine boilers and cement.
In 2008, the Utzon Center, its art, architecture and design credited to the noted architect Jørn Utzon, is also dedicated to him.
A new building, designed by schmidt hammer lassen architects and to be completed by 2020, will provide  for hospital buildings and  for the university's Faculty of Health.
It has recently expanded into floating production systems for the offshore market.
While Aalborg is renowned for its alcohol and nightlife, there are also a number of coffee shops.
The smaller Europahallen was added in 1991, making the centre the largest in Scandinavia.
The Royal School of Library and Information Science (RSLIS) provides higher education in library and information science; one of its two departments is in Aalborg.
Budolfi Church, now a cathedral, dates from the end of the 14th century and Aalborghus Castle, a royal residence, was built in 1550.
It was converted into a hospital during the Reformation and is still in use today as a nursing home for the elderly.
Architecturally, the city is known for its half-timbered mansions built by its prosperous merchants.
Notable establishments  include ''Fusion'' on the waterfront, ''Mortens Kro'', run by celebrity chef Morten Nielsen, and ''Irish House'', a pub in the 17th-century Jens Olufsen's House.
Aalborg Railway Station is operated by Banedanmark and DSB.
It was built next to the Limfjord at the central harbour front in Aalborg.
Replanning continued with additional thoroughfares cutting through the city.
It is the largest employer in the area with around 6,500 on the payroll.
Aalborg became the country's main producer of tobacco products and spirits, followed in the 1890s by fertilisers and cement.
By 1960, Aalborg had become known as the "city of smoking chimneys" with half of the inhabitants working in industry or manufacturing.
The present Budolfi Church, which has the status of a cathedral, dates from the end of the 14th century, although at least two earlier churches stood on the same spot.
Aalborg has 12 large hotels, most within walking distance of the city centre.
Over the years, the theatre has produced a wide selection of drama and musicals.
''Nordjyske Stiftstidende'', published in Aalborg, is Denmark's second oldest newspaper founded in 1767 as ''Nyttige og fornøyelige Jydske Efterretninger''.
Bent Exner designed some of the artefacts in the church including the crucifix over the altar.
Built in the Gothic style, it consists of a nave flanked by two aisles, a tower, and a porch.
During the German invasion of Denmark in 1940, the airport was captured by German paratroopers on the night of the 21 April as a base for German aircraft flying to Norway.
Completed in 1931 by the architect Alf Cock-Clausen, it combines functionality with decorative classical symbolism.
The Springeren - Marine Experience Center is a marine museum on the city's wharf with a wide range of exhibits including "Springeren", an old Danish submarine, whence its name.
Since 2012, the Egholm Festival, a small music festival on the island of Egholm near Aalborg has been organized in the first weekend of August.
The port facilities were also improved with the help of a dredger and the opening of new docks.
There was a temporary decline in population to 94,994 in 1976 but in 1981, following the incorporation of Nørresundby, it grew to 114,302.
The municipal authorities hope to increase the use of bicycles by providing better cycle tracks and parking facilities, as well as improved support services.
St Mark's Church (''Sankt Markus Kirke''), completed in 1933, was designed by Einar Packness.
The Aalborg University Hospital, section south, is on Hobrovej and has a 24-hour emergency ward.
In the city centre, there are both large department stores and smaller speciality shops.
In 1672, it had 4,181 inhabitants, growing slowly during the 18th century, with 4,425 in 1769, 4,866 in 1787 and 5,579 by 1801.
The telecommunications and information technology sector has developed with the support of Aalborg University and the North Jutland knowledge park NOVI.
