In 2012 construction of ''Det Nye Universitetshospital'' (The New University Hospital) began which ending in 2019 will centralize all departments by expanding the former Skejby Sygehus to  with an additional  for a new psychiatric center.
Many visitors arrive on cruise ships: in 2012, 18 vessels visited the port with over 38,000 passengers.
The initiatives are part of a larger and broader action plan for Aarhus municipality, that aims for a coherent and holistic administration of the water cycle.
Aarhus is in the humid continental climate zone (Köppen: ''Dfb'') and the weather is influenced by low-pressure systems from the Atlantic which result in unstable conditions throughout the year.
Construction of the first light rail system in the city commenced in 2013, with the first increment to be finished in 2017.
The newly reconstructed area of Skjoldhøjkilen is a prime example.
Wooden city walls were erected to prevent smuggling, with gates and toll booths on the major thoroughfares, Mejlgade and Studsgade.
When an election has determined the composition of the council, it elects a mayor, two deputy mayors and five aldermen from their ranks.
Aarhus has the highest ratio of immigrants in Denmark, 14.8% of the population, outside the Copenhagen area.
Strictly speaking it is not a museum but an arts centre and one of the oldest in Europe, built and founded in 1917.
The official tourist information service in Aarhus is organised under VisitAaarhus, a corporate foundation initiated in 1994 by Aarhus Municipality and local commercial interest organisations.
In 1851 octroi was abolished and the city walls were removed to provide easier access for trade.
In August 2014, the city council officially initiated a process to assert the viability of a new international airport.
In Aarhus, they publish a total of five local newspapers; ''Aarhus Midt'', ''Aarhus Nord'', ''Aarhus Vest'', ''Aarhus Syd'' and ''Aarhus Weekend''.
Aarhus is home to Aarhus University Hospital, one of six Danish "Super Hospitals" officially established in 2007 when the regions reformed the Danish healthcare sector.
Apart from this large main library, some neighbourhoods in Aarhus have a local library engaged in similar cultural and educational activities, but on a more local scale.
The city centre experiences the same climatic effects as other larger cities with higher wind speeds, more fog, less precipitation and higher temperatures than the surrounding, open land.
The growing resistance was countered with 19 Schalburgtage terror operations by the Peter Group from August 1944, including large-scale fire bombings and murders.
The Bakken Bears have most recently won the Danish basketball championships in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.
Since the turn of the millennium both skyline and land use has changed as former industrial sites are being redeveloped into new city districts.
Tivoli Friheden (lit.
Once one of Denmark's largest, it was a leading provincial newspaper for a time, but after the Second World War it increasingly faced competition from ''Demokraten'' (1884–1974) and ''Jyllands-Posten'', both published in Aarhus.
The city actively promotes its gay and lesbian community and celebrates the annual Aarhus Pride gay pride festival.
By contrast, the Aarhus River Valley and the Giber River Valley are late glacial meltwater valleys.
ommon or traditional Aarhusian words are: træls (tiresome), noller (silly or dumb) and dælme (Excl.
In recent decades, many free and public sports facilities have sprung up across the city, such as street football, basketball, climbing walls, skateboarding and beach volley.
The most prominent valleys of this network are the Aarhus Valley in the south, stretching inland east-west with the Aarhus River, Brabrand Lake and Tåstrup Sø (Tåstrup Lake) and the Egå Valley to the north, with the stream of Egåen, Kasted Mose (Kasted Bog) and Geding Sø (Geding Lake).
In Denmark, restaurants in Aarhus was the first outside Copenhagen to receive Michelin-stars since 2015.
It is located on the east coast of the Jutland peninsula, in the geographical centre of Denmark,  northwest of Copenhagen and  north of Hamburg, Germany.
The war and occupation left a notable impact on the city as many streets, particularly in Frederiksbjerg, are named after Danish officers of the time.
This has resulted in several 'especially vulnerable residential areas' (a.k.a.
The Mayor of Aarhus until 2017 is Jacob Bundsgaard of the Social Democrats.
On the summer solstice, the sun rises at 04:26 and sets at 21:58, providing 17 hours 32 minutes of daylight.
The population increased from 15,000 in 1870 to 52,000 in 1901 and, in response, the city annexed large land areas to develop new residential quarters such as Trøjborg, Frederiksbjerg and Marselisborg.
Aarhus Municipality and the city council have attacked the challenges from different angles in a constructive collaboration with private partners.
The population of Aarhus is both younger and better-educated than the national average which can be attributed to the high concentration of educational institutions.
There is a long tradition here in music of all genres and many Danish bands have emerged from Aarhus.
International Living theatre (ILT) is another bi-annual festival established in 2009, but with performing arts and stage art on a broad scale.
Trade and transportation remain important sectors benefiting from the large port and central position on the rail network.
Another important and historic church in the inner city, is the Church of our Lady (''Vor Frue Kirke'') also from the 13th&nbsp;century in Romanesque and Gothic style.
Along with the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, it is responsible for the education of architects in Denmark.
The city was spared any fighting, but in Vejlby north of the city a cavalry skirmish known as Rytterfægtningen took place which stopped the German advance through Jutland.
Being the Danish city with the youngest demographics, with 48,482 inhabitants aged under 18, Aarhus is also one of the fastest growing Danish cities, with an average growth of 4,000 people per annum since 2010.
Danmarks grimmeste festival (lit.
Aarhus has been heavily involved with several large-scale water treatment projects on many levels in the last two decades and more will follow in the future.
In the buildings and adjoining archaeological layers, everyday utensils like combs, jewellery and basic multi-purpose tools from approximately the year 900 have been found.
The sandy ground on the valley floor dries up quickly after winter and warms faster in the summer than the surrounding hills of moist-retaining boulder clay.
Spot festival is aiming to showcase up-and-coming Danish and Scandinavian talents at selected venues of the inner city.
The industry became an important employer, with factory employees increasing from 100 in 1896 to 1,000 in 1931, effectively transforming the city from a regional trade hub into an industrial centre.
Many public and religious buildings were built in and around the city; notably Aarhus Cathedral was initiated in the late 12th&nbsp;century by the influential bishop Peder Vognsen.
It is private hoped architecture enterprises will move into adjoining buildings or build their own domiciles on vacant lots to create a hotspot for architecture and design.
The spelling "Aarhus" is first found in 1406 and gradually became the norm in the 17th&nbsp;century.
Aarhus has a large variety of restaurants and eateries offering food from cultures all over the world, especially Mediterranean and Asian, but also international gourmet cuisine, traditional Danish food and New Nordic Cuisine.
These conditions affect crops and plants that often bloom 1–2 weeks earlier in the valley than on the northern and southern hillsides.
The Aarhus Letbane is a planned tram-train project that will link two railway lines with a new light rail route through the city.
The main bus terminal is planned to be moved to the central railway station by 2018 and the current site will be made into a new residential district.
''Ciconia Aarhus Private Hospital'' founded in 1984 is a leading Danish fertility clinic and the first of its kind in Denmark.
In 2014 it had approximately 1,700 students.
Otto Mønsted created the Danish Preserved Butter Company in 1874, focusing on butter export to England, China and Africa and later founded the Aarhus Butterine Company in 1883, the first Danish margarine factory.
In the 1980s the city entered a period of rapid growth and the service sector overtook trade, industry and crafts as the leading sector of employment for the first time.
The first publicly elected mayor of Aarhus was appointed in 1919.
Because of the northern latitude, the number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter.
The next phase will connect a large planned suburb west of Lisbjerg.
Aarhus was founded at the mouth of a brackish water fjord, but the original fjord no longer exists, as it has gradually narrowed into what is now the Aarhus River and the Brabrand Lake, due to natural sedimentation.
The city was founded on the northern shores of a fjord at a natural harbour and the primary driver of growth was for centuries seaborne trade in agricultural products.
Danmarks Radio has a large department in Aarhus with over 200 employees.
A number of larger cities and towns is within easy reach from Aarhus by road and rail, including Randers ( by road north), Grenå (northeast), Horsens ( south) and Silkeborg ( east).
The majority of immigrants have roots outside Europe and the developed world, comprising some 25,000 people from 130 different nationalities, with the largest groups coming from the Middle East and north Africa.
: ''the Ceres-grounds'').
The early buildings of Aarhus University, especially the main building completed in 1932, designed by Kay Fisker, Povl Stegmann and by C.F.
The festival has a vision of showing the best plays and stage art experiences of the world, by presenting the best stage art companies of the world, while at the same time attracting stage art interested people from both Aarhus and Europe at large.
In Brabrand and Gellerup, two thirds of the population now have a non-Danish ethnic background.
Aarhus has a population of 261,570 on  for a density of 2,874/km2 (7,444/sq mi).
Whichever spelling local authorities choose, most newspapers and public institutions will accept it.
This includes running events, cycle racing and orienteering, the annual Classic Race Aarhus with historic racing cars and the biennial event Sculpture by the Sea, Aarhus, all attracting thousands of people.
It is a municipal self-governing port with independent finances.
The brewery is located in the southern district of Viby and a large variety of their brews are available there, in most larger well-assorted stores in the city and in some bars and restaurants as well.
More than 40% of the population have an academic degree while only some 14% have no secondary education or trade.
The coin can be retrieved when the bike is returned.
Under the patronage of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik, it offers graduate level studies in areas such as music teaching, and solo and professional musicianship.
Musikhuset is the largest concert hall in Scandinavia, with seating for 3,000 people.
The rampart was later reinforced by Harald Bluetooth, and together with the town's geographical placement, this suggests that Aros was an important trade and military centre.
Also in the city centre is the undulating University Park, recognised for its unique landscaped design with large old oak trees.
Since the 1970s, the city has seen major developments on the pop and rock scene, with the arrival of many acclaimed bands such as Kliché, Under Byen, Gnags, TV-2, Michael Learns to Rock, Nephew, Carpark North, Spleen United, VETO, Hatesphere and Illdisposed in addition to popular individual performers like Thomas Helmig, Anne Linnet and Medina.
The city is home to more than 55,000 students.
Marselisborg Palace (''Marselisborg Slot''), designed by Hack Kampmann in Neoclassical and Art Nouveau styles, was donated by the city to Prince Christian and Princess Alexandrine as a wedding present in 1898.
The ARoS Art Museum, the Old Town Museum and Tivoli Friheden are among Denmark's top tourist attractions.
The city has grown up around the main transport hubs, the harbour and later the railway station and as a result, the oldest parts of the city are also the most central and busiest today.
Aarhus Municipality also offers a number of specialized services in the areas of nutrition, exercise, sex, smoking and drinking, activities for the elderly, health courses and lifestyle.
The building of Dokk1 and the associated squares and streetscape is also collectively known as Urban Mediaspace Aarhus and it is the largest construction project Aarhus municipality has ever undertaken.
It is a compound of the two words ''ār'', genitive of ''ā'' ("river", Modern Danish ''å''), and ''ōss'' ("mouth", in Modern Icelandic this word is still used for "river delta").
The long-range hiking route Aarhus-Silkeborg, starts off from Brabrandstien.
ghettos), with Gellerup as the most notable neighbourhood.
In the 1970 Danish Municipal Reform the current Aarhus municipality was created by merging 20 municipalities.
Average temperature over the year is  with February being the coldest month (0.1&nbsp;°C) and August the warmest (15.9&nbsp;°C).
Since 2012, it has run its own TV channel, TV 2 Østjylland.
The 5 Kolonne group was established with assistance from Holger Danske to restore a resistance movement in Aarhus along with the L-groups, tasked with assassinating collaborators.
This should protect against or clean up previous pollution and encourage green growth and self-sufficiency.
When the Aarhus Freight Station in the 2020s is redeveloped into a new neighborhood it will feature the to-be-built new domicile for the Aarhus School of Architecture in a central location.
Aarhus municipality contains 21 postal districts and some parts of another 9.
In 1840, the harbour was moved to the coast, north of the river where it became the largest industrial harbour outside Copenhagen over the following 15 years.
It was not until the middle of the 18th&nbsp;century growth returned in large part due to trade with the large agricultural catchment areas around the city; particularly grain proved to be a remunerative export.
With a combined total of almost 1.4 million visitors they represent the driving force behind tourism but other venues such as Moesgård Museum and Kvindemuseet are also popular.
It was founded in 1988 and takes place in either July, August or September every year.
In the 1970s and 1980s, Aarhus became the centre for Denmark's rock music fostering many iconic bands such as TV-2 and Gnags.
The bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948 when Adam of Bremen reported the bishop Reginbrand attended the synod of Ingelheim in Germany.
The inner urban area contains 264,716 inhabitants () and the municipal population is 330,639 ().
The renaming came into effect on 1 January 2011.
Some 15,000 have come from within Europe, with Poland, Germany, Romania and Norway being the largest contributors.
The city centre is packed with cafés, especially along the river and the Latin quarter.
''Vesterport'' (lit.
As in most of Denmark, there are no private beaches in the municipality, but access to the seabath requires a membership, except in the summer.
The municipality is home to 175,000 jobs with some 100,000 in the private sector and the rest split between state, region and municipality.
In 2010, it merged with the Royal Academy of Music in Aalborg, which was founded in 1930.
The first years were peaceful in conjunction with the policies of the Danish Protectorate Government, but following the enactment of the Communist Law in August 1941, the first armed resistance and sabotage commenced, gradually growing in intensity over the years with repression and terror in response.
Most city bus lines go through the inner city and pass through either Park Allé or ''Banegårdspladsen'' (lit.
The city council consists of 31 members elected for four-year terms.
The National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark counts some 380 sports organisations within the municipality and about one third of the population are members of one.
There are several clubs, discos and cafés aimed at gays and lesbians, including ''Danish D-lite'' (sports), ''Gbar'' (nightclub) and ''Gaia Vandreklub'' (hiking club).
The main railway station in Aarhus is Aarhus Central Station located in the city centre.
The valley system also includes the Lyngbygård Å (Lyngbygård River) in the west and valleys to the south of the city, following erosion channels from the pre-quaternary.
The municipality actively supports sports organisations in and around the city, providing public organisations that aim to attract major sporting events and strengthen professional sports.
It runs the DR Østjylland radio programme, provides local contributions to DR P4, and produces local regional television programmes.
The dialect is notable for single syllable words ending in "d" being pronounced with stød while the same letter in multiple syllable words is pronounced as "j", i.e.. Odder is pronounced "Ojjer".
The site of the former Royal Unibrew Ceres breweries began redevelopment in 2012 into "CeresByen", a residential district with educational institutions.
The light rail system is planned to eventually tie many of the suburbs closer to central Aarhus.
The municipality has more high and middle income jobs, and fewer low income jobs, than the national average.
There are increasingly more outlets inspired by other cultural flavours such as sushi, kebab and currywurst.
Many companies from this time would come to leave permanent iconic marks on Aarhus.
Some official authorities such as the Danish Language Committee, publisher of the Danish Orthographic Dictionary, still retain "Århus" as the main name, providing "Aarhus" as a new, second option, in brackets.
Aarhus Festuge usually includes exhibits, concerts and events designed for the LGBT communities.
Combined these factors make east and south Jutland comparatively wetter than other parts of the country.
The Aarhus Custom House (''Toldkammeret'') from 1898, is said to be Hack Kampmann's finest work.
Western winds from the Atlantic and North Sea are dominant resulting in more precipitation in western Denmark.
In Aarhus, New Nordic can currently be experienced at ''Kähler Villa Dining'', ''Hærværk'' and ''Domestic'', but local produce can be had at many places, especially at the twice weekly food markets on Frederiksbjerg.
The Ceres Brewery was established in 1856 and served as Aarhus' local brewery for more than 150 years, gradually expanding into an industrial district known as Ceres-grunden (lit.
Aarhusian, as most local dialects in Denmark, has diminished in use through the 20th century and most people today speak some version of Standard Danish with regional features although it still has a strong presence in older segments of the population and in areas with high numbers of immigrants.
''Western Gate'') still bears the name of a medieval city gate and the narrow alleyways ''Posthussmøgen'' and ''Telefonsmøgen'' are remnants of toll stations from that time.
Sections of the forest comprise trees and vegetation representing specific climatic epochs from the last Ice Age to the present.
In the 1844 elections only 174 citizens qualified out of a total population of more than 7,000.
The Samsing group, along with others in and around Aarhus, was dismantled in June 1944 when Grethe "Thora" Bartram turned her family and acquaintances over to German authorities.
Appraised high-end gourmet restaurants serving an international gourmet cuisine include Frederikshøj, Restaurant Varna, Miró, Nordisk Spisehus, Det Glade Vanvid, La Pyramide, Restaurant ET and Dauphine, all considered among the best places to eat in Denmark.
Regular steamship links with Copenhagen had begun in 1830 and in 1862 Jutland's first railway was established between Aarhus and Randers.
These goals have materialised in a plan to increase multiple-source heat production and the waste and district heating service ''AffaldVarme Aarhus'' is building a combined heat and power plant running on biofuels.
Temperature varies a great deal across the seasons with a mild spring in April and May, warmer summer months from June to August, frequently rainy and windy autumn months in October and September and cooler winter months, often with snow and frost, from December to March.
The central Botanical Gardens (''Botanisk Have'') from 1875 are a popular destination, as they include The Old Town open-air museum and host a number of events throughout the year.
The geography in the area affects the local climate of the city with the Aarhus Bay imposing a temperate effect on the low-lying valley floor where central Aarhus is located.
Aarhus is on average host to one or two international sailing competitions every year and hosted the ISAF Youth Sailing World Championships in 2008 and will in 2018 host the ISAF Sailing World Championships, the world championship for the 12 Olympic sailing disciplines and an important qualifier for the 2020 Olympics.
The occupation was a destructive period with major disasters, loss of life and economic depression.
Aarhus is notable for its musical history.
With over 1,700 students, the Danish School of Media and Journalism (''Danmarks Medie- og Journalisthøjskole'') is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism.
: The Central Station Square) or both.
Ordering "a set" suffices in most bars and pubs.
Langelandsgade Kaserne in National Romantic style from 1889 is the oldest former military barracks left in the country; home to the university Department of Aesthetics and Communication since 1989.
Other new factories of note include the dockyard of Flydedokken and the oil mill of Århus Oliefabrik, both located at the harbour, and Frichs, a machine factory initiated in 1854.
Mols and Helgenæs are both part of the larger regional peninsula of Djursland.
Aarhus is located at the Bay of Aarhus facing the Kattegat sea in the east with the peninsulas of Mols and Helgenæs across the bay to the northeast.
They play an active role in the cultural life and host many events, exhibitions, discussion groups, workshops, educational courses and facilitate everyday cultural activities for and by the citizens.
It is ranked among the top 100 universities in the world by several of the most influential and respected rankings.
It is still grammatically correct to write geographical names with the letter Å and local councils are allowed to use the Aa spelling as an alternative.
Watersports like sailing, kayaking, motor boating, etc.
Aarhus has hosted many sporting events including the 2010 European Women's Handball Championship, the 2014 European Men's Handball Championship, the 2013 Men's European Volleyball Championships, the 2005 European Table Tennis Championships, the Denmark Open in badminton, the UCI Women's Road Cycling World Cup, the 2006 World Orienteering Championships, the 2006 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the GF World Cup (women's handball).
A new event will replace Sculpture by the Sea in 2017.
Today the majority of the largest companies in the municipality are in the sectors of trade, transport and media.
In the 19th century it was occupied twice by German troops during the Schleswig Wars but avoided destruction.
In 1657, octroi was imposed in larger Danish cities which changed the layout and face of Aarhus over the following decades.
The State Library (''Statsbiblioteket'') at the university campus has status of a national library.
Like other dialects in East Jutland it has two grammatical genders, similar to Standard Danish, but different from West Jutlandic dialects which have only one.
Aarhus Bryghus is a local microbrewery with a sizeable production.
In addition to around 25 institutions of higher education, several research forums have evolved to assist in the transfer of expertise from education to business.
In the 900s an earth rampart for the defence of the early city was constructed, encircling the settlement, much like the defence structures found at Viking ring fortresses elsewhere.
Aarhus has two research parks and is in the process of establishing a third.
VIA University College was established in January 2008 and is one of eight new regional organisations offering bachelor courses of all kinds, throughout the Central Denmark Region.
In June 2015, the large central library and cultural centre of Dokk1 opened at the harbour front.
Aarhus has the greatest concentration of students in Denmark, fully 12% of those living there attending short, medium or long courses of study.
Apart from the Aarhus Festuge, Aarhus also hosts specific recurring events, dedicated to various art genres.
Starting in 2007, the former docklands are being converted to a new mixed use district dubbed "Aarhus Ø" (Aarhus Docklands).
The Moesgård Museum specialises in archaeology and ethnography in collaboration with Aarhus University with exhibits on Denmark's prehistory, including weapon sacrifices from Illerup Ådal and the Grauballe Man.
Today Aarhus is at the cultural and economic core of the region and the largest centre for trade, services and industry in Jutland.
The increasingly destructive occupation was compounded when an ammunition barge exploded in 1944, destroying much of the harbor and damaging the inner city.
Some estimates put the number of visitors spending at least one night as high as 750,000 a year, most of them Danes from other regions, the remainder coming mainly from Norway, Sweden, northern Germany and the United Kingdom.
The largest age group is 20- to 29-year-olds and the average age is 37.5, making it the youngest city in the country and one of its youngest municipalities.
The former DSB repair facilities at Frederiks Plads have been demolished and are being developed into a new business district with high-rise buildings scheduled for completion in 2017.
Brabrand Lake to the west further contributes to this effect and as a result the valley has a very mild, temperate climate.
The Port of Aarhus became a hub for supplies to the Baltics and Norway while the surrounding rail network supplied the Atlantic Wall in west Jutland and cargo headed for Germany.
It draws students from a large area, especially from the western and southern parts of the peninsula.
At Aarhus' location, the Bay of Aarhus provides a natural harbour with a depth of  quite close to the shore.
Two local railways provide commuter services to Grenaa and Odder.
Currently Mols-Linien operates the route and annually transports some 2 million passengers and a million vehicles.
The ''Århus Set'' (Danish: Århus Sæt) is a set of drinks often ordered together, named for the city and consisting of two beverages, one Ceres Top beer and one shot Arnbitter, both originally from Aarhus.
The city hosts a biannual international theatre festival, International Living Theatre (ILT), the next event being scheduled for 2017.
The school works closely with Aarhus University where the first journalism course was established in 1946.
The international cultures present in the community are an obvious and visible part of the city's daily life and contribute many cultural flavours hitherto uncommon for the Nordic countries, including Bazar Vest, a market with shopkeepers predominantly of foreign descent.
Since 1988, the New Forests of Aarhus have been developed to assist in binding CO2, securing drinking water, protecting groundwater from pollution, dealing with excessive nutrients, increasing biodiversity, creating an attractive countryside, providing easy access to nature and offering outdoor activities to the public.
The Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus (''Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium'')  is a conservatoire, established under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 1927.
Soccer is by far the most popular sport followed by Gymnastics, Handball and Badminton.
Below the Moesgård Museum in the southern parts of the Marselisborg Forests, is a large historical landscape of pastures and woodlands, presenting different eras of Denmark's prehistory.
The city of Aarhus seeks to build upon this idea.
DSB has connections to destinations throughout Denmark and beyond.
It is also a top 100 conference city in the world.
