He was buried near his father in Princeton, New Jersey.
Burr was charged with multiple crimes, including murder, in New York and New Jersey, but was never tried in either jurisdiction.
Burr saw war with Spain as a distinct possibility.
After being appointed commanding general of U.S. forces by President John Adams in 1798, Washington turned down Burr's application for a brigadier general's commission during the Quasi-War with France.
The two shots, witnesses reported, followed one another in close succession, and none of those witnesses could agree as to who fired first.
Many viewed him as untrustworthy, following his role in the founding of the Bank of Manhattan (discussed above).
This was likely due to a strong belief that some Federalists would vote for Jefferson so as to avoid a hung election.
Burr's actions resulted in general political instability in the nation.
Starting in Pittsburgh and then proceeding to Beaver, Pennsylvania, and Wheeling, Virginia, and onward he drummed up support for his plans.
Theodosia died of stomach cancer in 1794.
He was ordered out of England and Napoleon Bonaparte refused to receive him, although one of his ministers held an interview concerning Burr's goals for Spanish Florida or British possessions in the Caribbean.
He was indicted for murder after the death of Hamilton, but never prosecuted; he was reported by acquaintances to be curiously unmoved by Hamilton's death, expressing no regret for his role in the result.
Alexander Hamilton also opposed Burr, due to his belief that Burr had entertained a Federalist secession movement in New York.
His seconds placed him so that Burr would have the rising sun behind him, though during the brief duel, one witness reported, Hamilton seemed to be hindered by this placement as the sun was in his eyes.
Burr's Republican slate of assemblymen for New York City was elected, giving the party control of the legislature.
In any event, Hamilton's shot missed Burr, but Burr's shot was fatal.
John Quincy Adams  wrote in his diary when Burr died: "Burr's life, take it all together, was such as in any country of sound morals his friends would be desirous of burying in quiet oblivion."
These eight letters were meant to expose the supposed conspiracy of Burr, Van Ness, Ogden and Livingston.
Until her death at sea in 1813, she remained devoted to her father.
Hamilton thought that Burr's self-serving nature made him unfit to hold office— especially the presidency.
The City of New York elected assembly members on an at-large basis.
Washington wrote, "By all that I have known and heard, Colonel Burr is a brave and able officer, but the question is whether he has not equal talents at intrigue."
The regiment successfully fought off many nighttime raids into central New Jersey by British troops arriving by water from Manhattan.
Though technically no longer in the service, Burr remained active in the war: he was assigned by General Washington to perform occasional intelligence missions for Continental generals such as Arthur St. Clair.
In this district, part of the larger command of General Alexander McDougall, there was much turbulence and plundering by lawless bands of rebel or loyalist sympathizers, and by raiding parties of ill-disciplined soldiers from both armies.
For example, in the evening of February 20, 1807, when Burr appeared at the dinner table, he was introduced to Frances Gaines, the wife of the commandant Edmund P. Gaines.
During the next presidential election of 1800, Jefferson and Burr were again candidates for president and vice president.
Aside from being occupied with intensive studies, he was a part of the American Whig Society and Cliosophic Society, the two clubs the college had to offer at the time.
the most restless, impatient, artful, indefatigable, and unprincipled intriguer in the United States, if not in the world, to be second in command under himself, and now Washington dreaded an intriguer in a poor brigadier.
In the spring of 1776, Burr's stepbrother Mathias Ogden had helped Burr secure a place on George Washington's staff in Manhattan.
Burr intended to found a dynasty in what would have become former Mexican territory.
Ever hopeful, he solicited funding for renewing his plans for a conquest of Mexico, but was rebuffed.
On being promoted to lieutenant colonel in July 1777, Burr assumed virtual leadership of Malcolm's Additional Continental Regiment.
In case of a war declaration, Andrew Jackson stood ready to help Burr, who would be in position to immediately join in.
Cheetham and Clintonians published a series of letters in ''American Citizen''.
In 1800, New York's state legislature was to choose the presidential electors, as they had in 1796 (for John Adams).
He lived abroad from 1808 to 1812, passing most of his time in England, where he occupied a house on Craven Street in London.
He may be the most controversial of the Founding Fathers of the United States.
With help from old friends Samuel Swartwout and Matthew L. Davis, Burr returned to New York and his law practice.
He fled to South Carolina, where his daughter lived with her family, but soon returned to Philadelphia and then to Washington to complete his term as Vice President.
In the case of New Jersey, the indictment was thrown out on the basis that, although Hamilton was shot in New Jersey, he died in New York.
According to Thomas Fleming, Burr would have immediately published such an apology, and Hamilton's remaining power in the New York Federalist party would have been impaired.
Hamilton's eldest son Philip had died in a duel in 1801.
After leaving Washington, Burr traveled west seeking new opportunities, both economic and political.
The only physical evidence presented to the Grand Jury was Wilkinson's so-called letter from Burr, which proposed the idea of stealing land in the Louisiana Purchase.
Burr was shocked by his defeat, as he believed he had arranged with Jefferson's supporters for their vote for him as well, in exchange for Burr's working to obtain New York's electoral votes for Jefferson.
Burr lost the election to little known Morgan Lewis, in what was the largest margin of loss in New York's history up to that time.
The Twelfth Amendment required that votes be cast separately for president and vice president.
The first-place finisher overall became president and the runner up vice president.
The younger Theodosia Burr became widely known for her education and accomplishments.
It was illegal in New Jersey as well, but the consequences were less severe.
John Pierre Burr was an active member of Philadelphia’s Underground Railroad, served as an agent for the abolitionist newspaper, ''The Liberator,'' worked in the National Black Convention movement, and served as Chairman of the American Moral Reform Society.
Listed on the National Register of Historic Places, it is now preserved and open to the public.
Burr was immediately tried on a misdemeanor charge and was again acquitted.
Many Republicans were persuaded by these letters; the defenses by Burr supporters seemed to lead more adverse admissions.
Burr ran for president in the 1796 election, coming in fourth with 30 votes behind John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and Thomas Pinckney.
The grandmother was unable to provide adequate food or heat for the children and feared for their lives; she went to Burr, pleading for his help.
Burr believed women to be intellectually equal to men, and hung a portrait of Mary Wollstonecraft over his mantel.
You have in fact, and I may say in express term, committed his guilt to me".
The observers disagreed on who fired first.
During the Revolutionary War, Burr took part in Colonel Benedict Arnold's expedition to Quebec, an arduous trek of more than  through the frontier of what is now Maine.
He was confined to Fort Stoddert after being arrested on charges of treason.
The Burrs' daughter Theodosia, born in 1783 and named after her mother, was their only child to survive to adulthood.
Thomas Jefferson used all of his influence to get Marshall to convict, but Marshall was not swayed.
Burr imposed discipline, defeating an attempted mutiny by some of the troops.
Burr had been a frequent patron of prostitutes during various periods of his life.
After a near-incident with Spanish forces at Natchitoches, Wilkinson decided he could best serve his conflicting interests by betraying Burr's plans to President Jefferson and to his Spanish paymasters.
After Burr left the Vice-Presidency at the end of his term in 1805, he journeyed into what was then the Western frontier, areas west of the Allegheny Mountains and down the Ohio River Valley eventually reaching the lands acquired in the Louisiana Purchase.
(See the Burr–Hamilton duel article for further details.)
David O. Stewart, on the other hand, insists that while Burr was not explicitly guilty of treason according to Marshall's definition, evidence exists that links him to treasonous crimes.
Burr loosely associated with the Democratic-Republicans, though he had moderate Federalist allies, such as Sen. Jonathan Dayton of New Jersey.
She was also the daughter of Judge Harry Toulmin, who had issued Burr's arrest warrant.
Senator from New York, defeating the incumbent, General Philip Schuyler.
Hamilton was evacuated to Manhattan; he lay in the house of a friend, receiving visitors including clergy, in order to be baptized before he died the following day.
He was considered a notorious womanizer, and is believed to have had at least three natural children.
Later he helped the heirs of the Eden family in a financial lawsuit.
was not guilty of treason, nor was he ever convicted, because there was no evidence, not one credible piece of testimony, and the star witness for the prosecution had to admit that he had doctored a letter implicating Burr.
Adams' father, President John Adams, had frequently defended Burr during his life.
Despite Livingston's last minute renege, Jefferson lost the first ballot because Burr's supporters scrambled to keep Maryland voters on the side of the Federalists.
As Thomas Baker asserts in his piece, "An Attack Well Directed", William P. Van Ness, now believed to be in cahoots with Burr, had an electoral scheme.
On July 5, 1779, he rallied a group of Yale students at New Haven along with Captain James Hillhouse and the Second Connecticut Governors Foot Guard, in a skirmish with the British at the West River.
He became a good friend, even confidant, of the English Utilitarian philosopher, Jeremy Bentham, and on occasion lived at Bentham's home.
Hamilton conducted an unrelenting campaign in the House of Representatives to prevent Burr's election to the presidency and gain election of his erstwhile enemy, Jefferson.
He is remembered mainly for the duel with Hamilton.
Burr became vice president during Jefferson's first term (1801–1805).
Burr and Hamilton were the key campaigners for their respective parties.
But it was never recorded in full, and has been preserved only in short quotes and descriptions of the address, which defended the United States of America's system of government.
Burr distinguished himself during the Battle of Quebec, where he was rumored to have attempted to recover Montgomery's corpse after the General had been shot.
General Israel Putnam took Burr under his wing; by his vigilance in the retreat from lower Manhattan to Harlem, Burr saved an entire brigade (including Alexander Hamilton, who was one of its officers) from capture after the British landing on Manhattan.
In 1836, Burr died on Staten Island in the village of Port Richmond, in a boardinghouse.
However, Burr secretly changed the charter to include banking; shortly after it was approved, he dropped any pretense of founding the water company.
Despite this plan, Livingston changed his mind on his way to Washington.
In January 1779 Burr, in command of Malcolm's Regiment, was assigned to Westchester County, a region between the British post at Kingsbridge and that of the Americans about  to the north.
Montgomery then promoted Burr to captain and made him an aide-de-camp.
Burr read this in a newspaper in the Territory of Orleans on January 10, 1807.
Later that year, during the harsh winter encampment at Valley Forge, Burr commanded a small contingent guarding "the Gulf," an isolated pass that controlled one approach to the camp.
Burr solicited Hamilton and other Federalists' support under the guise that he was establishing a badly needed water company for Manhattan.
However, the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty secured Florida for the United States without a fight, and war in Texas did not occur until 1836, the year Burr died.
Burr quickly became a key player in New York politics, more powerful in time than Hamilton.
Due to Burr's manipulations, there was a delay in constructing a safe water system for Manhattan.
When Burr showed interest in certain Federalists, Cheetham and DeWitt Clinton accused Burr of "tampering with New York's electors; accusing Jefferson of buying off wavering Republicans to ensure his election; actively intriguing with Federalists to capture the chief magistracy in 1804".
By this point all of Burr's hopes for a political comeback had been dashed, and he fled America and his creditors for Europe, where he tried to regain his fortunes.
Livingston's resistance to Cheetham's push for information on Van Ness' original letter, which he had planned to publish as the 9th letter in ''American Citizen,'' was what saved Burr from exposure, at least temporarily.
He became seriously involved in politics in 1789, when George Clinton appointed him as New York State Attorney General.
Burr sponsored a bill through the New York Assembly that established the Manhattan Company, a water utility company whose charter also allowed creation of a bank controlled by Jeffersonians.
Hamilton, having already been disgraced by the Maria Reynolds adultery scandal and mindful of his own reputation and honor, did not.
Article 3, Section 3 of the United States Constitution requires that treason either be admitted in open court, or proved by an overt act witnessed by two people.
Members of the Democratic Republican Party understood they intended that Jefferson should be president and Burr vice president, but the final choice still belonged to the House of Representatives.
He hastened on this errand, and quickly returned, having pawned the article for twenty dollars, which he gave to make comfortable my precious babies.
His defense lawyers included Edmund Randolph, John Wickham, Luther Martin and Benjamin Gaines Botts.
Others included Harman Blennerhassett, who offered the use of his private island for training and outfitting Burr's expedition.
Burr's judicial manner in presiding over the impeachment trial of Justice Samuel Chase has been credited as helping to preserve the principle of judicial independence that was established by ''Marbury v. Madison'' in 1803.
He died in the West Indies during the Revolutionary War.
Burr, Weir contends, most likely had no idea that the gun's trigger pressure could be reset.
Although Alexander Hamilton and Burr had long been on good personal terms, often dining with one another, Burr's defeat of General Schuyler, Hamilton's father-in-law, probably drove the first major wedge into their friendship.
Although Hamilton considered Jefferson a political enemy, he believed him a man of public virtue.
According to Ogden, Burr was infuriated by the incident, which may have led to the eventual estrangement between him and Washington.
Young Aaron and his sister Sally were placed with the William Shippen family in Philadelphia.
Though Jefferson won New York, he and Burr tied for the presidency overall, with 73 electoral votes each.
But many Democratic-Republican electors voted for Jefferson and no one else, or for Jefferson and a candidate other than Burr.
He said he had made a copy because he had lost the original.
(At the time members of the electoral college cast two ballots but did not specify an office.
In 1784 as a New York state assemblyman, Burr unsuccessfully sought to abolish slavery immediately following the American Revolutionary War.
In due course, they gave New York's electoral votes to Jefferson and helped him win the 1800 presidential election.
But,  contemporaries were often suspicious of Burr's motives.
Burr accepted this as an apology, and the two men shook hands and ended the dispute.
He served in the Senate until 1797.
Mudslinging was heavily used against the candidates, specifically Burr.
On July 11, 1804, the enemies met outside Weehawken, New Jersey, at the same spot where Hamilton's son had died.
As Vice President, Burr earned praise from some enemies for his even-handed fairness and his judicial manner as President of the Senate; he fostered some traditions for that office which have become time-honored.
He was intercepted at Wakefield, in Mississippi Territory (now in the state of Alabama), on February 19, 1807.
He gained a place on the Democratic-Republican presidential ticket in the 1800 election with Jefferson.
Burr was never tried for the illegal duel, and all charges against him were eventually dropped, but Hamilton's death ended Burr's political career.
The Grand Jury threw the letter out as evidence, and the news made a laughingstock of the general for the rest of the proceedings.
She later married Tapping Reeve, founder of the Litchfield Law School in Litchfield, Connecticut.
Not only did Burr advocate education for women, upon his election to the New York State Legislature, he submitted a bill to allow women to vote.
Jefferson's warrant, however, followed Burr, who fled toward Spanish Florida.
He enlisted the help of members of Tammany Hall, a social club, to win the voting for selection of Electoral College delegates.
Burr wept and replied, 'Though I am poor and have not a dollar, the children of such a mother shall not suffer while I have a watch.'
Mary/Eugénie was said to have lived and worked in Saint-Domingue before being brought to Philadelphia; an early source said that she was born there.
Another crucial move was Burr's success in securing the election of his slate of greater New York City area electors, defeating the Federalist slate backed by Alexander Hamilton.
John Adams, whose enmity toward Alexander Hamilton was legendary, later wrote in 1815 that Washington's response was startling given his promotion of Hamilton, whom he described as
Soon, she realized her fortune was dwindling due to her husband's land speculation losses.
While Van Ness and Burr had their own plans to turn the election in their favor, James Cheetham, a supporter of Clinton, had a plan to discredit Burr.
Burr and Church fired at each other and missed, and afterward Church acknowledged that he was wrong to have accused Burr without having proof.
Burr responded by challenging Hamilton to personal combat under the ''code duello'', the formalized rules of dueling.
He was also Commissioner of Revolutionary War Claims in 1791.
He remained overseas until 1812, when he returned to the United States to practice law in New York City.
During this time, he cooperated with the Holland Land Company in gaining passage of a law to permit aliens to hold and convey lands.
Burr had an older sister Sarah ("Sally"), named for her maternal grandmother.
The highlight of Burr's tenure as president of the senate (one of his few official duties as vice president) was the Senate's first impeachment trial, of Supreme Court justice Samuel Chase.
They note that "Hamilton brought the pistols, which had a larger barrel than regular dueling pistols, and a secret hair-trigger, and were therefore much more deadly," and conclude that "Hamilton gave himself an unfair advantage in their duel, and got the worst of it anyway."
On June 28, 1778, at the Battle of Monmouth in New Jersey, Burr's regiment was devastated by British artillery, and in the day's heat, Burr suffered heat stroke.
In September 1799, Burr fought a duel with John Barker Church, whose wife was the sister of Hamilton's wife.
In 1791, he was elected by the legislature as a U.S.
One Senator wrote that Burr had conducted the proceedings with the "impartiality of an angel, but with the rigor of a devil".
Burr prescribed education for his daughter in the classics, language, horsemanship and music.
In a final quest for grand opportunities, he left the United States for Europe.
Although Burr was already a nationally known hero, he never received a commendation.
The British advance was repulsed, forcing them to enter New Haven from Hamden.
In his personal journals, he recorded with great detail encounters in Europe with dozens of women whom he paid for sex.
The Burrs' daughter, Theodosia, was taught dance, music, several languages, and learned to shoot from horseback.
A few more letters followed, in which the exchange escalated to Burr's demanding that Hamilton recant or deny any statement disparaging Burr's honor over the past 15 years.
They had a son together, who died of fever at ten years of age.
This drove another wedge between Hamilton and Burr.
It was a carefully watched drama (Henry Adams gives a full account in ''The History of the United States of America (1801–1817)'') as Thomas Jefferson wanted a conviction.
After returning from Europe, Burr used the surname "Edwards", his mother's maiden name, for a while to avoid creditors.
Jefferson, however, sought the highest charges against Burr.
He said he could not answer regarding Cooper's interpretation.
Aaron Burr was a man of complex character who made many friends, but also many powerful enemies.
This was a misdemeanor, based on the Neutrality Act of 1794, which Congress passed to block filibuster expeditions against US neighbors, such as those of George Rogers Clark and William Blount.
But Ron Chernow, in his biography, ''Alexander Hamilton'', states Hamilton told numerous friends well before the duel of his intention to avoid firing at Burr.
He studied theology for an additional year, before rigorous theological training with Joseph Bellamy, a Presbyterian.
Given the force of the presidency for conviction, the trial was a major test of the Constitution and separation of powers.
The trial, presided over by Chief Justice of the United States John Marshall, began on August 3.
Burr suffered a debilitating stroke in 1834, which rendered him immobile.
He challenged the authority of the Supreme Court and its Chief Justice John Marshall, an Adams appointee who clashed with Jefferson over John Adams' last-minute judicial appointments.
In her ''Autobiography of Jane Fairfield'', the wife of the struggling poet Sumner Lincoln Fairfield relates how their friend Burr saved the lives of her two children, who were left with their grandmother in New York while the parents were in Boston.
He avoided New York and New Jersey for a time, but all the charges against him were eventually dropped.
This likely contributed to additional deaths during a subsequent malaria epidemic.
Mrs. Gaines and Burr played chess that evening and continued this entertainment during his confinement at the fort.
This event only served to increase the antagonism between the former friends.
Their ideal, as particularly embodied in Washington and Jefferson, was that of "disinterested politics", a government led by educated gentlemen who would fulfill their duties in a spirit of public virtue and without regard to personal interests or pursuits.
He and his wife lived for the next several years in a house on Wall Street in Lower Manhattan.
During the winter of 1812–1813, Theodosia was lost with the schooner ''Patriot'' off The Carolinas, either murdered by pirates or shipwrecked in a storm.
Burr was treated well there.
"Aaron Burr defended the democratic clubs and was listed as a member of the New York Democratic Society in 1798."
In 1804, the last full year of his single term as vice president, Burr killed his political rival Alexander Hamilton, whom he had once rescued during the Revolutionary War, in a famous duel.
Wilkinson was later proved to be a bad choice.
Aaron Burr fathered two illegitimate children, Louisa Charlotte Burr (c.1788–1878) and John (Jean) Pierre Burr (1792–1864), by Mary Emmons, aka Eugénie Beauharnais, an East Indian woman said to be from Calcutta who worked as a servant in Burr’s household.
Jefferson's warrant put Federal agents on his trail.
In 1807, on a charge of treason, Burr was brought to trial before the United States Circuit Court at Richmond, Virginia.
Burr's farewell speech in March 1805 moved some of his harshest critics in the Senate to tears.
His most important contact was General James Wilkinson, Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Army at New Orleans and Governor of the Louisiana Territory.
Burr's secret correspondence with Anthony Merry and the Marquis of Casa Yrujo, the British and Spanish ministers at Washington, was eventually revealed.
Aaron Burr's father died in 1757, and his mother the following year, leaving him and his sister orphans.
When it became clear that Jefferson would drop Burr from his ticket in the 1804 election, the Vice President ran for Governor of New York instead.
And yet, Burr defended Washington's decision to evacuate New York as "a ''necessary consequence.''"
Ultimately, it took 36 ballots before James A. Bayard, a Delaware Federalist, and several of his Federalist colleagues submitted blank votes to decide the election in Jefferson's favor.
Both men fired, and Hamilton was mortally wounded by a shot just above the hip.
