His ''Four Piano Blues'' is an introspective composition with a jazz influence.
The ''Symphony for Organ and Orchestra'' established Copland as a serious modern composer.
Copland in hindsight found the work too "European" as he consciously sought a more consciously American idiom to evoke in his future work.
Among those mentors was Serge Koussevitzky, the music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and known as a champion of "new music."
During his studies with Boulanger in Paris, Copland was excited to be so close to the new post-Impressionistic French music of Ravel, Roussel, and Satie, as well as Les six, a group that included Milhaud, Poulenc, and Honegger.
This practice differed markedly from Schoenberg, who used his tone rows as complete statements around which to structure his compositions.
In them, he experimented with ambiguous beginnings and endings, rapid key changes, and the frequent use of tritones.
After some initial studies with composer Rubin Goldmark, Copland traveled to Paris, where he first studied with Isidor Philipp and Paul Vidal, then with noted pedagogue Nadia Boulanger.
Not especially athletic, the sensitive young man became an avid reader and often read Horatio Alger stories on his front steps.
His views were generally progressive and he had strong ties with numerous colleagues and friends in the Popular Front, including Odets.
Some controversy arose over the second volume's increased reliance over the first on old documents for source material.
Nor, according to Pollack, did he generally work in linear fashion, from beginning to end of a composition.
He wrote in a letter to his brother Ralph, "This intellectual Amazon is not only professor at the Conservatoire, is not only familiar with all music from Bach to Stravinsky, but is prepared for anything worse in the way of dissonance.
Except for the Shaker tune in ''Appalachian Spring'', Copland often syncopates traditional melodies, changes their metric patterns and note values.
During the Depression years, he traveled extensively to Europe, Africa, and Mexico, formed an important friendship with Mexican composer Carlos Chávez and began composing his signature works.
His mother, Sarah Mittenthal Copland, sang, played the piano, and arranged for music lessons for her children.
Copland derived his melodic material for this piece freely from two collections of Mexican folk tunes, changing pitches and varying rhythms.
Travels to Italy, Austria, and Germany rounded out Copland's musical education.
The other major work of Copland's first period is the ''Short Symphony'' (1933).
Evans' photographs inspired portions of Copland's opera ''The Tender Land''.
Boulanger "could always find the weak spot in a place you suspected was weak.... She could also tell you ''why'' it was weak italics Copland."
In 1950, Copland received a U.S.-Italy Fulbright Commission scholarship to study in Rome, which he did the following year.
Like Stravinsky, Copland mastered the ability to create a coherent, integrated composition from what was essentially a mosaic of divergent folk-based and original elements.
In its combination and refinement of modernist and jazz elements, Steinberg calls the ''Short Symphony'' "a remarkable synthesis of the learned and the vernacular, and thus, in all its brevity the work last just 15 minutes, a singularly 'complete' representation of its composer."
Many composers who scored for western movies, particularly between 1940 and 1960, were influenced by Copland's style, though some also followed the "Max Steiner" approach, which was more bombastic and obvious.
Copland's brand of nationalism in his ballets differed from that of European composers such as Béla Bartók, who tried to preserve the folk tones they used as close to the original as possible.
The use of a folk tune with variations set in a symphonic context started a pattern he repeated in many of his most successful works right on through the 1940s.
From the 1960s, Copland turned increasingly to conducting.
Nevertheless, he inherited a considerable interest in civic and world events from his father.
In spite of that, in his early adult life Copland would develop friendships with people with socialist and communist leanings.
He helped fill a vacuum for American choreographers to fill their dance repertory and tapped into an artistic groundswell, from the motion pictures of Busby Berkeley and Fred Astaire to the ballets of George Balanchine and Martha Graham, to both democratize and Americanize dance as an art form.
The McCarthy probes did not seriously affect Copland's career and international artistic reputation, taxing of his time, energy, and emotional state as they might have been.
Early in his life, Copland  developed, in Pollack's words, "a deep admiration for the works of Frank Norris, Theodore Dreiser and Upton Sinclair, all socialists whose novels passionately excoriated capitalism's physical and emotional toll on the average man."
Copland finished the 1940s with two film scores, one for William Wyler's ''The Heiress'' and one for the film adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel ''The Red Pony''.
The music of French composer Pierre Boulez showed Copland that the technique could be separated from the "old Wagnerian" aesthetic with which he had associated it previously.
Toward this end, Copland provided musical advice and inspiration to The Group Theater, a company which also attracted Stella Adler, Elia Kazan and Lee Strasberg.
Copland's fascination with the Russian Revolution and its promise for freeing the lower classes drew a rebuke from his father and uncles.
Aaron Copland was born in Brooklyn, New York on November 14, 1900.
Copland's relationship with these men, who became known as "commando unit" was one of both support and rivalry, and he played a key role in keeping them together until after World War Two.
Like fugal treatment, it is a stimulus that enlivens musical thinking, especially when applied to a series of tones that lend themselves to that treatment."
He often avoided the full orchestra, and he rejected the common practice of using a leitmotiv to identify characters with their own personal themes.
Copland, Pollack states, "stayed particularly concerned about the role of the artist in society."
Copland especially admired Boulanger's total grasp of all classical music, and he was encouraged to experiment and develop a "clarity of conception and elegance in proportion."
Performers and audiences generally greeted his conducting appearances as positive opportunities to hear his music as the composer intended.
The resulting opera, ''The Tender Land'' was written in two acts but later expanded to three.
These articles would appear in 1969 as the book ''Copland on Music''.
In it, music critic and musicologist Michael Steinberg writes, the "jazz-influenced dislocations of meter that are so characteristic of Copland's music of the 1920s are more prevalent than ever."
The piano, Perlis writes, "was so integral to his composing that it permeated his compositional style, not only in the frequent use in the instrument but in more subtle and complex ways."
Along with the ballet ''Rodeo'', ''Billy the Kid'' became, in the words of musicologist Elizabeth Crist, "the basis for Copland's reputation as a composer of Americana" and defines "an uncomplicated form of American nationalism."
However, while Bernstein (from whom Copland asked at times for conducting advice) occasionally joked that Copland could conduct his works "a little better," he also noted that Copland improved over time and considered him a more natural conductor than Stravinsky or Hindemith.
Copland's willingness to foster talent extended to critiquing scores in progress that were presented to him by his peers.
Due to the then-advanced stage of Copland's Alzheimer's and the resulting memory loss, however, this fallback to previous material was inevitable.
Along with the composer's first-person narrative, these two books incorporate 11 "interludes" by Perlis and other sections from friends and peers.
For the occasion of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Centennial, Copland composed ''Ceremonial Fanfare For Brass Ensemble'' to accompany the exhibition "Masterpieces Of Fifty Centuries."
When Copland found Vidal too much like Goldmark, he switched at the suggestion of a fellow student to Nadia Boulanger, then aged 34.
As he himself phrased it, "The composer who is frightened of losing his artistic integrity through contact with a mass audience is no longer aware of the meaning of the word art."
When he questioned something, it was in a manner that might make you want to question it yourself.
Nevertheless, beginning in 1950, Copland—who had been appalled at Stalin's persecution of Shostakovich and other artists—began resigning from participation in leftist groups.
They tended to be talented, younger men involved in the arts, and the age-gap between them and the composer widened as he grew older.
By the 1950s, he was also conducting the works of other composers, and after a televised appearance where he directed the New York Philharmonic, Copland became in high demand.
Also influential on the new music were the French intellectuals Marcel Proust, Paul Valéry, Sartre, and André Gide, the latter cited by Copland as being his personal favorite and most read.
From 1960 to his death, Copland resided at Cortlandt Manor, New York.
His habit of turning to the keyboard tended to embarrass Copland until he learned that Stravinsky also did so.
His ballet scores for ''Rodeo'' (1942) and ''Appalachian Spring'' (1944) were huge successes.
They often linked their disdain for Populist art with technology, new media and mass audiences—in other words, the areas of radio, television and motion pictures, for which Copland either had or soon would write music, as well as his popular ballets.
Copland began writing songs at the age of eight and a half.
The investigations ceased in 1955 and were closed in 1975.
He rented a studio apartment on New York City's Upper West Side in the Empire Hotel, close to Carnegie Hall and other musical venues and publishers.
In this way, Copland's music worked much in the same way as the murals of Thomas Hart Benton, in that it employed elements that could be grasped easily by a mass audience.
Virgil Thompson wrote that the score for ''Of Mice and Men'' established "the most distinguished populist musical style yet created in America."
He also helped found the Copland-Sessions Concerts to showcasing these composers' chamber works to new audiences.
Copland's graduation piece from his studies with Goldmark was a three-movement piano sonata in a Romantic style.
His father was a staunch Democrat.
Instead, he tended to compose whole sections in no particular order and surmise their eventual sequence after all those parts were complete, much like assembling a collage.
Even after the McCarthy hearings, he remained a committed opponent of militarism and the Cold War, which he regarded as having been instigated by the United States.
Of his siblings, oldest brother Ralph was the most advanced musically, proficient on the violin.
Beginning in 1923, he employed "jazzy elements" in his classical music, but by the late 1930s, he moved on to Latin and American folk tunes in his more successful pieces.
As Copland feared, critics found the libretto to be weak when the opera premiered in 1954.
Copland's work from the late 1940s onward included experimentation with Schönberg's twelve-tone system, resulting in two major works, the ''Piano Quartet'' (1950) and the ''Piano Fantasy'' (1957).
In 1939, Copland completed his first two Hollywood film scores, for ''Of Mice and Men'' and ''Our Town'', and composed the radio score "John Henry", based on the folk ballad.
Among Copland's love affairs were ones with photographer Victor Kraft, artist Alvin Ross, pianist Paul Moor, dancer Erik Johns, composer John Brodbin Kennedy, and painter Prentiss Taylor.
The path he said he chose was the latter one, which he said, when he described his ''Piano Fantasy'', allowed him to incorporate "elements able to be associated with the twelve-tone method and also with music tonally conceived."
When he needed a piece, he would turn to these ideas (his "gold nuggets")."
In addition to his ballets and orchestral works, he produced music in many other genres including chamber music, vocal works, opera and film scores.
Among this group in the heady cultural atmosphere of Paris in the 1920s were Paul Bowles, Ernest Hemingway, Sinclair Lewis, Gertrude Stein, and Ezra Pound, as well as artists like Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Amedeo Modigliani.
He had initial reservations: "No one to my knowledge had ever before thought of studying with a woman."
In a departure from other film scores of the time, Copland's work largely reflected his own style, instead of the usual borrowing from the late-Romantic period.
Avant-garde music had lost what cultural historian Morris Dickstein calls "its buoyant experimental edge" and the national mood toward it had changed.
But he had also composed more original and daring pieces which he did not share with his teacher.
The family members were active in Congregation Baith Israel Anshei Emes, where Aaron celebrated his Bar Mitzvah.
Around 1935, perhaps motivated by the plight of children during the Depression, Copland began to compose musical pieces for young audiences, in accordance with the first goal of American Gebrauchsmusik.
He instead matched a theme to the action, while avoiding the underlining of every action with exaggerated emphasis.
His synthesis of influences and inclinations helped create the "Americanism" of his music.
He condemned it as "almost worse for art than the real thing".
'''Aaron Copland''' (; November 14, 1900December 2, 1990) was an American composer, composition teacher, writer, and later a conductor of his own and other American music.
Koussevitsky would prove to be influential in Copland's life, perhaps the second most important after Boulanger.
His father wanted him to go to college, but his mother's vote in the family conference allowed him to give Paris a try.
Copland wrote a total about 100 works which covered a diverse range of genres.
Otherwise, he tended to write slowly whenever possible.
This is especially true in the opening of ''Appalachian Spring'', where the harmonizations remain "transparent and bare, suggested by the melodic disposition of the Shaker tune."
Inspired by the example of ''Les Six'' in France, Copland sought contemporaries such as Roger Sessions, Roy Harris, Virgil Thomson, and Walter Piston, and quickly established himself as a spokesman for composers of his generation.
It was there that Copland's father may have Anglicized his surname "Kaplan" to "Copland," though Copland himself believed for many years that the change had been due to an Ellis Island immigration official when his father entered the country.
If the situation dictated, as it did with his film scores, Copland could work quickly.
He was also generous with his time with nearly every American young composer he met during his life, later earning the title, "Dean of American Music."
Following her model, he studied all periods of classical music and all forms—from madrigals to symphonies.
During the Depression years, Copland traveled extensively to Europe, Africa, and Mexico.
Other late works include: "Dance Panels" (1959, ballet music), "Something Wild" (1961, his last film score, much of which would be later incorporated into his "Music for a Great City"), "Connotations" (1962, for the new Lincoln Center Philharmonic hall), "Emblems" (1964, for wind band), "Night Thoughts" (1972, for the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition), and "Proclamation'" (1982, his last work, started in 1973).
Copland's compositions before leaving for Paris were mainly short works for piano and art songs, inspired by Liszt and Debussy.
Everything he said was helpful in making a younger composer realize the potential of a particular work.
While "Copland's musical rhetoric has become iconic" and "has functioned as a mirror of America," conductor Leon Botstein suggests that the composer "helped define the modern consciousness of America's ideals, character and sense of place.
Inspiration for this work came from Copland's vivid recollection of visiting the "Salon Mexico" dancehall where he witnessed a more intimate view of Mexico's nightlife.
He shifted in the mid-1930s to a more accessible musical style which mirrored the German idea of ''Gebrauchsmusik'' ("music for use"), music that could serve utilitarian and artistic purposes.
In 1952, Copland received a commission from the League of Composers, funded by a grant from Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein, to write an opera for television.
Around this time, he also composed his ''Piano Quartet'', adopting Schoenberg's twelve-tone method of composition, and ''Old American Songs'' (1950), the first set of which was premiered by Peter Pears and Benjamin Britten, the second by William Warfield.
Electronic music seemed to have "a depressing sameness of sound," while aleatoric music was for those "who enjoy teetering on the edge of chaos."
After attempts to further his music study from a correspondence course, Copland took formal lessons in harmony, theory, and composition from Rubin Goldmark, a noted teacher and composer of American music (who had given George Gershwin three lessons).
He began his first serial work, the "Piano Fantasy," in 1951 to fulfill a commission from the young virtuoso pianist William Kapell.
However, Copland moved from this work toward more accessible works and folk sources.
Critics wrote of his precision and clarity before an orchestra.
Instead of wallowing in self-pity and self-destruction like many of the expatriate members of the Lost Generation, Copland returned to America optimistic and enthusiastic about the future, determined to make his way as a full-time composer.
However, he was one of the few composers of his stature to live openly and travel with his intimates.
As he summarized, "I've spent most of my life trying to get the right note in the right place.
Known as Rock Hill, his home was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003 and further designated a National Historic Landmark in 2008.
According to Pollack, Copland "had perhaps the most distinctive and identifiable musical voice produced by this country so far, an individuality ... that helped define for many what American concert music sounds like at its most characteristic and that exerted enormous influence on multitudes of contemporaries and successors."
Called later that year to a private hearing at the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C., Copland was questioned by Joseph McCarthy and Roy Cohn about his lecturing abroad and his affiliations with various organizations and events.
Understated on the podium, Copland modeled his style after other composer/conductors such as Stravinsky and Paul Hindemith.
Copland especially admired Stravinsky's "jagged and uncouth rhythmic effects," "bold use of dissonance," and "hard, dry, crackling sonority."
Thanks to Aaron, American music came into its own."
Copland was referred to by his peers and critics as "the Dean of American Composers."
It also marked a shift in emphasis from a unified musical structure to the rhetorical effect the music might have on an audience and showed Copland refining a simplified, more accessible musical language.
Within that framework, however, Copland preserved the American atmosphere of these ballets from what musicologist Elliott Antokoletz calls "the conservative handling of open diatonic sonorities," which fosters "a pastoral quality" in the music.
I assemble materials."
He also met with proponents of twelve-tone technique, based on the works of Arnold Schoenberg, and found himself interested in adapting serial methods to his own musical voice.
Copland found her incisive mind much to his liking and found her ability to critique a composition impeccable.
Even with this deliberation, Copland considered composition, in his words, "the product of the emotions," which included  "self-expression" and "self-discovery."
While Copland had various encounters with organized religious thought, which influenced some of his early compositions, and was close with the Zionist movement during the Popular Front movement, when it was endorsed by the left, he personally remained an agnostic.
Like many contemporaries, Copland regarded Judaism alternately in terms of religion, culture, and race; but he showed relatively little involvement in any aspect of his Jewish heritage.... At the same time, he had ties to Christianity, identifying with such profoundly Christian writers as Gerard Manley Hopkins and often spending Christmas Day at home with a special dinner with close friends....
Vivian Perlis, who collaborated with Copland on his autobiography, writes, "Copland's method of composing was to write down fragments of musical ideas as they came to him.
Pollack states that Copland was gay and that the composer came to an early acceptance and understanding of his sexuality.
This and other incidental commissions fulfilled the second goal of American Gebrauchsmusik, creating music of wide appeal.
Musicologist Gayle Murchison cites Copland's use melodic, harmonic and rhythmic elements endemic in jazz, which he would also use in his ''Music for the Theater'' and ''Piano Concerto'' to evoke an essentially "American" sound.
He didn't want to turn you into another Aaron Copland....
Milhaud was Copland's inspiration for some of his earlier "jazzy" works.
if one of more of these nuggets looked promising, he would then write a piano sketch and eventually work on them at the keyboard.
Through it and later his work in film, Copland met several major American playwrights, including Thornton Wilder, William Inge, Arthur Miller, and Edward Albee, and considered projects with all of them.
In 1949, Copland returned to Europe, where he found French composer Pierre Boulez dominating the group of post-war avant-garde composers there.
During the late 1940s, Copland became aware that Stravinsky and other fellow composers had begun to study Arnold Schoenberg's use of twelve-tone (serial) techniques.
Without what Copland called a "usable past," he looked toward jazz and popular music, something he had already started to do while in Europe.
Just throwing it open to chance seems to go against my natural instincts."
Serialism allowed Copland a synthesis of serial and non-serial practices.
In the process, McCarthy and Cohn neglected completely Copland's works, which made a virtue of American values.
The open, slowly changing harmonies in much of his music are typical of what many people consider to be the sound of American music, evoking the vast American landscape and pioneer spirit.
Also important was the ''Third Symphony''.
This was followed by the ''Symphonic Ode'' (1929) and the ''Piano Variations'' (1930), both of which rely on the exhaustive development of a single short motive.
While in Europe in 1949, he heard a number of serial works but did not admire much of it because "so often it seemed that individuality was sacrificed to the method."
I was spared the floundering that so many musicians have suffered through incompetent teaching."
Another technique Copland employed was to keep silent during intimate screen moments and only begin the music as a confirming motive toward the end of a scene.
Like many at that time, Copland guarded his privacy, especially in regard to his homosexuality.
Copland's response was that his writing as he did and in as many genres was his response to how the Depression had affected society, as well as to new media and the audiences made available by these new media.
Among the subjects he had considered were Theodore Dreiser's ''An American Tragedy'' and Frank Norris's ''McTeague'' He finally settled on James Agee's ''Let Us Now Praise Famous Men'', which seemed appropriate for the more intimate setting of television and could also be used in the "college trade," with more schools mounting operas than they had before World War II.
While emigrating from Russia to the United States, Copland's father, Harris Morris Copland, lived and worked in Scotland for two to three years to pay for his boat fare to the US.
In 1960, RCA Victor released Copland's recordings with the Boston Symphony Orchestra of the orchestral suites from ''Appalachian Spring'' and ''The Tender Land''; these recordings were later reissued on CD, as were most of Copland's Columbia recordings (by Sony).
He was included on an FBI list of 151 artists thought to have Communist associations and found himself blacklisted, with ''A Lincoln Portrait'' withdrawn from the 1953 inaugural concert for President Eisenhower.
Compared to the ''Symphonic Ode'', the orchestration is much leaner and the composition itself more concentrated.
Encouraged by Igor Stravinsky to master conducting and perhaps emboldened by Carlos Chavez's efforts in Mexico, he began to direct his own works on his international travels in the 1940s.
Even some of the composer's friends, such as composer Arthur Berger, were confused about Copland's simpler style.
This emphasis on the frontier carried over to his ballet ''Billy the Kid'' (1939), which along with ''El Salón México'' became his first widespread public success.
The ballet premiered in New York in 1939, with Copland recalling "I cannot remember another work of mine that was so unanimously received."
Variations which contrast to this tune in rhythm, key, texture and dynamics, fit within Copland's compositional practice of juxtaposing structural blocks.
Because of his leftist views, which had included his support of the Communist Party USA ticket during the 1936 presidential election and his strong support of Progressive Party candidate Henry A. Wallace during the 1948 presidential election, Copland was investigated by the FBI during the Red scare of the 1950s.
Copland's health deteriorated through the 1980s, and he died of Alzheimer's disease and respiratory failure on December 2, 1990, in North Tarrytown, New York (now Sleepy Hollow).
During the 1951-52 academic year, Copland gave a series of lectures under the Charles Eliot Norton Professorship at Harvard University.
In it and ''The Second Hurricane'', Copland began "experimenting," as he phrased it, with a simpler, more accessible style.
The Clarinet Concerto (1948), scored for solo clarinet, strings, harp, and piano, was a commission piece for bandleader and clarinetist Benny Goodman and a complement to Copland's earlier jazz-influenced work, the Piano Concerto (1926).
Much of his large estate was bequeathed to the creation of the Aaron Copland Fund for Composers, which bestows over $600,000 per year to performing groups.
He saw his rows as sources for melodies and harmonies, not as complete and independent entities, except at points in the musical structure that dictated the complete statement of a row.
The composer himself pointed out, in summarizing the American character of his music, "the optimistic tone", "his love of rather large canvases", "a certain directness in expression of sentiment", and "a certain songfulness".
During this period, Copland also wrote regularly for ''The New York Times'', ''The Musical Quarterly'' and a number of other journals.
He remained in that area for the next thirty years, later moving to Westchester County, New York.
Copland wrote that, to him, serialism pointed in two opposite directions, one "toward the extreme of total organization with electronic applications" and the other "a gradual absorption into what had become a very ''freely interpreted tonalism'' italics Copland."
It was financially contradictory, particularly in the Depression.
While Copland studied conducting in Paris in 1921, he remained essentially a self-taught conductor with a very personal style.
As such, he wrote prolifically about music, including pieces on music criticism analysis, on musical trends, and on his own compositions.
In addition to regularly attending the Metropolitan Opera and the New York Symphony, where he heard the standard classical repertory, Copland continued his musical development through an expanding circle of musical friends.
An avid lecturer and lecturer-performer, Copland eventually collected his presentation notes into three books, ''What to Listen for in Music'' (1939), ''Our New Music'' (1941), and ''Music and Imagination'' (1952).
From the 1960s onward, Copland's activities turned more from composing to conducting.
During his stay in Paris, Copland began writing musical critiques, the first on Gabriel Fauré, which helped spread his fame and stature in the music community.
Copland lived frugally and survived financially with help from two $2,500 Guggenheim Fellowships in 1925 and 1926.
Since 1927, he had been in the process of simplifying, or at least paring down, his musical language, though in such a manner as to sometimes have the effect, paradoxically, of estranging audiences and performers.
By the age of 15, after attending a concert by composer-pianist Ignacy Jan Paderewski, Copland decided to become a composer.
He called his writing "a byproduct of my trade" as "a kind of salesman for contemporary music."
Eventually, his New School lectures would appear in the form of two books—''What to Listen for in Music'' (1937, revised 1957) and ''Our New Music'' (1940, revised 1968 and retitled ''The New Music: 1900-1960'').
Though he planned on only one year abroad, he studied with her for three years, finding her eclectic approach inspired his own broad musical taste.
Though not enamored with the prospect, he found himself without new ideas for composition, saying, "It was exactly as if someone had simply turned off a faucet."
Goldmark, with whom Copland studied between 1917 and 1921, gave the young Copland a solid foundation, especially in the Germanic tradition.
Although his early focus of jazz gave way to other influences, Copland continued to make use of jazz in more subtle ways in later works.
Outraged by the accusations, many members of the musical community held up Copland's music as a banner of his patriotism.
Before he did this, according to musicologist Joseph Straus, the philosophical and compositional difference between non-tonal composers such as Schoenberg and tonal composers like Stravinsky had been considered too wide a gulf to bridge.
He was also exposed to Schoenberg and admired his earlier atonal pieces, thinking Schoenberg's ''Pierrot Lunaire''.
Music critic Paul Rosenfeld, for one, warned in 1939 that Copland was "standing in the fork in the highroad, the two branches of which lead respectively to popular and artistic success."
