The Abbey of Cluny was founded by William I, Duke of Aquitaine in 910 AD at Cluny, Saône-et-Loire, France.
Every large monastery had priories.
Together with the conventual buildings, it covered an area of twenty-five acres.
A passage at the other end of the dormitory lead to the "necessarium" (latrines).
The choirs were also long.
One of the miniature complexes was called the "oblati".
The nave in the northern houses of the order often had only a north aisle (this is the case at Bolton, Brinkburn and Lanercost).
The building might extend over the water as is the case at Fountains Abbey.
The outlying farming establishments belonging to the monastic foundations were known as "villae" or "granges".
Anthony, according to Johann August Wilhelm Neander, inadvertently became the founder of a new mode of living in common, Coenobitism.
Near Nursia, a town in Perugia, Italy, a first abbey was established at Monte Cassino (529 AD).
These valleys, now rich and productive, had a very different appearance when the brethren first chose them as their place of retreat.
The church at Bayham Old Abbey had no aisles in the nave or the choir.
The Cluniac reforms brought focus to the traditions of monastic life, encouraging art and the caring of the poor.
The physic garden occupied the north east corner of the Abbey.
By 1415 AD, the time of the Council of Constance, 15,070 Benedictine monasteries had been established.
The abbey was planned in compliance with the Benedictine rule that, if possible, a monastery should be self-contained.
On the south side of the cloister was the refectory.
The Abbey was surrounded by fortified walls on three sides.
The Cluniac reforms quickly spread by the founding of new abbey complexes and also by adoption of the reforms by existing abbeys.
The early Benedictine monasteries, including the first at Monte Cassino, were constructed on the plan of the Roman villa.
These included Canterbury, Chester, Durham, Ely, Gloucester, Norwich, Peterborough, Rochester, Winchester, and Worcester.
Near the gate was the hospitium (guest hall).
Its abbot had the status of a suffragan of the patriarch of Jerusalem, with the right to a cross, but not to a mitre nor a ring."
No overriding specification was demanded of the monks but the similarity of their needs resulted in uniformity of design of abbeys across Europe.
This was for visitors arriving at the Abbey to make their devotions.
The canons built very long naves to accommodate large congregations.
Close to the entrance was a chapel.
Their first settlement was at Newhouse, Lincolnshire, near the Humber tidal estuary.
The Abbey was noted for its strict observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict.
The priory at Paisley was an exception.
The layout of the church and associated buildings of an abbey often follows a set plan determined by the founding religious order.
The other complex was a hospital or infirmary for the care of sick monks.
In all, there were thirty-three separate structures; mostly one level wooden buildings.
The lay out of the Roman villa was quite consistent throughout the Roman Empire and where possible, the monks reused available villas in sound repair.
The plan of the Abbey of Saint Gall (719 AD) indicates the general arrangement of a Benedictine monastery of its day.
Against the outer wall of the church was a school and headmaster's house.
In the Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution in 1790 AD, the Abbey church was bought by the town and almost entirely destroyed.
The inner court is surrounded by a cloister (EE) from which one enters the monks' cells (II).
Unnecessary pinnacles and turrets were prohibited.
Near the entrance is a large tower (M), a constant feature in the monasteries of the Levant (Eastern Mediterranean area).
There was also a building to receive visiting monks.
The Austin canons were an order of regular clergy within the hierarchy of the Catholic church.
In time, this form of common life superseded that of the older laurae.
* Fossanuova Abbey.
They were subject to an abbot, and observed a common rule.
The longer side is about  in length.
On the east side of the cloister, on the ground floor, was the "pisalis" or "calefactory".
There are many famous abbeys across Europe.
Chrysostom recorded the workings of a coenobia in the vicinity of Antioch.
A chief steward was at the head of the monastery.
It was finished and consecrated by Pope Innocent II around 1132 AD.
In the earliest times of Christian monasticism, ascetics would live in social isolation but near a village church.
Between this building and the church was a parlour for receiving visitors.
Others were no more than a single building serving as residence or a farm offices.
The earliest known Christian monasteries were groups of huts built near the residence of a famous ascetic or other holy person.
In front of the church stands a marble fountain (F), covered by a dome supported on columns.
The chapter-house was octagonal in shape.
As well as the "laurae", communities known as "caenobia" developed.
The church follows the plan adopted by the Austin canons in their northern abbeys, and has only one aisle to the north of the nave, while the choir is long, narrow and without an aisle.
Beyond that was an infirmary with a table hall and a refectory for those who were able to leave their chambers.
Wide swamps, deep morasses, tangled thickets, and wild, impassable forests were their prevailing features.
All needless ornament was proscribed.
The usual arrangement for monasteries of the Eastern world is exemplified in the plan of the convent of the Great Lavra at Mount Athos.
However, over time, changes to the common villa lay out occurred.
A small cloister lay to the south-east of the large cloister.
The outer court, which is the larger by far, contains the granaries and storehouses (K), the kitchen (H) and other offices connected with the refectory (G).
Opening from the western side of the cloister, but actually standing in the outer court, is the refectory (G), a large cruciform (cross shaped) building, about  square, decorated within with frescoes of saints.
Eventually, the buildings of a Benedictine abbey were built in a uniform lay out, modified where necessary, to accommodate local circumstances.
The cloister is duly placed on the south side of the church, and the chief buildings occupy their usual positions around it.
It long maintained its rigid austerity, though in later years the abbey grew wealthier, and its members indulged in more frequent luxuries.
For instance, the cells and huts of anchorites (religious recluses) have been found in the deserts of Egypt.
The same principle governed the choice of site for Cistercian abbeys in that a most dismal site might be improved by the building of an abbey.
La Ferté, Pontigny, Clairvaux, and Morimond were the first four abbeys to follow Cîteaux's example and others followed.
Shrewsbury Abbey in Shropshire was founded as a Benedictine monastery by the Normans in 1083.
Clara Vallis of St Bernard, now the "bright valley" was originally, the "Valley of Wormwood".
The lay out of buildings became compact and orderly.
All the Cluniac houses in England and Scotland were French colonies, governed by French priors who travelled to the Abbey of Cluny to consult or be consulted (unless the abbot of Cluny chose to come to Britain, which happened rarely).
The nave of the church was on the north boundary of the cloister.
It was founded by William de Warenne, 1st Earl of Surrey in about 1077 AD.
All but one of the Cluniac houses in Britain were known as priories, symbolizing their subordination to the Abbey of Cluny.
The church at the Abbey was commenced in 1089 AD by St. Hugh, the sixth abbot.
The monks of the Abbey lived in a house built against the north wall of the church.
However, increasing religious fervor about the ascetic's ways and or persecution of them would drive them further away from their community and further into solitude.
The school consisted of a large schoolroom divided in the middle by a screen or partition, and surrounded by fourteen little rooms, the "dwellings of the scholars".
The produce of the monastery was shipped to Alexandria for sale.
Between 520 and 700 AD, monasteries were built which were spacious and splendid.
He built several monasteries, each with about 1,600 separate cells laid out in lines.
An abbey may be the home of an enclosed religious order or may be open to visitors.
One door of the parlour led to the cloisters and the other led to the outer part of the Abbey.
The Cistercian monasteries were founded in deep, well-watered valleys, always standing at a stream's edge.
Some were small monasteries accommodating five or ten monks.
The whole of the southern and western areas of the Abbey were devoted to workshops, stables and farm-buildings including stables, ox-sheds, goatstables, piggeries, and sheep-folds, as well as the servants' and labourers' quarters.
Monastic communities date back to pre-Christian times.
There was also a room for bloodletting and purging.
An '''abbey''' is a complex of buildings used by members of a religious order under the governance of an abbot.
The church and nearby buildings ranged about the cloister, a court about which there was a covered arcade which allowed sheltered movement between the buildings.
It was an infamous den of robbers.
The buildings are completely ruined, but the walls of the nave and the cloisters are still visible on the grounds of the Yorkshire Museum.
They were known as "Black canons" because of the colour of their habits.
There were fifteen tailors, seven smiths, four carpenters, twelve camel-drivers and fifteen tanners.
This was a common room, warmed by flues beneath the floor.
The area within the wall is between three and four acres (12,000 and 16,000 m²).
From a marshy area in the Forest of Coucy in the diocese of Laon, the order spread widely.
The dormitory opened onto the cloister and also onto the south transept of the church.
In 312 AD, Anthony the Great retired to the Thebaid region of Egypt to escape the persecution of the Emperor Maximian.
The lay out of Easby Abbey is irregular due to its position on the edge of a steep river bank.
The triforium was omitted.
However, reforms resulted in many departures from this precedent.
At the west entrance to the Abbey, there was a house and a small courtyard for the abbott.
Above the common room was the dormitory.
It provides a place for religious activities, work and housing of Christian monks and nuns.
At other abbeys of the order, such as Bolton or Kirkham, there were no aisles.
The church was regarded as one of the wonders of the Middle Ages.
The abbott's home was near the school.
On the eastern side, there was a dormitory, raised on a vaulted substructure and communicating with the south transept and a chapter house (meeting room).
The crosses were made of wood and the candlesticks of iron.
Abbeys are often self-sufficient while using any abundance of produce or skill to provide care to the poor and needy, refuge to the persecuted or education to the young.
Just after 1140 AD, the Premonstratensians were brought to England.
Anthony was the best known of the anchorites of his time due to his degree of austerity, sanctity and his powers of exorcism.
The enceinte comprises two large open courts, surrounded with buildings connected with cloister galleries of wood or stone.
The defining architectural characteristic of the Cistercian abbeys was extreme simplicity and plainness.
However, the cloister garth (quadrangle), as at Chichester, is not rectangular, and thus, all the surrounding buildings are positioned in an awkward fashion.
The tradesmen's living quarters were at the rear of the workshop.
Each hospitium had its own brewhouse and bakehouse, and the building for more prestigious travellers had a kitchen and storeroom, with bedrooms for the guests' servants and stables for their horses.
Only a single, central tower was permitted, and that was usually very low.
There is only one entrance, which is located on the north side (A), defended by three iron doors.
In 1105 AD, the first house of the order was established at St. Botolph's Priory, Colchester, Essex.
Within the walls, the buildings were arranged around one or more open courts surrounded by cloisters.
These were monasteries where monks lived a common life together.
The deeper he withdrew into the wilderness, the more numerous his disciples became.
The monks lived in separate huts ("kalbbia") which formed a religious hamlet on the mountainside.
To the north of the church and to the right of the main entrance to the Abbey, was a residence for distinguished guests.
The Cistercians, a Benedictine reform group, were established at Cîteaux in 1098 AD by Robert of Molesme, Abbot of Molesme, for the purpose of restoring, as far as possible, the literal observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict.
The monks required buildings which suited their religious and day-to-day activities.
With reference to the diagram, right, the convent of the Great Lavra is enclosed within a strong and lofty blank stone wall.
The head abbey in England was at Welbeck but the best preserved are Easby Abbey in Yorkshire, and Bayham Old Abbey in Kent.
They would subsist whilst donating any excess produce to the poor.
These "hospitia" had a large common room or refectory surrounded by bed rooms.
It followed the common plan.
In the centre of this court stands the katholikon or conventual church, a square building with an apse of the cruciform domical Byzantine type, approached by a domed narthex.
The Premonstratensian regular canons, or "White canons", were of an order founded in 1119 AD by Norbert of Xanten.The order was a reformed branch of the Augustinian canons.
Nearby were the bake house, brew house and the sleeping-rooms of the servants.
Of the Abbey of Saint Samuel, Denys Pringle wrote, "The Premonstatensian abbey of Saint Samuel was a daughter house of Prémontré itself.
At the upper end is a semicircular recess, similar to the triclinium of the Lateran Palace in Rome, in which is placed the seat of the hegumenos or abbot.
A priory was a smaller structure or entities which depended on the monastery.
The church is remarkable for its extreme narrowness in proportion to its length.
The stone walls remain as an excellent example of English abbey walls.
In 1245 AD it was raised to the status of an abbey, answerable only to the Pope.
To the left of the main entrance was a building to house poor travellers and pilgrims.
Disciples wished to be close to their holy man or woman in order to study their doctrine or imitate their way of life.
The river Ouse bordered the fourth side.
The Abbey was built in the Romanesque style.
The concept of the abbey has developed over many centuries from the early monastic ways of religious men and women where they would live isolated from the lay community about them.
Immediately adjacent to the gateway is a two-storied guest-house, entered from a cloister (C).
The plan of a Coptic Orthodox monastery, from Lenoir, shows a church of three aisles, with cellular apses, and two ranges of cells on either side of an oblong gallery.
Sometimes, as at Llanthony and Christchurch, Dorset(Twynham), the choir was closed from the aisles.
Religious life in an abbey may be monastic.
By the twelfth century, the Abbey of Cluny was the head of an order consisting of 314 monasteries.
Monasticism in the West began with the activities of Benedict of Nursia (born 480 AD).
Twice in the year, the superiors of several coenobia met at the chief monastery, under the presidency of an "archimandrite" (the "chief of the fold" from the word, "miandra" (a sheepfold)) in order to make their reports.
These were the buildings for the novices.
Parallel to the nave, on the south side of the cloister, was a refectory, with a lavatory at the door.
In the late 300s AD, Palladius, visited the Egyptian monasteries.
The church consisted of five naves, a narthex (ante-church) which was added in 1220 AD, and several towers.
On the western side of the cloister was another two-story building with a cellar on the ground floor and the larder and store-room on the upper floor.
These included a need for defence; economy of space; and convenience of access.
For instance, there was a mill, a bakehouse, stables, and cattle stalls.
At  in length, it was the largest church in Christendom until the completion of St. Peter's Basilica at Rome.
In the southern most area of the abbey was the workshop containing utilities for shoemakers, saddlers (or shoemakers, sellarii), cutlers and grinders, trencher-makers, tanners, curriers, fullers, smiths and goldsmiths.
They refused to be separated from him and built their cells close to him.
The first English house of the Cluniac order was built at Lewes, Sussex.
Premonstratensian canons did not care to have congregations nor possessions.
Many of today's cathedrals in England were originally Benedictine monasteries.
The prior's lodge was usually attached to the southwest angle of the nave.
Some abbeys offer accommodation to people who are seeking spiritual retreat.
The windows were usually plain and undivided, and it was forbidden to decorate them with stained glass.
While the building is  long, it is not more than  wide.
This became a first true monastic community.
Each transept has an aisle to the east, forming three chapels.
The latter terminated in a three-sided apse.
The lay out of the monastic coenobium was influenced by a number of factors.
An enclosure protecting all these buildings gave the settlement the appearance of a walled village.
There were as many as thirty-five Premonstratensian abbeys in England.
They held a position between monks and secular canons.
The moneys raised were used to purchase stores for the monastery or were given away as charity.
The Abbey church occupied the centre of a quadrangular area, about  square.
The Cistercian principle of rigid self-abnegation carried over to the design of the order's churches and buildings.
In the eastern part of the Abbey there was a group of buildings representing in layout, two complete miniature monasteries.
Even in Norbert's lifetime, the order had built abbeys in Aleppo, Syria and in the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
The Austin canons' house at Thornton, Lincolnshire had a large and magnificent gatehouse.
The kitchen, at the west end of the refectory was accessed via an anteroom and a long passage.
These cells formed an encampment where the monks slept and performed some of their manual tasks.
At the south-east corner of the Abbey were hen and duck houses, a poultry-yard, and the dwelling of the keeper.
A detached building belonging to each contained a bathroom and a kitchen.
This enabled the monks to attend nocturnal services.
The monks were not permitted to retire to the cells of a laurae before they had undergone a lengthy period of training.
On the eastern side of the north transept of the church was the "scriptorium" or writing-room, with a library above.
The upper floors of the gatehouse formed the guest-house.
The monks of Cîteaux created the well known vineyards of Clos-Vougeot and Romanée in Burgundy.
