The initial efforts of the League to Enforce Peace aimed at creating public awareness through magazine articles and speeches.
The affair went unreported until 2002, when Harvard President Lawrence Summers called the affair "part of a past that we have rightly left behind."
When the Harvard Overseers agreed in 1910 to appoint a dean for the Department of University Extension, the program's 600 student were two-thirds female.
That same year, he succeeded Charles William Eliot as president of Harvard University, a post he held for 24 years until his retirement in 1933.
With an "aristocratic sense of mission and self-certainty," Lowell cut a large figure in American education and to some extent in public life as well.
He had earlier been approached by a committee of Boston schoolteachers, and he believed his extension program would "put a college degree within the reach of schoolteachers."
One was granted permission to live outside the Freshman Halls even though he had not requested such a privilege.
On admissions, Lowell continued Eliot's attempts to broaden the backgrounds of the entering class.
They proposed an international agreement in which participating nations would agree to "jointly use their economic and military force against any one of their number that goes to war or commits acts of hostility against another."
An editorial in the ''Harvard Alumni Bulletin'' criticized him for needlessly involving the university in a political dispute.
Lowell proved particularly opposed to readmission for those who had been expelled only for associating too closely with those more directly involved.
Freshmen were required to live in the Freshman Halls beginning in 1915.
Funeral services were held at Harvard's Memorial Church.
Student living arrangements embodied and intensified the problem.
In the short term, Lowell raised funds and initiated construction projects that would permit the College to house all its freshmen together.
He headed the Boston Municipal Research Bureau and chaired a Committee on the Reform of Judicial Procedure under the auspices of the Boston Chamber of Commerce.
The defense attorneys considered resigning when they determined that the Committee was biased against the defendants, but some of the defendants' most prominent supporters, including Harvard Law Professor Felix Frankfurter and Judge Julian W. Mack of the U.S.
Publicly he consistently adopted assimilation as the solution to absorbing other groups, limiting their numbers to levels he believed would allow American society to absorb them without being changed itself, a stance that "fused liberal and racist ideas in making the case for exclusion."
That produced two classes, the underprivileged living in Harvard Yard in out-of-date buildings and the upper crust living on the "Gold Coast" of Mt.
Eliot had abolished the requirement in Greek (1886) and Latin (1898) so that students from schools other than elite preparatory schools could gain entry.
In 1910, he wrote approvingly in private of excluding Chinese immigrants entirely and of Southern states that denied the franchise to black citizens.
He appointed Lowell to an Advisory Committee along with President Samuel Wesley Stratton of MIT and Probate Judge Robert Grant.
In 1920, the brother of a student who had recently committed suicide brought evidence of ongoing homosexual activity among the students to the College's Acting Dean Chester N. Greenough.
Some students organized their own petition in favor of the nomination.
Harvard would reach out to youths in smaller cities and towns, even to rural communities, with the guideline that the student place in the top seventh of his class.
Despite an official policy of integration, what freshmen experienced thereafter is not entirely clear.
Then President Wilson's specific proposal for the League of Nations met resistance from the Republican-controlled Senate and the opposition led by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts.
Never did I sneer at the Farewell Address; but I believe that the greatness of Washington was due to his looking the facts of his day in the face, and determining his conduct thereby, instead of by utterances, however wise of a hundred and fifty years before.
''Essays on Government'' appeared in 1889, designed to counter the arguments Woodrow Wilson made in his ''Congressional Government''.
As early as 1887, he wrote of the Irish: "What we need is not to dominate the Irish, but to absorb them.... We want them to become rich, and send their sons to our colleges, to share our prosperity and our sentiments.
He owned Conaumet Neck along the shores of Mashpee Pond.
On June 19, 1879, while a law student, he married a distant cousin, Anna Parker Lowell in King's Chapel in Boston and honeymooned in the Western U.S.
Lowell's appointment was generally well received, for though he had controversy in his past he had also at times demonstrated an independent streak.
After 7 years, enrollment reached 1500.
He published frequently in such periodicals as ''The Atlantic'' and ''Foreign Affairs''.
Lowell watched the high-minded debate deteriorate until the ideal of international cooperation was "sacrificed to party intrigue, personal antipathy, and pride of authorship."
Some black freshmen lived in the dormitories but believed that not all the Freshman Halls were open to them.
Educational practices were only one side of the crisis Lowell saw at Harvard.
In his view, the League's proponents, and especially the League's Republican proponents, needed to control public perception of Harding's victory, which everyone knew was certain.
Lowell continued to argue both in private correspondence and in public speeches that his rationale was the welfare of the Jewish students.
The affair dogged Lowell for the rest of his life.
Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Lowell helped found a civic organization to promote international cooperation to prevent future wars.
A few others who applied at long intervals, were so skillfully located in the Halls that no susceptible feelings were hurt."
As the admissions process changed over the years, Lowell recognized that the student body was divided sharply socially and by class, far from the cohesive body he remembered from a few decades earlier.
Large numbers of students, lacking intellectual ambition, chose their courses with little concern for learning, more intent on the ease with which they could fulfill the course requirements, resulting in a course of study that was "neither rigorous nor coherent."
Following Lowell's earlier reform of Harvard's admissions process to increase the admission of public school students, the Jewish proportion of the student body rose from 6% in 1908 to 22% in 1922, at a time when Jews constituted about 3% of the U.S. population.
Harvard had not built new dormitories even as the size of its undergraduate enrollment grew, so private capital constructed living quarters designed to serve as dormitory-like accommodations for those who afford it.
He cited what he saw as the parallel experience of hotels and clubs that lost their old membership when the proportion of Jewish members increased.
Lowell's uncompromising statement in support of academic freedom was a landmark event at a time when other universities were demanding compliant behavior from their faculty.
They could not allow the election to appear as a victory of anti-League Republicans over pro-League Democrats.
He ignored contemporary literature and current social trends.
After consulting with Lowell and under his authority, the Dean convened an ad hoc tribunal of administrators to investigate the charges.
African-American students had lived in Harvard’s dormitories for decades, until Lowell changed the policy.
He proposed limiting Jewish admissions to 15% of the entering class.
He analyzed the social divisions of the Harvard students in similar terms.
The claim in the "Statement of 31 Republicans" that a Harding victory meant brighter prospects for the League of Nations was badly received by some League proponents.
When their direct appeal to Lowell failed, the students organized public support from alumni and the press.
As one historian posed the question: "How could a consensus form around one who exasperated his friends as often as he confounded his enemies."
Harvard responded with a new Adjunct in Arts.
He feared—and recent developments at Columbia University supported him—that the social elite would cease sending its sons to Harvard as Jewish enrollment increased.
We owe to the colored man the same opportunities for education that we do to the white man; but we do not owe it to him to force him and the white into social relations that are not, or may not be, mutually congenial."
Lowell and many other prominent League supporters backed Harding, publishing a statement that became known as the "Letter of the 31 Republicans" on October 14, 1920.
When Lowell gained final approval of these modifications in 1926 and appointed a compliant Admissions Committee, he had won his way.
He transformed the earlier variety of scientific courses into the School for Industrial Foremen at MIT, later called the Lowell Institute School, and focused its program on mechanical and electrical engineering.
In the summer of 1919, the League to Enforce Peace published a book of essays modeled on the Federalist Papers called ''The Covenanter: An American Exposition of the Covenant of the League of Nations''.
They were the great-grandchildren of John Lowell and, on their mother's side, the grandchildren of Abbott Lawrence.
One Wisconsin minister suggested Lowell allow the black students to live "voluntarily" in a segregated section of the Freshman Halls.
Harold Laski, a tutor in political science of socialist views and still too young to have a scholarly reputation, supported the strikers.
One entire organization of independent voters chose James Cox, the Democratic candidate, who favored the League but showed no more flexibility than President Wilson.
By the time the debate ended, many questioned that independence.
In 1920, Harvard purchased the private dormitories on Mt.
In 1915, Kuno Meyer a professor at the University of Berlin who was considering a temporary Harvard appointment, protested the publication of an undergraduate's satirical poem in a college magazine.
Most criticism saw Lowell's stance as a submission to Southern prejudice.
When a Harvard alumnus threatened to withdraw a ten-million-dollar bequest unless a certain pro-German professor was dismissed, the Harvard Corporation refused to submit to his demand.
Harvard's Professor Zechariah Chafee paid tribute to Lowell's defense of Harvard's teachers and students by dedicating his 1920 study ''Free Speech in the United States'' to Lowell, "whose wisdom and courage in the face of uneasy fears and stormy criticism made it unmistakably plain that so long as he was president no one could breathe the air of Harvard and not be free."
We do not want to feel that they are among us and yet not really part of us."
In both cases the Harvard Board of Overseers insisted on the consistent application of liberal principles and overruled him.
In 1910 he led in the formation of a consortium of area schools, soon called the Commission on Extension Courses, that included Boston University, Boston College, MIT, Simmons, Tufts, Wellesley, and the Museum of Fine Arts.
The interplay of democratic and patrician instincts, and especially his insistence on defending his positions when others found then indefensible, made him hard for his contemporaries to grasp.
While at Harvard, he was a member of the Hasty Pudding and was later made an honorary member of the Phoenix S.K.
Auburn Street, the "centre of social life."
That was a logical extension of the trend in U.S. education that had modeled the university on the German system, including the German principle of student freedom in choosing courses.
By 1925, Jews made up 28% of the entering class.
From relatively early in his professional career, Lowell worried about the role of racial and ethnic minorities in American society.
Topics tended to history and government, with some science and music upon occasion.
Bruce’s lengthy reply underscored the irony of Lowell's position: "The policy of compulsory residence in the Freshman Halls is costly indeed if it is the thing that constrains Harvard to enter open-eyed and brusque upon a policy of racial discrimination."
Paired with the concentration requirement was a tutorial system in which every student had the guidance of a tutor to see he was prepared for examination in his area of concentration.
At a convention in Philadelphia's Independence Hall on June 17, 1915, with former President William Howard Taft presiding, one hundred noteworthy Americans announced the formation of the League to Enforce Peace.
The ''New York Times'' later wrote that Lowell "steadfastly refused to accede to the demands of the hysterically patriotic that German subjects be dropped from the curriculum."
It became the New Lecture Hall (later renamed Lowell Lecture Hall), at the corner of Oxford and Kneeland Streets, and held a 928-seat auditorium as well as 8 meeting rooms.
Lowell's construction projects, some based on the Freshman Halls and the College system, but including Widener Library, the Memorial Church and many others, had transformed the university's infrastructure.
When he became Harvard's President, Lowell exploited his two positions to press further.
Harding as president disappointed proponents of the League, but Lowell never regretted his decision to endorse him.
Charged with sacrificing his principles to expediency, Lowell admitted he had but provided his own definition of expediency: "striving to find the most effective way of achieving a principle—refusing to beat one's head uselessly against a wall to attack an entrenchment in face instead if taking it by a turning movement."
Sometime before 1906, he became an honorary vice-president of the Immigration Restriction League, an organization that promoted literacy tests and tightened enforcement of immigration laws.
Lowell authored 13 of its 27 essays.
Though some suspected this was nothing but a covert way to decrease Jewish enrollment, the policy had the opposite effect.
:I yield neither to Senator Borah nor to any other man in admiration of the Farewell Address and of the great Fathers of the Republic; but I would not use them as a cover for party politics.
If higher Jewish enrollment provoked greater prejudice against them, he asked, "How can we cause the Jews to feel and be regarded as an integral part of the student body?"
One of the most widely publicized confrontations saw Lowell debate Lodge, the League's most prominent opponent, in Boston’s Symphony Hall on March 19, 1919, with Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge presiding.
Yet his Harvard years saw two public disputes in which he argued for compromising basic principles of justice for the sake of his own personal vision of Harvard's mission with respect to assimilating non-traditional students.
"It is the duty of Harvard," he said, "to receive just as many boys who have come, or whose parents have come, to his country without our background as it can effectively educate."
His siblings included the poet Amy Lowell, the astronomer Percival Lowell, and Elizabeth Lowell Putnam, an early activist for prenatal care.
Senator Borah saw a lack of patriotism: "There are a vast number of people supporting the league of nations who never let an opportunity go by of belittling...everything that is truly American: and Dr. Lowell is one of them."
A defense attorney later noted ruefully that the release of the Committee's report "abruptly stilled the burgeoning doubts among the leaders of opinion in New England."
When Lowell learned in 1933 that other American schools had begun to award the Associate in Arts degree to students after the equivalent of just two years of work, he felt betrayed.
Instead, Harvard's new guiding principle in admissions would be the top seventh rule.
In retirement from Harvard, he lived on Marlborough St. in Boston's Back Bay and in Cotuit on Cape Cod.
Lowell's wife of 51 years, Anna Parker Lowell, died in the spring of 1930.
In 1900, Lowell succeeded his father as Trustee of the Lowell Institute, which Lowell's great-grandfather founded to subsidize public lectures and popular education programs.
It conducted more than 30 interviews behind closed doors and took action against eight students, a recent graduate, and an assistant professor.
Though some opposition to Brandeis was rooted in antisemitism, Brandeis himself viewed Lowell's opposition as driven by social class prejudice.
The first Freshman Halls open in 1914.
As the election of 1920 approached, the Republican nominee, Warren Harding, campaigned on the domestic issues that united his party and sent confusing signals about his support for a League of Nations.
He joined 54 others in signing a letter claiming that Brandeis lacked the requisite "legal temperament and capacity."
So dominant was Harvard's role in American education that all large American colleges and universities had adopted the elective system by 1904.
Lowell graduated from Noble and Greenough School in 1873 and attended Harvard College where he presented a thesis for honors in mathematics that addressed using quaternions to treat quadrics and graduated in 1877.
There were certainly many colored students in Cambridge when we were there and no question ever arose."
During the Boston police strike of 1919, Lowell called upon Harvard's students "to help in any way...to maintain order and support the laws of the Commonwealth" by providing security in place of the strikers.
Years before, he had given $10,500 to purchase a 13-inch telescope for his deceased brother Percival's Lowell Observatory, which in 1930 gained fame as the Pluto Discovery Telescope.
Auburn Street "so that the student body may enjoy what was the privilege of the few."
In 1927, Massachusetts Governor Alvan T. Fuller was facing last minute appeals to grant clemency to Sacco and Vanzetti, whose case had attracted attention worldwide.
The founders included Alexander Graham Bell, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, James Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore, and Edward Filene on behalf of the recently founded U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
After two weeks of hearing witnesses and reviewing evidence, the trio produced a report largely authored by Lowell that criticized the judge in the case but deemed the trial fair.
Lowell was elected to the Executive Committee.
Supporters of the convicted men denounced the Committee.
Also among the new campus buildings of Lowell's tenure was the President's House (later called Loeb House) at 17 Quincy Street, which Lowell commissioned from his cousin Guy Lowell.
He also recognized the university's obligation to serve the surrounding community, particularly in making college courses available to and putting college degrees within the reach of local schoolteachers.
As public opinion on the nomination divided along ideological lines, Lowell joined the Republican establishment, particularly that of his Boston Brahmin class, in opposition.
It appealed to all student types, those intellectually curious and energetic as well as the lazy without intellectual ambition.
Lowell immediately embarked upon a series of reforms that were both academic and social in nature.
During his years as president, enrollment at the College expanded from 3,000 to 8,000 and its endowment grew from $23 to $123 million.
Members of the University's Board of Overseers began to talk of dismissing Laski, which provoked a threat from Lowell: "If the Overseers ask for Laski's resignation they will get mine!"
One of them, Franklin D. Roosevelt, wrote: "It seems to be a pity that the matter ever came up in this way.
Despite the basic divide between the older Jewish immigrants, usually of German origin, and the lower class of more recently arrived Eastern European Jews, Lowell found no ally there who would articulate his view of "desirable" and "undesirable" Jews.
In 1897, Lowell became lecturer, and in 1898, professor of government at Harvard.
Two black students did live there during World War I without incident.
He accused Bruce of insisting on a change of policy and employed an argument about minority presence provoking prejudice that he also used about the same time in the Jewish quota dispute.
Lowell’s long-term solution was a residential system that he only achieved with the opening of the residential houses in 1930.
As long ago as 1902 Lowell had decried the "great danger of a snobbish separation of the students on lines of wealth," resulting in "the loss of that democratic feeling which ought to lie at the basis of university life."
In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson nominated Louis Brandeis, a private attorney renowned as a liberal opponent of monopolies and proponent of social reform legislation, to serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
One Harvard graduate, who had just formed the New Hampshire committee to raise funds for the University's endowment, wrote: "One can understand a Republican partisan and respect him.
The idea was immediately denounced by Irish and black groups and by the American Federation of Labor.
Roughly a third of the students were teachers, a third office workers, and the remainder working at home.
In 1909, he became president of the American Political Science Association.
His first scholarly publications appeared before he undertook an academic career.
The applicant who had raised the question decided to live elsewhere.
Lowell was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, joining his father and brother, in 1897.
In the other, he tried to ban African-American students from living in the Freshman Halls when all Harvard's new students were required to room there.
Lowell replied that such a plan "seems to me to be something like the Jim Crow car, an enforced seclusion which is, to me, very repulsive."
The faculty committee eventually rejected Lowell's proposed quota.
Lowell then found another way to accomplish his goal, this time less publicly.
His publishing career continued with the appearance of ''Colonial Civil Service'' in 1900, and ''The Government of England'' in two volumes in 1908.
He resigned his position as Harvard's president on Nov 21, 1932, and served through the following summer.
They were expelled or had their association with the university severed.
If the League lost a referendum in that way, there would be no hope for its revival under the new administration.
Though courses were comparable, the programs and requirements were different, since the many specialized courses required of the College students could not be offered in the Extension Program.
The question was turned over to a faculty committee: the Committee on Methods of Sifting Candidates for Admission.
That debate proved gentlemanly, since Lowell believed that the resolution of the policy dispute required Wilson and Lodge to compromise.
Lowell stood his ground: "It is not a departure from the past to refuse to compel white and colored men to room in the same building.
Its oratory had failed to engage the public at large, he thought, so public opinion remained "indifferent" to its call for muscular internationalism, leaving isolation or at least inaction to win the day.
With the election just weeks away, whole groups of League proponents chose different sides.
Harold Laski said the decision represented Lowell's "loyalty to his class."
The numbers of students from public schools grew steadily, forming a majority by 1913.
He believed that only a homogeneous society could safeguard the achievements of American democracy.
I will trust the American people not to mistake short-sightedness for patriotism or narrow-mindedness for love of country.
Of those who wrote to Lowell, blacks saw his position as unqualified racism.
Lowell's health declined slowly and his lifelong hearing problems worsened.
A balanced series on "Soviet Russia after Thirteen Years" was an exception.
He cared little about Wilson’s specific plan or the details of the reservations or amendments Lodge wanted to attach for the Senate to give its assent.
He first won approval from the Harvard Board of Overseers for a new policy that would, in addition to traditional academic criteria, use letters from teachers and interviews to assess an applicant's "aptitude and character," thus introducing discretion in the place of the strict top seventh rule.
"For the colored man to claim that he is entitled to have the white man compelled to live with him is a very unfortunate innovation which, far from doing him good, would increase a prejudice which, as you and I will thoroughly agree, is most unfortunate and probably growing."
Lowell was born on December 13, 1856 in Boston, Massachusetts, the second son of Augustus Lowell and Katherine Bigelow Lowell.
He wrote: "the name of Associate in Arts has been degraded, probably beyond recovery, by wicked, thievish, and otherwise disreputable institutions."
Lowell wrote this explanation to Roscoe Conkling Bruce, himself an African American Harvard alumnus and the father of an incoming freshman: "We have not thought it possible to compel men of different races to reside together."
At Harvard University his years as president saw a remarkable expansion of the university in terms of the size of its physical infrastructure, its student body, and its endowment.
When a few were excluded after the war they raised no protest.
As early as his service on an ad hoc faculty Committee on Improving Instruction in 1903, he had determined that the elective system was a failure.
The Harvard president replied in kind:
Circuit Court of Appeals, persuaded them to stay because Lowell "was not entirely hopeless."
His progressive reputation in education derived principally from his insistence on integrating social classes at Harvard and preventing students of wealthy backgrounds from living apart from their less wealthy peers, a position for which he was sometimes termed "a traitor to his class."
During World War I, when American universities were under great pressure to demonstrate their unambiguous commitment to the American war effort, Harvard under Lowell established a distinguished record of independence.
To the education programs Lowell brought his instinct for organization.
Lowell dismantled the elective system and in its place established concentration (what is commonly call a "major") and distribution requirements that would soon become the new American model.
He also became head of the Motion Picture Research Council, a group established to promote studies of the social values of motion pictures.
Lowell now implemented a second, equally revolutionary restructuring of undergraduate education.
The ''New York Times'' called it a "masterly analysis" and thought it perfectly suited for a broad public: "This—thank Heaven—is a brochure for the lazy-minded!"
When the schoolteachers asked why they were not entitled to the same bachelor's degree as the Harvard College students, Lowell defended the distinction.
Stating that "any popular education at the present day should be systematic," he hired Harvard professors to repeat their courses for an audience of adults in Boston in the late afternoon or evening, promising the same quality and examinations.
"We have endeavored to maintain the right of all members of the university to express themselves freely, without censorship or supervision by the authorities of the university, and have applied this rule impartially to those who favor Germany and those who favor the Allies—to the former in the face of a pretty violent agitation for muzzling professors by alumni of the university and outsiders."
When Lowell left his position in 1933, Jews made up 10% of the undergraduate population.
Harvard Dean Henry Aaron Yeomans, later Lowell's biographer, frankly admitted that he and Lowell as administrators found a way to accommodate themselves to the Overseer's stated principle: "The matter was settled in theory, and in practice no serious difficulties were encountered.
All agreed to provide similar courses and agreed to award the degree of Associate in Arts to students who completed the equivalent of a college program.
Whites either saw it as a violation of Harvard's traditions or applauded it in frankly racist terms.
He took the progressive side on certain public issues as well.
In 1936, on the day when Harvard's 300th anniversary was celebrated, 28 Harvard alumni attacked Lowell for his role in the case, including editor Malcolm Cowley, scholar Newton Arvin, and author John Dos Passos.
Under his predecessor, Charles W. Eliot, Harvard had replaced the single standardized undergraduate course with a system that allowed students free choice of electives.
Lowell had sharper exchanges with the die-hard Republican isolationist Senator William Borah of Idaho.
Throughout the 40 years he headed the Institute, Lowell's selection of topics and lecturers for the public series reflected his conservative tastes.
His reform of undergraduate education established the system of majoring in a particular discipline that became the standard in American education.
