Notable Abenaki from this area include the documentary filmmaker Alanis Obomsawin (National Film Board of Canada).
If there was not total understanding, the debate would stop until there was understanding.
The homeland of the Abenaki, which they call ''Ndakinna'' (our land), extended across most of northern New England, southern Quebec, and the southern Canadian Maritimes.
Since the year 2000, the total Abenaki population (on and off reserve) has doubled to 2,101 members in 2011.
The other major tribe, the Western Abenaki, lived in the Connecticut River valley in Vermont, New Hampshire and Massachusetts.
The Sokoki (the Abenaki Nation at Missisquoi) are located along the Missisquoi River in northwestern Vermont, with tribal headquarters in Swanton.
The St Francis Missisquoi Tribe owns forest land in the town of Brunswick, centered around the Brunswick Springs.
Because of this, descendants of nearly every southern New England Algonquian tribe can be found among the Abenaki people.
When the Wampanoag people under King Philip (Metacomet) fought the English colonists in New England in 1675 in King Philip's War, the Abenaki joined the Wampanoag.
The Missiquoi lived along the eastern shore of Lake Champlain.
The Third Abenaki War (1722–25), called Father Rale's War, erupted when the French Jesuit missionary Sébastien Rale (or Rasles, 1657?-1724) encouraged the Abenaki to halt the spread of Yankee settlements.
The Abenaki from St. Francois continued to raid British settlements in their former homelands along the New England frontier during Father Le Loutre's War (see Northeast Coast Campaign (1750)) and the French and Indian War.
In this they differed from the six Iroquois tribes to the west in New York, and from many other North American Indian tribes who had matrilineal societies.
In New Hampshire the Abenaki, along with other Native American groups, have proposed legislation for recognition as a minority group.
Others worry that the Abenaki may use recognition as a step toward opening a casino.
They erect a pole planted in the earth, and if anyone disagrees, he strikes the pole.
The Abenaki language is closely related to the Panawahpskek (Penobscot) language.
The Abenaki settled in the Sillery region of Quebec between 1676 and 1680, and subsequently, for about twenty years, lived on the banks of the Chaudière River near the falls, before settling in Odanak and Wôlinak in the early eighteenth century.
Over 5,000 people visit the Abenaki Museum annually.
New Hampshire has considered expanding gambling separate from the Native Americans.
It has come close to extinction as a spoken language.
The Penobscot Indian Nation and the Passamaquoddy People have been federally recognized as tribes in the United States.
The remaining Abenaki people live in multi-racial towns and cities across Canada and the U.S.A., mainly in Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and northern New England.
During the Anglo-French wars, the Abenaki were allies of France, having been displaced from Ndakinna by immigrating English people.
If there was a disagreement, the facilitator would tell the groups to discuss again.
This bill was debated in 2010 in the state legislature.
Peace conferences at Boston and Casco Bay brought an end to the war.
The Abenaki want to gain formal state recognition as a people.
On May 7, 2012, the Abenaki Nation at Missisquoi and the Koasek Traditional Band of the Koas Abenaki Nation received recognition by the State of Vermont.
Vermont granted recognition of the council the same year, but later withdrew it.
There are about 3,200 Abenaki living in Vermont and New Hampshire, without reservations, chiefly around Lake Champlain.
The Massachusetts government then declared war and bloody battles were fought at Norridgewock (1724), where Rasles was killed, and at a daylong battle at the Indian village near present-day Fryeburg, Maine, on the upper Saco River (1725).
The man would give the woman a box made of a fine wood, which was decorated with the virtues of the woman; the woman would give a similar box to the man.
The unrecognized majority are off-reserve members, living in various cities and towns across Canada and the United States.
Dedicated to preserving the culture of the Natives in New Hampshire, the group is one of the chief supporters of the HB 1610; the Abenaki, the main tribe in the state, are the only people named specifically in the bill.
If there is no consensus for change, they agree to keep the status quo.
As noted above, facing annihilation, many Abenaki had begun emigrating to Canada, then under French control, around 1669.
In 1614, Thomas Hunt captured 24 young Abenaki people and took them to England.
The collection features commonly known and less known modern writers as well as historical documents from Abenakis and their ancestors.
The Sokoki-St. Francis Band of the Abenaki Nation organized a tribal council in 1976 at Swanton, Vermont.
Facing annihilation from English attacks and epidemics of new infectious diseases, the Abenaki started to emigrate to Quebec around 1669.
Other less major, but still important, parts of their diet included game and fish from hunting and fishing, and wild plants.
Generally the men were the hunters.
The Abenaki hold on to their traditions and ways of life in several ways.
Children born to a married couple belonged to the mother's clan, and her eldest brother was an important mentor, especially for boys.
The disagreement must be resolved or the marriage does not happen.
This story would be used to show a child the pitfalls of pride.
The language is holophrastic, meaning that a phrase or an entire sentence is expressed by a single word.
The English settlement of New England and frequent wars forced many Abenaki to retreat to Quebec.
These contributions by Native American Abenaki peoples went largely unreported.
Tribal connections were lost as those Abenaki who were tolerated by the Anglo population were assimilated into colonial society.
In those days, the Abenaki practiced a subsistence economy based on hunting, fishing, trapping, berry picking and on growing corn, beans, squash, potatoes and tobacco.
Accounts of life with the Abenaki can be found in the captivity narratives written by women taken captive by the Abenaki from the early New England settlements: Mary Rowlandson (1682), Hannah Duston (1702); Elizabeth Hanson (1728); Susannah Willard Johnson (1754); and Jemima Howe (1792).
These springs are believed to be a sacred traditional religious site of the Abanaki.
On April 22, 2011, Vermont officially recognized two Abenaki bands: the Nulhegan Band of the Coosuk-Abenaki and the El Nu Abenaki Tribe.
Group decision-making was done by a consensus method.
It has a chief, a council of elders, and methods and means for election to the council and chieftainship, as well as requirements for citizenship in the tribe.
Unlike the Iroquois, the Abenaki were patrilineal.
In addition to the debates, there was a goal of total understanding for all members.
On May 7, 2012, the Abenaki Nation at Missisquoi and the Koasek Traditional Band of the Koas Abenaki Nation received recognition by the State of Vermont.
Several Abenaki companies include: in Wôlinak, General Fiberglass Engineering employs a dozen natives, with annual sales of more than $3 million Canadian dollars.
In ''Reflections in Bullough's Pond'', historian Diana Muir argues that Abenaki neighbors, pre-contact Iroquois, were an imperialist, expansionist culture whose cultivation of the corn/beans/squash agricultural complex enabled them to support a large population.
Odanak is now active in transportation and distribution.
The raids stopped when the war ended.
The Pennacook lived along the Merrimack River in southern New Hampshire.
The governor of New France allocated two seigneuries (large self-administered areas similar to feudal fiefs).
The '''Abenaki''' ('''Abnaki''', '''''Alnôbak''''') are a Native American tribe and First Nation.
On May 7, 2012, the Abenaki Nation at Missisquoi and the Koasek of the Koas Abenaki Traditional Band received recognition by the State of Vermont.
The maritime Abenaki lived around the St. Croix and Wolastoq (Saint John River) valleys near the boundary line between Maine and New Brunswick.
The bill would create a state commission on Native American relations, which would act as an advisory group to the governor and the state government in general.
Lydia Maria Child wrote of the Abenaki in her short story, "The Church in the Wilderness" (1828).
They also list many of the different traditions they uphold, such as the different dances they perform and what those dances mean.
On April 22, 2011, Vermont officially recognized two Abenaki bands: the Nulhegan Band of the Coosuk-Abenaki and the El Nu Abenaki Tribe.
The Abenaki smash the flowers and leaves of Ranunculus acris and sniff them for headaches.
The men would hunt bears, deer, fish, & birds.
For example, since 1960, the Odanak Historical Society has managed the first and one of the largest aboriginal museums in Quebec, a few miles from the Quebec-Montreal axis.
The Abenaki also built long houses similar to those of the Iroquois.
Storytelling is a major part of Abenaki culture.
The Abenaki are featured in Charles McCarry's historical novel ''Bride of the Wilderness'' (1988), and James Archibald Houston's novel ''Ghost Fox'' (1977), both of which are set in the eighteenth century; and in Jodi Picoult's ''Second Glance'' (2003) and ''Lone Wolf'' (2012) novels, set in the contemporary world.
Smallpox affected the Abenaki again in 1649, and diphtheria came through 10 years later.
Their traditional land is along the river, extending to its outlet at Lake Champlain.
This was performed under the auspices of the Brandon School of the Feeble-Minded, and the Vermont Reform School.
A century later, fewer than 1,000 Abenaki remained after the American Revolution.
#Power: Does it preserve the integrity of the group?
Much of the trapping was done by the people, and traded to the English colonists for durable goods.
Before the Abenaki—except the Pennacook and Mi'kmaq—had contact with the European world, their population may have numbered as many as 40,000.
In December 2012, Vermont's Nulhegan Abanaki Tribe created a tribal forest in the town of Barton.
The bill would allow for the creation and sale of goods to be labeled as Native-made, to create a source of income for the Natives in New Hampshire.
The state noted that many Abenaki had been assimilated, and only small remnants remained on reservations during and after the French and Indian War, later eugenics projects further decimated the Abenaki people of America through forced sterilization and questionable 'miscarriages' at birth.
The Abenaki who chose to remain in the United States did not fare as well as their Canadian counterparts.
Some people have opposed the bill, as they fear it may lead to Abenaki land claims for property now owned and occupied by European Americans.
For example, the word for "white man" ''awanoch'' is a combination of the words ''awani'' meaning "who" and ''uji'' meaning "from".
The first epidemic was an unknown sickness occurring sometime between 1564 and 1570, and the second one was typhus in 1586.
Most Abenaki crafted dome-shaped, bark-covered wigwams for housing, though a few preferred oval-shaped long houses.
These rings are the outward and visible sign of the unity of this couple.
Smallpox affected the Native Americans in 1677, 1679, 1687, along with measles, 1691, 1729, 1733, 1755, and finally in 1758.
The Elnu Abenaki tribe focuses mainly on  carrying on the traditions of their ancestors  through their children and teaching about their culture.
Since no party agreed to territorial boundaries, there was regular conflict among them.
What familial groups remained were often eradicated, in the early 20th century, through forced sterilization and pregnancy termination policies in Vermont.
Modern Abenaki writers as well as historical Abenaki-written documents are featured in the anthology ''Dawnland Voices'', edited by Siobhan Senier.
This forest was established with assistance from the Vermont Sierra Club and the Vermont Land Trust.
The numerous groups of Natives in the state have created a New Hampshire Inter-tribal Council, which holds statewide meetings and powwows.
Everyone in the tribe must agree to the marriage.
Multiple epidemics arrived a decade prior to the English settlement of Massachusetts in 1620, when three separate sicknesses swept across New England and the Canadian Maritimes.
The forest contains .
On April 22, 2011, Vermont officially recognized two Abenaki tribes: the Nulhegan Band of the Coosuk-Abenaki and the Elnu Abenaki Tribe.
The Abenaki live in Quebec and the Maritimes of Canada and in the New England region of the United States, a region called ''Wabanahkik'' ("Dawn Land") in the Eastern Algonquian languages.
They made war primarily against neighboring Algonquian peoples, including the Abenaki.
During Queen Anne's War in 1702, the Abenaki were allied with the French; they raided numerous small villages in Maine, Wells to Casco, killing about 300 settlers over ten years.
In 1982, the band applied for federal recognition, which is still pending.
At the time, many of the children who were sterilized were not even aware of what the physicians had done to them.
Tribal members are working to revive the Abenaki language at Odanak (means "in the village"), a First Nations Abenaki reserve near Pierreville, Quebec, and throughout New Hampshire, Vermont and New York state.
As listed below, there were numerous smaller bands and tribes who shared many cultural traits.
The first was on the Saint Francis River and is now known as the ''Odanak'' Indian Reservation; the second was founded near Bécancour and is called the ''Wolinak'' Indian Reservation.
The Eastern Abenaki population was concentrated in portions of Maine east of New Hampshire's White Mountains.
In this way, the word for "white man" literally translates to "Who is this man and where does he come from?"
In the 1990 U.S. Census, 1,549 people identified themselves as Abenaki.
It contains a hunting camp and maple sugaring facilities which are administered cooperatively by the Nulhegan.
The Abenaki pushed back the line of white settlement by devastating raids on scattered farmhouses and small villages.
So did 2,544 people in the 2000 U.S census, with 6,012 people claiming Abenaki heritage.
must have equal say, so each group would elect a spokesperson.
When he marries, he keeps all his hair in a braid, shaving only the side and back of the head.
These two Abenaki reserves continue to grow and develop.
They came together as a post-contact community after their original tribes were decimated by colonization, disease, and warfare.
The development of tourism projects has allowed the Canadian Abenaki to develop a modern economy, while preserving their culture and traditions.
The council would be under the Department of Cultural Resources, so it would be in the same department as the State Council on the Arts.
Two tribal communities formed in Canada, one once known as Saint-Francois-du-lac near Pierreville, Quebec (now called Odanak, Abenaki for "coming home"), and the other near Bécancour (now known as Wôlinak) on the south shore of the Saint Lawrence River, directly across the river from Trois-Rivières.
Some captives were adopted into the Mohawk and Abenaki tribes; older captives were generally ransomed, and the colonies carried on a brisk trade.
For three years there was fighting along the Maine frontier in the First Abenaki War.
This enabled them to support their own populations large enough to have sufficient warriors to defend against the threat of Iroquois conquest.
The modernized spiritual version has the man with a girlfriend tying his hair and braiding it.
Around 20,000 would have been Eastern Abenaki, another 10,000 would have been Western Abenaki, and the last 10,000 would have been Maritime Abenaki.
The war was settled by a peace treaty in 1678, with the Wampanoag more than decimated and many Native survivors having been sold into slavery in Bermuda.
When the waterfall does not respond, Azban dives into the waterfall to try to outshout it; he is swept away because of his pride.
Each man had different hunting territories inherited through his father.
In 2006, the state of Vermont officially recognized the Abenaki as a People, but not a Tribe.
The new diseases continued to strike in epidemics, starting with smallpox in 1631, 1633, and 1639.
The Abenaki were a farming society that supplemented agriculture with hunting and gathering.
The film ''Northwest Passage'' (1940) is based on a novel of the same name by Roberts.
In much the same way as the Christian marriage tradition, there is an (optional) exchange and blessing of wedding rings.
Maine was hit very hard during the year of 1617, with a fatality rate of 75%, and the population of the Eastern Abenaki fell to about 5,000.
Several Abenaki characters and much about their 18th-century culture are featured in the Kenneth Roberts novel ''Arundel'' (1930).
The chief and political leader of the Nulhegan Band is Don Stevens.
The collection also includes writings from several other native New England tribes.
They are one of the Algonquian-speaking peoples of northeastern North America.
The spiritual meaning surrounding this cut is most importantly to indicate betrothal or fidelity as a married Abenaki man.
Basket weaving remains a traditional activity for members of both communities.
All Abenaki tribes lived a lifestyle similar to the Algonquian-speaking peoples of southern New England.
Each smaller group would send the decision of the group to an impartial facilitator.
It is used not only as entertainment but also as a teaching method.
Not all Abenaki natives fought on the side of the French, however; many remained on their native lands in the northern colonies.
Smallpox struck in 1670, and influenza in 1675.
The homes there were bark-covered wigwams shaped in a way similar to the teepees of the Great Plains Indians.
Changes in the hair style were symbolic of a complex courtship process.
Together these Vermont forests are the only Abanaki held lands outside of the existing reservations in Quebec and Maine.
The Nulhegan are located in the Northeast Kingdom of Vermont, with tribal headquarters in Brownington, and the Elnu Abenaki are located in southeastern Vermont with tribal headquarters in Jamaica, Vermont.
It was documented in the 1911 "Preliminary Report of the Committee of the Eugenic Section of the American Breeder's Association to Study and to Report on the Best Practical Means for Cutting Off the Defective Germ-Plasm in the Human Population."
The idea is that every group (family, band, tribe, etc.)
During several of these dances there is no photography allowed, out of respect for the culture.
The Abenaki people also call themselves ''Alnôbak'', meaning "Real People" (c.f., Lenape language: ''Lenapek'') and by the autonym ''Alnanbal,'' meaning "men".
The Abenaki were traditionally allied with the French; during the reign of Louis XIV, Chief Assacumbuit was designated a member of the French nobility for his service.
Four Abenaki tribes are located in Vermont.
The three sisters were grown together: the stalk of corn supported the beans, and squash or pumpkins provided ground cover and reduced weeds.
The Abenaki view stories as having lives of their own and being aware of how they are used.
No documentation of informed consent for these procedures was found.
During the winter, the Abenaki lined the inside of their conical wigwams with bear and deer skins for warmth.
#Righteousness: Is it moral?
After Rale died the Abenaki moved to a settlement on the St. Francis River.
In 1991 Canadian Abenaki numbered 945; by 2006 they numbered 2,164.
When a man would find a girlfriend, he would tie his hair.
These truths guide all group deliberations, and the goal is to reach a consensus.
Traditionally, Abenaki men kept their hair long and loose.
During the European colonization of North America, the land occupied by the Abenaki was in the area between the new colonies of England in Massachusetts and the French in Quebec.
Other neighboring Wabanaki tribes, the Mi'kmaq, Wolastoqiyik (Maliseet), and Pestomuhkati (Passamaquoddy), and other Eastern Algonquian languages share many linguistic similarities.
For several, there are instructions such as "All stand while it is sung" or "All Stand to Show Respect."
The Sokoki do so in the current constitution for their government.
One of the stories is of Azban the Raccoon.
"Abenaki" is a linguistic and geographic grouping; historically there was not a strong central authority.
These villages occasionally had to be fortified, depending on the alliances and enemies of other tribes or of Europeans near the village.
The name "Abenaki" was derived from the terms ''w8bAn'' (light) and ''Aki'' (land), which mean "people in the rising sun" or "people of the East".
When the Massachusetts militia tried to seize Rasles, the Abenaki raided the settlements at Brunswick, Arrowsick, and Merry-Meeting Bay.
An anecdote from this period tells the story of a warrior named Nescambuit, who killed more than 140 enemies of King Louis XIV of France and received the rank of knight.
In their fields, they planted the crops in groups of "sisters".
#Peace: Is this preserved?
After this period the only Abenaki that remained in the United States were those who could pass for white, or avoid capture and subsequent dissolution of their families through forced interment in "schools" after their sterilization.
Bands came together during the spring and summer at temporary villages near rivers, or somewhere along the seacoast for planting and fishing.
But, the bill specifically says that "this act shall not be interpreted to provide any Native American or Abenaki person with any other special rights or privileges that the state does not confer on or grant to other state residents."
Seven years later, an unknown epidemic struck, with influenza passing through the following year.
The Abenaki are one of the five members of the Wabanaki Confederacy.
The women tended the fields and grew the crops.
Four Abenaki communities are located in Vermont.
The Abenaki population continued to decline, but in 1676, they took in thousands of refugees from many southern New England tribes displaced by settlement and King Philip's War.
When he married, he would attach the hair of the scalp with a piece of leather and shave all but the ponytail.
The biological father had a lesser role.
During the winter, the Abenaki lived in small groups further inland.
There were over 3,400 reported cases of sterilization of Abenaki having been performed, many of which involved termination of an unborn fetus.
Children were not to be mistreated, and so instead of punishing the child, they would be told a story.
They also produced baskets, made of ash and sweet grass, for picking wild berries, and boiled maple sap to make syrup.
The more isolated Western Abenaki suffered fewer fatalities, losing about half of their original population of 10,000.
Stories were used as a means of teaching children behavior.
