In 1319, the Great Charter of Robert the Bruce transformed Aberdeen into a property-owning and financially independent community.
Royal Aberdeen also hosted the Scottish Open in 2014, won by Justin Rose.
Geologists had speculated about the existence of oil and gas in the North Sea since the middle of the 20th century, but tapping its deep and inhospitable waters was another story.
Since their formation, Aberdeen Oilers have played in the British Floorball Northern League and went on to win the league in the 2008/09 season.
Three of the team's swimmers qualified for the 2006 Commonwealth Games.
The Fisheries Research Services are headquartered in Aberdeen, and there is a marine research lab in Torry.
The local dialect of Lowland Scots is often known as ''Doric'', and is spoken not just in the city, but across the north-east of Scotland.
In the European Parliament the city is represented by six MEPs as part of the all-inclusive Scotland constituency.
After first being mooted some 60 years ago and being held up for the past five years by a number of legal challenges, Aberdeen's long-awaited Western Peripheral Route was finally given the go-ahead after campaigners lost their appeal to the UK Supreme Court in October 2012.
There are three commercial radio stations operating in the city: Northsound Radio, which runs Northsound 1 and Northsound 2, and independent station Original 106.
Former Wanderers' player Jason White was captain of the Scotland national rugby union team.
There is a conservatory used as a seating area and a fountain made of fourteen different granites, presented to the people by the granite polishers and master builders of Aberdeen.
In 1903, the vocational education component of the college was designated a Central Institution and was renamed as the Robert Gordon Institute of Technology in 1965.
Following the May 2007 elections the Liberal Democrats formed a new coalition with the Scottish National Party.
The city is also home to the Scottish Premiership Division One rugby club Aberdeen GSFP RFC who play at Rubislaw Playing Fields, and Aberdeenshire RFC which was founded in 1875 and runs Junior, Senior Men's, Senior Ladies and Touch sections from the Woodside Sports Complex and also Aberdeen Wanderers RFC.
The park forms a natural amphitheatre located in the Denburn Valley and is an oasis of peace and calm in the city centre.
This is the first team which Aberdeen has enjoyed since the Granite City Oilers were wound up in the late 1990s.
The traditional shopping streets are Union Street and George Street, now complemented by shopping centres, notably the Bon Accord & St Nicholas and the Trinity Shopping Centre.
In 1804, St Peter's Church, the first permanent Roman Catholic church in the city after the Reformation was built.
The expensive infrastructure works led to the city becoming bankrupt in 1817 during the Post-Napoleonic depression, an economic downturn immediately after the Napoleonic wars; but the city's prosperity later recovered.
Unlike other Scottish cities where sandstone has been used, the buildings are not weathering and need very little structural maintenance on their masonry.
who no longer play.
With large grass pitches it is widely used for field sports.
''Bon Accord'' is the motto of the city and is French for "Good Agreement".
Water supplies are provided by Scottish Water.
The city won the 2006 Scotland in Bloom "Best City" award along with the International Cities in Bloom award.
It is operated by CrossCountry, leaving Aberdeen at 08:20 and taking 13 hours and 23 minutes to complete.
During the mid-18th to mid-20th centuries, Aberdeen's buildings incorporated locally quarried grey granite, which can sparkle like silver because of its high mica content.
Stoneywood, Glentanar F.C., Sunnybank and Hermes F.C..
Ceilidhs are also common in the city's halls.
Conversely, an Aberdeen postcode has the second highest number of millionaires of any postcode in the UK.
Being sited between two river mouths, the city has little natural exposure of bedrock.
Two weather stations collect climate data for the area, Aberdeen/Dyce Airport, and Craibstone.
Mediaeval (or ecclesiastical) Latin has it as ''Aberdonia''.
With energy still providing the backbone of the local economy, recent years have seen massive new investment in the North Sea owing to rising oil prices and favorable government tax incentives.
Infrastructure in private hands includes electricity, gas and telecoms.
The traditional industries of fishing, paper-making, shipbuilding, and textiles have been overtaken by the oil industry and Aberdeen's seaport.
Nicknames include the ''Granite City'', the ''Grey City'' and the ''Silver City with the Golden Sands''.
In 2015, a study was published in The Scotsman which analysed the presence of branded fast food outlets in Scotland.
The city also has two meetinghouses of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
It is still widely present in the city, throughout street names, business names and the city's Bon Accord shopping mall.
In 2007 additions were made and a new ticket office was built in the building.
There are six major roads in and out of the city.
Situated next to each other, Victoria Park and Westburn Park cover  between them.
Aberdeen's largest denominations are the Church of Scotland (through the Presbytery of Aberdeen) and the Roman Catholic Church, both with numerous churches across the city, with the Scottish Episcopal Church having the third-largest number.
The council began major road improvements at the end of the 18th century with the main thoroughfares of George Street, King Street and Union Street all completed at the beginning of the 19th century.
The city was incorporated in 1891.
Aberdeen Warriors rugby league team play in the Scotland Rugby League Conference Division One.
Legend tells that its use dates from a password used by Robert the Bruce during the 14th century Wars of Scottish Independence, when he and his men laid siege to the English-held Aberdeen Castle before destroying it in 1308.
*'''Ambulance:''' The North East divisional headquarters of the Scottish Ambulance Service is located in Aberdeen.
In February 2012 the University of Aberdeen also hosted the Inter Varsity Folk Dance Festival, the longest running folk festival in the United Kingdom.
The A944 also heads west, through Westhill and on to Alford.
Every year the annual Doric Festival takes place in Aberdeenshire to celebrate the history of the north-east's language.
The Aberdeen Roughnecks American football club are a new team which started in 2012.
During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms of 1644–1647 the city was plundered by both sides.
In August 2009 a councillor resigned from the Liberal Democrats and became an independent.
Aberdeen is well regarded for the agricultural and soil research carried out at The James Hutton Institute (formerly the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute), which has close links to the city's two universities.
The main concert hall is the Music Hall on Union Street, built in 1822.
Duthie Park opened in 1899 on the north bank of the River Dee.
Virgin Trains East Coast and the Caledonian Sleeper operate direct trains to London.
Aberdeen is connected to the UK National Cycle Network, and has a track to the south connecting to cities such as Dundee and Edinburgh and one to the north that forks about  from the city into two different tracks heading to Inverness and Fraserburgh respectively.
Seafarers' welfare organisation, Apostleship of the Sea has a  port chaplain in Aberdeen to offer practical and pastoral support to them.
Opposite to the north is Westburn Park opened in 1901.
The city is built on many hills, with the original beginnings of the city growing from Castle Hill, St. Catherine's Hill and Windmill Hill.
There is also a mosque in Old Aberdeen which serves the Islamic community in the city, and an Orthodox Jewish Synagogue established in 1945.
In March 2004, Aberdeen was awarded Fairtrade City status by the Fairtrade Foundation.
Aberdeen boasts a large cricket community with 4 local leagues operating that comprise a total of 25 clubs fielding 36 teams.
The most notable are Aberdeen Grammar School (founded in 1257), Harlaw Academy, Cults Academy, and Oldmachar Academy which were all rated in the top 50 Scottish secondary schools league tables published by ''The Times'' in 2005.
To the south side of the city, coastal cliffs expose high-grade metamorphic rocks of the Grampian Group; to the south-west and west are extensive granites intruded into similar high-grade schists; to the north the metamorphics are intruded by gabbroic complexes instead.
The city is also home to STV North (formerly ''Grampian Television''), which produces the regional news programmes such as ''STV News at Six'', as well as local commercials.
In common with many other major towns and cities in the UK, Aberdeen has an active roller derby league, Granite City Roller Girls.
Though Brittonic was spoken in Southern Scotland (part of ''yr Hen Ogledd'') up to medieval times, as evidenced (for example) by the poem ''Y Gododdin'', Aberdeen was in Pictish territory and became Gaelic-speaking at some time in the medieval period.
As winter progresses, the length of the day grows fairly quickly, to 8 hours and 20 minutes by the end of January.
Under the management of Alex Ferguson, Aberdeen was a major force in British football during the 1980s.
There is also a boat race held every year between AUBC and RGUBC.
Aberdeen has two other cathedrals: St. Mary's Cathedral is a Roman Catholic cathedral in Gothic style, erected in 1859.
High technology developments in the electronics design and development industry, research in agriculture and fishing and the oil industry, which has been largely responsible for Aberdeen's economic boom in the last three decades, are now major parts of Aberdeen's economy.
Aberdeen has long been famous for its 45 parks and gardens, and citywide floral displays which include two million roses, eleven million daffodils and three million crocuses.
Aberdeenshire Rugby Football Club is based in the North of the city at Woodside Sports Complex near the Great North Road on the banks of the river Don.
The city is regularly visited by Scotland's National Arts Companies.
These industries have been largely replaced.
An underground sewer system replaced open sewers in 1865.
In addition, St. Andrew's Cathedral serves the Scottish Episcopal Church.
'''UK Census 2011'''
The Aberdeen buttery is more frequently seen and is sold at bakeries and supermarkets throughout the city.
The city has a wide range of cultural activities , amenities and museums.
The station, based at Craigshaw Business Park in Tullos, was based at larger studios in Queens Cross from September 1961 until June 2003.
Until 2007, a 1950s-style concrete bus station at Guild Street served out-of-the-city locations; it has since transferred to a new and well-presented bus station just 100&nbsp;metres to the east off Market Street as part of the Union Square development.
It differs somewhat from other Scots dialects most noticeable are the pronunciation ''f'' for what is normally written ''wh'' and ''ee'' for what in standard English would usually be written ''oo'' (Scots ''ui'').
The buildings can however become noticeably darker as a result of pollution and grime accumulated over the years.
There is one free newspaper, the ''Aberdeen Citizen''.
Starting out as a fishing port, moving onto steam trawlers, the oil industry, it is now a major port of departure for the Baltic and Scandinavia.
This is situated beside the roundabout for Aberdeen Airport on the A96.
The shield in the coat of arms is supported by two leopards.
National Express operate express coach services to London twice daily.
Aberdeen is twinned with Regensburg, Germany (1955), Clermont-Ferrand, France (1983), Bulawayo, Zimbabwe (1986), Stavanger, Norway (1990) and Gomel, Belarus (1990).
With the exception of the episcopate of William Elphinstone (1484–1511), building progressed slowly.
During the Wars of Scottish Independence, Aberdeen was under English rule, so Robert the Bruce laid siege to Aberdeen Castle before destroying it in 1308, followed by the massacring of the English garrison and the retaking of Aberdeen for the townspeople.
Aberdeen features an oceanic climate (Köppen ''Cfb'').
The most recent census in 2001 showed that Aberdeen has the highest proportion of non-religious residents of any city in Scotland, with nearly 43% of citizens claiming to have no religion and several former churches in the city have been converted into bars and restaurants.
Since 1929—other than on a handful of occasions—it has been staged at His Majesty's Theatre.
There are currently 12 secondary schools and 54 primary schools which are run by the city council.
The A93 is the main route to the west, heading towards Royal Deeside and the Cairngorms.
The citation for the 2011 award read: "''With a graduate unemployment rate that is lower than the most famous universities, including Oxford and Cambridge, plus a flourishing reputation for research, high student satisfaction rates and ambitious plans for its picturesque campus, the Robert Gordon University is The Sunday Times Scottish University of the Year''".
Fishing was once the predominant industry, but was surpassed by deep-sea fisheries, which derived a great impetus from improved technologies throughout the 20th century.
The closure of the Schoolhill site includes the removal of the Student Union building, giving Aberdeen the dubious distinction of having two universities but no student bar.
There are football pitches, two golf courses, a pitch and putt course and a horse riding school.
There is also a Quaker meetinghouse on Crown street, the only purpose built Quaker House in Scotland that is still in use today.
Local junior teams include Banks O' Dee F.C., Culter F.C., F.C.
Aberdeen City and Shire's Gross Domestic Product is estimated at over £11.4billion, accounting for over 17% of the overall Scottish GDP.
The 2011 census showed that there are fewer young people in Aberdeen, with 16.4% under 16, opposed to the national average of 19.2%.
They currently play in the Scottish League Championship B (East), the 3rd tier of club rugby.
The city extends to , and includes the former burghs of Old Aberdeen, New Aberdeen, Woodside and the Royal Burgh of Torry to the south of River Dee.
Popular music venues include the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre (AECC), Aberdeen Music Hall , along with smaller venues such as The Tunnels, The Moorings, Drummonds, Downstairs, The Lemon Tree and The Garage.
The current building was opened in 1997.
The other senior team is Cove Rangers F.C.
The latest population estimate (mid 2012) for the urban area of Aberdeen is 196,670.
Aberdeen is the global headquarters of FirstGroup plc, having grown from the GRT Group.
In 2011, the Centre for Cities named Aberdeen as the best placed city for growth in Britain, as the country looked to emerge from the recent economic downturn.
The Marine Laboratory Aberdeen, which specialises in fisheries, Macaulay Land Use Research Institute (soil science), and the Rowett Research Institute (animal nutrition) are some other higher education institutions.
Aberdeen City Council is responsible for city owned infrastructure which is paid for by a mixture of council tax and income from HM Treasury.
Amongst the notable buildings in the city's main street, Union Street, are the Town and County Bank, the Music Hall, the Trinity Hall of the incorporated trades (originating between 1398 and 1527, although completely rebuilt in the 1860s), now a shopping mall; the former office of the Northern Assurance Company, and the National Bank of Scotland.
Two particularly popular footpaths along old railway tracks are the Deeside Way to Banchory (which will eventually connect to Ballater) and the Formartine and Buchan Way to Ellon, both used by a mixture of cyclists, walkers and occasionally horses.
For the wider settlement of Aberdeen including Cove Bay and Dyce the latest population estimate (mid 2012) is 209,460.
The Dee Estuary, Aberdeen's harbour, has continually been improved.
In the 18th century, a new Town Hall was built and the first social services appeared with the Infirmary at Woolmanhill in 1742 and the Lunatic Asylum in 1779.
(also known as "rowie") and Aberdeen Sausage.
On the coast, Aberdeen has a long sand beach between the two rivers, the Dee and the Don, which turns into high sand dunes north of the Don stretching as far as Fraserburgh; to the south of the Dee are steep rocky cliff faces with only minor pebble and shingle beaches in deep inlets.
There are no formal Buddhist or Hindu buildings, although the University of Aberdeen has a small Bahá'í society and there is a fortnightly Hindu religious gathering in the 1st and 3rd Sunday afternoons at Queens Cross Parish church hall.
The Conservative Group split in August 2010 with two councillors forming the Aberdeen Conservatives.
Grey granite was quarried at Rubislaw quarry for more than 300 years, and used for paving setts, kerb and building stones, and monumental and other ornamental pieces.
There are a number of private schools in Aberdeen: Robert Gordon's College, Albyn School for Girls (co-educational as of 2005), St Margaret's School for Girls, the Hamilton School (closed by the Child Care Inspectorate in early 2014), the Total French School (for French oil industry families), the International School of Aberdeen and a Waldorf/Steiner School.
Major exports include fertiliser, granite, and chemicals.
Provost Ross' House is the second oldest dwelling house in the city.
Marischal Museum holds the principal collections of the University of Aberdeen, comprising some 80,000 items in the areas of fine art, Scottish history and archaeology, and European, Mediterranean and Near Eastern archaeology.
The city has two national league sides, Aberdeenshire and Stoneywood-Dyce.
The city council operates public tennis courts in various parks including an indoor tennis centre at Westburn Park.
During this time of the year marginal nautical twilight lasts the entire night.
In addition, there are a number of Baptist congregations in the city, and Evangelical congregations have been appearing in significant numbers since the late 2000s.
There are plans to build a new Aberdeen Stadium in the future.
Aberdeen Grammar School won the Saltire Schools Cup in 2011.
There are regattas and head races annually, managed by the Committee of the Dee.
Aberdeen had been a major maritime centre throughout the 19th century, when a group of local entrepreneurs launched the first steam-powered trawler.
calling at Dundee, Glasgow, Hamilton, Carlisle, Heathrow Airport and Victoria Coach Station.
Gas street lighting arrived in 1824 and an enhanced water supply appeared in 1830 when water was pumped from the Dee to a reservoir in Union Place.
The Cathedral Walk is maintained in a formal style with a great variety of plants providing a popular display.
Aberdeen is also home to two artistic schools: Gray's School of Art, founded in 1886, which is one of the oldest established colleges of art in the UK.
As with all Scots dialects in urban areas, it is not spoken as widely as it used to be in Aberdeen.
The area around Aberdeen has been settled since at least 8,000 years ago, when prehistoric villages lay around the mouths of the rivers Dee and Don.
The park includes several other areas with contrasting styles to this.
Old Aberdeen is the approximate location of ''Aberdon'', the first settlement of Aberdeen; this literally means "the mouth of the Don".
This has led to several oil majors and independents building new global offices in the city.
It closed to the public in 2008 for renovations; its reopening date has yet to be confirmed.
Established in 1136, it has been referred to as the oldest business in Britain.
'''Aberdeen compared'''
*'''Fire and rescue:''' This is the responsibility of the Grampian Fire and Rescue Service; the service operates distinctive white painted fire engines (other UK fire brigades use red vehicles).
It has been in operation since 1996.
The outskirts of the city spread beyond the (inferred) limits of the outlier onto the surrounding metamorphic/ igneous complexes formed during the Dalradian period (approximately 480–600 million years ago) with sporadic areas of igneous Diorite granites to be found, such as that at the Rubislaw quarry which was used to build much of the Victorian parts of the city.
FirstGroup operates the city buses under the name First Aberdeen, as the successor of Grampian Regional Transport (GRT) and Aberdeen Corporation Tramways.
The University of Aberdeen began as King's College, Aberdeen, which was founded in 1495 by William Elphinstone (1431–1514), Bishop of Aberdeen and Chancellor of Scotland.
Aberdeen Harbour is important as the largest in the north of Scotland and as a ferry route to Orkney and Shetland.
The Grampian Division of Police Scotland headquarters (and Aberdeen divisional headquarters) is located in Queen Street, Aberdeen.
Both are now part of Robert Gordon University and are based at its Garthdee campus.
The industry still supports about 47,000 jobs locally and known reserves are such that oil will continue to flow well into the 21st century.
Catches have fallen because of overfishing and the use of the harbour by oil support vessels, and so although still an important fishing port it is now eclipsed by the more northerly ports of Peterhead and Fraserburgh.
There are new courses planned for the area, including world class facilities with major financial backing, the city and shire are set to become a hotbed for golf tourism.
National festivals which visited Aberdeen in 2012 included the British Science Festival in September, hosted by the University of Aberdeen but with events also taking place at Robert Gordon University and at other venues across the city.
Andrew Street campus being sold to unknown buyers.
As oil reserves in the North Sea decrease there is an effort to rebrand Aberdeen as "Energy Capital of Europe" rather than "Oil Capital of Europe", and there is interest in the development of new energy sources; and technology transfer from oil into renewable energy and other industries is under way.
The steam trawling industry expanded and by 1933 Aberdeen was Scotland's top fishing port, employing nearly 3,000 men with 300 vessels sailing from its harbour.
The bars of Belmont Street are particularly known for featuring live music.
In Castle Street, a continuation eastwards of Union Street, is the new Town House, a very prominent landmark in Aberdeen, built between 1868 and 1873 to a design by Peddie and Kinnear.
There is large tennis centre with indoor and outdoor courts, a children's cycle track, play area and a grass boules lawn.
There are a variety of courses from diplomas through to master's degrees.
Aberdeen hosted Caledonia Reds a Scottish rugby team, before they merged with the Glasgow Warriors in 1998.
The city has a long, sandy coastline and a marine climate, the latter resulting in chilly summers and mild winters.
Since the discovery of North Sea oil in the 1970s, other nicknames have been the ''Oil Capital of Europe'' or the ''Energy Capital of Europe''.
Aberdeen Heliport is one of the busiest commercial heliports in the world and the seaport is the largest in the north-east of Scotland.
Infrastructure and services run by the council include: clearing snow in winter, city wardens, maintaining parks, refuse collection, sewage, street cleaning and street lighting.
The college features many land based courses such as Agriculture, Countryside Management, Sustainable Environmental Management and Rural Business Management.
Traditionally, Aberdeen was home to fishing, textile mills, shipbuilding and paper making.
The city has won the Royal Horticultural Society's Britain in Bloom 'Best City' award ten times, the overall Scotland in Bloom competition twenty times and the large city category every year since 1968.
This leaves local geologists in a slight quandary: despite the high concentration of geoscientists in the area (courtesy of the oil industry), there is only a vague understanding of what underlies the city.
The Royal Aberdeen Golf Club, founded in 1780 and the oldest golf club in Aberdeen, hosted the Senior British Open in 2005, and the amateur team event the Walker Cup in 2011.
Primary schools in Aberdeen include Airyhall Primary School, Albyn School, Ashley Road Primary School, Balgownie Primary School, Broomhill Primary School, Cornhill Primary School (the city's largest), Culter Primary School, Cults Primary School, Danestone Primary School, Fernielea Primary school, Ferryhill Primary School, Gilcomstoun Primary School, Glashieburn Primary School, Hamilton School, Kaimhill Primary School, Kingsford Primary School, Kittybrewster Primary School, Mile-End School, Muirfield Primary School, Robert Gordon's College, Skene Square Primary School, St. Joseph's Primary School and St Margaret's School for Girls.
Textile production ended in 2004 when Richards of Aberdeen closed.
At this time, the city also was home to houses of the Carmelites (Whitefriars) and Franciscans (Greyfriars), the latter of which surviving in modified form as the chapel of Marischal College as late as the early 20th century.
Its main campus is in Old Aberdeen in the north of the city and it currently has approximately 14,000 students.
Aberdeen's architecture is known for its principal use during the Victorian era of granite, which has led to its local nickname of the ''Granite City'' or more romantically the less commonly used name the ''Silver City'', since the Mica in the stone sparkles in the sun.
The increasing economic importance of Aberdeen and the development of the shipbuilding and fishing industries led to the construction of the present harbour including Victoria Dock and the South Breakwater, and the extension of the North Pier.
In May 2007 the council consisted of: 15 Liberal Democrat, 13 SNP, 10 Labour, 4 Conservative councillors and a single independent councillor.
Aberdeen City council also have an Outdoor Education service which is now known as '''''adventure aberdeen''''', that provides abseiling, surfing, white water rafting, gorge walking, kayaking and open canoeing, mountaineering, sailing, mountain biking and rock climbing.
The Aberdeen area has seen human settlement for at least 8,000 years.
It was named after and given to the city by Miss Elizabeth Crombie Duthie of Ruthrieston in 1881.
By 1801 it had become 26,992; (1901) 153,503; (1941) 182,467.
The Student Show traditionally combines comedy and music, inspired by the North-East's Doric dialect and humour.
A new retail  £190 million development, Union Square, reached completion in late September/early October 2009.
Dyce tends to have marginally warmer daytime temperatures year round owing to its slightly lower elevation, though is more susceptible to harsh frosts.
The A947 exits the city at Dyce and goes on to Newmachar, Oldmeldrum and Turriff finally ending at Banff and Macduff.
The ''City of Aberdeen Swim Team'' (COAST) was based in Northfield swimming pool, but since the opening of the Aberdeen Aquatics Centre in 2014, it is now based there, as it has a 50 m pool as opposed to the 25 m pool at Northfield.
