The Abkhaz Native Religion has undergone a strong revival in recent decades.
Russia recognised the independence of Abkhazia on 26 August 2008.
Georgia accuses the Abkhaz secessionists of having conducted a deliberate campaign of ethnic cleansing of up to 250,000 Georgians, a claim supported by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE; Budapest, Lisbon and Istanbul declaration).
After several days of violence, Soviet troops restored order in the city and blamed rival nationalist paramilitaries for provoking confrontations.
The opposition said these policies could endanger Abkhazia's ethnic Abkhazian identity.
The climate at higher elevations varies from maritime mountainous to cold and summerless.
Russian recognition was condemned by NATO nations, OSCE and European Council nations due to "violation of territorial integrity and international law".
Abkhazia is a presidential republic, and the second elected President of Abkhazia was Sergei Bagapsh.
Russian support of Abkhazia became pronounced when the Russian ruble became the de facto currency and Russia began issuing passports to the population of Abkhazia.
Sporadic acts of violence continued throughout the postwar years.
The Abkhaz side, however, has never accepted the paper as a basis for negotiations.
Some Georgian historians assert that Georgian tribes (Svans and Mingrelians) had populated Abkhazia since the time of the Colchis kingdom.
The publishing of materials in Abkhazians dwindled and was eventually stopped altogether; Abkhazian schools were closed on 1945/46.
Gamsakhurdia's rule was soon challenged by armed opposition groups, under the command of Tengiz Kitovani, that forced him to flee the country in a military coup in January 1992.
Lake Ritsa is the most important of them.
Anacopia was the princedom's capital.
The Abkhazian military is primarily a ground force but includes small sea and air units.
Lakoba claimed that, according to data from the Abkhaz Security Council, 129 local people in Gali fought against Abkhazia.
The first attempt to enter into relations with Russia was made by Keilash Bey in 1803, shortly after the incorporation of eastern Georgia into the expanding Tsarist empire (1801).
Before 2002, Russian law allowed residents of former Soviet Union to apply for citizenship if they had not become citizens of their newly independent states.
The UN has played various roles during the conflict and peace process: a military role through its observer mission (UNOMIG); dual diplomatic roles through the Security Council and the appointment of a Special Envoy, succeeded by a Special Representative to the Secretary-General; a humanitarian role (UNHCR and UNOCHA); a development role (UNDP); a human rights role (UNHCHR); and a low-key capacity and confidence-building role (UNV).
After that, a deal was struck between former rivals to run jointly, with Bagapsh as a presidential candidate and Khadjimba as a vice presidential candidate.
The legislation, however, also lists "special" cases in which entry into the breakaway regions will not be regarded as illegal.
Those who are not ethnic Abkhazians are eligible for citizenship if they lived in Abkhazia for at least five years prior to adoption of act of independence in October, 1999.
More than 80% of the Abkhazian population had received Russian passports by 2006.
By 12 August the Georgian forces and civilians had evacuated the last part of Abkhazia under Georgian government control.
During this period, the Government of Abkhazia in exile, led by Tamaz Nadareishvili, was known for a hard-line stance towards the Abkhaz problem and frequently voiced their opinion that the solution to the conflict can be attained only through Georgia's military response to secessionism.
The United Nations has reaffirmed "the commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally recognised borders" and outlined the basic principles of conflict resolution which call for immediate return of all displaced persons and for non-resumption of hostilities.
Chief of these are: Kodori, Bzyb, Ghalidzga, and Gumista.
It declared Abkhazia "mine free" in 2011.
This provision aimed at creating a legal hurdle in obtaining Abkhaz passports for those ethnic Georgians who fled Abkhazia as a result of 1992-1993 armed conflict and who then returned to the Gali district.
It stipulates that a special permit on entry into the breakaway regions can be issued if the trip there "serves Georgia’s state interests; peaceful resolution of the conflict; de-occupation or humanitarian purposes."
The exact numbers and the type of equipment used remain unverifiable.
However thousands of tourists from Russia and other CIS countries visit Abkhazia every summer.
The 1921 constitution granted Abkhazia autonomy.
In the case of Basayev, it has been suggested that when he and the members of his battalion came to Abkhazia, they received training by the Russian Army (though others dispute this), presenting another possible motive.
In the wake of the Syrian Civil War Abkhazia granted refugee status to a few hundred Syrians with Abkhaz, Abazin and Circassian ancestry.
Russians moved into Abkhazia in great numbers.
The Abkhazian Armed Forces are composed of:
According to the Abkhaz officials, more than 26,000 passports were distributed in Gali, Tkvarcheli and Ochamchire districts, including about 23,000 of which were given out since Russian recognition of Abkhazia's independence in August, 2008.
In April 2008, a Russian MiG – prohibited from Georgian airspace, including Abkhazia – shot down a Georgian UAV.
Bagapsh was re-elected as president with 59.4% of the total vote.
The HALO Trust, an international non-profit organisation that specialises in the removal of the debris of war, has been active in Abkhazia since 1999 and has completed the removal of landmines in Sukhumi and Gali districts.
Ethnic Georgians who have returned to the Gali district and want to obtain Abkhaz passports, according to Abkhazian law, should undergo lengthy procedures which also include a requirement to submit documented proof that they renounced their Georgian citizenship.
The administrative subdivision of Abkhazia used by Georgia is identical to the one outlined above, except for the new Tkvarcheli district.
He was not an ethnic nationalist but did little to avoid being seen as supporting his administration's dominant figures and the leaders of the coup that swept him to power.
In the meantime, the Abkhaz leader Vladislav Ardzinba intensified his ties with hardline Russian politicians and military elite and declared he was ready for a war with Georgia.
According to the census carried out in 2003 it measured 215,972 people, but this is contested by Georgian authorities.
On 2 July 1810, the Russian Marines stormed Sukhum-Kale and had Aslan-Bey replaced with his rival brother, Sefer-Bey (1810–1821), who had converted to Christianity and assumed the name of George.
Low prices and an absence of any visa requirements attracts Russian tourists especially those who cannot afford vacations in Turkey, Egypt, Bulgaria and other popular Russian tourist destinations.
The passportisation caused outrage in Tbilisi, worsening its already shaky relations with Russia.
The region enjoyed autonomy within Soviet Georgia at the time when the Soviet Union began to disintegrate in the late 1980s.
The population of Abkhazia remains ethnically very diverse, even after the 1992–1993 War.
Despite the official numbers, unofficial estimates believe that the Abkhaz and Armenian communities are roughly equal in number
The extent of Russian influence in Abkhazia has caused some locals to say Abkhazia is under full Russian control, but they still prefer Russian influence over Georgian.
Abkhazia, Transnistria, Nagorno-Karabakh, and South Ossetia are post-Soviet "frozen conflict" zones.
Local political parties and the coordination council of civil organisations expressed concern about Lakoba’s dismissal.
The basis of the Abkhazian armed forces was formed by the ethnically Abkhaz National Guard formed early in 1992.
The autonomy of Abkhazia, which had functioned as a pro-Russian "buffer zone" in this troublesome region, was no longer needed by the Tsarist government and the rule of the Shervashidze came to an end; in November 1864, Prince Michael was forced to renounce his rights and resettle in Voronezh.
In 1998 the USA announced its readiness to allocate up to $15 million for rehabilitation of infrastructure in the Gali region if substantial progress is made in the peace process.
Pressures have been placed upon teachers in areas of Abkhazia which retain large Georgian populations to abandon the use of the Georgian language in education and adopt Russian textbooks.
On 28 August 2008 the Parliament of Georgia passed a resolution declaring Abkhazia a Russian-occupied territory.
It is reported that the public organisation the Congress of Russian Communities of Abkhazia started collecting Abkhazians’ Soviet-era travel documents.
By June 25 of 2002, an estimated 150,000 people in Abkhazia had acquired the new passports, joining 50,000 who already possessed Russian citizenship.
Opposition claimed that “massive” passportisation involving granting citizenship to ethnic Georgians in eastern districts was fraught with risk of “losing sovereignty and territorial integrity.” According to Apsnipress, Stanislav Lakoba, secretary of Abkhaz security council, said that “We are facing the process of the total Georgianization of Abkhazia.”
The procedure was extremely complex.
Posters of Russia's President Vladimir Putin together with Khadjimba, who, like Putin, had worked as a KGB official, were everywhere in Sukhumi.
In the terror of 1937-38, the ruling elite was purged of Abkhaz and by 1952 over 80% of the 228 top party and government officials and enterprise managers were ethnic Georgians; there remained 34 Abkhaz, 7 Russians and 3 Armenians in these positions.
Ankvab soon declared his formal resignation, although he accused his opponents of acting immorally and violating the constitution.
German support enabled the Georgians to repel the Bolshevik threat from Abkhazia in 1918.
There is a very small number of adherents of Judaism, Jehovah's Witnesses and new religious movements.
Russian nationalist non-governmental organisations with close ties to Russian officialdom simply took their papers to a nearby Russian city for processing.
The official response a criminal case brought against Tedo Sakhokia and leaders of his "Georgian Party" active in Abkhazia.
However Raul Khadjimba lost the elections to Sergei Bagapsh.
The UN’s position has been that there will be no forcible change in international borders.
Moscow, at certain times, hinted that it might recognise Abkhazia and South Ossetia when Western countries recognised the independence of Kosovo, suggesting that they had created a precedent.
The mountains of Abkhazia receive significant amounts of snow.
The Republic of Georgia boycotted the 17 March 1991 all-Union referendum on the renewal of the Soviet Union called by Gorbachev; however, 52.3% of Abkhazia's population (almost all of the ethnic non-Georgian population) took part in the referendum and voted by an overwhelming majority (98.6%) to preserve the Union.
Georgia has also accused Russia of violating its airspace by sending helicopters to attack Georgian-controlled towns in the Kodori Gorge.
Khajimba was later elected president, taking office in September 2014.
Calling on both parties to follow up on dialogue initiatives, it further urged them to comply fully with all previous agreements regarding non-violence and confidence-building, in particular those concerning the separation of forces.
Most refugees from the 1992–1993 war (mainly ethnic Georgians) have not been able to return and have thus been excluded from the political process.
The policy of repression was eased after Stalin's death and Beria's execution, and the Abkhaz were given a greater role in the governance of the republic.
The annual precipitation vacillates from  along the coast  in the higher mountainous areas.
In early 2000, then-UN Special Representative of the Secretary General Dieter Boden and the Group of Friends of Georgia, consisting of the representatives of Russia, the United States, Britain, France, and Germany, drafted and informally presented a document to the parties outlining a possible distribution of competencies between the Abkhaz and Georgian authorities, based on core respect for Georgian territorial integrity.
The western Georgian kingdom flourished between 850 and 950 when it annexed significant parts of central Georgia.
These political debates have caused concerns in the ethnic Georgian population of Abkhazia, who reside mainly in Gali district, that they would be stripped of Abkhazian citizenship and thus forced to leave Abkhazia again.
The main NGO working in Abkhazia is the France-based international NGO Première-Urgence (PU): PU has been implementing rehabilitation and economical revival programmes to support the vulnerable populations affected by the frozen conflict for almost 10 years.
Subsequently, a conference of opposition parties nominated Raul Khadjimba as their candidate in the December 2009 Abkhazian presidential election won by Sergei Bagapsh.
Tedo Sakhokia demanded the Russian authorities introduce Abkhazian and Georgian languages in church services and education.
During the War in Abkhazia, the Government of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia (at the time the Georgian faction of the "Council of Ministers of Abkhazia") left Abkhazia after the Abkhaz separatist forces took control of the region’s capital Sukhumi and relocated to Georgia’s capital Tbilisi where it operated as the Government of Abkhazia in exile for almost 13 years.
There are two main entrances into Abkhazia.
On March 17, 1898 the synodal department of the Russian Orthodox Church of Georgia-Imereti, by order 2771, again prohibited teaching and the conduct of religious services in church schools and churches of the Sukhumi district in Georgian.
Among ethnic Abkhaz, explicit support for reunification with Georgia is around 1%; a similar figure can be found among ethnic Russians and Armenians as well.
Key officials of the Gali district are virtually all ethnic Abkhaz, though their support staff are ethnic Georgian.
Abkhazians began mass acquisition of Russian passports in 2002.
In September, the Abkhaz and Russian paramilitaries mounted a major offensive against Gagra after breaking a cease-fire, which drove the Georgian forces out of large swathes of the republic.
The law will remain in force until "the full restoration of Georgian jurisdiction" over the breakaway regions is realised.
In early 2013 the process of passportisation of ethnic Georgians came under the scrutiny of Abkhaz opposition groups who turned this issue into one of the central topics of the breakaway region’s internal politics, and issuing of passports was suspended in May.
On 28 August 2008, the Parliament of Georgia declared Abkhazia a Russian-occupied territory, a stance recognised by the vast majority of the international community.
On the same day, Ankvab's headquarters in Sukhumi was stormed by opposition groups led by Raul Khadjimba, forcing him into flight to Gudauta.
The Caucasus Mountains to the north and the northeast divide Abkhazia and the Russian Federation.
The Psou River separates the region from Russia, and the Inguri serves as a boundary between Abkhazia and Georgia proper.
During the war, gross human rights violations were reported on both sides (see Human Rights Watch report).
As Russian citizens living abroad, Abkhazians do not pay Russian taxes or serve in the Russian Army.
After the mass deportation of 1878, Abkhazians were left in the minority, officially branded "guilty people", and had no leader capable of mounting serious opposition to Russification.
Russia has also issued passports to the citizens of Abkhazia since 2000 (as Abkhazian passports cannot be used for international travel) and subsequently paid them retirement pensions and other monetary benefits.
In the Sukhumi district, this order was carried out in only three of 42 parishes.
According to the staff of Abkhazia's passport and visa service, there are about 2-3 thousand mostly elderly people left with Soviet passports who had no chance of acquiring new documents.
The document allows travelling abroad as well as enjoying social benefits existing in Georgia.
The Roman Empire conquered Egrisi in the 1st century AD and ruled it until the 4th century, following which it regained a measure of independence, but remained within the Byzantine Empire's sphere of influence.
A period of unrest ensued, which ended as Abkhazia and eastern Georgian states were unified under a single Georgian monarchy, ruled by King Bagrat III (who was buried in the Monastery of Bedia in eastern Abkhazia) at the end of the 10th century and the beginning of the 11th century.
This was followed by the annulment of the 1994 ceasefire agreement and the termination of UN and OSCE monitoring missions.
The OSCE expressed concern and condemnation over ethnic cleansing of Georgians in Abkhazia during the 1994 Budapest Summit Decision and later at the Lisbon Summit Declaration in 1996.
Russia has started work on the establishment of a naval base in Ochamchire by dredging the coast to allow the passage of their larger naval vessels.
Most of the weapons come from the former Russian airborne division base in Gudauta.
Nevertheless, between 40,000 and 60,000 refugees have returned to the Gali district since 1998, including persons commuting daily across the ceasefire line and those migrating seasonally in accordance with agricultural cycles.
Abkhazia is diverse geographically with lowlands stretching to the extremely mountainous north.
Russia also called on other CIS members to undertake similar steps, but met with protests from Tbilisi and lack of support from the other CIS countries.
Shevardnadze's government accused Russia of giving covert military support to the rebels with the aim of "detaching from Georgia its native territory and the Georgia-Russian frontier land".
The document did not state any reason for the decision but Lakoba saw it as related to his political position on granting citizenship to Georgians living in Gali.
However, the Abkhaz ''de facto'' government considers Abkhazia a sovereign country even if it is recognised by few other countries.
They surrounded and heavily shelled the capital, where Shevardnadze was trapped.
The new neutral identification and travel documents were called "neutral passports".
On 10 October 2006, EU South Caucasus envoy Peter Semneby noted that "Russia's actions in the Georgia spy row have damaged its credibility as a neutral peacekeeper in the EU's Black Sea neighbourhood."
Acknowledging that the "new and tense situation" resulted, at least in part, from the Georgian special forces' operation in the upper Kodori Valley, the resolution urged the country to ensure that no troops unauthorised by the Moscow ceasefire agreement were present in that area.
Facing a growing Armenian community, this move has been linked with the wish of the ruling Abkhaz —who have often been in the minority on their territory— to tilt the demographic balance in favour of the titular nation.
The conflict escalated into a full-scale war between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Georgia.
The Georgian Prime Minister Lado Gurgenidze said Georgia will treat any additional troops in Abkhazia as "aggressors".
The principality retained a degree of autonomy.
Abkhazia’s Foreign Ministry expressed concerns about some countries recognising the “neutral passports.” The ministry also said an increasing number of Abkhazian residents with Russian passports were being denied Schengen visas.
After ten days of heavy fighting, Sukhumi was taken by Abkhazian forces on 27 September 1993.
It also bans air, sea and railway communications and international transit via the regions, mineral exploration and money transfers.
The new citizenship law of Russia adopted on 31 May 2002 introduced a simplified procedure of citizenship acquisition for former citizens of the Soviet Union regardless of their place of residence.
In Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the application process was simplified even further, and people could apply even without leaving their homes.
However, George’s rule, as well as that of his successors, was limited to the neighbourhood of Sukhum-Kale and the Bzyb area.
During the Crimean War (1853–1856), Russian forces had to evacuate Abkhazia and Prince Michael (1822–1864) seemingly switched to the Ottomans.
The Abkhazians in Turkey are almost exclusively Sunni Muslims.
The Sukhum authorities, although officially not involved in the registration for Russian nationality process, openly encouraged it.
Abkhazia, or Abasgia in classic sources, formerly part of Colchis and later of Egrisi (Lazica) until the late 690s, was a princedom under Byzantine authority.
The Abkhaz military defeat was met with a hostile response by the self-styled Confederation of Mountain Peoples of the Caucasus, an umbrella group uniting a number of movements in the North Caucasus, including elements of Circassians, Abazins, Chechens, Cossacks, Ossetians and hundreds of volunteer paramilitaries and mercenaries from Russia, including the then-little-known Shamil Basayev, later a leader of the anti-Moscow Chechen secessionists.
The USA rejects the unilateral secession of Abkhazia and urges its integration into Georgia as an autonomous unit.
Electricity is largely supplied by the Inguri hydroelectric power station located on the Inguri River between Abkhazia and Georgia (proper) and operated jointly by both parties.
Georgian Communist Party leader Candide Charkviani supported the Georgianization of Abkhazia.
While Georgia lacks control over Abkhazia, the Georgian government, the United Nations and the majority of the world's governments consider Abkhazia part of Georgia, whose constitution designates the area the '''Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia'''.
The Abkhaz leader Sergei Bagapsh rejected these new initiatives as "propaganda", leading to Georgia's complaints that this scepticism was "triggered by Russia, rather than by real mood of the Abkhaz people."
Today, Turkey is home to the world's largest Abkhaz diaspora community.
In 1921, the Bolshevik Red Army invaded Georgia and ended its short-lived independence.
The Abkhazian ASSR was the only autonomous republic in the USSR in which the language of the titular nation (in that case Abkhazian) was confirmed in its constitution as one of its official languages.
However, on 16 April 2008, the outgoing Russian president Vladimir Putin instructed his government to establish official ties with South Ossetia and Abkhazia, leading to Georgia's condemnation of what it described as an attempt at "de facto annexation" and criticism from the European Union, NATO, and several Western governments.
With the main highway of the country being rebuilt in 2014 many damaged hotels in Gagra are either being restored or demolished.
Arguably the most famous Abkhaz writers are Fazil Iskander, who wrote mostly in Russian, and Bagrat Shinkuba, a poet.
Russia has at present around 1,600 troops stationed in Abkhazia.
On 5 October 2006, Javier Solana, the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, ruled out the possibility of replacing the Russian peacekeepers with the EU force.
The exact size of Abkhazia's population was unclear.
Abkhazian legislation forbids citizens of Abkhazia from holding dual citizenship with any other state apart from Russia.
Of about 250,000 Georgian refugees, some 60,000 Georgian refugees subsequently returned to Abkhazia's Gali district between 1994 and 1998, but tens of thousands were displaced again when fighting resumed in the Gali district in 1998.
The Abkhazian Armed Forces are the military of the "Republic of Abkhazia".
In the first half of 2012, the principal trading partners of Abkhazia were Russia (64%) and Turkey (18%).
As a response to the Georgian sea blockade of Abkhazia, in which the Georgian coast guard had been detaining ships heading to and from Abkhazia, Russia began patrolling the Black Sea to protect Abkhazia-transiting ships and detaining  Georgian ships navigating Abkhazian waters.
Although the exact time when the population of the region of Abkhazia was converted to Christianity has not been determined, it is known that the Metropolitan of Pityus participated in the First Ecumenical Council in 325 in Nicaea.
Georgians, conduct both church services and church education in Georgian, while Abkhazian parishes use old Slavic.
Between 1000 and 550 BC, Greeks established trade colonies along the coast of the Black Sea, in particular at Pitiunt and ''Dioscurias'', which was to become the capital of modern-day Abkhazia.
In October 2013 Alexander Ankvab signed a document ordering the firing Stanislav Lakoba.
The United Nations and other international organisations have been fruitlessly urging the Abkhaz ''de facto'' authorities "to refrain from adopting measures incompatible with the right to return and with international human rights standards, such as discriminatory legislation... and to cooperate in the establishment of a permanent international human rights office in Gali and to admit United Nations civilian police without further delay."
The tense situation in the republic led to the cancellation of the election results by the Supreme Court.
The first newspaper in Abkhaz, called ''Abkhazia'' and edited by Dmitry Gulia, appeared in 1917.
The world's deepest known cave, Krubera (Voronja) Cave ("The Crows' Cave"), is located in Abkhazia's western Caucasus mountains.
Simmering ethnic tensions between the Abkhaz—the region's "titular ethnicity"—and Georgians—the largest single ethnic group at that time—culminated in the 1992–1993 War in Abkhazia which resulted in Georgia's loss of control of most of Abkhazia, the ''de facto'' independence of Abkhazia, and the mass exodus and ethnic cleansing of Georgians from Abkhazia.
In the spring of 2014, the opposition submitted an ultimatum to President Aleksandr Ankvab to dismiss the government and make radical reforms.
The Russian Revolution of 1917 led to the creation of an independent Georgia which included Abkhazia, in 1918.
Most inhabitants of Abkhazia are Christian (Eastern Orthodox and Armenian Apostolic), Sunni Muslim or irreligious, but few people who declare themselves Christian or Muslim attend religious service.
Regarding the disputed role of the peacekeepers from the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Council stressed the importance of close, effective cooperation between UNOMIG and that force and looked to all sides to continue to extend the necessary cooperation to them.
The campaign ethnic cleansing also included Russians, Armenians, Greeks, moderate Abkhaz and other minor ethnic groups living in Abkhazia.
Although Abkhazia's complex topographic setting has spared most of the territory from significant human development, its cultivated fertile lands produce tea, tobacco, wine and fruits, a mainstay of the local agricultural sector.
Many Abkhaz interpreted this as an abolition of their autonomous status, although the 1921 constitution contained a provision for the region's autonomy.
Sixteen Georgians are said to have been killed and another 137 injured when they tried to enroll in a Georgian university instead of an Abkhaz one.
Government officials said privately that President Putin’s administration agreed with the passport acquisition during Abkhazia’s prime minister Djergenia's visit to Moscow in May 2002.
According to Bagapsh, these were actually ethnic Abkhaz people who were "Georgianised" during the long process of the Georgianisation of Abkhazia that culminated during the rule of Joseph Stalin and Lavrenti Beria.
According to Russian media, the President of Republic of Abkhazia, Alexander Ankvab threatened international organisations that accepted neutral passports, saying during a meeting with the leadership of the foreign ministry that “international organizations that suggest the so-called neutral passports, will leave Abkhazia.”
The northern entrance ("Psou") is in the town of Leselidze.
The lowland regions used to be covered by swaths of oak, beech, and hornbeam, which have since been cleared.
Many Abkhaz opposed this, fearing that an independent Georgia would lead to the elimination of their autonomy, and argued instead for the establishment of Abkhazia as a separate Soviet republic in its own right.
They sided with the Abkhaz separatists to fight against the Georgian government.
USAID has already funded some humanitarian initiatives for Abkhazia.
Later, in the 1950s and 1960s, Vazgen I and the Armenian church encouraged and funded the migration of Armenians to Abkhazia.
Support for a reunification with Georgia is very low.
On 3 July 2008, the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly passed a resolution at its annual session in Astana, expressing concern over Russia’s recent moves in breakaway Abkhazia.
On 18 October 2006, the People's Assembly of Abkhazia passed a resolution, calling upon Russia, international organisations and the rest of the international community to recognise Abkhaz independence on the basis that Abkhazia possesses all the properties of an independent state.
On 22 August 2006, Senator Richard Lugar, then visiting Georgia's capital Tbilisi, joined Georgian politicians in criticism of the Russian peacekeeping mission, stating that "the U.S. administration supports the Georgian government’s insistence on the withdrawal of Russian peacekeepers from the conflict zones in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali district."
The southern entrance is at the Inguri bridge, a short distance from the city of Zugdidi.
On 10 August 2008 an estimated 9,000 Russian soldiers entered Abkhazia ostensibly to reinforce the Russian peacekeepers in the republic.
Other nationalities include Ukrainians, Belarusians, Greeks, Ossetians, Tatars, Turks, and Roma.
However, Abkhaz share the Nart sagas, a series of tales about mythical heroes, with other Caucasian peoples.
The long-term presence of a United Nations Observer Mission and a Russian-led Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force failed to prevent the flare-up of violence on several occasions.
The Vice President, Raul Khadjimba, resigned on 28 May saying he agreed with the criticism the opposition had made.
In the beginning of the 19th century, while the Russians and Ottomans were vying for control of the region, the rulers of Abkhazia shifted back and forth across the religious divide.
Abkhazia has experienced a modest economic upswing since the 2008 South Ossetia war and Russia's subsequent recognition of Abkhazia's independence.
Football remains the most popular sport in Abkhazia.
The speaker of parliament Nino Burjanadze said that she would raise the matter at the forthcoming OSCE parliamentary assembly.
