Birth control, such as the pill or intrauterine devices, can be used immediately following abortion.
In the U.S., the Supreme Court decisions in ''Roe vs Wade'' and ''Doe vs Bolton'': "ruled that the state's interest in the life of the fetus became compelling only at the point of viability, defined as the point at which the fetus can survive independently of its mother.
An American study in 2002 concluded that about half of women having abortions were using a form of contraception at the time of becoming pregnant.
In both public and private debate, arguments presented in favor of or against abortion access focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced abortion, or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion.
The same 2012 study indicated that in 2008, the estimated abortion percentage of known pregnancies was at 21% worldwide, with 26% in developed countries and 20% in developing countries.
Between 1999 and 2013, in the U.S., the CDC recorded 531 such deaths for newborns, approximately 4 per 100,000 abortions.
Reasons for procuring induced abortions are typically characterized as either therapeutic or elective.
Only limited data are available comparing this method with dilation and extraction.
Secondary infertility caused by an unsafe abortion affects an estimated 24 million women.
Sex-selective abortion is partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the birth rates of male and female children in some countries.
Those who oppose abortion often maintain that an embryo or fetus is a human with a right to life and may compare abortion to murder.
The risk of abortion-related mortality increases with gestational age, but remains lower than that of childbirth through at least 21 weeks' gestation.
It has been estimated that the incidence of unsafe abortion could be reduced by up to 75% (from 20 million to 5 million annually) if modern family planning and maternal health services were readily available globally.
Eating pine needles can also induce abortions in cows.
Aristotle, in his treatise on government ''Politics'' (350 BCE), condemns infanticide as a means of population control.
There is evidence to suggest that pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods, including the administration of abortifacient herbs, the use of sharpened implements, the application of abdominal pressure, and other techniques.
However, the Dublin Declaration on Maternal Health, signed in 2012, notes that "the prohibition of abortion does not affect, in any way, the availability of optimal care to pregnant women".
Some proposed negative psychological effects of abortion have been referred to by anti-abortion advocates as a separate condition called "post-abortion syndrome", which is not recognized by medical or psychological professionals in the United States.
The rate of legal, induced abortion varies extensively worldwide.
Anti-abortion violence is classified by both governmental and scholarly sources as terrorism.
Around 56 million abortions occur each year in the world, with a little under half done unsafely.
Abortion rates changed little between 2003 and 2008, before which they decreased for at least two decades as access to family planning and birth control increased.
Health education, access to family planning, and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon.
Hundreds of bombings, arsons, acid attacks, invasions, and incidents of vandalism against abortion providers have occurred.
Preventive antibiotics (such as doxycycline or metronidazole) are typically given before elective abortion, as they are believed to substantially reduce the risk of postoperative uterine infection.
Approximately 205 million pregnancies occur each year worldwide.
The abortion rate may also be expressed as the average number of abortions a woman has during her reproductive years; this is referred to as ''total abortion rate'' (TAR).
A bill passed by the state legislature of New York legalizing abortion was signed by Governor Nelson Rockefeller in April 1970.
All these factors may relate to health.
Feticide can occur in horses and zebras due to male harassment of pregnant mares or forced copulation, although the frequency in the wild has been questioned.
Most abortions result from unintended pregnancies.
Women without the means to travel can resort to providers of illegal abortions or attempt to perform an abortion by themselves.
When allowed by local law, abortion in the developed world is one of the safest procedures in medicine.
These methods are rarely seen in developed countries where surgical abortion is legal and available.
Beginning in the second half of the twentieth century, abortion was legalized in a greater number of countries.
One of the bas reliefs decorating the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia depicts a demon performing such an abortion upon a woman who has been sent to the underworld.
80% of these spontaneous abortions happen in the first trimester.
Modern methods use medication or surgery for abortions.
Church groups as well as physicians were highly influential in anti-abortion movements.
Complications after second-trimester abortion are similar to those after first-trimester abortion, and depend somewhat on the method chosen.
These techniques differ in the mechanism used to apply suction, in how early in pregnancy they can be used, and in whether cervical dilation is necessary.
The right to life, the right to liberty, the right to security of person, and the right to reproductive health are major issues of human rights that are sometimes used as justification for the existence or absence of laws controlling abortion.
'''Abortion''' is the ending of pregnancy by removing a fetus or embryo before it can survive outside the uterus.
After the 16th week of gestation, abortions can also be induced by intact dilation and extraction (IDX) (also called intrauterine cranial decompression), which requires surgical decompression of the fetus's head before evacuation.
Inconsistent use was reported by half of those using condoms and three-quarters of those using the birth-control pill; 42% of those using condoms reported failure through slipping or breakage.
Religious, moral, and cultural sensibilities continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world.
The degree of force, if severe, can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing miscarriage.
The most common early first-trimester medical abortion regimens use mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog (misoprostol or gemeprost) up to 9 weeks gestational age, methotrexate in combination with a prostaglandin analog up to 7 weeks gestation, or a prostaglandin analog alone.
In a number of cases, abortion providers and these facilities have been subjected to various forms of violence, including murder, attempted murder, kidnapping, stalking, assault, arson, and bombing.
Legal protection of access to abortion has been brought into some countries where abortion is legal.
Foal embryos that are homozygous for the dominant white gene (WW) are theorized to also be aborted or resorbed before birth.
The rate of complications of vacuum aspiration abortion in the first trimester is similar regardless of whether the procedure is performed in a hospital, surgical center, or office.
Confusion sometimes arises over the term "elective" because "elective surgery" generally refers to all scheduled surgery, whether medically necessary or not.
The American Psychological Association has concluded that a woman's first abortion is not a threat to mental health when carried out in the first trimester, with such women no more likely to have mental-health problems than those carrying an unwanted pregnancy to term; the mental-health outcome of a woman's second or greater abortion is less certain.
In 1967, the American Medical Association publicly supported liberalization of abortion laws.
The physician Scribonius Largus wrote in 43 CE that the Hippocratic Oath prohibits abortion, as did Soranus, although apparently not all doctors adhered to it strictly at the time.
In places lacking the necessary medical skill for dilation and extraction, or where preferred by practitioners, an abortion can be induced by first inducing labor and then inducing fetal demise if necessary.
Although it is very uncommon in the United States, more than 80% of induced abortions throughout the second trimester are labor induced abortions in Sweden and other nearby countries.
In Christianity, Pope Sixtus V (1585–90) was the first Pope to declare that abortion is homicide regardless of the stage of pregnancy; the Catholic Church had previously been divided on whether it believed that abortion was murder, and did not begin vigorously opposing abortion until the 19th century.
Other medical practitioners in addition to some physicians advertised their services, and they were not widely regulated until the 19th century, when the practice (sometimes called ''restellism'') was banned in both the United States and the United Kingdom.
Exposures above 0.005–0.025 Gy cause a dose-dependent reduction in IQ.
These laws typically seek to protect abortion clinics from obstruction, vandalism, picketing, and other actions, or to protect women and employees of such facilities from threats and harassment.
For example, the question of a link between induced abortion and breast cancer has been investigated extensively.
"Vaginal delivery may result in dissemination of neoplastic cells into lymphovascular channels, haemorrhage, cervical laceration and implantation of malignant cells in the episiotomy site, while abdominal delivery may delay the initiation of non-surgical treatment."
Medical abortion using the prostaglandin analog misoprostol alone is less effective and more painful than medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol or surgical abortion.
90.9% of these were classified as having been done by "curettage" (suction-aspiration, dilation and curettage, dilation and evacuation), 7.7% by "medical" means (mifepristone), 0.4% by "intrauterine instillation" (saline or prostaglandin), and 1.0% by "other" (including hysterotomy and hysterectomy).
The analysis, however, did not take into account travel to other states without such laws to obtain an abortion.
There is little difference in terms of safety and efficacy between medical abortion using a combined regimen of mifepristone and misoprostol and surgical abortion (vacuum aspiration) in early first trimester abortions up to 9 weeks gestation.
This is particularly true for cervical cancer, the most common type which occurs in 1 of every 2000-13000 pregnancies, for which initiation of treatment "cannot co-exist with preservation of fetal life (unless neoadjuvant chemotherapy is chosen)."
In the US, abortion was more dangerous than childbirth until about 1930 when incremental improvements in abortion procedures relative to childbirth made abortion safer.
Found in a series of friezes that represent judgment after death in Hindu and Buddhist culture, it depicts the technique of abdominal abortion.
All of these, and any other method to terminate pregnancy may be called "induced miscarriage".
In the United States, the percentage of early medical abortions is far lower.
According to the CDC, due to data collection difficulties the data must be viewed as tentative and some fetal deaths reported beyond 20 weeks may be natural deaths erroneously classified as abortions if the removal of the dead fetus is accomplished by the same procedure as an induced abortion.
The manner selected often depends upon the gestational age of the embryo or fetus, which increases in size as the pregnancy progresses.
For this reason, labor induced abortion is legally risky in the U.S.
Dilation and evacuation (D&E) consists of opening the cervix of the uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction.
The World Medical Association Declaration on Therapeutic Abortion notes that "circumstances bringing the interests of a mother into conflict with the interests of her unborn child create a dilemma and raise the question as to whether or not the pregnancy should be deliberately terminated".
A 2011 study concluded that in the United States, some state-level anti-abortion laws are correlated with lower rates of abortion in that state.
Those who favor the legality of abortion often hold that a woman has a right to make decisions about her own body.
It is possible to greatly reduce exposure to radiation with abdominal shielding, depending on how far the area to be irradiated is from the fetus.
The health risks of abortion depend principally upon whether the procedure is performed safely or unsafely.
Specific procedures may also be selected due to legality, regional availability, and doctor or a women's personal preference.
Early medical abortion regimens using mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by buccal or vaginal misoprostol are 98% effective up to 9 weeks gestational age.
This is sometimes called "induced miscarriage".
Some jurisdictions require a waiting period before the procedure, prescribe the distribution of information on fetal development, or require that parents be contacted if their minor daughter requests an abortion.
First-trimester procedures can generally be performed using local anesthesia, while second-trimester methods may require deep sedation or general anesthesia.
However, conservatism by most physicians with regards to sexual matters prevented the wide expansion of safe abortion techniques.
A pregnancy that ends before 37 weeks of gestation resulting in a live-born infant is known as a "premature birth" or a "preterm birth".
The World Health Organization believes that mortality has fallen since the 1990s.
An abortion may be caused purposely and is then called an induced abortion, or less frequently, "induced miscarriage".
In countries where abortion is banned entirely, such as Nicaragua, medical authorities have recorded rises in maternal death directly and indirectly due to pregnancy as well as deaths due to doctors' fears of prosecution if they treat other gynecological emergencies.
Some countries, such as Bangladesh, that nominally ban abortion, may also support clinics that perform abortions under the guise of menstrual hygiene.
The Guttmacher Institute estimated there were 2,200 intact dilation and extraction procedures in the US during 2000; this accounts for 0.17% of the total number of abortions performed that year.
Chemotherapy may be used simultaneously.
Very early stage cervical cancers (I and IIa) may be treated by radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection, radiation therapy, or both, while later stages are treated by radiotherapy.
Treatment with more than 40 Gy of radiation usually causes spontaneous abortion.
Similarly, in England and Wales in 2006, 89% of terminations occurred at or under 12 weeks, 9% between 13 and 19 weeks, and 1.5% at or over 20 weeks.
The Guttmacher Institute estimated that "most abortions in the United States are obtained by minority women" because minority women "have much higher rates of unintended pregnancy."
Spontaneous abortion, also known as miscarriage, is the unintentional expulsion of an embryo or fetus before the 24th week of gestation.
This deviation from the standard birth rates of males and females occurs despite the fact that the country in question may have officially banned sex-selective abortion or even sex-screening.
Ethical, moral, philosophical, biological, religious and legal issues surrounding abortion are related to value systems.
Abortion is sometimes attempted by causing trauma to the abdomen.
A combined abortion and spaying is performed on pregnant cats, especially in Trap-Neuter-Return programs, to prevent unwanted kittens from being born.
In the third trimester of pregnancy, induced abortion may be performed surgically by intact dilation and extraction or by hysterotomy.
In the United States, four physicians who performed abortions have been murdered: David Gunn (1993), John Britton (1994), Barnett Slepian (1998), and George Tiller (2009).
When a fetus dies in utero after viability, or during delivery, it is usually termed "stillborn".
A similar procedure after the fetus could potentially survive outside the womb is known as a "late termination of pregnancy".
A major factor in whether abortions are performed safely or not is the legal standing of abortion.
Some purported risks of abortion are promoted primarily by anti-abortion groups, but lack scientific support.
Complications of unsafe abortion account for approximately an eighth of maternal mortalities worldwide, though this varies by region.
Forty percent of the world's women are able to access therapeutic and elective abortions within gestational limits, while an additional 35 percent have access to legal abortion if they meet certain physical, mental, or socioeconomic criteria.
Abortion laws and cultural or religious views of abortions are different around the world.
In 2003, Chris Danze organized pro-life organizations throughout Texas to prevent the construction of a Planned Parenthood facility in Austin.
Infections account for one-third of abortion-related deaths in the United States.
According to Soranus' 1st or 2nd century CE work ''Gynaecology'', one party of medical practitioners banished all abortives as required by the Hippocratic Oath; the other party —to which he belonged— was willing to prescribe abortions, but only for the sake of the mother's health.
Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages although usage of these terms can sometimes overlap.
Spontaneous abortion occurs in various animals.
Cats can experience spontaneous abortion for many reasons, including hormonal imbalance.
The World Health Organization defines unsafe abortions as those performed by unskilled individuals, with hazardous equipment, or in unsanitary facilities.
In China, a historical preference for a male child has been exacerbated by the one-child policy, which was enacted in 1979.
On the same day that the Court decided Roe, it also decided Doe v. Bolton, in which the Court defined health very broadly: "The medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors—physical, emotional, psychological, familial, and the woman's age—relevant to the well-being of the patient.
Viral infection can cause abortion in dogs.
An abortion is medically referred to as a therapeutic abortion when it is performed to save the life of the pregnant woman; prevent harm to the woman's physical or mental health; terminate a pregnancy where indications are that the child will have a significantly increased chance of premature morbidity or mortality or be otherwise disabled; or to selectively reduce the number of fetuses to lessen health risks associated with multiple pregnancy.
Complications are rare and can include uterine perforation, pelvic infection, and retained products of conception requiring a second procedure to evacuate.
For example, the 1996 legalization of abortion in South Africa had an immediate positive impact on the frequency of abortion-related complications, with abortion-related deaths dropping by more than 90%.
Male gray langur monkeys may attack females following male takeover, causing miscarriage.
In very early abortions, up to 7 weeks gestation, medical abortion using a mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimen is considered to be more effective than surgical abortion (vacuum aspiration), especially when clinical practice does not include detailed inspection of aspirated tissue.
He preferred abortion in such cases, with the restriction " must be practised on it before it has developed sensation and life; for the line between lawful and unlawful abortion will be marked by the fact of having sensation and being alive."
The World Health Organization and UNICEF, along with other United Nations agencies, have found that measures to reduce access to abortion are much less effective at reducing sex-selective abortions than measures to reduce gender inequality.
There is no relationship between most induced abortions and mental-health problems other than those expected for any unwanted pregnancy.
Generally, the former position argues that a human fetus is a human person with a right to live, making abortion morally the same as murder.
Unlike D&E, labor induced abortions after 18 weeks may be complicated by the occurrence of brief fetal survival, which may be legally characterized as live birth.
The process of birth itself may also put the mother at risk.
Unsafe abortions are believed to result in millions of injuries.
According to the report of employees of Guttmacher Institute it ranged from 7 per 1000 women (Germany and Switzerland) to 30 per 1000 women (Estonia) in countries with complete statistics in 2008.
Public opinion shifted in America following television personality Sherri Finkbine's discovery during her fifth month of pregnancy that she had been exposed to thalidomide, unable to abort in the United States she traveled to Sweden.
From 1962-65 there was an outbreak of German measles that left 15,000 babies with severe birth defects.
Abortion rates also vary depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method practiced.
Rates of such abortions may be difficult to measure because they can be reported variously as miscarriage, "induced miscarriage", "menstrual regulation", "mini-abortion", and "regulation of a delayed/suspended menstruation".
The rate of unsafe abortions has increased from 44% to 49% between 1995 and 2008.
The unsafe abortion rate in developing countries is partly attributable to lack of access to modern contraceptives; according to the Guttmacher Institute, providing access to contraceptives would result in about 14.5 million fewer unsafe abortions and 38,000 fewer deaths from unsafe abortion annually worldwide.
In some areas abortion is legal only in specific cases such as rape, problems with the fetus, poverty, risk to a woman's health, or incest.
Hysterotomy abortion is a procedure similar to a caesarean section and is performed under general anesthesia.
Advancing maternal age and a women's history of previous spontaneous abortions are the two leading factors associated with a greater risk of spontaneous abortion.
Death following live birth which is caused by abortion is given the ICD-10 underlying cause description code of P96.4; data are identified as either fetus or newborn.
A pregnancy can be intentionally aborted in several ways.
Vacuum aspiration in the first trimester is the safest method of surgical abortion, and can be performed in a primary care office, abortion clinic, or hospital.
Some protestors record women entering clinics on camera.
, 40% of the world's women had access to legal abortions without limits as to reason.
In horses, a fetus may be aborted or resorbed if it has lethal white syndrome (congenital intestinal aganglionosis).
This procedure may be performed from 13 weeks gestation to the third trimester.
Many restrictions are waived in emergency situations.
Since ancient times, abortions have been done using herbal medicines, sharp tools, with force, or through other traditional methods.
These requirements usually depend on the age of the fetus, often using a trimester-based system to regulate the window of legality, or as in the U.S., on a doctor's evaluation of the fetus' viability.
Exposure to much lower doses during the first trimester, especially 8 to 15 weeks of development, can cause intellectual disability or microcephaly, and exposure at this or subsequent stages can cause reduced intrauterine growth and birth weight.
In the United States from 2000 to 2009, abortion had a lower mortality rate than plastic surgery.
Legal abortions performed in the developed world are among the safest procedures in medicine.
''Manual vacuum aspiration'' (MVA) consists of removing the fetus or embryo, placenta, and membranes by suction using a manual syringe, while ''electric vacuum aspiration'' (EVA) uses an electric pump.
Over a third are unintended and about a fifth end in induced abortion.
Dilation and curettage (D&C), the second most common method of surgical abortion, is a standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons, including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy, investigation of abnormal bleeding, and abortion.
Only 30% to 50% of conceptions progress past the first trimester.
Islamic tradition has traditionally permitted abortion until a point in time when Muslims believe the soul enters the fetus, considered by various theologians to be at conception, 40 days after conception, 120 days after conception, or quickening.
These circumstances vary based on jurisdiction, but may include whether the pregnancy is a result of rape or incest, the fetus' development is impaired, the woman's physical or mental well-being is endangered, or socioeconomic considerations make childbirth a hardship.
Abortion may also be induced in animals, in the context of animal husbandry.
The word ''abortion'' is often used to mean only induced abortions.
*  Soviet Russia (1919), Iceland (1935) and Sweden (1938) were among the first countries to legalize certain or all forms of abortion.
Notable perpetrators of anti-abortion violence include Eric Robert Rudolph, Scott Roeder, Shelley Shannon, and Paul Jennings Hill, the first person to be executed in the United States for murdering an abortion provider.
These might include the preference for children of a specific sex or race, disapproval of single or early motherhood, stigmatization of people with disabilities, insufficient economic support for families, lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods, or efforts toward population control (such as China's one-child policy).
In contrast, unsafe abortions cause 47,000 deaths and 5 million hospital admissions each year.
Woundings (e.g., Garson Romalis) and attempted murders have also taken place in the United States and Canada.
Mifepristone–misoprostol combination regimens work faster and are more effective at later gestational ages than methotrexate–misoprostol combination regimens, and combination regimens are more effective than misoprostol alone.
Female rodents may terminate a pregnancy when exposed to the smell of a male not responsible for the pregnancy, known as the Bruce effect.
IDX is sometimes called "partial-birth abortion", which has been federally banned in the United States.
The number of abortions performed worldwide seems to have remained stable in recent years, with 41.6&nbsp;million having been performed in 2003 and 43.8&nbsp;million having been performed in 2008.
The World Health Organization recommends safe and legal abortions be available to all women.
In 1935 Nazi Germany, a law was passed permitting abortions for those deemed "hereditarily ill", while women considered of German stock were specifically prohibited from having abortions.
From the 15th week of gestation until approximately the 26th, other techniques must be used.
The rate of cancer during pregnancy is 0.02–1%, and in many cases, cancer of the mother leads to consideration of abortion to protect the life of the mother, or in response to the potential damage that may occur to the fetus during treatment.
For example, in sheep, it may be caused by crowding through doors, or being chased by dogs.
In 2003, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that 26% of abortions in the United States were known to have been obtained at less than 6 weeks' gestation, 18% at 7 weeks, 15% at 8 weeks, 18% at 9 through 10 weeks, 9.7% at 11 through 12 weeks, 6.2% at 13 through 15 weeks, 4.1% at 16 through 20 weeks and 1.4% at more than 21 weeks.
While maternal mortality seldom results from safe abortions, unsafe abortions result in 70,000 deaths and 5 million disabilities per year.
It requires a smaller incision than a caesarean section and is used during later stages of pregnancy.
Up to 15 weeks' gestation, suction-aspiration or vacuum aspiration are the most common surgical methods of induced abortion.
Induced abortion has long been the source of considerable debate.
Estimates of deaths vary according to methodology, and have ranged from 37,000 to 70,000 in the past decade; deaths from unsafe abortion account for around 13% of all maternal deaths.
Countries that permit abortions have different limits on how late in pregnancy abortion is allowed.
Major medical and scientific bodies (including the World Health Organization, the US National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) have concluded that abortion does not cause breast cancer, although such a link continues to be studied and promoted by anti-abortion groups.
This is also a terminology in traditional medicine.
Women seeking to terminate their pregnancies sometimes resort to unsafe methods, particularly when access to legal abortion is restricted.
Outpatient abortion is as safe and effective from 64 to 70 days' gestation as it is from 57 to 63 days.
Only a small fraction of those opposed to abortion commit violence.
The latter position argues that a woman has certain reproductive rights, especially the choice whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term.
Although data are imprecise, it is estimated that approximately 20 million unsafe abortions are performed annually, with 97% taking place in developing countries.
Although some studies show negative mental-health outcomes in women who choose abortions after the first trimester because of fetal abnormalities, more rigorous research would be needed to show this conclusively.
The drug mifepristone in combination with prostaglandin appears to be as safe and effective as surgery during the first and second trimester of pregnancy.
Many countries have taken legislative steps to reduce the incidence of sex-selective abortion.
The vast majority of those that do not progress are lost before the woman is aware of the conception, and many pregnancies are lost before medical practitioners can detect an embryo.
Anti-abortion groups who favor greater legal restrictions on abortion, including complete prohibition, most often describe themselves as "pro-life" while abortion rights groups who are against such legal restrictions describe themselves as "pro-choice".
In many places there is much debate over the moral, ethical, and legal issues of abortion.
