McClellan's letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint John Pope, a Republican, as head of the new Army of Virginia.
The deaths of their sons had profound effects on both parents.
He denounced secession as anarchy, and explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints in the American system.
On April 15, Lincoln called on all the states to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect Washington, and "preserve the Union", which, in his view, still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states.
Lincoln declared that such an amendment would "clinch the whole matter".
Some of his neighbors and family members thought for a time that he was lazy for all his "reading, scribbling, writing, ciphering, writing Poetry, etc.
The stage was then set for the campaign for statewide election of the Illinois legislature which would, in turn, select Lincoln or Douglas as its U.S. senator.
He supported the construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal, which he remained involved with later as a Canal Commissioner.
After Lincoln acted, Union enlistments from Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri increased by over 40,000 troops.
The Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act, also signed in 1862, provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state.
Nevertheless, he worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than any other senior official.
In 1851, he represented the Alton & Sangamon Railroad in a dispute with one of its shareholders, James A. Barret, who had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to buy shares in the railroad on the grounds that the company had changed its original train route.
Lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, Douglas 1,376,957 votes, Breckinridge 849,781 votes, and Bell 588,789 votes.
Lincoln successfully argued that the railroad company was not bound by its original charter extant at the time of Barret's pledge; the charter was amended in the public interest to provide a newer, superior, and less expensive route, and the corporation retained the right to demand Barret's payment.
During Early's raid on Washington, D.C. in 1864, Lincoln was watching the combat from an exposed position; Captain Oliver Wendell Holmes shouted at him, "Get down, you damn fool, before you get shot!"
In 1815 a claimant in another land dispute sought to eject the family from the farm.
As a youth, Lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with frontier life.
Lincoln adhered to the Whig theory of the presidency, which gave Congress primary responsibility for writing the laws while the Executive enforced them.
This call forced the states to choose sides.
Shortly after Lee's surrender, a general had asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates should be treated, and Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy."
Of special importance were Tennessee and Arkansas, where Lincoln appointed Generals Andrew Johnson and Frederick Steele as military governors, respectively.
In terms of war strategy, Lincoln articulated two priorities: to ensure that Washington was well-defended, and to conduct an aggressive war effort that would satisfy the demand in the North for prompt, decisive victory; major Northern newspaper editors expected victory within 90 days.
There were attempts at compromise.
Barry Schwartz, a sociologist who has examined America's cultural memory, argues that in the 1930s and 1940s, the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with "a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life".
Lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraphic reports coming into the War Department headquarters.
Lincoln made five appointments to the United States Supreme Court.
On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter, forcing them to surrender, and began the war.
On October 16, 1854, in his "Peoria Speech", Lincoln declared his opposition to slavery, which he repeated en route to the presidency.
He obtained Congress's consent to reinstate for Grant the rank of Lieutenant General, which no officer had held since George Washington.
On May 9–10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur.
Lincoln was largely self-educated.
Though he gained very little support in the slaveholding states of the South, he swept the North and was elected president in 1860.
Thomas and Nancy Lincoln were also members of a Separate Baptists church, which had restrictive moral standards and opposed alcohol, dancing, and slavery.
President Lincoln rejected two geographically limited emancipation attempts by Major General John C. Frémont in August 1861 and by Major General David Hunter in May 1862, on the grounds that it was not within their power, and it would upset the border states loyal to the Union.
During the family's years in Kentucky and Indiana, Thomas Lincoln worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter.
Born in Hodgenville, Kentucky, Lincoln grew up on the western frontier in Kentucky and Indiana.
Once the abolition of slavery in the rebel states became a military objective, as Union armies advanced south, more slaves were liberated until all three million of them in Confederate territory were freed.
Schwartz argues that Lincoln's reputation grew slowly in the late 19th century until the Progressive Era (1900–1920s) when he emerged as one of the most venerated heroes in American history, with even white Southerners in agreement.
Lincoln warned that "The Slave Power" was threatening the values of republicanism, and accused Douglas of distorting the values of the Founding Fathers that all men are created equal, while Douglas emphasized his Freeport Doctrine, that local settlers were free to choose whether to allow slavery or not, and accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists.
McClellan then resisted the President's demand that he pursue Lee's retreating and exposed army, while his counterpart General Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee.
He was private about his beliefs and respected the beliefs of others.
Before Lincoln's presidency, Thanksgiving, while a regional holiday in New England since the 17th century, had been proclaimed by the federal government only sporadically and on irregular dates.
In it, he stated that "as a fit and necessary military measure, on January 1, 1863, all persons held as slaves in the Confederate states will thenceforward, and forever, be free".
In late 1854, Lincoln ran as a Whig for the U.S. Senate.
", and must have done it to avoid manual labor.
The debates had an atmosphere of a prize fight and drew crowds in the thousands.
He advocated navigational improvements on the Sangamon River.
Also in 1861, Lincoln signed the Revenue Act of 1861, creating the first U.S. income tax.
Learning that the President and Grant would be attending Ford's Theatre, Booth formulated a plan with co-conspirators to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at the theater, as well as Vice President Johnson and Secretary of State Seward at their homes.
Conversely, the Radical Republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery.
Lincoln led the United States through its Civil War—its bloodiest war and its greatest moral, constitutional, and political crisis.
Lincoln, however, did tacitly support the proposed Corwin Amendment to the Constitution, which passed Congress before Lincoln came into office and was then awaiting ratification by the states.
John Merryman, a Maryland official involved in hindering the U.S. troop movements, petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice and Marylander, Roger B. Taney, author of the controversial pro-slavery ''Dred Scott'' opinion, to issue a writ of ''habeas corpus,'' and in June Taney, acting as a circuit judge and not speaking for the Supreme Court, issued the writ, because in his opinion only Congress could suspend the writ.
Subsequently, on April 12, 1861, a Confederate attack on Fort Sumter inspired the North to enthusiastically rally behind the Union.
In a larger sense, the outpouring of grief and anguish was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war that had just ended.
People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln because of his ideas of anti-slavery and took action to rally supporters for Lincoln.
In the Cold War years, Lincoln's image shifted to emphasize the symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by communist regimes.
A few days after Emancipation was announced, 13 Republican governors met at the War Governors' Conference; they supported the president's Proclamation, but suggested the removal of General George B. McClellan as commander of the Union Army.
Historians agree that it is impossible to predict exactly what Lincoln would have done about Reconstruction if he had lived, but they make projections based on his known policy positions and political acumen.
On May 18, at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Lincoln's friends promised and manipulated and won the nomination on the third ballot, beating candidates such as William H. Seward and Salmon P. Chase.
The upper South and border states (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) listened to, but initially rejected, the secessionist appeal.
Many, though not all, in the South considered Lincoln as a man of outstanding ability.
In 1861, Lincoln signed the second and third Morrill Tariff, the first having become law under James Buchanan.
After attending an April 11, 1865, speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, an incensed Booth changed his plans and became determined to assassinate the president.
Following his return, Lincoln continued his campaign for the August 6 election for the Illinois General Assembly.
From the start, it was clear that bipartisan support would be essential to success in the war effort, and any manner of compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle, such as the appointment of Republicans and Democrats to command positions in the Union Army.
Lincoln insisted the moral foundation of the Republicans required opposition to slavery, and rejected any "groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong".
After repeated calls on Grant to defend Washington, Sheridan was appointed and the threat from Early was dispatched.
In 1846, Lincoln was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served one two-year term.
Instead, he monitored the campaign closely and relied on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party.
The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.
Lincoln vetoed only four bills passed by Congress; the only important one was the Wade-Davis Bill with its harsh program of Reconstruction.
These are often based on photographs appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting.
In 272 words, and three minutes, Lincoln asserted the nation was born not in 1789, but in 1776, "conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal".
I cannot but hate it.
In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents conducted since the 1940s, Lincoln is consistently ranked in the top three, often as number one.
Sharing this fear, Lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that, if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House:
She never replied and the courtship ended.
In that month, Lincoln discussed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet.
On February 23, 1861, he arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C., which was placed under substantial military guard.
On April 14, 1865, five days after the April 9th surrender of Confederate commanding general Robert E. Lee, Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth, a Confederate sympathizer.
Although Lincoln believed it was not within Congress's power to free the slaves within the states, he approved the bill in deference to the legislature.
In June 1864, Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant enacted by Congress, which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park.
Politically, Lincoln fought back by pitting his opponents against each other, by carefully planned political patronage, and by appealing to the American people with his powers of oratory.
By the late 1960s, liberals, such as historian Lerone Bennett, were having second thoughts, especially regarding Lincoln's views on racial issues.
:Large head, with high crown of skull; thick, bushy hair; large and deep eye-caverns; heavy eyebrows; a large nose; large ears; large mouth; thin upper and somewhat thick under lip; very high and prominent cheek-bones; cheeks thin and sunken; strongly developed jawbone; chin slightly upturned; a thin but sinewy neck, rather long; long arms; large hands; chest thin and narrow as compared with his great height; legs of more than proportionate length, and large feet.
In presidential ranking polls conducted in the United States since 1948, Lincoln has been rated at the very top in the majority of polls: Schlesinger 1948, Schlesinger 1962, 1982 Murray Blessing Survey, ''Chicago Tribune'' 1982 poll, Schlesinger 1996, CSPAN 1996, Ridings-McIver 1996, ''Time'' 2008, and CSPAN 2009.
I do no more than oppose the ''extension'' of slavery."
Other important legislation involved two measures to raise revenues for the Federal government: tariffs (a policy with long precedent), and a new Federal income tax.
By the end of 1863, at Lincoln's direction, General Lorenzo Thomas had recruited 20 regiments of blacks from the Mississippi Valley.
African-Americans were especially moved; they had lost 'their Moses'.
David Davis, Lincoln's campaign manager in 1860, nominated December 1, 1862 and appointed December 8, 1862, had also served as a judge in Lincoln's Illinois court circuit.
Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature re-elected Douglas to the Senate.
The Senate campaign featured the seven Lincoln–Douglas debates of 1858, the most famous political debates in American history.
He was known for his "free soil" stance of opposing both slavery and abolitionism.
A former Democrat, Hannibal Hamlin of Maine, was nominated for Vice President to balance the ticket.
Despite some financial challenges he eventually obtained clear title to  of land in what became known as the Little Pigeon Creek Community in Spencer County.
He signed into law Senator Charles Sumner's Freedmen's Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate material needs of former slaves.
Drawing on the antislavery portion of the Whig Party, and combining Free Soil, Liberty, and antislavery Democratic Party members, the new Republican Party formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery.
From every side came news of mass meetings, speeches, resolutions, tenders of business support, the muster of companies and regiments, the determined action of governors and legislatures."
As a Whig activist, Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, internal improvements, and railroads in opposition to the agrarian Democrats.
Lincoln's reaction was to send the strongest of messages to the media about such behavior; he ordered the military to seize the two papers.
Eric Foner argues that:
Lincoln's followers organized a campaign team led by David Davis, Norman Judd, Leonard Swett, and Jesse DuBois, and Lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency.
Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie) in 1846.
Lincoln arranged for an intermediary to make inquiry into Grant's political intentions, and being assured that he had none, submitted to the Senate Grant's promotion to commander of the Union Army.
Since she was raised by a wealthy family, her cooking abilities were simple, but satisfied Lincoln's tastes, which included, particularly, imported oysters.
Lincoln stated Douglas' popular sovereignty theory was a threat to the nation's morality and that Douglas represented a conspiracy to extend slavery to free states.
Captain Lincoln was killed in an Indian raid in 1786.
Americans asked, "What would Lincoln do?"
Poet Walt Whitman composed ''When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd'' to eulogize Lincoln, one of four poems he wrote about the assassinated president.
He abandoned the bill when it failed to garner sufficient Whig supporters.
Lincoln's managers had been adroitly focused on this delegation as well as the others, while following Lincoln's strong dictate to "Make no contracts that bind me".
The Republican Party's production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition; a ''Chicago Tribune'' writer produced a pamphlet that detailed Lincoln's life, and sold 100,000 to 200,000 copies.
From 1853 to 1860, another of Lincoln's largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad.
Thomas Lincoln bought or leased several farms in Kentucky, including the Sinking Spring farm, where Abraham was born; however, a land title dispute soon forced the Lincolns to move.
But time and again during the war, Lincoln, after initial opposition, had come to embrace positions first advanced by abolitionists and Radical Republicans.&nbsp;... Lincoln undoubtedly would have listened carefully to the outcry for further protection for the former slaves&nbsp;...
Confederate general Jubal Anderson Early began a series of assaults in the North that threatened the Capital.
On April 1, 1865, Grant successfully outflanked Lee's forces in the Battle of Five Forks and nearly encircled Petersburg, and the Confederate government evacuated Richmond.
Lincoln's Democratic opponents seized on these appointments to accuse him of using the military to ensure his and the Republicans' political aspirations.
This created a flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above $800 ($ in current dollar terms), which was later changed by the Revenue Act of 1862 to a progressive rate structure.
The creation of the system of national banks by the National Banking Act provided a strong financial network in the country.
Before the election, Lincoln served as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War.
Lincoln's flag-enfolded body was then escorted in the rain to the White House by bareheaded Union officers, while the city's church bells rang.
Lincoln argued, "The authors of the Declaration of Independence never intended 'to say all were equal in color, size, intellect, moral developments, or social capacity', but they 'did consider all men created equal—equal in certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness'."
He attained a reputation for brawn and audacity after a very competitive wrestling match with the renowned leader of a group of ruffians known as "the Clary's Grove boys".
Shortly before his assassination, Lincoln announced he had a new plan for southern Reconstruction.
Lincoln concluded that the Civil War had a profound objective: a new birth of freedom in the nation.
The successful reunification of the states had consequences for the name of the country.
Virginia declared its secession and was rewarded with the Confederate capital, despite the exposed position of Richmond so close to Union lines.
For some time, Lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the newly freed slaves.
In recent years, historians such as Harry Jaffa, Herman Belz, John Diggins, Vernon Burton and Eric Foner have stressed Lincoln's redefinition of ''republican values''.
Lincoln provided Grant with more troops and mobilized his party to renew its support of Grant in the war effort.
On the other hand, Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability, defined by the poet John Keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were "content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts, and not compelled toward fact or reason".
Despite the bitterness of the defeat for Lincoln, his articulation of the issues gave him a national political reputation.
Upon ratification, it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution on December 6, 1865.
Of his learning method, Lincoln stated: "I studied with nobody".
Mark E. Neely Jr. has argued that there was no effort to engage in "total war" against civilians which he believed did take place during World War II.
In the 1840s, Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity, a belief that asserted the human mind was controlled by some higher power.
Lincoln wrote, "I think I am a Whig, but others say there are no Whigs, and that I am an abolitionist ...
I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself.
:his restraint, his avoidance of any outward expression of truculence, his early softening of State Department's attitude toward Britain, his deference toward Seward and Sumner, his withholding of his own paper prepared for the occasion, his readiness to arbitrate, his golden silence in addressing Congress, his shrewdness in recognizing that war must be averted, and his clear perception that a point could be clinched for America's true position at the same time that full satisfaction was given to a friendly country.
Although the economy was booming in the region, the business struggled and Lincoln eventually sold his share.
'''Abraham Lincoln''' (; February 12, 1809&nbsp;– April 15, 1865) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the 16th President of the United States from March 1861 until his assassination in April 1865.
Secession sentiment was strong in Missouri and Maryland, but did not prevail; Kentucky tried to be neutral.
In 1860, Lincoln secured the Republican Party presidential nomination as a moderate from a swing state.
Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope.
It is entirely plausible to imagine Lincoln and Congress agreeing on a Reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage, along the lines Lincoln proposed just before his death."
Lincoln was close to the Todds, and he and his family occasionally visited the Todd estate in Lexington.
"Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together," say Thomas and Hyman.
While preparing for the nuptials and feeling anxiety again, Lincoln, when asked where he was going, replied, "To hell, I suppose."
:It is likely that had he lived, Lincoln would have followed a policy similar to Johnson's, that he would have clashed with congressional Radicals, that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred, and that his political skills would have helped him avoid Johnson's mistakes.
At his first speech, when he saw a supporter in the crowd being attacked, Lincoln grabbed the assailant by his "neck and the seat of his trousers" and threw him.
Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Mary if she returned to New Salem.
Mary did return in November 1836, and Lincoln courted her for a time; however, they both had second thoughts about their relationship.
Lincoln continued the army policy that the writ was suspended in limited areas despite the Ex parte Merryman ruling.
On December 2, 1819, Lincoln's father married Sarah "Sally" Bush Johnston, a widow from Elizabethtown, Kentucky, with three children of her own.
Lincoln appointed 32 federal judges, including four Associate Justices and one Chief Justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, and 27 judges to the United States district courts.
However he did believe in an all-powerful God that shaped events and, by 1865, was expressing those beliefs in major speeches.
Lincoln initially concentrated on the military and political dimensions of the war.
In the 1835–36 legislative session, he voted to expand suffrage to white males, whether landowners or not.
Nationally, the Whigs had been irreparably split by the Kansas–Nebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue.
Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellan's failure to reinforce Pope, Lincoln was desperate, and restored him to command of all forces around Washington, to the dismay of all in his cabinet but Seward.
At times Seward was too bellicose, so for balance Lincoln stuck a close working relationship with Senator Charles Sumner, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
James G. Randall emphasizes his tolerance and especially his moderation "in his preference for orderly progress, his distrust of dangerous agitation, and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform".
He kept close tabs on all phases of the military effort, consulted with governors, and selected generals based on their past success (as well as their state and party).
The emphasis shifted away from Lincoln-the-emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery, or at least were responsible for pressuring the government on emancipation.
West Virginia, admitted to the Union June 20, 1863, contained the former north-westernmost counties of Virginia that seceded from Virginia after that commonwealth declared its secession from the Union.
Lincoln stated that his Louisiana plan did not apply to all states under Reconstruction.
Lincoln was viewed by abolitionists as a champion for human liberty.
I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.
I do not expect the Union to be dissolved—I do not expect the house to fall—but I do expect it will cease to be divided.
Lincoln's decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbull's antislavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate, Joel Aldrich Matteson.
Lincoln's most notable criminal trial occurred in 1858 when he defended William "Duff" Armstrong, who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker.
Lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to make further amendments to the Constitution.
Turnout was 82.2&nbsp;percent, with Lincoln winning the free Northern states, as well as California and Oregon.
On December 20, 1860, South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession; by February 1, 1861, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas followed.
In 1864, Booth formulated a plan (very similar to one of Thomas N. Conrad previously authorized by the Confederacy) to kidnap Lincoln in exchange for the release of Confederate prisoners.
As Lincoln's election became evident, secessionists made clear their intent to leave the Union before he took office the next March.
Later in life, Lincoln's frequent use of religious imagery and language might have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to appeal to his audiences, who were mostly evangelical Protestants.
McClellan's repeated delays frustrated Lincoln and Congress, as did his position that no troops were needed to defend Washington.
Yet the contest proceeds."
Lincoln learned from reading the theoretical book of his chief of staff General Henry Halleck, a disciple of the European strategist Jomini; he began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points, such as the Mississippi River;.
After refusing to surrender to Union troops, Booth was killed by Sergeant Boston Corbett on April 26.
(Their land in southern Indiana became part of Spencer County, Indiana, when the county was established in 1818.)
Lincoln then made an extended visit to Grant's headquarters at City Point, Virginia.
As a riverboat man, Lincoln initially favored those interests, but ultimately represented whoever hired him.
Samuel's grandson and great-grandson began the family's western migration, which passed through New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.
Even though they had the advantage of fighting on the defensive, the Confederate forces had "almost as high a percentage of casualties as the Union forces".
Days later, when that city fell, Lincoln visited the vanquished Confederate capital; as he walked through the city, white Southerners were stone-faced, but freedmen greeted him as a hero.
Lincoln's comment on the signing of the Proclamation was: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper."
:The thunderclap of Sumter produced a startling crystallization of Northern sentiment&nbsp;... Anger swept the land.
On foreign and military policy, Lincoln spoke out against the Mexican–American War, which he attributed to President Polk's desire for "military glory—that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood".
After his father's murder, Thomas was left to make his own way on the frontier, working at odd jobs in Kentucky and in Tennessee, before settling with members of his family in Hardin County, Kentucky, in the early 1800s.
After the Battle of Fort Sumter, Lincoln realized the importance of taking immediate executive control of the war and making an overall strategy to put down the rebellion.
Historian Barry Schwartz wrote in 2009 that Lincoln's image suffered "erosion, fading prestige, benign ridicule" in the late 20th century.
Congress never enacted the resolution or even debated it, the national papers ignored it, and it resulted in a loss of political support for Lincoln in his district.
Several claims abound that Lincoln's health was declining before the assassination.
In the spring of 1863, Lincoln was optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to the point of thinking the end of the war could be near if a string of victories could be put together; these plans included Hooker's attack on Lee north of Richmond, Rosecrans' on Chattanooga, Grant's on Vicksburg, and a naval assault on Charleston.
Abraham Lincoln suffered from "melancholy", a condition which now is referred to as clinical depression.
