In the sole country (Switzerland) that does possess a legal definition of absinthe, distillation is the only permitted method of production.
Many countries never banned absinthe, notably Britain, where it had never been as popular as in continental Europe.
In the Netherlands, the restrictions on the manufacture and sale of absinthe were successfully challenged by the Amsterdam wine seller Menno Boorsma in July 2004, thus confirming the legality of absinthe once again.
The Netherlands banned absinthe in 1909, Switzerland in 1910, the United States in 1912, and France in 1914.
This practice may be responsible for some of the alleged toxicity historically associated with this beverage.
In 1905, it was reported that Jean Lanfray, a Swiss farmer, murdered his family and attempted to take his own life after drinking absinthe.
The precise origin of absinthe is unclear.
The aura of illicitness and mystery surrounding absinthe has played into literature, movies, music, and television, where it is often portrayed as a mysterious, addictive, and mind-altering drink.
Whether the word was a borrowing from Persian into Greek, or from a common ancestor of both, is unclear.
The sale of absinthe is permitted in all EU countries unless they further regulate it.
Iced water is poured or dripped over the sugar cube to mix the water into the absinthe.
Individual provincial liquor boards must approve each product before it may be sold.
If naturally coloured absinthe is exposed to light or air for a prolonged period, the chlorophyll gradually becomes oxidised, which has the effect of gradually changing the colour from green to yellow green, and eventually to brown.
This step involves steeping plants such as petite wormwood, hyssop, and melissa (among other herbs) in the distillate.
''opaque'' or ''shady'', IPA luʃ).
Absinthe's popularity grew steadily through the 1840s, when absinthe was given to French troops as a malaria preventive.
In 2000, an amendment proposed by Foods Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) as part of a new consolidation of the Food Code across Australia and New Zealand, made all wormwood species prohibited herbs for food purposes under ''Food Standard 1.4.4.
One study published in the ''Journal of Studies on Alcohol'' concluded that high doses (0.28&nbsp;mg/kg) of thujone in alcohol had negative effects on attention performance in a clinical setting.
In baking, Pernod Anise is often used as a substitute if absinthe is unavailable.
In addition to banning the production of and commercial trade in absinthe, the law went so far as to prohibit the distribution of printed matter that provided details of its production.
It is an anise-flavoured spirit derived from botanicals, including the flowers and leaves of ''Artemisia absinthium'' ("grand wormwood"), together with green anise, sweet fennel, and other medicinal and culinary herbs.
In this context, the TTB considers a product thujone-free if the thujone content is less than 10 ppm (equal to 10&nbsp;mg/kg).
The effects of absinthe have been described by some as mind opening.
As with any spirit, importation by individuals for personal use is allowed, provided that conditions for the individual's duration outside the country are satisfied.
'''Absinthe''' ( or ; French: ) is historically described as a distilled, highly alcoholic (45–74% ABV / 90–148 U.S. proof) beverage.
A variant of the Bohemian Method involves allowing the fire to extinguish on its own.
These controls have now been repealed, and permission is no longer required.
Absinthe was exported widely from its native France and Switzerland, and attained some degree of popularity in other countries,  including Spain, Great Britain, USA, and the Czech Republic.
The medical use of wormwood dates back to ancient Egypt, and is mentioned in the Ebers Papyrus, c.&nbsp;1550&nbsp;BC.
Many modern absinthes are produced using a cold mix process.
Beginning in 2000, a product called Absente was sold legally in the United States under the marketing tagline "Absinthe Refined," but as the product contained sugar, and was made with ''southernwood'' (''Artemisia abrotanum'') and not grande wormwood (''Artemisia absinthium'') (prior to 2009), the TTB classified it as a liqueur.
While this regulation is enforced throughout channels of legal distribution, it may be possible to find absinthe containing alcohol in excess of the legal limit in some restaurants or food fairs.
Tests conducted on mice  to study toxicity showed an oral  of about 45&nbsp;mg thujone per kg of body weight, which represents far more absinthe than could be realistically consumed.
Many contemporary absinthe critics simply classify absinthe as ''distilled'' or ''mixed'', according to its production method.
It is legal to produce and sell absinthe in the Republic of Georgia, which has claimed to possess several producers of absinthe.
In Switzerland, the constitutional ban on absinthe was repealed in 2000 during an overhaul of the national constitution, although the prohibition was simultaneously rewritten into ordinary law instead.
Two famous artists who helped popularise the notion that absinthe had powerful psychoactive properties were Toulouse-Lautrec and Vincent van Gogh.
The fact that Lanfray was an alcoholic who had consumed considerable quantities of wine and brandy prior to drinking two glasses of absinthe was overlooked or ignored, therefore placing the blame for the murders solely on absinthe.
Clandestine home distillers produced colourless absinthe (''la Bleue''), which was easier to conceal from the authorities.
While the effects of the high dose samples were statistically significant in a double blind test, the test subjects themselves were unable to reliably identify which samples contained thujone.
The flavour of absinthe is said to improve materially with storage, and many pre-ban distilleries aged their absinthe in settling tanks before bottling.
In December 2007, St. George Absinthe Verte, produced by St. George Spirits of Alameda, California, became the first brand of American-made absinthe produced in the United States since the ban.
In preparing the classic New Orleans-style Sazerac cocktail, various substitutes such as Pastis, Pernod, Ricard, and Herbsaint have been used to replace absinthe.
One of the most famous of these libations is Ernest Hemingway's "Death in the Afternoon" cocktail, a tongue-in-cheek concoction contributed to a 1935 collection of celebrity recipes.
A referendum was subsequently held on banning the drink on 5 July 1908.
It is commonly referred to in historical literature as "''''" (the green fairy).
The ''Old Absinthe House'' bar, located on Bourbon Street, serves as a prominent historical landmark.
The belief that absinthe induces hallucinogenic effects is at least partly rooted in the fact that following some ten years of experiments with wormwood oil in the 19th century, the French psychiatrist Valentin Magnan studied 250 cases of alcoholism, and claimed that those who drank absinthe were worse off than those drinking ordinary alcohol, having experienced rapid-onset hallucinations.
Authorities believe that high taxes on alcohol and the mystique of being underground are likely reasons.
Such accounts by opponents of absinthe (like Magnan) were cheerfully embraced by famous absinthe drinkers, many of whom were bohemian artists or writers.
Absinthe was favoured by all social classes, from the wealthy bourgeoisie, to poor artists and ordinary working-class people.
The ban was reinforced in 1931 with harsher penalties for transgressors, and remained in force until 1992 when the Italian government amended its laws to comply with the EU directive 88/388/EEC.
Some claim that the word means "undrinkable" in Greek, but it may instead be linked to the Persian root ''spand'' or ''aspand'', or the variant ''esfand'', which meant ''Peganum harmala'', also called Syrian Rue—although it is not actually a variety of rue, another famously bitter herb.
New Orleans has a profound cultural association with absinthe, and is credited as the birthplace of the Sazerac, perhaps the earliest absinthe cocktail.
In Switzerland, the ban served only to drive the production of absinthe underground.
Recent studies have shown that absinthe's psychoactive properties (apart from that of the alcohol) have been exaggerated.
* The product must be thujone-free as per TTB guidelines,
The modern day interest in absinthe has spawned a rash of absinthe kits from companies that claim they produce homemade absinthe.
Since that time, other micro-distilleries have started producing small batch artisanal absinthes in the US.
Past reports estimated thujone concentrations in absinthe as being up to 260&nbsp;mg/kg.
In Canada, liquor laws are established by the various provincial governments.
It rose to great popularity as an alcoholic drink in late 19th- and early 20th-century France, particularly among Parisian artists and writers.
Drink three to five of these slowly."
Predictably, vintage absinthes often emerge from sealed bottles as distinctly amber in tint due to decades of slow oxidation.
Additionally, at least some cheap absinthes produced before the ban were reportedly adulterated with poisonous antimony trichloride, reputed to enhance the louching effect.
No peer-reviewed scientific study has demonstrated absinthe to possess hallucinogenic properties.
This let drinkers prepare a number of drinks at once—and with a hands-free drip, patrons could socialise while louching a glass.
This variant is sometimes referred to as "Cooking the Absinthe" or "The Flaming Green Fairy."
According to popular legend, absinthe began as an all-purpose patent remedy created by Dr. Pierre Ordinaire, a French doctor living in Couvet, Switzerland, around 1792 (the exact date varies by account).
The guinea pig exposed to wormwood vapour experienced convulsive seizures, while the animal exposed to alcohol did not.
Traditional absentas may taste slightly different due to their use of Alicante anise, and often exhibit a characteristic citrus flavour.
Absinthe imported in violation of these regulations is subject to seizure at the discretion of U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
* Manitoba: 6–8&nbsp;mg
In one of the best-known written accounts of absinthe drinking, an inebriated Oscar Wilde described a phantom sensation of having tulips brush against his legs after leaving a bar at closing time.
It is claimed that at least one local liquor distillery in Bohemia was producing absinthe at the turn of the 20th century.
The government-owned chain of liquor stores (Alko) is the only outlet that may sell alcoholic beverages containing over 4.7% ABV, although national law bans the sale of alcoholic beverages containing over 60% ABV.
The original ban was lifted in 1981, but the use of ''Artemisia absinthium'' as a flavouring agent remained prohibited.
It is widely accepted that reports of hallucinogenic effects of absinthe were attributable to the poisonous adulterants being added to cheaper versions of the drink in the 19th century, such as oil of wormwood, impure alcohol, and poisonous colouring matter (e.g.
When the troops returned home, they brought their taste for absinthe home with them.
Only one historical brand of rose absinthe has been documented.
Bohemian-style absinth typically contains little or none of the anise, fennel, and other herbal flavours associated with traditional absinthe, and thus bears very little resemblance to the absinthes made popular in the 19th century.
The Absinthe (Prohibition) Act 1915, passed in the New Hebrides, has never been repealed, is included in the 2006 Vanuatu consolidated legislation, and contains the following all-encompassing restriction: "The manufacture, importation, circulation and sale wholesale or by retail of absinthe or similar liquors in Vanuatu shall be prohibited."
However, this amendment was found inconsistent with other parts of the preexisting Food Code.
The name ''la Bleue'' was originally a term used for bootleg Swiss absinthe, but has become a popular term for post-ban-style Swiss absinthe in general.
Today it is known that absinthe does not cause hallucinations.
However, the only outlet that may sell alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.5% ABV in Sweden and 4.75% ABV in Norway, is the government-owned chain of liquor stores known as Systembolaget in Sweden and Vinmonopolet in Norway.
The lack of a formal legal definition for absinthe in most countries enables some cold mixing producers to falsify advertising claims, such as referring to their products as "distilled", since the base alcohol itself was created at some point through distillation.
''Absinthe'' is derived from the Latin ''absinthium'', which in turn comes from the ancient Greek ἀψίνθιον ''apsínthion'', "wormwood".
The brands Kubler and Lucid and their lawyers did most of the work to get absinthe legalized in the U.S., over the 2004-2007 time period.
As such, most traditionally crafted absinthes, both vintage and modern, fall within the current EU standards.
Absinthe has been consumed in the Czech countries (then part of Austria-Hungary) since at least 1888, notably by Czech artists, some of whom had an affinity for Paris, frequenting Prague's famous Café Slavia.
The Fascist regime in 1926 banned the production, import, transport and sale of any liquor named ''"Assenzio"''.
Like the French method, a sugar cube is placed on a slotted spoon over a glass containing one shot of absinthe.
Some of these included Édouard Manet, Guy de Maupassant, Amedeo Modigliani, Arthur Rimbaud, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Paul Verlaine, Vincent van Gogh, Oscar Wilde, and Émile Zola.
A legal challenge to the scientific basis of this decree resulted in its repeal (2009), which opened the door for the official French re-legalisation of absinthe for the first time since 1915.
To be legally made or sold in Switzerland, absinthe must be distilled, must not contain certain additives, and must be either naturally coloured or left uncoloured.
The high percentage of alcohol in absinthe would result in mortality long before thujone could become a factor.
In at least one documented case, a person suffered acute renal failure after drinking 10&nbsp;ml of pure wormwood oil—a dose much higher than that found in absinthe.
The ''Bohemian Method'' is a recent invention that involves fire, and was not performed during absinthe's peak of popularity in the Belle Époque.
Absinthe has been frequently and improperly described in modern times as being hallucinogenic.
Despite adopting sweeping EU food and beverage regulations in 1988 that effectively re-legalised absinthe, a decree was passed that same year that preserved the prohibition on products explicitly labelled as "absinthe", while placing strict limits on fenchone (fennel) and pinocamphone (hyssop) in an obvious, but failed, attempt to thwart a possible return of absinthe-like products.
It is produced mainly in the Czech Republic, from which it gets its designation as ''Bohemian'' or ''Czech'', although not all absinthes from the Czech Republic are Bohemian-style.
Importation is a federal matter, and is enforced by the Canada Border Services Agency.
That law was later repealed such that as of March 1, 2005, absinthe was made again legal in its country of origin.
Prohibited and Restricted Plants and Fungi''.
The cold mixing process involves the simple blending of flavouring essences and artificial colouring in commercial alcohol, in similar fashion to most flavoured vodkas and inexpensive liqueurs and cordials.
Magnan would later blame the naturally occurring (in wormwood) chemical thujone for these effects.
By the 1880s, mass production had caused the price of absinthe to drop sharply.
Most categorical alcoholic beverages have regulations governing their classification and labelling, while those governing absinthe have always been conspicuously lacking.
Absinthe originated in the canton of Neuchâtel in Switzerland in the late 18th century.
Ernest Hemingway, James Joyce, Charles Baudelaire, Paul Verlaine, Arthur Rimbaud, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Amedeo Modigliani, Pablo Picasso, Vincent van Gogh, Oscar Wilde, Marcel Proust, Aleister Crowley, Erik Satie, Edgar Allan Poe, Lord Byron and Alfred Jarry were all known absinthe drinkers.
Absinthe is traditionally bottled at a high level of alcohol by volume, but it is normally diluted with water prior to being consumed.
That ''Artemisia absinthium'' was commonly burned as a protective offering may suggest that its origins lie in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European root ''*spend'', meaning "to perform a ritual" or "make an offering".
Although the ban has been lifted in Switzerland, some clandestine distillers have not legitimised their production.
As the popularity of the drink increased, additional accoutrements of preparation appeared, including the absinthe fountain, which was effectively a large jar of iced water with spigots, mounted on a lamp base.
Traditional absinthes were redistilled from a white grape spirit (or eau de vie), while lesser absinthes were more commonly made from alcohol from grain, beets, or potatoes.
The blanche is altered by the colouring step, by which a separate mixture of herbs is steeped into the clear distillate.
Importation requires a permit under the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulation 1956 due to a restriction on importing any product containing "oil of wormwood".
Such practices usually yield a harsh substance that bears little resemblance to the genuine article, and are considered inauthentic by any practical standard.
Numerous artists and writers living in France in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were noted absinthe drinkers, and featured absinthe in their work.
This reflects what is perhaps the oldest and purest method of preparation, and is often referred to as the ''French Method''.
This is verified through the use of Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry.
One incident resulted in breathing difficulties and hospitalisation of a 17-year-old for alcohol poisoning.
Pernod Fils remained one of the most popular brands of absinthe up until the drink was banned in France in 1914.
Typical Bohemian-style absinth has only two similarities with its authentic, traditional counterpart: it contains wormwood and has a high alcohol content.
Bitters may contain a maximum 35&nbsp;mg/kg thujone, while other alcoholic beverages can contain a maximum 10&nbsp;mg/kg.
After it was approved by voters, the prohibition of absinthe was then written into the Swiss constitution.
Many other herbs may be used as well, such as petite wormwood (''Artemisia pontica'' or Roman wormwood), hyssop, melissa, star anise, angelica, peppermint, coriander, and veronica.
The Lanfray murders were the tipping point in this hotly debated topic, and a subsequent petition to ban absinthe in Switzerland collected more than 82,000 signatures.
Ordinaire's recipe was passed on to the Henriod sisters of Couvet, who sold absinthe as a medicinal elixir.
More recently, published scientific analyses of samples of various original absinthes have disproved previous estimates, and demonstrated that only a trace of the thujone present in wormwood actually makes it into a properly distilled absinthe when historical methods and materials are employed to create the spirit.
In 1805, they built a second distillery in Pontarlier, France, under the new company name Maison Pernod Fils.
The use of ''Artemisia absinthium'' in a drink is attested in Lucretius' ''De Rerum Natura'' (I 936–950), where Lucretius indicates that a drink containing wormwood is given as medicine to children in a cup with honey on the brim to make it drinkable.
Absinthe has never been illegal to import or manufacture in Australia.
* '''''Blanche, or la Bleue''''': Blanche absinthe (also referred to as ''la Bleue'' in Switzerland) is bottled directly following distillation and reduction, and is uncoloured (clear).
This theory was conclusively disproved in 1999.
Absinthe that is artificially coloured or clear is aesthetically stable, and can be bottled in clear glass.
In the only country that possesses a formal legal definition of absinthe (Switzerland), anything made via the cold mixed process cannot be sold as absinthe.
Absinthe has served as the subject of numerous works of fine art, films, video, music, and literature since the mid-19th-century.
The debate over whether absinthe produces effects on the human mind in addition to those of alcohol has not been conclusively resolved.
Some concoctions may even be dangerous, especially if they call for supplementation with potentially poisonous herbs, oils and/or extracts.
Member countries regulate absinthe production within this framework.
Alternative spellings for absinthe include ''absinth'', ''absynthe'' and ''absenta''.
The traditional French preparation involves placing a sugar cube on top of a specially designed slotted spoon, and placing the spoon on a glass filled with a measure of absinthe.
Artificially coloured green absinthes may also claimed to be ''verte'', though they lack the characteristic herbal flavours that result from the colouring process.
Absinthe is once again distilled and sold in its Val-de-Travers birthplace, with Kübler and La Clandestine Absinthe among the first new brands to re-emerge.
The particular brand of absinthe that caused these effects was bottled at an unusually high 89.9% ABV.
Thujone, once widely believed to be an active chemical in absinthe, is a GABA antagonist; and while it can produce muscle spasms in large doses, there is no direct evidence to suggest it causes hallucinations.
The 21st century has seen new modalities for absinthe, including various frozen preparations, which have become increasingly popular.
''Absinth'' (without the final ''e'') is a spelling variant most commonly applied to absinthes produced in central and eastern Europe, and is specifically associated with Bohemian-style absinthes.
Until July 13, 2013, the import and sale of absinthe technically required a special permit, since "oil of wormwood, being an essential oil obtained from plants of the genus ''Artemisia'', and preparations containing oil of wormwood" were listed as item 12A, Schedule 8, Regulation 5H of the ''Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations 1956'' (Cth).
The domestic production and sale of absinthe is regulated by state licensing laws.
The natural colouring process is considered critical for absinthe ageing, since the chlorophyll remains chemically active.
In 19th century Parisian cafés, upon receiving an order for an absinthe, a waiter would present the patron with a dose of absinthe in a suitable glass, sugar, absinthe spoon, and a carafe of iced water.
A ban on absinthe was enacted in Germany on 27 March 1923.
And while the former is generally considered far superior in quality to the latter, an absinthe's simple claim of being 'distilled' makes no guarantee as to the quality of its base ingredients or the skill of its maker.
Kits often call for soaking herbs in vodka or alcohol, or adding a liquid concentrate to vodka or alcohol to create an ersatz absinthe.
One of the first vilifications of absinthe followed an 1864 experiment in which Magnan simultaneously exposed one guinea pig to large doses of pure wormwood vapour, and another to alcohol vapours.
* The word "absinthe" can neither be the brand name nor stand alone on the label, and
Notions of absinthe's alleged hallucinogenic properties were again fuelled in the 1970s, when a scientific paper suggested that thujone's structural similarity to THC, the active chemical in cannabis, presented the possibility of THC receptor affinity.
Absinthe is readily available in many bottle shops.
Moreover, there is evidence of the existence of a wormwood-flavoured wine, ''absinthites oinos'', in ancient Greece.
There is now an Australian-produced brand of absinthe called ''Moulin Rooz''.
The sugar is pre-soaked in alcohol (usually more absinthe), then set ablaze.
Its wider appeal in Bohemia itself is uncertain, though it was sold in and around Prague.
The French word ''absinthe'' can refer either to the alcoholic beverage or, less commonly, to the actual wormwood plant, with ''grande absinthe'' being ''Artemisia absinthium'', and ''petite absinthe'' being ''Artemisia pontica''.
By other accounts, the Henriod sisters may have been making the elixir before Ordinaire's arrival.
Finally, a shot glass of water is added to douse the flames.
It was up to the patron to prepare the drink, as the inclusion or omission of sugar was strictly an individual preference, as was the amount of water used.
In the preban era, this natural phenomenon was favourably viewed, for it confirmed the product in question was coloured naturally, and not artificially with potentially toxic chemicals.
Owing in part to its association with bohemian culture, the consumption of absinthe was opposed by social conservatives and prohibitionists.
Absinthe was never banned in Spain or Portugal, and its production and consumption have never ceased.
Absinthe was historically bottled at 45-74% percent ABV.
Unlike Switzerland and France, there are no further restrictions.
Absinthe is not sold in some provinces, although in Saskatchewan, an individual is permitted to import one case (usually twelve 750&nbsp;ml bottles or eight one-litre bottles) of any liquor.
The production of spirits in Canada is provincially regulated
The custom of drinking absinthe gradually became so popular in bars, bistros, cafés, and cabarets that, by the 1860s, the hour of 5&nbsp;p.m. was called ''l'heure verte'' ("the green hour").
It gained a temporary spike in popularity there during the early 20th century, corresponding with the French influenced Art Nouveau and Modernism aesthetic movements.
In addition to being prepared with sugar and water, absinthe emerged as a popular cocktail ingredient in both the United Kingdom and the United States.
Lalo Zanini and legalised in the same year.
Absinthe has often been portrayed as a dangerously addictive psychoactive drug and hallucinogen.
* Nova Scotia : absinthe sold in provincial liquor store outlets
The ban came in August 2008 after several issues of misuse drew public and police attention.
Following the conclusion of the First World War, production of the Pernod Fils brand was resumed at the Banus distillery in Catalonia, Spain (where absinthe was still legal), but gradually declining sales saw the cessation of production in the 1960s.
Accordingly, producers are free to label a product 'absinthe' or 'absinth', whether or not it bears any resemblance to the traditional spirit.
* '''Bohemian-style absinth''' is also referred to as Czech-style absinthe, anise-free absinthe, or just "absinth" (without the "e"), and is best described as a wormwood bitters.
The chemical compound thujone, although present in the spirit in only trace amounts, was blamed for its alleged harmful effects.
In 2007, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB) effectively lifted the long-standing absinthe ban, and it has since approved many brands for sale in the US market.
Hausgemacht absinthe is produced in tiny quantities for personal use and not for the commercial market.
* Newfoundland and Labrador: absinthe sold in provincial liquor store outlets
In either case, a certain Major Dubied acquired the formula from the sisters and in 1797, and with his son Marcellin and son-in-law Henry-Louis Pernod, opened the first absinthe distillery, Dubied Père et Fils, in Couvet.
Low doses (0.028&nbsp;mg/kg) did not produce an effect noticeably different from the plain alcohol control.
This inexpensive method of production does not involve distillation, and is regarded as inferior in the same way that cheaper ''compound'' gin is regarded as inferior to ''distilled'' gin.
* '''''Verte''''' ("green" in French) absinthe begins as a blanche.
In May 2011, the French Absinthe Ban of 1915 was repealed following petitions by the Fédération Française des Spiritueux, who represent French distillers.
Chlorophyll from these herbs is extracted in the process, giving the drink its famous green colour.
This is used as justification to sell these inexpensively produced absinthes at prices comparable to more authentic absinthes that are distilled directly from whole herbs.
Except for a period of prohibition from 1919 to 1932, the sale and production of absinthe has never been prohibited in Finland.
Producers of legitimate absinthes employ one of two historically defined processes to create the finished spirit: distillation, or cold mixing.
These events were erroneously reported by the media as Australia having reclassified it from a ''prohibited'' product to a ''restricted'' product.
