On 30 June 2008 the Department of Transport began public bus service in Abu Dhabi with four routes.
In the eastern part of the city, the pronunciation is "Abu".
The native-born population are Arabic-speaking Arabs who are part of a clan-based society.
On average, January is the coolest month in the year, while August is the hottest.
Some of the tallest buildings on the skyline include the  Central Market Residential Tower, the  The Landmark and the 74-story,  Sky Tower, all of them completed.
Abu Dhabi lies on a T-shaped island jutting into the Persian Gulf from the central western coast.
The development of tall buildings has been encouraged in the Abu Dhabi Plan 2030, which will lead to the construction of many new skyscrapers over the next decade, particularly in the expansion of Abu Dhabi's central business district such as the new developments on Al Sowwah Island and Al Reem Island.
Many Hollywood and other national film production teams have used the UAE as filming locations.
This is arguably one of the most important architectural treasures of contemporary UAE society—and one of the most opulent in the world.
In this plan Abu Dhabi's economy will be sustainable and not be dependent on any one facet or source of revenue.
This book is effectually an encyclopædia about navigation and sailing in and around the Indian Ocean.
The design of the inner city roads and main roads are quite organised.
The sale and consumption of pork, though not illegal, is regulated and it is sold only to non-Muslims in designated areas.
This family makes up the rulers of Abu Dhabi today.
Abu Dhabi is the wealthiest emirate of the UAE in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and per capita income.
Most of Abu Dhabi city is located on the island itself, but it has many suburbs on the mainland, for example: Khalifa City A, B, and C; Al Raha Beach; Al Bahia City A, B, and C; Al Shahama; Al Rahba; Between Two Bridges; Baniyas; Shamkha; AL Wathba and Mussafah Residential.
A majority of mosques are Maliki or Muwahhid oriented.
Its terminal spaces are dominated by Etihad Airways which is the UAE's national carrier and the country's second largest airline.
The Bani Yas bedouin were originally centered on the Liwa Oasis.
Approximately 80% of the population were expatriates.
According to the tourism page Majid came from a family of sailors and 40 of his works have survived.
Abu Dhabi houses federal government offices, is the seat of the United Arab Emirates Government, home to the Abu Dhabi Emiri Family and the President of the UAE, who is from this family.
The four routes, which operate between 6&nbsp;am and midnight every day, run at a frequency of 10 to 20 minutes.
Sunny blue skies can be expected throughout the year.
;First oil discoveries
The current network is supported by a bandwidth of 6 GB, with 50,000 dialup and 150,000 broadband ports.
According to a source about pearling, the Persian Gulf was the best location for pearls.
Although the new, zero-fare bus service has been a success, many taxi drivers are losing business.
Universities from every corner of the world exhibit their career programs and scholarship programs for globally bright students.
Abu Dhabi accounts for about two-thirds of the roughly $400-billion United Arab Emirates economy.
Article 7 of the UAE's Provisional Constitution declares Islam the official state religion of the UAE.
and projects are in progress to boost production to 3m bpd.
On average each Abu Dhabi resident uses  of water per day.
This location is very strategic because it is the UAE’s second tallest mountain, so it would have great visibility.
In 1904, German explorer, Hermann Burchardt, took many photographs of historical sites in Abu Dhabi, photos that are now held at the Ethnological Museum of Berlin.
This tribe was the most significant in the area, having over 20 subsections.
Abu Dhabi has a diverse and multicultural society.
Abu Dhabi Education Council (ADEC) maintains a comprehensive after-school program for interested and talented jiu-jitsu students.
There are three major bridges of the project, the largest has eight lanes, four leaving Abu Dhabi city and four coming in.
Etisalat recently announced implementing a fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) network in Abu Dhabi during the third quarter of 2009 to make the emirate the world's first city to have such a network.
''Furious 7'' (2015),  had some scenes taken and/or based in Abu Dhabi.
The months of June through September are generally extremely hot and humid with maximum temperatures averaging above .
Human rights organisations have heavily criticised violations of human rights in Abu Dhabi.
The Environment Agency of Abu Dhabi (EAD) states that groundwater is the most significant source of water, as well as desalinated potable water, and treated sewage effluent.
The first word of Abu Dhabi is pronounced "Bu" by inhabitants on the city's western coast.
, it supplied 560.2 MiGD (million imperial gallons per day) of water, while the water demand for 2005–06 was estimated to be 511 MiGD.
Major holidays in Abu Dhabi include ''Eid al Fitr'', which marks the end of ''Ramadan'', Eid ul-Adha which marks the end of Hajj, and National Day (2 December), which marks the formation of the United Arab Emirates.
According to an article from an Abu Dhabi tourism page, sheikhs, teachers, sailors and princes make a large bulk of the poets within the UAE.
Because of the rapid development of Abu Dhabi, a number of challenges to the city's urban organization have developed, among them:
Finances are mainly through the state government.
The first town bus entered service in about 1969 but this was all part of a very informal service.
The United Arab Emirates is a fast-growing economy: in 2006 the per capita income grew by 9%, providing a GDP per capita of $49,700 and ranking third in the world at purchasing power parity.
In 2007 the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council (UPC) was established, which is the agency responsible for the future of Abu Dhabi’s urban environments and the expert authority behind the visionary Plan Abu Dhabi 2030 Urban Structure Framework Plan that was published in September 2007.
In 1953, D'Arcy Exploration Company, the exploration arm of BP, obtained an offshore concession which was then transferred to a company created to operate the concession: Abu Dhabi Marine Areas (ADMA) was a joint venture between BP and Compagnie Française des Pétroles (later Total).
The maximum capacity is approximately 41,000 people and the overall structure is 22,412 square metres, the internal prayer halls were initially opened in December 2007.
Abu Dhabi is known in the region for its greenery; the former desert strip today includes numerous parks and gardens.
Taxi drivers have seen a considerable decrease in the demand for taxis while lines were forming for the buses.
Many youth play football in parking lots nearby corniche because of the pleasant environment and enough space.
Various cultural societies such as the Abu Dhabi Classical Music Society have a strong and visible following in the city.
The Cultural Foundation, while closed for reconstruction as of spring 2011, is home to the UAE Public Library and Cultural Center.
In 1793, the Al Bu Falah subsection migrated to the island of Abu Dhabi on the coast of the Persian Gulf due to the discovery of fresh water there.
Meaning "Father of the Gazelle", when literally translated from Arabic, it probably referred to the few gazelles that inhabit the emirate.
Served by high oil prices, the country’s non-oil and gas GDP has outstripped that attributable to the energy sector.
Principal thoroughfares are the Corniche, Airport Road, Sheikh Zayed Street, Hamdan Street and Khalifa Street.
+Abu Dhabi mean sea temperature
There has also been a drive to promote the tourism and real estate sectors with the Abu Dhabi Tourism Authority and the Tourism and Development Investment Company undertaking several large-scale development projects.
According to Bilal al-Budoor, assistant under-secretary for Cultural Affairs at the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Community Development, "The area had a lot of dhibaa deer (plural), and was nicknamed after that."
These projects will be served by an improved transport infrastructure with a new port, an expanded airport and a proposed rail link between Abu Dhabi and Dubai all in the development stages.
There are also Arabs who are from other parts of the Arab World.
According to another article this book was written in the 1990s and was banned in the city for some time for making accusations about the ruling family.
This is evident in the emphasis on industrial diversification with the completion of free zones, Industrial City of Abu Dhabi, twofour54 Abu Dhabi media free zone and the construction of another, ICAD II, in the pipeline.
The city was planned under the guidance of Sheikh Zayed by Japanese architect Dr Takahashi in 1967 initially for a population of 40,000.
Starting from the Corniche, all horizontal streets are oddly numbered, while all vertical streets are evenly numbered.
In the 1930s, as the pearl trade declined, interest grew in the oil possibilities of the region.
Cellular coverage is extensive, and both GSM and CDMA (from Etisalat and Du) services are available.
Abu Dhabi Island is also connected to Saadiyat Island by a five-lane motorway bridge.
The stadium hosts at least two series per year in the last 4 years.
File:Watch Tower at the Heritage Park in Abu Dhabi, UAE.JPG|Watch Tower at the Heritage Park
Abu Dhabi's rapid development and urbanisation, coupled with the relatively high average income of its population, has transformed the city into a large and advanced metropolis.
According to some historical accounts, the name Abu Dhabi was first used more than 300 years ago.
Non-oil and gas GDP now constitutes 64% of the UAE’s total GDP.
Settlements were also found farther outside the modern city of Abu Dhabi but closer to the modern city of Al Ain.
They are either silver with a yellow roof sign (newer taxis) or white and gold with a green roof sign (older taxis).
This seems to be a well-defined platform for the students of all nationalities.
These boast several languages that make up the population of the city.
In 2014, the stadium also hosted one leg of the Indian Premier League.
Abu Dhabi is also planning many future projects sharing with the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) and taking 29% of all the GCC future plannings.
The recently launched Emirates Foundation offers grants in support of the arts, as well as to advance science and technology, education, environmental protection and social development.
The  terminal will initially include 42 gates, rising to more than 90 gates on completion of the airport.
The service steadily expanded and by the end of 2008, 230 buses were in service.
Thus, the Corniche is Street #1, Khalifa is Street #3, Hamdan is Street #5, Electra street is Street #7 and so on.
This was followed in 1959 by PDTC’s onshore discovery well at Murban No.3.
Public transport systems in Abu Dhabi include the Abu Dhabi public buses, taxis, ferries, and airplanes.
Other notable modern buildings include the Emirates Palace with its design inspired by Arab heritage.
Abu Dhabi has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification ''BWh'').
This was followed by a seventy-five-year concession signed in January 1939.
An excerpt from his book is:
Every year in the season of admissions an exhibition is launched in Abu Dhabi Exhibition Center under the supervision of the government.
The Corniche, the city's seaside promenade, is about  in length, with gardens, playgrounds, and a BMX/skateboard ring.
There are many parks throughout the city.
The divers had a leather nose clip and leather coverings on their fingers and big toes to protect them while they searched for oysters.
Councils such as the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council and the Regulation and Supervision Bureau are responsible for infrastructure projects in the city.
More than $1&nbsp;trillion is invested worldwide in this city alone.
Recently the government has been diversifying their economic plans.
There are other inter-city buses departing the Abu Dhabi Dhabi central bus station; these inter-city buses are not only intra-emirate buses, but also inter-emirate services.
The city of Abu Dhabi is on the northeastern part of the Persian Gulf in the Arabian Peninsula.
All schools in the emirate are under the authority of the Abu Dhabi Education Council.
The plan is for up to 500 schools to be participating in the school-jitsu program by 2015.
9 to 13-year-old students are taught Brazilian jiu-jitsu as part of the curriculum.
There is evidence of civilizations around the mountain of Hafeet (Jebel Hafeet).
Another Emirati poet, Ibn Daher is from the 17th century.
During this time, sandstorms occur intermittently, in some cases reducing visibility to a few meters.
Prior to the 2000s, the airport was one of the key supporters of Gulf Air.
Some of these expatriates have been in the country for many decades with only a few of them awarded nationality Consequently, English, Hindi-Urdu (Hindustani), Malayalam, Tulu, Tamil, Somali, Tigrinya, Amharic and Bengali are widely spoken.
The purpose behind the development of the Dome@Rawdhat was to create a community football and sporting facility with indoor and outdoor pitches in the heart of the city of Abu Dhabi for everyone to enjoy.
Abu Dhabi thus holds 9% of the world’s proven oil reserves (98.2bn barrels) and almost 5% of the world’s natural gas (5.8&nbsp;trillion cu metres).
This idea of diversification of the economy is also seen in the Abu Dhabi Economic Vision 2030 planned by the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council.
Daher is important because he used Nabati poetry (AKA Bedouin poetry), poetry written in the vernacular instead of the classical/religious Arabic.
The UPC is also working on similar plans for the regions of Al-Ain and Al-Gharbia.
This causes traffic congestion, a shortage of car parking spaces, and overcrowding.
The city's per capita electricity consumption is about 41,000 kWh and the total supplied is 8,367 MW .
In the 19th century, as a result of treaties (known as "truces" which gave the coast its name) entered into between Great Britain and the sheikhs of the Arab States of the Persian Gulf, Britain became the predominant influence in the area.
As of July 2008, there were 62 high-rise buildings  under construction, approved for construction, or proposed for construction.
The main purpose of British interest was to protect the trade route to India from pirates, hence the earlier name for the area, the "Pirate Coast".
The origin of the name "Abu Dhabi" is uncertain.
In recent years the focus has turned to gas as increasing domestic consumption for power, desalination and reinjection of gas into oil fields increases demand.
Today in Abu Dhabi there is a group called the Abu Dhabi Cultural Foundation that works to preserve the art and culture of the city.
The program launched in 14 schools for pupils in grades 6 and 7 and has since expanded to 42 government schools, with 81 Brazilian coaches brought in as instructors.
In the dense areas, most of the concentration is achieved with medium- and high-rise buildings.
The government subsidizes almost 95% of mosques and employs all imams.
At this point the main streets have a large amount of 20- to 30-storey towers.
Pearl divers dove for one to one-and-a-half minutes, and would have dived up to thirty times per day.
Abu Dhabi has been criticized for perpetuating a class-based society, where migrant workers are in the lower classes, and suffer abuse which "is endemic to the system".
Within the first week of service the bus network had seen high usage.
The Abu Dhabi Jiu-Jitsu Schools Program began in 2008 under the patronage of Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, who is a keen Brazilian jiu-jitsu competitor.
* Today, the city's population far surpasses the original estimated maximum population when it was designed.
Entrance is usually free for children, however there is often an entrance fee for adults.
Due to this planning a modern city with tall offices, apartment buildings, broad boulevards and busy shops is present.
The new mega-midfield terminal complex will be capable of handling an additional 20&nbsp;million passengers a year initially and then later, as Abu Dhabi develops as a major Middle East transport hub, up to 50&nbsp;million passengers a year, thus providing a major competition to Dubai International Airport.
More specifically the non-oil portion of income is planned to be increased from about 40% to about 70%.
Abu Dhabi's original name was ''Milh'' "salt", possibly referring to the salty water of the Persian Gulf, or the ancient salt marshes that surround the city.
However, owing to the desert terrain, inland exploration was fraught with difficulties.
Another major event is the Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition and Conference (ADIPEC).
As one of the most visited buildings in the UAE, the Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque Center was established to manage the day-to-day operations, as a place of worship and Friday gathering and as a centre of learning and discovery through its education and visitor programs.
Natural materials were chosen for much of its design and construction due to their long-lasting qualities, including marble, stone, gold, semi-precious stones, crystals and ceramics.
There have been many small competitions conducted between small-time football and cricket teams.
In an attempt to entice people to use the bus system, all routes were zero-fare until the end of 2008.
The median age in the emirate was about 30.1 years.
Internet was introduced into Abu Dhabi in 1995.
A large portion of the sewerage flows as waste into streams, and separation plants.
The divers were not paid for a day’s work but received a portion of the season’s earnings.
There are no old taxis available for transportation anymore.
The majority of the inhabitants of Abu Dhabi are expatriate workers from Nepal‚ India, Pakistan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Philippines, the United Kingdom and various countries from across the Arab world.
Some of the buses, which have a maximum capacity of 45 passengers, only had room for standing left.
Passenger numbers at Abu Dhabi International Airport rose by 17.2 per cent in 2015, with more than 23 million travellers passing through its terminals during the past year.
The Al Nahyan family, part of the al-Falah branch of the Bani Yas clan, rules the emirate and has a central place in society.
These poets made headway in the field of Classical Arabic poetry as opposed to the Nabati poetry of the 17th century.
Heriot-Watt University, University of Bolton, Cambridge University, Oxford University, the Petroleum Institute, Khalifa University and Abu Dhabi University attend.
Taxation in Abu Dhabi, as in the rest of the UAE, is nil for a resident and for a non-bank, non-oil company.
State-owned Etisalat and private du communication companies provide telephone and cell phone service to the city.
Today the city is the country's center of political and industrial activities, and a major cultural and commercial centre, due to its position as the capital.
* Although there is an addressing system for the city, it is not widely used, causing problems in describing building locations.
According to an article from the English Pen Atlas Al jawaher wal la'li was the first manuscript to come out of the UAE.
Following their withdrawal from India in 1947, the British maintained their influence in Abu Dhabi as interest in the oil potential of the Persian Gulf grew.
There are also public buses serving the airport.
Today, in addition to the oil fields mentioned, the main producing fields onshore are Asab, Sahil and Shah, and offshore are al-Bunduq, and Abu al-Bukhoosh.
Motorsport is popular throughout the country and the circuit has also hosted other events such as the V8 Supercars series of Dubai.
After piracy was suppressed, other considerations came into play, such as a strategic need of the British to exclude other powers from the region.
A third, Sheikh Zayed Bridge, designed by Zaha Hadid, opened in late 2010.
The cosmopolitan atmosphere is gradually growing and as a result, there are a variety of Asian and Western schools, cultural centers and themed restaurants.
;Origins of the Al Nahyan family
Fast food and South Asian cuisine are also very popular and are widely available.
Development work has also started on a new passenger terminal, to be situated between the two runways and known as the Midfield Terminal.
It has taken on an active diversification and liberalisation programme to reduce the UAE’s reliance on the hydrocarbon sector.
This unique socioeconomic development in the Persian Gulf has meant that Abu Dhabi is generally more tolerant than its neighbours, including Saudi Arabia.
A massive expansion of public transport is anticipated within the framework of the government's Surface Transport Master Plan 2030.
Poetry in Abu Dhabi and the UAE is highly regarded and often is centric around the themes of satire, religion, family, chivalry and love.
The expansion is expected to see  of metro and  of tramways and/or bus rapid transit (BRT) routes.
Abu Dhabi is the fourth most expensive city for expatriate employees in the region, and in 2014 was the 68th most expensive big city in the world.
There were no oxygen tanks and any other sort of mechanical device was forbidden.
The cooler season is from November to March, which ranges between moderately hot to cold.
Street taxis are easily recognised.
Gas extraction is not without its difficulties, however, as demonstrated by the sour gas project at Shah where the gas is rich in hydrogen sulphide content and is expensive to develop and process.
In 1958, using a marine drilling platform, the ADMA Enterprise, oil was struck in the Umm Shaif field at a depth of about .
Etihad Airways maintains its headquarters in Abu Dhabi.
Also many other skyscrapers over  (500&nbsp;ft) are either proposed or approved and could transform the city's skyline.
Similarly, the sale of alcoholic beverages is regulated.
One family within this section was the Al Nahyan family.
As with other parts of the UAE, foreign workers are not given proper treatment and many companies (both government and private) have yet to improve things.
Some Bedouins called the city Umm Dhabi (mother of deer), while British records refer to the place as Abu Dhabi.
The airport, in 2009, experienced a 30%+ growth in passenger usage.
In 2010, the GDP per capita also reached $49,600, which ranks ninth in the world after Qatar, Liechtenstein and Luxembourg and many others.
This organization oversees and administers public schools and licenses and inspects private schools.
Abu Dhabi's government is looking to expand revenue from oil and gas production to tourism and other sorts of things which would attract different types of people.
More than 3,000 workers and 38 renowned contracting companies took part in the construction of the mosque.
The first known poet from the UAE, Ibn Majid, was born sometime between 1432 and 1437 in Ras Al Khaimah.
Whilst neighbouring Dubai gets a lot of attention, in recent years Abu Dhabi has become a popular destination.
In 1962, the company discovered the Bu Hasa field and ADMA followed in 1965 with the discovery of the Zakum offshore field.
A unique form of poetry to the UAE was formed in the 8th century by Al Khalil bin Ahmed and it was written in 16 meters.
The crude birth rate, , was 13.6%, while the crude death rate was about 2%.
