On 26 March, ten Indonesian sailors were held hostage by Islamist militant group Abu Sayyaf operating in Sulu Archipelago in the southern Philippines.
Abdurajik Abubakar Janjalani, the older brother of Khadaffy Janjalani, had been a teacher from Basilan, who later studied Islamic theology and Arabic in Libya, Syria and Saudi Arabia during the 1980s.
They face the death sentence if found guilty of kidnapping for ransom.
The author asserts on Page 270; "Social media is changing what was once a closed dialogue between kidnappers, their victims and governments."
The most "valuable" of the hostages were three North Americans, Martin and Gracia Burnham, a missionary couple, and Guillermo Sobero, a Peruvian-American tourist who was later beheaded by Abu Sayyaf, for whom Abu Sayyaf demanded $1&nbsp;million in ransom.
The military chief had giving a notice to any Abu Sayyaf members to surrender or "neutralised", a term that means getting killed, apprehended or arrested.
Superferry 14 was a large ferry destroyed by a bomb on 27 February 2004, killing 116 people in the Philippines' worst terrorist attack and the world's deadliest terrorist attack at sea.
Australia formed a multi-agency task force to assist the Philippine authorities, and liaise with Rodwell's family.
The deadline passed.
On 2 May, the ten Indonesian sailors held hostage were released by their captors.
On that day, the 10,192 ton ferry sailed out of Manila with about 900 passengers and crew on board.
After Janjalani's leadership was secured, the Abu Sayyaf began a new strategy, as they proceeded to take hostages.
In July 2004, Gracia Burnham testified at a trial of eight Abu Sayyaf members and identified six of the suspects as being her erstwhile captors, including Alhamzer Limbong, Abdul Azan Diamla, Abu Khari Moctar, Bas Ishmael, Alzen Jandul, and Dazid Baize.
In September 2014, the group began kidnapping people to ransom, in the name of ISIL.
The group expanded its operations to Malaysia in 2000 when it abducted foreigners from two resorts.
A defector from Abu Sayyaf told Filipino authorities, "The IIRO was behind the construction of Mosques, school buildings and other livelihood projects" but only "in areas penetrated, highly influenced and controlled by the Abu Sayyaf."
She was subsequently flown to Davao to meet President-elect Rodrigo Duterte.
Both officially distance themselves from Abu Sayyaf because of its attacks on civilians and its supposed profiteering.
On 18 July, five Malaysian sailors were also abducted near the coast of Lahad Datu.
Both hostages wore orange coveralls, similar to hostages in videos produced by ISIL, to which Abu Sayyaf had previously pledged allegiance.
The hostage money is probably the method of financing of the group.
He quotes ASG leader Khadaffy Janjalain's statement that his brother (the former leader of ASG) was right to split from the more moderate MNLF because "up to now, nothing came out" of attempts to gain more autonomy for Moro Muslims.
The issue has strained the relationship between the Philippines and Malaysia, and has affected the lives of Filipinos in Sabah.
On 15 January 2009, Abu Sayyaf kidnapped International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) delegates in Patikul, Sulu province, Philippines.
in what they describe as their fight for an independent Islamic province in the Philippines.
However, despite the permission that have been granted by the Philippine government, the government of Indonesia decided to not launching any military operation to southern Philippines, citing the reason was due to there have been enough military personnel been deployed by the Philippine government, with the Malaysian side also shared the similar view to not sending their armies.
However, after divers righted the ferry five months after it had sunk, they found evidence of a bomb blast.
"We pledge to obey him on anything which our hearts desire or not and to value him more than anyone else.
In the same month, the Indonesian government announced that the company that owned tugboat ''Brahma 12'' had agreed to pay the 50-million-peso ($1 million) ransom demanded for the release of ten Indonesian crew members.
Former Canadian politician Bob Rae (and friend of Ridsdel), worked with the family to try to secure his release.
The Philippine army launched a major offensive on 16 September 2000, rescuing all remaining hostages, except Filipino dive instructor Roland Ullah.
An explosion at a military base in Jolo on 18 February 2006 was blamed on Abu Sayyaf by Brig.
The hostages were taken to an Abu Sayyaf base in Jolo, Sulu.
Jeffrey Schilling, an American citizen and Muslim convert, was held by Abu Sayyaf for 8 months after being captured while visiting a terrorist camp with his wife, Ivy Osani.
All three workers were eventually released.
Also, Colonel (reserve) in the Israel Defence Forces and research fellow at the International Institute for Counter-Terrorism (ICT), Dr Shaul Shay, analysed the Warren Rodwell terror abduction in: ''Global Jihad and The Tactic of Terror Abduction : A Comprehensive Review of Islamic Terrorist Organisations''.
(4 kilograms) of TNT had been placed on board.
These include the 2000 Sipadan kidnappings, the 2001 Dos Palmas kidnappings, 2004 SuperFerry 14 bombing and the 2016 Davao City bombing.
Consequently, on 24 February 2006, Janjalani was among six fugitives in the second and most recent group of indicted fugitives to be added to the FBI Most Wanted Terrorists list along with two fellow members of the Abu Sayyaf, including Isnilon Totoni Hapilon and Jainal Antel Sali, Jr.
Ridsdel was beheaded by Abu Sayyaf on 25 April 2016 following a ransom deadline.
On 3 May 2016, a video of the Ridsdel execution was released, along with a new set of demands for the remaining hostages.
By 1995 Abu Sayyaf was active in large scale bombings and attacks in the Philippines.
According to the defector "Only 10 to 30% of the foreign funding goes to the legitimate relief and livelihood projects and the rest go to terrorist operations."
On 29 July 2016, the Philippine military gaining control on one of the Abu Sayyaf stronghold in Tipo-Tipo, Basilan.
He was allegedly shot in the neck in an encounter with government troops on September on Luba Hills, Patikul town in Sulu.
As part of its kidnap-for-ransom operations, the Abu Sayyaf has executed some of their male hostages if ransom demands were not being met.
Despite claims from terrorist groups, the blast was initially thought to have been an accident caused by a gas explosion.
He was linked to the kidnappings of Rodwell in 2011, Irish missionary Michael Sinnott in 2009 in Pagadian City, and Italian Catholic priest Giancarlo Bossi in Zamboanga del Sur’s Payao town in 2007.
Some Abu Sayyaf members have studied or worked in Saudi Arabia and developed ties to mujahadeen while fighting and training in the war against the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Since its inception in 1991, the group has carried out bombings, kidnappings, assassinations, and extortion
If you procrastinate once again the negotiations, we will behead this all anytime."
The group was reported to have been training alongside Jemaah Islamiyah militants.
On 9 September 2016, following the meeting between President Rodrigo Duterte and Indonesian President of Joko Widodo, an agreement was reached to pursue the Abu Sayyaf for their persistent terrorism.
They use mostly improvised explosive devices, mortars, and automatic rifles.
Award-winning Filipino journalist and CEO of Rappler, Maria A. Ressa wrote at some length about the Warren Rodwell case in the 2013 international edition of her Imperial College Press - published book ''From Bin Laden to Facebook: 10 Days of Abduction, 10 Years of Terrorism'' ISBN 978-1-908979-53-7  (Refer to Pages 265 - 271) Crowdsourcing for ransom, and social media (such as, Facebook and YouTube) were used by Abu Sayyaf during negotiations.
The Vietnamese military has also start to holding military exercise and precaution against the Abu Sayyaf (more known locally as "pirates" by the Vietnamese) following the repeat kidnappings of Malaysian and Indonesian sailors by the group.
Another Indonesian hostage was released on 22 September.
The four were released on 11 May with the help of the Philippine government.
The group has been designated as a terrorist group by the United Nations, Australia, Canada, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
On 15 May 2016, media reports advised that Canadian Robert Hall had appeared in a new video, announcing that he and Norwegian Kjartan Sekkingstad would be decapitated at 3pm on Monday 13 June 2016 if a ransom of $16 million is not paid.
On 23 July 2014, Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon Totoni Hapilon swore an oath of loyalty to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of ISIL.
Observers were sceptical of whether the pledge would lead to Abu Sayyaf becoming an ISIS outpost in Southeast Asia, or was simply a way for the group to taking advantage of the international publicity Islamic State is getting.
During that period, he is alleged to have met Osama Bin Laden and been given $6 million to establish a more Islamic group with the MNLF in the southern Philippines, made up of members of the extant MNLF By then, as a political solution in the southern Philippines, ARMM had been established in 1989.
While the body of 73-year-old Korean hostage Nwi Seong Hong, who had been held by Abu Sayyaf since January 24, 2015, was found in November 2015.
Many commentators have been critical of Schilling, who had reportedly walked into the camp.
90 minutes out of port, the bomb exploded.
The suspect has been tagged by the United States authorities as "one of the United States most wanted fugitives" which he was then deported by the Philippine government to facing legal action in the United States.
A news blackout was imposed.
This action was condemned by most leaders in the Islamic world.
Since the incident, the Philippine military sent thousands more troops to fight and destroy the Abu Sayyaf.
A spokesman for the Abu Sayyaf has stated that, "We have been trying hard to get an American because they may think we are afraid of them".
Russian intelligence agencies connected with Victor Bout's planes have reportedly provided Abu Sayyaf with arms.
But Isabela City is administered under the Zamboanga Peninsula political region north of the island of Basilan, while the rest of the island province of Basilan is now (since 1996) governed as part of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) to the east.
On 2 April 2014, a group believed to originate from Abu Sayyaf militants raided a resort off Semporna, Sabah.
The trial began this year and is not expected to end for several months."
Despite being shed by two of its leaders, the ASG would continue to pose a threat to Philippine security.
On 25 August 2016, Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte ordered the group to be "destroyed" after a teenager was beheaded by the extremist group.
John Ridsdel has been beheaded.
The hostages and hostage-takers then returned hundreds of kilometres back across the Sulu Sea to the Abu Sayyaf's territories in Mindanao.
Both Abdurajik Abubakar and his younger brother who succeeded him were natives of Isabela City, currently one of the poorest cities of the Philippines.
He stated that it is shameful to commit such acts in the name of the Islamic faith, saying that such acts produce backlashes against Islam and Muslims worldwide.
MNLF had moderated into an established political government, the ARMM.
While MNLF describing the group as "causing chaos to their community".
During the raid, Gao Huayun, a Chinese tourist from Shanghai and Marcy Dayawan, a Filipino resort worker who was on the resort were kidnapped and taken to the Sulu Archipelago.
The 14K Triad has militarily supported Abu Sayyaf.
On 27 September 2016, another largest attempt for the smuggling of weapons to the Abu Sayyaf group were busted by the Philippine National Police in San Juan City, Philippines with the arrestment of four people.
The Abu Sayyaf through one of its spokesperson Abu Rami have claimed responsibility on the attack according to a report released by local radio station, dzMM.
The Indonesian government has calling both Malaysian and Philippine armies to launch a combined land attacks together on Mindanao in every Abu Sayyaf nests to wipe them out, while at the same time urging the Philippine government to give a law relaxation to both Indonesia and Malaysia military forces to enter the Philippines territory.
Unlike the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Moro National Liberation Front, the group is not recognised by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and according to author Dr Robert (Bob) East, was seen as "nothing more than a criminal operation" at least prior to 2001.
A commander named Abu Sabaya was killed in 2002 while trying to evade forces.
On 15 May 2015, four armed men from the Abu Sayyaf-based group abducted two people in a resort in Sandakan, Sabah and brought them to Parang, Sulu.
They, three French television crew members and a German journalist, all visiting Abu Sayyaf on Jolo, were also taken hostage.
On 24 June, Abu Sayyaf released Filipina Marites Flor.
The group had also previously beheaded Christian civilians and other non-believers of Islam without raising any ransoms for their release, simply due to religious affiliation.
Khalifa had married a local woman, Alice "Jameelah" Yabo,
President Duterte have reminded that there will be "no amnesty" for Abu Sayyaf despite a proposal by Nur Misuari, the leader of MNLF to include Abu Sayyaf in peace talks as the group have killed too many innocent peoples.
As "holy warriors, they were justified in kidnapping, killing and stealing.
The group obtains most of its financing through ransom and extortion.
and and  Several hundred United States soldiers are also stationed in the area to mainly train local forces in counter terror and counter guerrilla operations, but, as a status of forces agreement and under Philippine law, they are not allowed to engage in direct combat.
On Saturday 17 September 2016, remaining hostage Norwegian Kjartan Sekkingstad was released on Jolo island.
The Abu Sayyaf primarily operates in the southern Philippines with members travelling to Manila and other provinces in the country.
The death of Aburajik Abubakar Janjalani marked a turning point in Abu Sayyaf operations, shifting from its ideological focus to more general kidnappings, murders and robberies, as the younger brother Khadaffy Janjalani succeeded Abdurajak.
Tribute was also made to Australian officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Australian Federal Police and Defence.
General Alexander Aleo, an Army officer.
Although the Abu Sayyaf spokesman have denied their involvement, the Philippine government have put the blame on Abu Sayyaf based on a statement by the country President that stated:
One of the hostage was released on 9 November, after six months in captivity, while another one, Bernard Then, was beheaded due to ransom demands not being met.
Schilling claims to have been invited by his wife's distant cousin who was a member of Abu Sayyaf.
While the Philippine government are interested to make a peace agreement with the Moro separatists of MNLF and MILF, the government are not keen to do the similar things on Abu Sayyaf as the group was seen no more than a "bunch of criminals" who terrorise innocent civilians.
"The eight suspects sat silently during her three-hour testimony, separated from her by a wooden grill.
On 27 September, one Malaysian boat-skipper was kidnapped from his trawler by seven armed Filipino militant before the group attacking another Indonesian trawler but no kidnapping were committed in the second incident.
A television set filled with 8&nbsp;lb.
He did not elaborate.
As of 2012, the group was estimated to have between 200 and 400 members, down from 1,250 in 2000.
# GMA-7 television reporter Carlo Lorenzo and cameraman Gilbert Ordiales (September 2002, Jolo, for 6 days).
The Philippine military has intensified their operation more since 2003 following the arrest of a Filipino-American who been alleged to have selling illegal weapons to the group.
A Center for Strategic and International Studies report by Jack Fellman notes the political rather than religious motivation of ASG.
Consequently, being on the social or political division line, Basilan, Jolo and Sulu have seen some of the fiercest fighting between government troops and the Muslim separatist group Abu Sayyaf through the early 1990s.
The three ICRC workers had finished conducting field work in Sulu province, located in the southwest of the country, when they were abducted by an unknown group, later confirmed as Abu Sayyaf leader Albader Parad's group.
Parad himself was said to be involved in the kidnapping.
On 1 April, four Malaysian sailors aboard a tugboat from Manila were kidnapped when they arrived near the shore of Ligitan Island.
Both the Philippine and Australian governments had strict policies of refusing to pay ransoms.
Abu Sayyaf coordinated with the Chinese 14K Triad gang in carrying out the kidnappings.
Gene Yu, an American and former US Army Special Forces captain was instrumental in negotiating, locating and working to free Taiwanese citizen Chang An-wei from Abu Sayyaf militants with Filipino special forces and private security contractors in 2013.
Located on the North-Western part of the island of Basilan, Isabela is also the capital of Basilan province, across the Isabela Channel from the Malamwi Island.
Chang was taken to the Sulu Archipelago in the southern Philippines.
In August 2016, The Manila Times reported the arrest of the kidnap-for-ransom group of Barahama Alih sub-leader, Hasim Calon alias Husien (also a notorious provincial drug dealer), in his hideout in Tenan village in Ipil town.
On 2 September 2016, an explosion occurred at a night market in Davao City, Philippines resulting in at least 15 deaths and 70 injuries.
Abu Sayyaf conducted a second raid on the island of Pandanan near Sipadan on 10 September and seized three more Malaysians.
Abu Sayyaf proclaimed themselves as mujahideen and freedom fighters but are not supported by many people in the Philippines including its Muslim clerics.
"The Secretary General has pointed out that this operation and the like are rejected by divine laws and that they are neither the appropriate nor correct means to resolve conflicts", the statement said.
During the ambush, Taiwanese citizen Chang An-wei was kidnapped and her husband, Hsu Li-min, was killed.
Having sex with women captives was justified by their claiming them as "wives".
At the 2015 Australian Federal Police Foundation Day award ceremony in Canberra, fourteen AFP members received the Commissioners’ Group Citation for Conspicuous Conduct for their work in support of the Philippine National Police and Australian Government efforts to release Australian man Warren Rodwell.
He is thought to have been about age 39 at the time of his death.
Abdurajik Abubakar Janjalani's first recruits were soldiers of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
However, the spokesman later denied the report and any of their involvement in the bombing, saying a group that allied to them; the Daulat Ul-Islamiya who responsible to the attack.
On 21 September 2015, Canadians Robert Hall and John Ridsdel, as well as Norwegian Kjartan Sekkingstad, and (Hall's girlfriend) Marites Flor; a Filipino woman, were all abducted from an upscale resort complex on the Philippine island of Samal near Davao in south eastern Mindanao.
63 people were killed instantly and 53 went missing and presumed dead.
The name of the group is derived from the Arabic ''abu'' () ("father of"), and ''sayyaf'' () ("swordsmith").
A man called Redendo Cain Dellosa also admitted to planting the bomb on board for Abu Sayyaf.
On 15 November 2013, Abu Sayyaf militants raided a resort on a Malaysian island of Pom Pom in Semporna, Sabah.
He was later freed on July with the help of Malaysian negotiators.
Abdurajik then went to Afghanistan to fight against the Soviet Union and the Afghan government during the Soviet war in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Abu Ramie, an ASG spokesman, claimed $638,000 was paid as ransom.
By the end of his 15 months as a hostage in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, Rodwell had lost about 30 kilograms in weight due to starvation, His biography ''472 Days Captive of the Abu Sayyaf - The Survival of Australian Warren Rodwell'' by independent researcher Dr Robert (Bob) East was published by Cambridge Scholars Publishing, United Kingdom (2015) ISBN 1-4438-7058-7 In popular culture, Blue Mountains (Sydney) techno Cowpunk band ''Mad Cowboy Disease'' composed, performed and released songs written by Rodwell, based on his ordeal ; ''Situation Not Normal''  and ''Our Sibling Hearts''
He added, "We want to fight the American people".
This year also marked the escape of 20-year-old Khadaffy Janjalani from Camp Crame in Manila along with another member named Jovenal Bruno.
On 21 June, seven Indonesian sailors aboard a tugboat that passing through the Sulu Archipelago was kidnapped.
In May, ex-Philippine National Police (PNP) officer Jun A. Malban was arrested in Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia for the crime of "Kidnapping for Ransom" after Rodwell identified him as the negotiator/spokesperson of the Abu Sayyaf Group during his captivity.
In July, a Filipino television evangelist and 12 of his crew offered their help and went as mediators for the relief of other hostages.
The group demanding there should be a large scale military operation to destroy the Abu Sayyaf, of which the Indonesian military before also have proposing to sent their military to Philippines but were rejected by the Philippine government, citing it is against their constitution.
Abu Sayyaf has carried out numerous bombings, kidnappings, assassinations, and extortion activities in what they describe as their fight for an independent Islamic province in the Philippines.
However, both MNLF and MILF deny having any links with Abu Sayyaf.
Most hostages were released in August and September 2000, partly due to mediation by Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi and an offer of $25 million in "development aid".
The Filipino Army Major Filemon Tan said, “The order of the president is to search and destroy the Abu Sayyaf so that’s what we are doing”.
Rodwell subsequently returned to Australia.
According to the State Department, it may also receive funding from radical Islamic benefactors in the Middle East and South Asia.
According to a CNN story, Parad was reportedly killed, along with five other militants, in an assault raid by Philippine marines in Sulu province on Sunday, 21 February 2010.
On 6 May, a group comprising five Abu Sayyaf gunmen raided a Malaysian fish farm in Baik Island, Sabah and kidnapped the fish farm manager, after which the hostage was brought to Jolo island.
In 2000, Abu Sayyaf captured an American Muslim visiting Jolo and demanded that the United States release Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman and Ramzi Yousef, who were jailed for their involvement in the World Trade Center bombing of 1993.
Due to the increase of attacks against foreign vessels by the Abu Sayyaf, the governments of Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines have agreed to jointly patrol their waters on 5 May 2016.
The two hostages were later rescued after a collaboration between the Malaysian and the Philippines security forces.
The plot was reported to have involved detonating a car bomb in Cebu City where the summit was scheduled to take place.
Now there are three remaining captives here.
Galib Andang, one of the leaders of the group, was captured in Sulu in December 2003.
On 9 July, three Indonesians fishermen was kidnapped near the coast of Lahad Datu, Sabah, Malaysia.
Earlier in 2016, police forces killed Waning Abdulsalam.
(Both were arrested in 2014).
In 1993, Abu Sayyaf kidnapped an American Bible translator in the southern Philippines.
The terrorism to innocent civilians committed by Abu Sayyaf have been condemned by fellow Moro separatists of MNLF and MILF who said the Abu Sayyaf have gone too far from their real paths of struggle, with MILF labelling Abu Sayyaf as "anti-Islam" soon after the beheading of Canadian hostage John Ridsdel in 2016.
A mayor in Sumisip of Basilan has support the calling, saying:
Hasim Calon was involved in the abduction of Warren Rodwell.
Al-Qaeda-affiliated terrorist Ramzi Yousef operated in the Philippines in the mid-1990s and trained Abu Sayyaf soldiers.
On 3 May 2000, Abu Sayyaf guerillas occupied the Malaysian dive resort island Sipadan and took 21 hostages, including 10 tourists and 11 resort workers – 19 non-Filipino nationals in total.
This was responded by around 20 Abu Sayyaf who have surrender and giving their arms to the Philippine military in Sumisip on 22 September 2016.
After the payment of $AUD94,000 for "board and lodging" expenses by his siblings, Rodwell was released 472 days later on 23 March 2013.
Filipino Islamist guerillas such as Abu Sayyaf, have been described as "rooted in a distinct class made up of closely knit networks built through marriage of important families through socioeconomic backgrounds and family structures," according to Michael Buehler, a lecturer in comparative politics at the University of London's School of Oriental and African Studies.
Robert Hall was beheaded.
The 2002 edition of the United State Department's Patterns of Global Terrorism mention links to Al-Qaeda.
Ulep was tagged as the ransom courier of the Abu Sayyaf bandits in Zamboanga Sibugay in the kidnapping of Rodwell.
The Philippine government has pledged to destroy the group to maintain the peace in Mindanao.
The Philippine military chief Ricardo Visaya had warned the Abu Sayyaf that they will continue with more further major military operation to stop the rampant lawlessness in the southern Philippines islands.
Two of the "Muktadir brothers" identified as Nixon Muktadil and Brown Muktadil was killed during an operation by the Philippine military on 27 September 2016.
Alhamzer Limbong was later killed in a prison uprising.
The Abu Sayyaf's first attack was the assault on the town of Ipil in Mindanao in April 1995.
For many years prior to this Islamic State's competitor, Al Qaeda, had the support of Abu Sayyaf "through various connections."
The group was founded by Abdurajik Abubakar Janjalani, and led after his death in 1998 by his younger brother Khadaffy Janjalani who was killed in 2007.
On 13 December 2006, it was reported that Abu Sayyaf members may have been planning attacks during the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) summit in the Philippines.
We will not take any emir (leader) other than him unless we see in him any obvious act of disbelief that could be questioned by Allah in the hereafter."
It was reported that Abu Sayyaf had begun expanding into neighbouring Malaysia and Indonesia by the early 1990s.
Meanwhile, the fish farm manager was taken to Jolo.
Most of the Abu Sayyaf victims have been Filipinos.
In 2002, fighting Abu Sayyaf became a mission of the American military's Operation Enduring Freedom and part of the Global War on Terrorism.
A Japanese businessman was killed when a Cebu to Tokyo Philippine Airlines flight was bombed on 10 December 1994 by Abu Sayyaf.
Gracia Burnham has claimed that Philippine military officials were colluding with her captors, saying that the Armed Forces of the Philippines "didn't pursue us...As time went on, we noticed that they never pursued us".
It was reported that Libya facilitated ransom payments to Abu Sayyaf.
Their companions, three Myanmar nationals and two Indonesians, were unharmed.
A group of concerned Filipinos in Sabah has urged the Philippine president-elect Rodrigo Duterte to intervene for the release of four Malaysians held hostage by the Abu Sayyaf.
In a video published in the summer of 2014, senior Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon Hapilon and other masked men swear their allegiance or "bay'ah" to the "Islamic State"  (ISIS) caliph.
ASG reportedly demanded more than $8.1 million for Ridsdel and the others.
