This qualification is the traditional route of entry into third level education.
Some bachelor's degrees (e.g.
Students who complete all the requirements for an honours degree, but do not receive sufficient merit to be awarded third-class honours may be awarded a ''Special Degree'' (ordinary degree – bachelor's level SCQF Level 9).
achieved after rigorosum exam.
The former, which are considered higher status, are controlled by the state and issued by universities on behalf of the responsible ministry; the latter are controlled and granted by the universities themselves.
Education in Mexico follows a three-degree system similar to that of Canada and the US.
Nowadays these Dutch titles have been largely replaced by the Anglo Saxon titles MSc (Master of Science), MA (Master of Arts), and LLM (Master of Laws), depending on the area of study.
Management degrees are also classified under 'Arts' but is nowadays considered a major new stream, Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) and Master Of Business Administration (MBA).
For example, 'York (Can.)'
This also reflects the broader scope of the final years of Scottish secondary education, where traditionally five Highers are studied, compared to (typically) three English or Welsh A-Levels.
From 2008, the European Union has been developing the European Qualifications Framework (EQF).
Over the years these were replaced gradually with degrees that were more and more internationally comparable programs and corresponding titles.
The main reason for offering this alternative studies, though, is the heavy burocratic process that needs to be accomplished to receive the approval of specific titles, in particular when it refers to new studies or studies about matters that do not fit with the official studies.
A common framework for degrees was agreed between the provinces and territories in 2007.
However, neither Professional Association, Government Agencies, Judiciary Authorities, nor Universities -other than the study programme provider- are obliged to recognize non-official qualifications in any way.
Some universities offer proprietary study programmes as an alternative to accredited study programmes for a variety of reasons: attending the continuing education market for individual self-advancement and also providing higher education to individuals that have failed to acquire bachelor's degree qualifications.
Non-doctoral postgraduate research degrees are usually designated Master of Philosophy (M.Phil) or Master of Research (M.Res).
By far the most common research doctorate is the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.), comprising  98.1% of research doctorates in 2014.
Some schools, mostly junior colleges and community colleges and some four-year schools, offer an associate degree for two full years of study.
Dutch academic titles however are legally protected and can only be used by graduates from Dutch institutions of higher education.
A combination of a Dutch title with an international title is not allowed, except for some limited number of international professional titles.
The Dutch professor's title, noted as ''prof.
In New Zealand, master's degrees may be awarded with classified honours (1st, 2:1, 2:2, 3rd), or with distinction or merit.
Historically, academic degrees were orientated towards research and the vocational education system awarded only diplomas.
Implementation of the various elements of the EHEA varies.
First professional degrees should also not be confused with professional master's degrees such as the M.Arch.
Although the previously mentioned college programs are typical, they are ''not'' offered in every institution in the province.
The highest level was "Doctor".
Several Mexican universities offer students the possibility of obtaining an equivalent to an Associate degree, called in Mexico ''Técnico Superior universitario'' (TSU), studying only half of the ''licenciatura'', with the possibility of finishing a full bachelor's degree later.
(See  for a more complete list and discussion of abbreviations for British universities.)
Contrary to what happens in the United States, candidates must declare their intended university major when they register for the Vestibular.
AFAM institutions may offer ''Diploma di perfezionamento o Master'' and ''Diploma accademico di specializzazione''.
It is earned by writing a second thesis (the ''Habilitationsschrift'') or presenting a portfolio of first-author publications in an advanced topic.
These may be in professional or academic fields, and the most common awards are the Associate of Arts (A.A.) and Associate of Science (A.S.) degrees.
and its master is called Master of Science (M.Sc.).
degree in the UK, are not present in the German system.
Post-graduate students in Mexico typically enter a master's program after a few years in the workforce and often continue working while studying.
Universities may also offer the possibility to gain a Diploma of Advanced Studies (DAS), less than 60 ECTS credits).
Bachelor of Engineering (B.E.)
Despite their names, these extended masters degrees may not be described as doctoral degrees nor do they confer the right to use the title of doctor on their recipients.
Titles in Venezuela start with the ''Certificado de Educación Básica'' (Certificate of Basic Education), awarded upon completing 9th grade.
Medical students don't get bachelor's or master's degrees, instead they study six years and after obligatory rigorosum exam they get title MUDr.
(equivalent to MD degree) or MDDr.
These degrees do not normally give access to the doctorate study.
These qualifications comply with the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) framework.
However, this is not a given; it is also possible that a department is headed by a "plain" doctor, based on knowledge, achievement, and expertise.
The honours degree involves two years of study at a sub-honours level in which a range of subjects within the relevant faculty are studied, and then two years of study at honours level which is specialised in a single field (for example classics, history, chemistry, biology, etc.
The RUCT records all officially approved Universities and their bachelor's degrees, Master's Degrees and PhDs, and each and every one of the officially approved and accredited study programmes and universities are assigned a specific number Code (''Código'') by the RUCT.
However, all of Canada follows the three level bachelor's—master's—doctorate system common to the Anglophone world, with a few variations.
Although it is theoretically possible to switch majors afterwards (in a process known within the universities as ''transferência interna''), that is actually quite rare in Brazil.
Further study, and in particular successful participation in and then moderating of disputations would earn one the Master of Arts degree, from the Latin magister, "master" (typically indicating a teacher), entitling one to teach these subjects.
Statistics citing that college graduates make around $1 million more in their lifetimes than those who didn’t attend college, and living longer, healthier lives work in favor of those who argue the continued value of higher degrees.
Traditionally more men than women attended and earned degrees at the world's universities.
Successful completion however does grant the student the Dutch degree of "drs."
has gradually become less common outside theology, and is now mostly used for honorary degrees, with the title "Doctor of Theology" being used more often for earned degrees.
The U.S. census reports that 10.5 million men have master's degrees or higher, compared with 10.6 million women.
for medical doctors has to be viewed differently; medical students usually write their doctoral theses right after they have completed studies, without any previous conducted scientific research, just as students in other disciplines write a ''Diplom'', ''Magister'' or ''Master's'' thesis.
The reform of higher education in Norway, ''Kvalitetsreformen'' (''"The Quality Reform"''), was passed in the Norwegian Parliament, the Storting, in 2001 and carried out during the 2003/2004 academic year.
After the first Staatsexamen, teachers and lawyers go through a form of pupillage, the ''Vorbereitungsdienst'', for two years, before they are able to take the second Staatsexamen, which tests their practical abilities in their jobs.
passport, drivers license, (governmental) communication).
There are three official academic bachelor titles (BA, BSc, and LLB) and three official master titles (MA, MSc, and LLM).
), and if got before September 1, 2002 from a recognized Dutch university, may be rendered as M (from Master) behind one's name, instead of using the typical Dutch shortcuts before one's name.
A milestone was reached in the United States according to results of the 2010 census, as women surpassed men in attaining master's degrees, for the first time.
The law provides the option of using the shortcut D following one's name instead of dr. before one's name.
The Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) covers 10 levels, of which 6 – 10 correspond to academic degrees.
After completion of high school, students may follow professional or technical studies at Universities or Technical schools.
Originally the terms "master" and "doctor" were synonymous, but over time the doctorate came to be regarded as a higher qualification than the master degree.
Honours for MA or bachelor's degrees are classified into three classes:
There are also Level 5 qualifications in certain vocational subjects (e.g.
Usually this is a Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BSc) degree.
Finally, a small number of Brazilian universities, most notably the public universities in the state of São Paulo still award the title of Livre-Docente (''free docent''), which is of higher standing than a doctorate and is obtained, similar to the German Habilitation, by the submission of a second (original or cumulative) thesis and approval in a ''Livre-Docência'' examination that includes giving a public lecture before a panel of full professors.
"''Doctors''" (dr.) can proceed to teach at universities as "universitair docent" (UD – assistant professor).
There are also voluntary academic titles called "small doctorates" (e. g. RNDr.
These agencies work within the ANECA framework, and generally show more detailed information about the study programmes available in each territory (i.e.
The naming of degrees eventually became linked with the subjects studied.
Its roots can be traced to the early church when the term "doctor" referred to the Apostles, church fathers and other Christian authorities who taught and interpreted the Bible.
Jansen, arts'') and not "dr." in medicine, as often used incorrectly.
To get ahead on the academic ladder, one is strictly assessed numerically.
Thus a degree was only a step on the way to becoming a fully qualified master – hence the English word "graduate", which is based on the Latin  ("step").
These titles as equivalent to an LL.M (the title mr.) and to a MSc (the title ir.
The Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree is highly valued by those seeking to advance in business as managers and decision makers.
Traditionally in Germany, students graduated after four to six years either with a ''Magister'' degree in Social Sciences, Humanities, Linguistics and the Arts or with a ''Diplom'' degree in Natural Sciences, Economics, Business Administration, Political Science, Sociology, Theology and Engineering.
The foundation degree can be awarded by a university or college of higher education that has been granted foundation degree awarding powers by the UK government.
With a few exceptions, the two-cycle degree system will be phased out by 2010.
Stacking of the titles as seen in countries such as Germany (Prof. Dr. Dr. Dr. Gruber) is highly uncommon in the Netherlands and not well received culturally.
Those who have multiple doctor titles may use dr.mult.
Not uncommonly, the Dutch "drs."
The exact requirements for satisfying a Habilitation depend on individual universities.
The most common undergraduate degree is the bachelor's degree, although in some countries lower qualifications are titled degrees (e.g.
Universities offering non-official study programmes are legally bound to clearly differentiate between officially approved and non-officially approved qualifications when naming their offer of non-official qualifications.
The second level, tied to the second cycle of the Bologna Process, covers the ''Laurea magistrale'' and the ''laurea specialistica'' in university institutions and the ''Diploma accademico di secondo livello'' in AFAM institutions.
These degrees are usually designated by the subject, such as Master of Engineering for engineering, Master of Physics for physics, Master of Mathematics for mathematics, and so on; it usually takes four years to read for them.
It's a professional level where theory and practice are focused in a broad sense.
See also graduate certificate, graduate diploma, postgraduate certificate, postgraduate diploma and British degree abbreviations.
Additionally, whereas aspiring medical students are usually required to complete an undergraduate degree before applying to medical schools, Quebec college graduates have the option to enter:
The first one is called a "" (professional career), which is similar to a bachelor's degree requiring from four to 6 years of study according to the chosen program.
Additionally, private providers may be recognised by the state and then, after five years of recognition, have their degrees validated by the state, the validation having to be renewed every six years.
specific diplomas designed by various institutions with no recognition from the Ministry of Education, such as the mastère spécialisé or the Sciences Po ''Bachelor''.
The French terminology is tied closely to the original meanings of the terms.
For some British universities it is traditional to use Latin abbreviations, notably 'Oxon' and 'Cantab' for the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge respectively, in spite of these having been superseded by English 'Oxf' and 'Camb' in official university usage, particularly in order to distinguish the Oxbridge MA from an earned MA.
The Engineer have more physics subjects than the Licenciate, but both are five-year careers.
A special kind of examination is the ''Staatsexamen'' (State Examination).
It usually takes three years to read for a bachelor's degree.
A master's degree or postgraduate diploma at Level 9;
A doctorandus in law uses the title "''meester''" (master, abbreviated as ''mr.
Requirements for obtaining a doctor's degree include taking additional advanced courses, passing an oral qualifying exam, and submitting a longer doctoral dissertation which must represent a significant original contribution to knowledge in the field to which the dissertation topic is related.
The Archbishop of Canterbury's right to grant degrees is derived from Peter's Pence Act of 1533 which empowered the Archbishop to grant dispensations previously granted by the Pope.
In the past, degrees have also been directly issued by authority of the monarch or by a bishop, rather than any educational institution.
There are also 5 year (300 ECTS credits) engineer's degrees, which are master's degree.
# D.Sc to ''Kandidat Nauk of Natural Science'',
Some universities were initially resistant to this change, considering it a displacement of a venerable tradition for the pure sake of globalization.
Spanish qualifications and their professional effects.'''
(Most universities conferred the Master of Arts, although the highest degree was often termed Master of Theology/Divinity or Doctor of Theology/Divinity depending on the place).
At some institutions pharmacists and jurists can choose whether to be awarded the first Staatsexamen or a master's degree (or formerly the ''Diplom'').
If the ''Consejo'' agrees with ANECA’s approval, it will be included in the RUCT and ANECA registries.
The second part of the title usually consisted of a Latin word corresponding to the profession or training.
This is not similar to any type of doctoral exam that would grant the student with any type of PhD title.
Study at the ''maestría'' level takes 1–3 years and mandates completion of a thesis.
The doctorate (Latin: ''doceo'' “I teach”) appeared in medieval Europe as a license to teach (Latin: ''licentia docendi'') at a medieval university.
Master of Arts were eligible to enter study under the "higher faculties" of Law, Medicine or Theology, and earn first a bachelor's and then master or doctor's degrees in these subjects.
This means that, should the professor leave the university, he or she also loses the privilege to use the title of professor.
In Great Britain, Lambeth Degrees are still awarded by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Since September 1, 2002, Dutch universities offer specific BSc, BA or LLB studies followed by MSc, MA or LLM studies, thus integrating into and merging with the international scientific community, offering lectures, other classes, seminars, or complete curricula in English instead of Dutch.
one in business, and all others in theology).
There are other routes possible, but only if the end level of the applicant is comparable to the two levels is access to university education is granted.
Hence, formal use of the Anglo-Saxon PhD following one's name is not legal, as it is not a Dutch degree.
Some universities require that candidates take entrance exams; others make admission decisions based solely on undergraduate transcripts, letters of recommendation, and possibly oral interviews.
The ''Diploma di specializzazione'', which is offered in a few specific professions, takes two to six years and gives the title of ''specialista''.
In most respects, the criteria for awarding qualifications at honours level and above are the same as in the rest of the UK (see above under England, Wales and Northern Ireland).
The standard first degree in England, Northern Ireland and Wales is the Bachelor's degree conferred with honours.
Doctorates in Australia may be research doctorates (normally titled PhDs) or professional doctorates (normally titled to tefer to the field of practice, e.g.
* a "medical preparatory" year at McGill University and Université de Montréal and then pursue medical studies for the four following years or
All bachelor's and master's degrees accredited by ANECA enjoy full academic and professional effects in accordance with new and previous laws.
In this case, the convention is to include a country abbreviation with the university's name.
Doctor's degrees normally take four additional years of full-time study to complete.
The degree title of Doctor of Philosophy is of a much later time, and was not introduced in England before 1900.
It requires discovery of new phenomenon, or development of new theory, or essential development of new direction, etc.
In addition to the doctorate, which is always a research degree, the ''Diplôme d'Etat de docteur en médicine'' and the ''Diplôme d'Etat de docteur vétérinaire'' are also considered third cycle qualifications.
), or Master of Science (M.S.
Most standard ''academic'' programs are based on the four-year bachelor's degree, most often Bachelor of Arts (B.A.
The University of Paris used the term "master" for its graduates, a practice adopted by the English universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as well as the ancient Scottish universities of St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen, and Edinburgh.
''See also Universities and Higher Education in Brazil''
The pre-university academic level is the ''bachillerato'' (also called ''preparatoria''), similar to high school.
Some universities award a Master's as a first degree following an integrated programme of study (an 'integrated master's degree').
As study in the arts or in grammar was a necessary prerequisite to study in subjects such as theology, medicine and law, the degree of doctor assumed a higher status than the master degree.
The Ancient universities of Scotland and the University of London have abbreviations that are the same in English and Latin.
are commonly used to denote degrees conferred by these universities where the potential for confusion exists, and institution names are given in this form in the Commonwealth Universities Yearbook.
An honours bachelor's degree or higher diploma at Level 8;
However, sometimes incorrectly regarded as a degree, the Habilitation is a higher academic qualification in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland that allows further teaching and research endorsement after a doctorate.
The degrees awarded by European universities—the bachelor’s degree, the licentiate, the master’s degree, and the doctorate—have been adopted in the most diverse societies throughout the world."
It introduced standard periods of study and the titles ''master'' and ''bachelor (baccalaureus)''.
Most students stay at this level, but some choose to continue to the ''maestría'', equivalent to the Master's degree.
For some studies in the Netherlands, a governmental determined limited access is in place (although under political review for abolishment, February 2011).
The doctoral dissertation is examined in a final oral exam before a panel of at least two members (in the state of São Paulo the preferred number is five, while the other regions prefer three members), usually including one or two external examiners from another university or research institute.
* Second class honours, divided into:
In recent years, the six-year (nominal time) old Curius curriculum (which offered the titles doctorandus and physician) has been replaced with a three-year (nominal time) Bachelor Curius+ followed by a three-year (nominal time) Master Curius+.
Dutch surgeons commonly are only granted access to surgeon training and positions after obtaining a doctorate (PhD) successfully.
In Canada, first professional degrees such as DDS, MD, PharmD and LLB or JD are considered bachelor's level qualifications, despite their often being named as if they were doctorates.
An ordinary bachelor's degree at Level 7;
Before the Bologna Process after 4 or 5 years of study the academic degree of a Licentiate was reached.
More and more common, and in some disciplines even mandatory, is that the student writes and submits scientific publications to peer-reviewed journals, which eventually need to be accepted for publication.
Over time, the D.D.
The earliest doctoral degrees (theology – Divinitatis Doctor (D.D.
Officially approved and accredited university study programmes must implement this framework by law in order to attain and retain accreditation in Spain.
Accreditation System'''
Media coverage of the rising costs of higher education and increased student debt have also affected the public’s perceptions of whether higher degrees are still worthwhile.
Bangladesh, India and Pakistan mostly follow the colonial era British system for classification of degrees.
A student undertaking a Master's would normally be expected to already hold an honours degree in a relevant subject, hence the possibility of reaching Master's level in one year.
A similar option is offered for college nursing graduates as they can pursue their studies in university to obtain a Bachelor of Nursing in two years (rather than the usual three or four years, depending on whether the student has completed a college diploma in Quebec).
Therefore, in the UK it may only take seven years to progress from undergraduate to doctoral level – in some cases six, since having a Master's is not always a precondition for embarking on a Doctoral degree.
All licence degrees are 3 years (180 ECTS credits) in length and all master's degrees are 2 years (120 ECTS credits) in length.
"" is the equivalent to the master's degree in English speaking countries.
Doctoral degrees or doctorates, such as the Doctor of Philosophy degree (PhD or DPhil) or Doctor of Education (EdD or DEd) are awarded following a programme of original research that contributes new knowledge within the context of the student's discipline.
before their name, but this is seldomly seen in practice.
Nonetheless, there are diplomas in France with no degree recognition, e.g.
With the exception of few fields such as Medicine and Dentistry, the Finnish system of Higher education degrees is in compliance with the Bologna process.
* simply directly into the undergraduate medical education program at Université Laval (4 to 5 years in duration) or Université de Sherbrooke (4 years in duration).
The ''laurea'' is is obtained after three years of study (180 ECTS credits), and gives the academic title of ''dottore''; the older university qualifications at this level took two to three years, with three year courses granting the title of ''dottore''.
This right remained a bone of contention between the church authorities and the slowly emancipating universities, but was granted by the Pope to the University of Paris in 1231 where it became a universal license to teach (''licentia ubique docendi'').
Jansen'') instead of drs., and some studies like for example technique and agriculture grant the title "''ingenieur''" (engineer, noted as ''ir.
Universities award the student with the title of ''Ingeniero'' (Engineer) or with the title ''Licenciado'' (Licentiate) after completing a five-year program.
Individuals who hold either a bachelor's degree, Licentiate or Technologist are eligible for admission into graduate courses leading to advanced master's or doctor's degrees.
The current system of higher education comprises two types of higher education institutions, the universities and the polytechnics, many of whom refer to themselves as Universities of Applied Sciences (UAS) , http://www.okm.fi/OPM/Koulutus/ammattikorkeakoulutus/?lang=en.
Each university may present proposals for the study programme considered to meet professional and academic demand.
is frequent, indicating one holds a HBO, vocational (or professional) engineering degree together with an academic engineering degree.
Students also can take an specialization course, "", equivalent to a graduate certificate degree, after their bachelor's degree.
The most renowned studies for their numerus clausus are medicine and dentistry.
The doctoral degree (e.g., Dr. rer.
ANECA makes recommendations regarding procedures, staffing levels, quality of teaching, resources available to students, and continuity or loss of accreditation and the ANECA Registry records all events in the life of an officially approved and accredited study programme or a university.
The Third Council of the Lateran of 1179 guaranteed the access – now largely free of charge – of all able applicants, who were, however, still tested for aptitude by the ecclesiastic scholastic.
In 21 US jurisdictions, religious institutions can be authorized to grant religious-exempt (rel.
'''1.2 Non-official education.'''
Additional effect was that students would be persuaded stringently to produce results within a preset time-frame, or otherwise discontinue their studies.
The ''Diploma di perfezionamento'' is a university certificate, aimed at professional training or in specific study fields, which usually takes one year; it is not allocated a level on the framework.
Besides the title doctorandus, the graduates of the Curius curriculum may also bear the title ''arts'' (physician).
It is roughly equivalent to Habilitation in Germany, France, Austria, and some other European countries.
Students typically leave preparatoria at the age of 18 for university, at which point they choose to specialize in a specific academic area (a ''carrera'').
The ''Laurea magistrale'' and the ''laurea specialistica'' are obtained after two further years of study (120 ECTS credits), and give the academic title of ''dottore magistrale''.
The old ''Diploma di laurea'' took four to six years but was accessed directly from school, with a possible reduction by one year for those with a related ''diploma'', and also granted the title of ''dottore magistrale''.
The  Doctor of Education (Ed.D.)
