Universities start on the first Monday of September and usually end in the middle of May or in the beginning of June; though in reality, exam periods may continue until the end of June (e.g.
The school year in Israel starts in elementary, middle, and high schools on September 1, and lasts until the end of June for elementary schools, and until June 20 for middle and high schools.
*'''Term 3:''' Begins mid-July; ends mid-to-late September
*'''Autumn Break''': One week or two weeks in October/November.
The break originated to avoid the heat in summer, so elementary, middle, and high schools in Hokkaidō and Nagano Prefecture tend to have a shorter summer break than the rest of schools in Japan.
The dates of the school year for coastal schools are slightly different from those for inland schools.
For states with a Saturday-Sunday weekend, the school week is Monday to Friday.
The student will need to successfully complete clearance requirements and in a few cases, maintain a certain overall mark in order to progress in her university studies in the next semester.
Six years old is the prescribed age for admission into grade one.
The university academic year typically divides into two semesters which start after Sukkot (typically mid to late October) and end in June or July.
Most universities start their courses on October 1 (at some institutions late September), and the first semester (commonly referred to as the "''winter term''") ends in January.
The school graduation ceremony - ''Graduation Evening'' () - is organized on June 20–25.
The first semester begins in early January and ends in early June, with a one-week mid-term break.
Some independent (private) schools have a three-term year instead .
University of Tartu).
The reduced maximum course load that accompanies the shortening from the traditional semester makes the trimester system compatible with the semester system.
The school year for elementary, grammar and high schools begins on September 2 (September 1 is Constitution Day) and ends June 29 of the following year.
The summer break starts after the exams and lasts until the start of the next academic year.
The terms are separated by two holidays each consisting of approximately two weeks: the Christmas Holidays separating the autumn and spring terms, and the Easter holidays separating the spring and summer terms.
The semesters are often divided into two terms each.
In partnership with Local Authorities and teachers unions, they were unable to agree to a suitable alternative arrangement for terms, but by 2004 came to an agreement with the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers for a standardised arrangement of school terms.
For schools, students move from old to the new academic year immediately after the exams for the previous year is over with a small break of a week for compilation of results.
In Iran, the academic year runs from September to June (10 months).
Universities and colleges follow a different academic year.
In Northern Hemisphere countries, this means that the academic year lasts from August, September, or October to May, June, or July.
*School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS): Term 1, Term 2, Term 3
The Brazilian school year ends the first week of December, summer in Brazil.
In the last school year of secondary education, the examinations of abitur (similar to A-level exams in the UK or high school diplomas in the US) end in July.
Since 2004, around one third of English local authorities have signed up to the proposals which see a standard academic year agreed between the authorities, including slight variations on the traditional schemes, based on the following principles:
Sole exception to this is the final year at high schools, which ends with Graduation of students at the end of May.
Some academic institutions also enable a third semester in the summer.
The first term usually runs from March 2, unless it is a Friday or the weekend, to mid July with the summer vacation from mid-July to late-August (elementary and secondary schools) and from mid-June to late August (higher education institutions).
*Rosh Hashanah: three-day break; the break is sometime between September 4 and October 6.
*'''Whitsun Break''': One or two weeks around Whitsun
The terms are roughly structured as follows:
School on Saturday ends at noon.
(see note below from 2012).
* Spring Term: January to the Friday before Lazarus Saturday (half term: mid-February)
"Berufsakademien" have four quarters, January to March and so on.
Many universities offer an optional short summer semester.
The summer semester begins on 15 February and lasts until 31 May, followed by the exam period, which ends on 30 June.
The first semester runs from September 1 till the middle of January and is divided by the fall vacation, which is around All Saints' Day and lasts for a week.
In Hong Kong, the academic year usually runs from September 1 to mid-July for most primary and secondary schools.
The quarter system divides the calendar year into four quarters, three of which constitute a complete academic year.
The school year is divided into trimesters.
In the elementary and secondary schools and college, the academic year is divided in semesters.
The University of Mannheim changed its schedule to conform with US standards in Fall of 2006.
* identify and agree annually designated periods of holiday, including the summer holiday, where head teachers are recommended not to arrange teacher days.
*Followed by the September Holidays, also sometimes called the Spring Holidays, which usually last 10 days.
*King's College London: Michaelmas, Lent, Summer
The first semester of the year is from September to late January or mid February.
The school year in Guyana usually begins in September and ends in July of the following year.
By law, all state and state-integrated schools are required to be open for instruction for 380 half-days in a year (390 half-days for schools with only Year 8 students or below), meaning that the start and end of the school year is not nationally fixed to a particular date, as schools take different teacher-only days and provincial anniversary days off during the year.
Christmas break: approximately two weeks
Universities and colleges follow a different academic year, which consists of two semesters.
Various forms of summer studies may be offered May to August.
Enrollment/registration in an institution is usually good for only one semester: a student who successfully registers for the first semester is not automatically enrolled to study in the second semester.
Secondary schools run from September to the end of May, but due to the Junior Certificate and Leaving Certificate exams, 3rd and 6th years respectively break at the end of June for summer holidays upon completion of the exams which end in the 3rd week of June.
Most schools operate a three-term school year similar to England and Wales; however, there is no half term during summer term due to the province's longer summer holidays.
As most of these breaks depend on the Higri year which is 10 days shorter than the Solar year, there is a gradual change on the date of these events in relation to the school year.
In addition to these legal holidays, there are vacation periods of varying length.
It divides the academic year into three equal portions of 15 – 16 weeks each.
Some of these colleges often continue to follow the K-12 schedule.
In general, terms run as follows if Easter falls in early-to-mid-April:
Higher education consists of bachelor, masters, and PhD levels.
The school day starts at 8:00&nbsp;a.m. and ends at 2:00&nbsp;p.m. (time varies due to day and type of school).
Three-week break at Christmas, one week following the January exam period (Inter-Semester Break) and two weeks at Easter.
They last about a week-and-a-half from midday Saturday before All Saints' Day to the Second Wednesday of holidays.
After Easter, the classes start again until the end of May, followed by four weeks of examinations in June, after which three months of vacation is given.
Usual Months covered (including exam periods)
Then there is a two-week-break before the new academic year starts in March.
The period between the end of one school year and the start of the next is known as the summer holidays and consists of six or seven weeks.
*'''Term 2:''' Begins second Monday following Easter Monday; ends beginning of July
Out of the formal track, short-term programs(1 year) focusing on skills development are also available.
Christmas holidays start on December 24 and end on the first weekday after January 6.
French pupils used to attend school on Saturdays, but the so-called "four-days week" has been implemented since September 2008, reducing the teaching year from 936 to 864 hours (above the European average of 800 hours, but below the UK minimum of 950 hours for state schools).
Generally the school year lasts until 25 May, which is also known as ''The Last School-Bell'' day celebrated by the graduates, their families and teachers.
No mid-term break exists in the academic calendar.
Called Carnival Break if they start at Carnival Monday.
There is usually a recess of about two weeks during the winter holiday period at Christmas and New Year, with a spring break in March or April that is usually correlated to the holidays of Easter and/or Passover.
There is a mid-year break during summer, usually from the end of May to the start of July in Universities and in elementary and high schools, the vacations range from the beginning of May and lasts up to the end of June.
Both Eid festivals are also public holidays.
*Shavuot: three-day break, the break in late May or early June.
In most primary and secondary schools, an academic year is usually divided in quarters for purposes of examination and reporting of marks though a few private schools adopt a trimestral system.
The first from September to January, the second from January to April, and the third is from April to June.
The autumn semester begins in mid-August and is suspended a few days before Christmas.
The first (fall) semester begins on the first day of the Persian Calendar month of Mehr equivalent to the first day of autumn in the Northern Hemisphere and ends in January.
Quest University in Squamish, British Columbia; Tusculum College in Tusculum, Tennessee; and The University of Montana - Western are the only other colleges operating under this academic calendar.
In the elementary and high schools in Hungary, the school year usually runs from September 1 to June 15 of the next year, with variation if these dates fall on Saturday or Sunday.
In 1999, the Local Government Association set up a commission to look at alternative proposals for a more balanced school year.
The second term usually resumes in late August and runs until mid February.
In addition to the break between the semesters in summer, there is typically a break including Christmas and New Year.
The Summer term exams run for weeks 4,5 & 6 of Summer Term, with the first three weeks of Spring Term are also used for exams.
It is split into two halves, with the first half ending on the last day of January.
Both semesters are followed by an examination period.
*University of East Anglia: Autumn, Spring (both 12 weeks), each followed by a six-week "assessment period"
In Southern Hemisphere countries, the academic year aligns with the calendar year, lasting from February or March to November or December.
The terms are separated by two holidays, each of approximately two weeks' duration: the Christmas holidays separating the autumn term and spring term, and the Easter holidays separating the spring term and the summer term.
University of Calicut, Kerala University, MG University and Sri Sankara University (SCSVMV University) have reached a consensus and the other universities are also likely to introduce credit based semester system in Kerala.
*Eid ul-Fitr: the end of Ramadan, three- to five-day break, according to the lunar calendar (only in Islamic schools).
Unplanned vacations can extend the school year if they could have been prevented by school administrators, in theory if not in fact.
Most schools also have an autumn break or Diwali break in August or around October/November.
In Cambodia the school year kindergarten sectors in public schools consists of 10 months with a two-month vacation, while in primary, and secondary sectors, it is divided into two semesters and each semester is divided into 2 quarters.
*'''Term 4:''' Begins early-to-mid October; ends no later than 20 December
The two semesters together constitute 32 to 36 weeks of instruction, so that three academic quarters equal two academic semesters.
*London School of Economics (LSE): Michaelmas, Lent, Summer
Most universities now operate Autumn, Spring and Summer terms of notional ten-week lengths, although some may use different names, and terms may be of uneven length, with the autumn term usually the longest.
The school year includes four or five shorter breaks or holidays:
There is a mid-term vacation of approximately 2 weeks in July, and most schools also observe "Easter Week" in March or April.
Approximately 20% of universities are on the quarter system.
The school year is divided into four terms (quarters), separated by one- or two-week holidays (the first week in November, the first two weeks in January, and the last week of March).
*Sukkot: nine-day break in late September or in October.
For the purposes of education, the remainder of the year was arranged into three terms accommodating the Christian holidays of Christmas and Easter.
In addition the independent schools have set their own term dates with varying degrees of local and national co-ordination.
In Maldivians primary and secondary schools, the school year is divided into two semesters.
The academic year at universities also starts on September 1 and usually consists of 42 educational weeks and 10 weeks of holidays.
Until 2011, students went to school on the 1st, 3rd, and 5th Saturdays of each month; but from 2012, students no longer go to school on Saturdays.
Sometimes schools do half-day in-service days in which students are dismissed early, rather than full-day holidays.
Under this system, students are typically able to finish their academic studies a year earlier than those from other universities with a semestral programme.
This allows their engineering programmes to be completed a year ahead of schools running on a semestral schedule.
The second semester is closed at the end of the school year.
The second term starts in February or March,  (the "''summer term''") and ends in June.
However, every day missed exceeding the special holiday allowance would be replaced by having classes on weekends.
Coincidentally January 25 is also ''Tatiana Day'', traditionally celebrated as Russian Students Day.
Depending upon the stream and subject, bachelors level may be of three to five years' duration.
The school year in Russia traditionally starts on September 1 (''The Knowledge Day'').
(Where the break does not coincide with the bank holiday the date should be, as far as practicable, nationally agreed and as consistent as possible across all local authorities);
An academic year in Indonesia is divided to two terms, running from mid-July to December and January to mid-June.
New classes are held again in October.
Usually there are exams at the end of each semester.
*Followed by the Easter Holidays, which usually last 10 days.
Summer break: approximately eight to nine weeks and it separates one school year from another.
They include federal, state, and local holidays, all or only some of which may be observed by an individual school district.
There are two semesters in the Thai academic year with an optional summer semester.
There is also a winter holiday break lasting two weeks in January or February but the exact date is different for each province and the dates usually change each year.
There is a one-week break between the two terms.
In Poland, the school year begins on September 1 and ends on the first Friday after June 18.
Students who have not passed the necessary exams have a chance to do so during the autumn exam period in September.
All public and private elementary schools under the guidance of the dependence observe this year.
The terms are structured as follows:
In some universities - for example, the University of Cambridge, the University of Oxford, and the London School of Economics and Political Science, the Autumn, Spring and Summer terms can be referred to as Michaelmas, Lent or Hilary, and Easter or Trinity terms, respectively.
Education in Nepal is structured as school education and higher education.
Exceptions include the University of Buckingham where undergraduate courses do not coincide with the academic year used by universities in Britain and elsewhere.
Most schools with a trimester system have a first term from April 1 to late July.
The summer holiday lasts three months: June, July, and August.
Autumn (October - December), Spring (January–March), Summer (May–July) with 4 weeks off for Christmas, and 5 off at Easter.
The fall and winter trimesters constitute an academic year of 30–32 weeks.
Universities starts in second half of September or 1 October.
The two lecture-free periods of 12 to 14 weeks between the semesters are for taking exams, doing internships, lab courses, and employment.
The first one (autumn semester) runs from September 1 to January 24/25 (21 weeks, including a 3- to 5-week winter exams session at the end) followed by a two-week holiday.
* New Year holiday: from 1 to 3 January.
six weeks), but most intense semester as it comes before the High Holidays of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.
*University of Birmingham: Autumn, Spring and Summer Semesters (each eleven weeks)
Most if not all schools observe the Thanksgiving holiday, and extend it include the day after Thanksgiving since it is a Friday.
Put another way, 3 quarter hours is 2 semester hours.
July and August thus constitute summer holidays.
Hungarian universities run two semesters.
The universities start the second semester in the beginning of February.
Summer semester starts after Passover and lasts until either the middle of the month of Tammuz or Tisha B'Av, a duration of about three months.
The academic calendar and dates of mid-semester breaks may vary across private institutions.
Each semester is usually 15 or 16 weeks long.
The Semestral Break can be two to three weeks long, and normally includes the All Saints' and All Souls' holidays.
There are two weeks of school (elementary and secondary schools) in February.
At the University of Michigan and Brigham Young University, for example, the Fall trimester (informally still called 'semester') operates from September through December; the Winter trimester runs from January through April; and the spring-summer trimester operates from May through August, as two half-trimesters.
The calendar is designed by the Secretary of Public Education , SEP), the government department overseeing public educatio aln in Mexico with arrangements of the leaders of the National Educational Workers Union (Spanish: ''Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educación'', SNTE).
Some schools have a similar format but ordered as 4-4-1, with the short term in May after the conclusion of the spring semester.
*'''Term 1:''' Begins no earlier than Auckland Anniversary Day (Monday closest to 29 January) and no later than 7 February; ends Maundy Thursday (day before Good Friday)
The start of term two may be delayed if Anzac Day (25 April) falls on the Monday or Tuesday directly following the Easter break.
The university academic year is slightly different, lasting from June to October and mid November to mid March.
There is also a winter vacation of two weeks at the beginning of the year.
International schools tend to follow the Northern Hemisphere academic calendar.
For universities, however, the terms are much shorter, running from September to December and February to May.
The school year in Romania is divided into two semesters.
The second semester runs from February the 9th to June the 30th or July the 4/5th.
These semesters have breaks for public festivities, such as Easter (approx.
In countries like Argentina, public universities divide the academic year into two quadrimesters (march-July and august-December).
After the end of school year on June 30, the Summer holidays follow till September 1 when a new school year starts.
The school year usually begins during the first week of February.
The proposals were introduced at a small number of schools nationally.
Each quarter culminates in most schools with a quarterly examination period of three to five days.
The semesters there are now from August 1 to January 31 (''Herbst-/Wintersemester'') and from February 1 to July 31 (''Frühjahrs-/Sommersemester'').
During president Abdurrahman Wahid's term, schools are closed for Ramadan and a week after Eid-ul-Fitr (Idul Fitri).
After each of them there is an "''examination session''", when no courses are taught, which lasts up to one month.
*'''Summer Break''': Six weeks, may start as early as mid June (then school starts again in late July in this state) or as late as in the end of July (then school starts again only in early September in that state).
*Yom Ha'atzmaut: one-day break, the break in late April or early May.
Exceptions to this general schedule are international schools operating in the country, which normally follow their home country's respective school system.
During the interim periods, which are called ''bein hazmanim'' (between the terms), students are on vacation.
The second semester lasts from February until mid June.
*Begins mid-April and ends June
The school year ends with a six-week year-end holidays from mid-November to early January.
Some universities, however, offer a limited number of courses in summer.
In most public educational institutions from primary to tertiary, the first semester begins in September and continues until January, and the second semester begins February and continues until June.
*'''Easter Break''': Two weeks of March / April
* Dragon Boat Festival (lunar): Usually around May or June.
*Yom Kippur: two-day break; the break is sometime between September 13 and October 15.
After the mid-year holidays, which lasts for two weeks, the second semester begins in mid-June and ends in mid-November, with a one-week mid-term break.
The terms are structured as follows:
In most countries, the academic year begins in late summer or early autumn and ends during the following spring or summer.
Some colleges and universities have a 4-1-4 system, which divides the year into two four-month terms (September to December and February to May) as well as a single one-month term in January in which students can do independent study, study abroad, internships, activities, or focus on one or two classes.
*Begins early October and ends early December
