Facing open ocean just northwest of the bays is Pie de la Cuesta and southeast are Playa Revolcadero, Playa Aeromar, Playa Encantada and Barra Vieja.
Former Swing Musician Teddy Stauffer, so called "Mister Acapulco", was a hotel manager ("Villa Vera", "Casablanca"), who attracted a lot of celebrities to Acapulco.
There is a bungee jump in this area as well.
Acapulco's reputation is that of a high-energy party town, where one can "have dinner at midnight, dance until dawn then relax in the daytime on the beach.
The area has a population () of 786,830.
Among the first incident's dead were six members of the city police and the brother of an ex-mayor.
The economy grew and foreign investment increased with it.
A major gun battle between 18 gunmen and soldiers took place in the summer of 2009 in the Old Acapulco seaside area, lasting hours and killing 16 of the gunmen and two soldiers.
The port continued to grow and in 1996, a new private company, API Acapulco, was created to manage operations.
Perhaps the most unusual thing about the privately operated buses is the fact that they are all highly decorated and personalized, with decals and home-made interior designs that range from comic book scenes, to pornography, and even to "Hello Kitty" themes.
It is a port of call for shipping and cruise lines running between Panama and San Francisco, California, United States.
The main reason students head to Mexico is the 18-year-old drinking age (versus 21 for the United States), something that has been marketed by tour operators along with the sun and ocean.
These are located along the Costera road, face the ocean and feature techno or alternative rock.
Some are willing to travel to the other designated areas, especially during slow periods of the day.
A Dutch fleet invaded Acapulco in 1615, destroying much of the town before being driven off.
From the U.S., many airlines now fly to Juan N. Álvarez International Airport year-round.
In the 11th century, new waves of migration of Nahuas and Coixas came through here.
Another forty percent is semi-flat, and the other twenty percent is flat.
Acapulco is still famous and still attracts many tourists, although most are now from Mexico itself.
The center mostly caters to children.
From a population of only 4,000 or 5,000 in the 1940s, by the early 1960s, Acapulco had a population of about 50,000.
Over the years, a number of problems have developed here, especially in the bay and the older sections of the city.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Cancún had been favored as the spring break destination of choice.
Another problem is garbage that has accumulated in the bay.
In addition, there is the beach bar zone, where younger crowds go.
The galleon trade made its yearly run from the mid-16th century until the early 19th.
In the adjoining, smaller Bay of Puerto Marqués there is Pichilingue, Las Brisas, and Playa Roqueta.
The temperature of the sea is quite stable, with lows of  between January – March, and a high of  in August.
In the bay proper there are the La Angosta (in the Quebrada), Caleta, Caletilla, Dominguillo, Tlacopanocha, Hornos, Hornitos, Honda, Tamarindo, Condesa, Guitarrón, Icacos, Playuela, Playuelilla and Playa del Secreto.
In the later 15th century, after four years of military struggle, Acapulco became part of the Aztec empire during the reign of Ahuizotl (1486–1502).
Tropical storms and hurricanes are threats from May through November.
This came after the swine flu outbreak earlier in the year nearly paralyzed the Mexican economy, forcing hotels to give discounts to bring tourists back.
The home is not a museum, so only the outside murals are able to be seen by the public.
Altitude varies from sea level to .
Acapulco would become the second most important port, after Veracruz, due to its direct trade with the Philippines.
The "de Juárez" was added to the official name in 1885 to honor Benito Juárez, former President of Mexico (1806–1872).
Today the fort serves as the Museo Histórico de Acapulco (Acapulco Historical Museum), which shows the port's history from the pre-Hispanic period until independence.
The fort was partially destroyed by the Dutch in the mid-17th century, rebuilt, then destroyed again in 1776 by an earthquake.
In 1933 Carlos Barnard started the first section of Hotel El Mirador, with 12 rooms on the cliffs of La Quebrada.
There is one major river, the Papagayo, which runs through the municipality, along with a number of arroyos.
The other states that the bay was discovered on December 13, 1526 by a small ship named the El Tepache Santiago captained by Santiago Guevara.
These buses are not for tourists only, but are certainly the nicest and most uniform of the bus systems.
In February 2009, the US State Department issued a travel alert directed at college students planning spring break trips to Acapulco.
This history is known through the archaeological artifacts that have been found here, especially at Playa Hornos, Pie de la Cuesta and Tambuco.
The colectivos each travel a designated area of the city, the three main ones being Costera, Colosio, Coloso, or a mixture of the three.
The city was devastated by Hurricane Pauline in 1997.
During that time, he painted nearly nonstop and created the outside walls with tile mosaics, featuring Aztec deities such as Quetzalcoatl.
In the city, there are many buses and taxi services one can take to get from place to place, but most of the locals choose to walk to their destinations.
Most of trash removal during the off seasons is done on the beaches and in the waters closest to them.
The collection contains about one thousand examples and is divided into seven rooms called Masks of the World, Mexico across History, The Huichols and the Jaguar, Alebrijes and Dances of Guerrero, Devils and Death, Identity and Fantasy, and Afro-Indian masks.
The forested area tends to lose leaves during the winter dry season, with evergreen pines in the highest elevations.
This area also has the higher hotel occupancy rates.
There are temporary exhibits as well.
During the 1950s, Acapulco became the fashionable place for millionaire Hollywood stars such as Elizabeth Taylor, Frank Sinatra, Eddie Fisher and Brigitte Bardot.
These cabs cost 13 pesos per person to ride, but they are not private.
Even some of the local nightclubs feature French DJs.
The independence of Mexico in 1821 ended the run of the Manila Galleon.
At the north end of the square is Nuestra Señora de la Soledad cathedral, with blue onion-shaped domes and Byzantine towers.
It was annexed to a tributary province named ''Tepecuacuilco''.
This legislation has pushed spring break visitation to various parts of Mexico, with Acapulco as one of the top destinations.
Parts of the moats remain as well as the five bulwarks and the battlements.
The wharf, named Marqués, was constructed by 1533 between Bruja Point and Diamond Point.
Forty percent of the municipality is mountainous terrain.
The city is best known as one of Mexico's oldest and most well-known beach resorts, which came into prominence in the 1950s as a getaway for Hollywood stars and millionaires.
This area includes Punta Diamante, Puerto Marqués, and stretches from the airport to the Papagayo River which separates it from the older section of town.
In addition to sunbathing, the beaches around the bay offer a number of services, such as boat rentals, boat tours, horseback riding, scuba diving and other aquatic sports.
The resort area is divided into two: The north end of the bay is the "traditional" area, where the famous in the mid-20th century vacationed, and the south end is dominated by newer luxury high-rise hotels.
By the 8th century around the Acapulco Bay area, there was a small culture which would first be dominated by the Olmecs, then by a number of others during the pre-Hispanic period and before it ended in the 1520s.
Tres Palos also has sea turtle nesting areas which are protected.
There are also dolphin shows daily and a swim with dolphins program.
The death of Arturo Beltran Leyva in December 2009 resulted in infighting among different groups within the Beltran Leyva cartel.
Villafuerte was unable to subdue the local native peoples, and this eventually resulted in the Yopa Rebellion in the region of Cuautepec.
The city of Acapulco is the largest in the state, far larger than the state capital Chilpancingo.
The Centro Internacional de Convivencia Infantil or CICI is a sea-life and aquatic park located on Costera Miguel Aleman.
These people were the antecedents of the Aztecs.
In 1810, José María Morelos y Pavón attacked and burnt down the city, after he defeated royalist commander Francisco Parés at the Battle of Tres Palos.
The Cinépolis Galerías Diana and the Teatro Juan Ruíz de Alarcón present French and French literary figures who give talks on their specialised subjects.
Most of the plants here are native to the region, and many, such as the Peltogyne mexicana or purple stick tree, are in danger of extinction.
Acapulco's most historic building is the Fort of San Diego, located east of the main square and originally built in 1616 to protect the city from pirate attacks.
Olmedo and Rivera had been friend since Olmedo was a child and Rivera spent the last two years of his life here.
Today the divers are professionals, diving from heights of forty meters into an inlet that is only seven meters wide and four meters deep, after praying first at a shrine to the Virgin of Guadalupe.
Tourism is the main economic activity of the municipality and most of this is centered on Acapulco Bay.
Acapulco is one of the embarkation ports for the Mexican cruise line Ocean Star Cruises.
Hotels did not get that many in 2009, due mostly to the economic situation in the United States, and partially because of scares of drug-related violence.
Most of the victims were from the shantytowns built on steep hillsides that surround the city.
Eighty percent arrive by land and 18 percent by air.
The Dolores Olmedo House is located in the traditional downtown of Acapulco and is noted for the murals by Diego Rivera that adorn it.
Although 60.65 tons have recently been extracted from the bays of Acapulco and nearby Zihuatanejo, more needs to be done.
These included coordinated attacks on police headquarters and open battles in the streets, involving large-caliber weapons and grenades.
The Mayan Palace course was designed by Pedro Guericia and an economical course called the Club de Golf Acapulco is near the convention center.
In the 2000s, the drug war in Mexico has had a negative effect on tourism in Acapulco as rival drug traffickers fight each other for the Guerrero coast route that brings drugs from South America as well as soldiers that have been fighting the cartels since 2006.
However, no incidents of violence against spring breakers were reported.
This consolidated operations and now Acapulco is the major port for car exports to the Pacific.
along with a number of thermal springs.
One popular cruise is from Caletilla Beach to Roqueta Island, which has places to snorkel, have lunch, visit a small zoo and a lighthouse.
In 1920, the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VIII) visited the area.
However, Cancún has taken some steps to control the reckless behavior associated with the event, and students have been looking for someplace new.
The fort was destroyed by an earthquake in 1776 and was rebuilt between 1778 and 1783.
Mining and manufacturing employ less than twenty percent and only about five percent is dedicated to agriculture.
During the 1990s, the road known as the Ruta del Sol was built, crossing the mountains between Mexico City and Acapulco.
Some consider it a "passé" resort, eclipsed by the newer Cancún and Cabo San Lucas.
It was no longer necessary to be a millionaire to spend a holiday in Acapulco; the foreign and Mexican middle class could now afford to travel here.
On February 4, 2013, six Spanish men were tied up and robbed and the six Spanish women with them were gang-raped by five masked gunmen who stormed a beach house on the outskirts of Acapulco.
The bus system is highly complex and can be rather confusing to an outsider.
'''Acapulco de Juárez''' (), commonly called '''Acapulco''', is a city, municipality and major seaport in the state of Guerrero on the Pacific coast of Mexico,  south of Mexico City.
The "original" Acapulco, where hotels owned by personalities such as Johnny Weismuller and John Wayne are located, is on the northern end of the bay.
The nightlife has long been a major tourist draw of the city.
In 2008, 22,500 students came to Acapulco for spring break.
Around the city are many small shantytowns that cling to the mountainsides, populated by migrants who have come here looking for work.
Over 100,000 American teenagers and young adults travel to resort areas and balnearios throughout Mexico during spring break each year.
In the 1970s, there was a significant expansion of the port.
Soon after, the area was made an "alcadia" (major province or town).
Acapulco is also Mexico's largest beach and balneario resort city.
On August 20, 2011, Mexican authorities reported that five headless bodies were found in Acapulco, three of which were placed in the city's main tourist area and two of which were cut into multiple pieces.
Both lagoons have mangroves and offer boat tours.
The season runs during the winter and is called the Fiesta Brava.
However, this was only transitory, as the Aztecs could only establish an unorganized military post at the city's outskirts.
Coloso cabs travel mainly to old Acapulco.
The journey takes only about three and a half hours, making Acapulco a favorite weekend destination for Mexico City inhabitants.
There is a small museum called Casa de la Máscara (House of Masks) which is dedicated to masks, most of them from Mexico, but there are examples from many parts of the world.
This has become attractive since the 1990s, especially since more traditional spring break places such as Daytona Beach, Florida, have enacted restrictions on drinking and other behaviors.
It was in that time period that the economic impact of Acapulco as a tourist destination increased positively and as a result a new type of services emerged like the Colegio Nautilus.
However, an important mode of transportation is the government subsidized 'Colectivo' cab system.
Other festivals celebrated here include Carnival, the feast of San Isidro Labrador on 15 May, and in November, a crafts and livestock fair called the Nao de China.
The Miss Universe 1978 pageant took place in the city.
Additionally, Acapulco is the hometown of actress, singer and comedian Aída Pierce, who found fame during the 1980s, 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century.
The warmest areas are next to the sea where the city is.
It is located next to the ocean and is home to flocks of ducks and other birds.
Informal lobby or poolside cocktail bars often offer free live entertainment.
Dives range from the simple to the complicated and end with the "Ocean of Fire" when the sea is lit with gasoline, making a circle of flames which the diver aims for.
Despite Acapulco's international fame, most of its visitors are from central Mexico, especially the affluent from Mexico City.
The first states that two years after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, Hernán Cortés sent explorers west to find gold.
Other victims were swept away by thirty-foot waves and  winds.
The driver will pick up more passengers as long as seats are available, and will transport them to their destination based on first-come first-served rules.
The most exclusive course is that of the Tres Vidas Golf Club, designed by Robert von Hagge.
In June 2009, a number of incidents occurred between the drug cartel and the government.
The storm stranded tourists and left more than 100 dead in the city.
The spectacle can be seen from a public area which charges a small fee or from the Hotel Plaza Las Glorias/El Mirador from its bar or restaurant terrace.
Acapulco features a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen: Aw): hot with distinct wet and dry seasons, with more even temperatures between seasons than resorts farther north in Mexico, but this varies depending on altitude.
On September 28, 2014, A Mexican politician called Braulio Zaragoza was gunned down at the El Mirador hotel in the city, He was the leader of the conservative opposition National Action Party (PAN) in southern Guerrero state, Several politicians have been targeted by drug cartels operating in the area, investigations are under way but no arrests have yet been made.
For the Christmas season of 2009, Acapulco received 470,000 visitors, most of whom are Mexican nationals, adding 785 million pesos to the economy.
Galleons started arriving here from Asia by 1550, and in that year thirty Spanish families were sent to live here from Mexico City to have a permanent base of European residents.
In this area, no one walks, as almost all transportation is by car, limousine or golf cart.
It became an archdiocese in 1983.
There are buses with specific routes and destinations, generally written on their windshields or shouted out by a barker riding in the front seat.
These buses travel the tourist section of Acapulco, driving up and down the coast.
Then Mayan influence arrived from the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and through what is now Oaxaca.
At the beginning of the 19th century, King Charles IV declared Acapulco a Ciudad Official and it became an essential part of the Spanish Crown.
From November to April, luxury liners stop here daily and include ships such as the MS ''Queen Victoria'', the MS ''Rotterdam'', ''Crystal Harmony'', and all the Princess line ships.
Acapulco is located on a deep, semicircular bay and has been a port since the early colonial period of Mexico's history.
Colosio cabs travel through most of the tourist area of Acapulco.
Agricultural products include tomatoes, corn, watermelon, beans, green chili peppers and melons.
Hernán Cortés was obligated to send Vasco Porcayo to negotiate with the indigenous people giving concessions.
While much of the glitz and glamour that made Acapulco famous still remains, from the latter 20th century on, the city has also taken on other less-positive reputations.
It is a bother to tourists who simply want to relax on the beach, but the government says it is difficult to eradicate, as there is a lot of unemployment and poverty here.
Industrial production is limited mostly to bottling, milk products, cement products, and ice and energy production.
The building was originally constructed as a movie set, but was later adapted into a church.
These places tend to open earlier and have more informal dress.
The luxury items it brought to New Spain attracted the attention of English and Dutch pirates, such as Francis Drake, Henry Morgan and Thomas Cavendish, who called it "The Black Ship."
Olmec influence caused the small spread-out villages here to coalesce into larger entities and build ceremonial centers.
At Acapulco Bay itself, there were two Olmec sites, one by Playa Larga and the other on a hill known as El Guitarrón.
The main road, Avenida Costera, became a fast-moving three-foot-deep river of sludge.
The tradition started in the 1930s when young men casually competed against each other to see who could dive from the highest point into the sea below.
Spanish trade in the Far East would give Acapulco a prominent position in the economy of New Spain.
The interior of the home is covered in murals.
Much of the original hotel and trading infrastructure was built by an East Texas businessman named Albert B. Pullen from Corrigan, Texas, in the area now known as Old Acapulco.
This side of the bay is also known as "Tradicional" or "Nautica."
About seventy-three percent of the municipality's population is involved in commerce, most of it related to tourism and the port.
In the last decade, drug-related violence has caused problems for the local tourism trade.
This is where the boardwalk and main square are and today the area is filled with modern, Mexican-style hotels, with discothèques and restaurants within walking distance.
However, hotel occupancy for 2009 was down five percent from the year before.
It offers wave pools, water slides and water toboggans.
The highest peaks are Potrero, San Nicolas and Alto Camarón.
Sailfish are so plentiful that boat captains have been known to bet with a potential customer that if he does not catch anything, the trip is free.
On December 12, the feast day of this Virgin, freestyle cliff divers jump into the sea to honor her.
In 1958, the Diocese of Acapulco was created by Pope Pius XII.
Nightclubs change names and owners frequently.
In the second incident, the headless bodies of 15 young men were found dumped near the Plaza Senderos shopping center.
For tourists, the Acapulco city government has established a system of yellow buses with Acapulco painted on the side of them.
But some of Acapulco's best known hotels were built by others.
There are a number of golf courses in Acapulco including the Acapulco Princess and the Pierre Marqués course, the latter designed by Robert Trent Jones in 1972 for the World Cup Golf Tournament.
The seal for the city shows broken reeds or cane.
Acapulco is still popular with Mexican celebrities and the wealthy, such as Luis Miguel, Plácido Domingo and Dolores Olmedo, who maintain homes here.
The New York Times tracked the travels of a Penn student on spring break in Acapulco just a week after the dissemination of the email, while Bill O'Reilly devoted a segment of his show, ''The O'Reilly Factor'', to urge students to stay away from Acapulco.
Most are concentrated between the Fiesta Americana and Continental Plaza hotels.
There is also an underwater statue of the Virgin of Guadalupe here, created in 1958 by Armando Quesado in memory of a group of divers who died here.
The city was on territory under control of the Yopes, who continued defending it and living there until the arrival of the Spanish in the 1520s.
Eventually, locals began to ask for tips for those coming to see the men dive.
The metropolitan area is made up of the municipalities of Acapulco de Juárez and Coyuca de Benitez.
Another popular activity is deep-sea fishing.
The island and municipality of Capul, in the Philippines, derives its name from Acapulco; Capul was the western end of the trans-Pacific sailing route from Acapulco to what was then a Spanish colony.
Another enigmatic attraction at Acapulco are the La Quebrada Cliff Divers.
The area has over 25,000 condominiums, most of which function as second homes for their Mexican owners.
This has led many more to choose Acapulco, in spite of the fact that for many travelers, the flight is longer and more expensive than to Cancún.
In the old part of the city, there is a traditional main square called the Zócalo, lined with shade trees, cafés and shops.
Later, Teotihuacan influence made its way here via Cuernavaca and Chilpancingo.
The Botanical Garden of Acapulco is a tropical garden located on lands owned by the Universidad Loyola del Pacífico.
In 1983, singer-songwriter Juan Gabriel wrote the song "Amor eterno", which pays homage to Acapulco.
Two lagoons are in the area, Coyuca to the northwest of Acapulco Bay and Tres Palos to the southeast.
Costera cabs drive up and down the coast of Acapulco, where most of the hotels for visitors are located, but which includes some of old Acapulco.
