Decreased levels of retinoic acid in the skin may contribute to comedone formation.
It may be used with or without an oral contraceptive.
Due to the various known negative health effects of cigarette smoking, it is not recommended as an approach to improving the appearance of acne.
Additionally, squalene oxidation leads to increased activity of the 5-lipoxygenase enzyme responsible for conversion of arachidonic acid to leukotriene B4 (LTB4).
Dapsone is not recommended for use with benzoyl peroxide due to reports of yellow-orange skin discoloration with this combination of medications.
The combinations which contain third- or fourth-generation progestins such as desogestrel, drospirenone, or norgestimate may theoretically be more beneficial.
Efforts are underway to better understand the mechanisms involved in sebum production.
The Pillsbury acne grading scale simply classifies the severity of the acne from 1 (least severe) to 4 (most severe).
These strains have the capability of either changing, perpetuating, or adapting to the abnormal cycle of inflammation, oil production, and inadequate sloughing of dead skin cells from acne pores.
acnes'' worldwide, they are becoming less effective.
Spironolactone is relatively contraindicated for use during pregnancy due to its antiandrogen effects.
While some research has found it affects people of all ethnic groups, acne may not occur in the non-Westernized peoples of Papua New Guinea and Paraguay.
These scars can fade with time.
Oral contraceptives decrease the ovaries' production of androgen hormones, resulting in lower skin production of sebum, and consequently reduce acne severity.
Pigmented scar is a common but misleading term, as it suggests the color change is permanent.
Skin disorders such as perioral dermatitis and keratosis pilaris can appear similar to acne but tend to occur more frequently in childhood, whereas rosacea tends to occur more frequently in older adults.
They are believed to work in at least four different ways, including the following: anti-inflammatory effects, hormonal manipulation, killing ''P.
acnes'' within the hair follicle.
In the United States, acne tends to be more severe in Caucasians than in people of African descent.
Effects from other potentially contributing dietary factors, such as consumption of chocolate or salt, are not supported by the evidence.
Additionally, salicylic acid opens obstructed skin pores and promotes shedding of epithelial skin cells.
Nadifloxacin and dapsone (category C) are other topical antibiotics that may be used to treat acne in pregnant women, but have received less extensive study.
About 20% of those affected have moderate or severe cases.
The accumulation of dead skin cell debris and oily sebum blocks the pore of the hair follicle, thus forming the microcomedone.
acnes'' is of particular importance.
This scale was the first to use a standardized photographic protocol to assess acne severity; since its creation in 1979, Cook's grading scale has undergone several revisions.
Skin conditions which may mimic acne vulgaris include angiofibromas, folliculitis, keratosis pilaris, perioral dermatitis, and rosacea, among others.
acnes'' ) bacteria, and the local release of pro-inflammatory chemicals in the skin.
There is a lack of high-quality evidence for the use of acupuncture, herbal medicine, or cupping therapy for acne.
During the 1880s, bacteria were observed by microscopy in skin samples affected by acne and were regarded as the causal agents of comedones, sebum production, and ultimately acne.
Scarring is most likely to occur with severe nodular acne, but may occur with any form of acne vulgaris.
Retinoids are medications which possess anti-inflammatory properties, normalize the follicle cell life cycle, and reduce sebum production.
The recognition and characterization of acne progressed in 1776 when Josef Plenck (an Austrian physician) published a book that proposed the novel concept of classifying skin diseases by their elementary (initial) lesions.
The aim of this research is to develop medications targeting hormones known to increase sebum production (e.g., IGF-1 and alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone).
Following the introduction of isotretinoin in the United States, it was recognized as a medication highly likely to cause birth defects if taken during pregnancy.
An increase in androgen (and sebum) synthesis may also be seen during pregnancy.
The presence of comedones can also help health professionals differentiate acne from skin disorders that are similar in appearance.
However, light therapy may have a role for individuals whose acne has been resistant to topical medications.
acnes'' and anti-inflammatory properties.
These peels only affect the epidermal layer of the skin and can be useful in the treatment of superficial acne scars as well as skin pigmentation changes from inflammatory acne.
The social and economic costs of treating acne vulgaris are substantial.
A 2014 systematic review and meta-analysis found that oral antibiotics appear to be somewhat more effective than oral contraceptives at decreasing the number of inflammatory acne lesions at three months.
There are multiple candidates for genes which are possibly related to acne, including polymorphisms in TNF-alpha, IL-1 alpha, and CYP1A1, among others.
'''Acne vulgaris''' (or simply '''acne''') is a long-term skin disease that occurs when hair follicles become clogged with dead skin cells and oil from the skin.
Application twice daily for six months is necessary, and treatment is as effective as topical benzoyl peroxide 5%, isotretinoin 0.05%, and erythromycin 2%.
Eating fewer simple carbohydrates like sugar may help.
Activation of TLR2 and TLR4  by ''P.
However, it is unclear whether eradication of these mites improves acne.
Acne can be a side effect of testosterone replacement therapy or of anabolic steroid use.
Tretinoin (category C) and adapalene (category C) are very poorly absorbed, but certain studies have suggested teratogenic effects in the first trimester.
Conversely, people who lack androgenic hormones or are insensitive to the effects of androgens rarely have acne.
As of 2012, the evidence to support the routine use of laser resurfacing as a treatment modality for acne was insufficient.
One particularly virulent strain has been circulating in Europe for at least 87 years.
The scar is created by an abnormal form of healing following this dermal inflammation.
Many studies that evaluated this form of treatment did not have a control group, did not compare laser resurfacing to effective medical treatments, or were of a short duration, thus limiting the quality of the evidence.
The approach to acne treatment also underwent significant changes during the twentieth century.
Acne usually improves around the age of 20, but may persist into adulthood.
Disadvantages of light therapy include its cost, the need for multiple visits, and the time required to complete the procedure.
After a single course, about 80% of people report an improvement, with more than 50% reporting complete remission.
Azelaic acid may cause skin irritation but is otherwise very safe.
Retinoids contraindicated for use during pregnancy include the topical retinoid tazarotene (category X) and oral retinoids isotretinoin (category X) and acitretin (category X).
Benzoyl peroxide normally causes dryness of the skin, slight redness, and occasional peeling when side effects occur.
Tetracyclines (category D) are contraindicated during pregnancy as they are known to deposit in developing fetal teeth, resulting in yellow discoloration and thinned tooth enamel.
This topical treatment does increase sensitivity to the sun, as indicated on the packaging, so sunscreen use is often advised during treatment, to prevent sunburn.
Excessive growth of the bacteria ''Propionibacterium acnes'', which is normally present on the skin, is often involved.
If the microcomedone is superficial within the hair follicle, the skin pigment melanin is exposed to air, resulting in its oxidation and dark appearance (known as a blackhead or open comedone).
It is unclear whether these undesirable strains evolve on-site or are acquired, or possibly both depending on the person.
Plenck's work was later refined when the English dermatologist Robert Willan authored his seminal 1808 treatise, which provided the first detailed descriptions of several skin disorders with morphologic terminology that continues to be used today.
In contrast, if the microcomedone occurs deep within the hair follicle, this causes the formation of a whitehead (known as a closed comedone).
If retinoids are used during pregnancy, there is a high risk of abnormalities occurring in the developing fetus; therefore, women of childbearing age are required to use effective birth control if retinoids are used to treat acne.
As of 2012, evidence for light therapy was insufficient to recommend it for routine use.
Additional sebum-lowering medications being researched include topical antiandrogens and PPAR modulators.
Acne vulgaris is a chronic skin disease of the pilosebaceous unit and develops due to blockages in the skin's hair follicles.
In 2007, the first genome sequencing of a ''P.
Benzoyl peroxide may be paired with a topical antibiotic or retinoid such as benzoyl peroxide/clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide/adapalene, respectively.
The authors of the analysis suggested that oral contraceptives may be a preferred first-line acne treatment over oral antibiotics in certain women due to similar efficacy at six months and a lack of associated antibiotic resistance.
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is usually the result of nodular acne lesions.
The retinoids appear to influence the cell life cycle in the follicle lining.
Retinol is a form of vitamin A that has similar but milder effects, and is used in many over-the-counter moisturizers and other topical products.
Topical retinoids often cause an initial flare-up of acne and facial flushing.
Globally, acne affects approximately 650&nbsp;million people, or about 9.4% of the population, as of 2010.
A number of birth control pills may be useful for preventing acne in women.
Light therapy (also known as photodynamic therapy) is a method that involves delivering intense pulses of light to the area with acne following the application of a sensitizing substance such as aminolevulinic acid or methyl aminolevulinate.
Procedures such as light therapy and laser therapy are not considered to be first-line treatments and typically have an adjunctive role due to their high cost and the limited evidence of their efficacy.
It may result in psychological and social problems.
Typical side effects of light therapy include skin peeling, temporary reddening of the skin, swelling, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.
Formulations of trichloroacetic acid concentrated to 50% or more are considered to be deep chemical peels.
In 2013, acne was estimated to affect 660 million people globally, making it the 8th most common disease worldwide.
The use of antimicrobial peptides against ''P.
Large nodules have been referred to as cysts in the past, and the term ''nodulocystic'' has been used in the medical literature to describe severe cases of inflammatory acne.
Squalene oxidation by ''P.
It is slightly more common in females than males (9.8% versus 9.0%).
Prolonged use of salicylic acid over significant areas of the skin or under occlusive dressings is not recommended as these methods increase systemic absorption and the potential for fetal harm.
Oral antibiotics are indicated for moderate to severe cases of inflammatory acne, and decrease acne due to their anti-inflammatory properties and antimicrobial activity against ''P.
Isotretinoin is an oral retinoid and is very effective for severe nodular acne as well as moderate acne refractory to other treatments.
However, untreated scars can last for months, years, or even be permanent if deeper layers of skin are affected.
The genetics of acne susceptibility is likely polygenic, as the disease does not follow a classic Mendelian inheritance pattern.
Chocolate does contain varying amounts of sugar, which can lead to a high glycemic load, and it can be made with or without milk.
Mild chemical peels include those using glycolic acid, lactic acid, salicylic acid, Jessner's solution, or a lower concentration (20%) of trichloroacetic acid.
There are specific sub-strains of ''P.
Involvement of AP-1 in the aforementioned inflammatory cascade also leads to activation of matrix metalloproteinases, which contribute to local tissue destruction and scar formation.
This led dermatologists to propose the modernly accepted idea that acne could be explained by a sequence of related events, beginning with blockage of the skin follicle by excessive dead skin cells, followed by bacterial invasion of the hair follicle pore, changes in sebum production, and inflammation.
However, tazarotene is also the most expensive and is not as well-tolerated as other topical retinoids.
With increasing resistance of ''P.
Similarly, acne vulgaris is responsible for 3.5 million doctor visits each year in the United Kingdom.
Many different treatments exist for acne, including alpha hydroxy acid, anti-androgen medications, antibiotics, antiseborrheic medications, azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, hormonal treatments, keratolytic soaps, nicotinamide, retinoids, and salicylic acid.
Numerous other plant-derived therapies have been observed to have positive effects against acne (e.g., basil oil and oligosaccharides from seaweed); however, few studies have been performed, and most have been of lower methodological quality.
Improvement is typically seen after one to two months of use.
This helps prevent the hyperkeratinization of these cells which can create a blockage.
The resulting appearance can lead to anxiety, reduced self-esteem and, in extreme cases, depression or thoughts of suicide.
Frequently used combinations include the following: antibiotic + benzoyl peroxide, antibiotic + topical retinoid, or topical retinoid + benzoyl peroxide.
Cook's acne grading scale uses photographs to grade severity from 0 to 8 (0 being the least severe and 8 being the most severe).
Antiandrogens such as cyproterone acetate and spironolactone have also been used successfully to treat acne, especially in women with signs of excessive androgen production such as increased hairiness, baldness, or increased skin production of oily sebum.
Other workers have voiced concerns related to creating a vaccine designed to neutralize a stable community of normal skin bacteria that is known to protect the skin from colonization by more harmful microorganisms.
acnes'' is also under investigation as a novel method of treating acne and overcoming antibiotic resistance.
People may also be affected before and after puberty.
acnes'' leads to increased secretion of IL-8, TNF-α, and IL-1α.
A number of adverse effects may occur, including dry skin and lips, nose bleeds, muscle pains, increased liver enzymes, and increased lipid levels in the blood.
Oral isotretinoin is usually reserved for severe acne due to greater potential side effects.
Finasteride is also not recommended for use during pregnancy as it is highly teratogenic.
Though it becomes less common in adulthood than in adolescence, nearly half of people in their twenties and thirties continue to have acne.
Image:Backacne.JPG|Nodular acne on the back.
These blockages are thought to occur as a result of the following four abnormal processes: a higher than normal amount of sebum production (influenced by androgens), excessive deposition of the protein keratin leading to comedone formation, colonization of the follicle by ''Propionibacterium acnes'' (''P.
As of 2014, evidence is insufficient to recommend milk restriction for this purpose.
In the United States, more than 2,000 women became pregnant while taking the drug between 1982 and 2003, with most pregnancies ending in abortion or miscarriage.
The 308 G/A single nucleotide polymorphism in the gene for tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is associated with acne risk.
PPARα increases activity of activator protein 1 (AP-1) and NF-κB, thereby leading to the recruitment of inflammatory T cells.
In the 16th century, the French physician and botanist François Boissier de Sauvages de Lacroix provided one of the earlier descriptions of acne and used the term "psydracia achne" to describe small, red and hard tubercles that altered a person's facial appearance during adolescence and were neither itchy nor painful.
Acne after the age of 25 affects 54% of women and 40% of men.
A vaccine against inflammatory acne has been tested successfully in mice, but has not yet been proven to be effective in humans.
Highly recommended therapies include topically applied benzoyl peroxide (category C) and azelaic acid (category B).
Image:Cysticacne.JPG|A severe case of nodular acne
IL-1α stimulates higher keratinocyte activity and reproduction, which in turn fuels comedone development.
Many treatment options are available to improve the appearance of acne, including lifestyle changes, procedures, and medications.
They can, however, cause significant irritation of the skin.
The aldosterone antagonist spironolactone is an effective treatment for acne in adult women, but unlike combination oral contraceptives, it is not approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for this purpose.
Medical conditions that commonly cause a high-androgen state, such as polycystic ovary syndrome, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and androgen-secreting tumors, can cause acne in affected individuals.
acnes'' associated with normal skin and others with moderate or severe inflammatory acne.
A low-glycemic-index/low-glycemic-load diet is recommended as a dietary method of improving acne.
Commonly used antibiotics, either applied topically or taken orally, include clindamycin, erythromycin, metronidazole, sulfacetamide, and tetracyclines such as doxycycline and minocycline.
The predisposition to acne for specific individuals is likely explained in part by a genetic component, a theory which has been supported by twin studies as well as studies that have looked at rates of acne among first-degree relatives.
Tea tree oil is thought to be approximately as effective as benzoyl peroxide or salicylic acid, but has been associated with cases of allergic contact dermatitis.
Hormonal therapies should not be used to treat acne during pregnancy or lactation as they have been associated with certain birth defects such as hypospadias and feminization of the male fetus or infant.
Benzoyl peroxide was introduced as a medication to treat acne in the 1920s.
acnes'' readily grows and can cause inflammation within and around the follicle due to activation of the innate immune system.
Acne occurs most commonly during adolescence, affecting an estimated 80–90% of teenagers in the Western world.
Higher concentrations of trichloroacetic acid (30–40%) are considered to be medium-strength peels and affect skin as deep as the papillary dermis.
The role of diet and cigarette smoking is unclear and neither cleanliness nor sunlight appear to be involved.
This process is thought to kill bacteria and decrease the size and activity of the glands that produce sebum.
Age is one factor which may help a physician distinguish between these disorders.
To address this deficiency, and potentially replace the use of irritating topical retinoids, methods to increase the skin's production of retinoid acid are being explored.
Dry skin is the most commonly seen side effect with topical application, though darkening of the skin has been observed in individuals with darker skin types who use salicylic acid.
acnes'' ability to bind and activate a class of immune system receptors known as toll-like receptors, especially toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4).
Atrophic acne scars are the most common type of acne scar and have lost collagen from this healing response.
During the mid-twentieth century, dermatologists realized that no single hypothesized factor (sebum, bacteria, or excess keratin) could completely explain the disease.
Both androgens and IGF-1 seem to be essential for acne to occur, as acne does not develop in individuals with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) or Laron syndrome (insensitivity to GH, resulting in extremely low IGF-1 levels).
Mild acne is classically defined as open (blackheads) and closed (whiteheads) comedones limited to the face with occasional inflammatory lesions.
Acne is commonly classified by severity as mild, moderate, or severe.
Overall, few high-quality studies have been performed which demonstrate that stress causes or worsens acne.
LTB4 promotes skin inflammation by acting on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARα).
Lower rates are reported in some rural societies.
Subsequently, in the 1970s tretinoin (original trade name Retin A) was found to be an effective treatment for acne.
Generally speaking, retinoids increase skin's sensitivity to sunlight and are therefore recommended for use at night.
As of 2014, studies examining the effects of probiotics on acne in humans were limited.
Acne vulgaris and its resultant scars have been associated with significant social difficulties that can last into adulthood.
Leeds acne grading technique counts acne lesions on the face, back, and chest  and categorizes them as inflammatory or non-inflammatory.
Atrophic scars may be further classified as ice-pick scars, boxcar scars, and rolling scars.
However, increased production of oily sebum in those with acne causes the dead skin cells to stick together.
Commonly used medical treatments include topical therapies such as antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide, and retinoids, and systemic therapies including antibiotics, hormonal agents, and oral retinoids.
Certain medical literature reviews have stated cigarette smoking clearly worsens acne whereas others have stated it is unclear whether smoking is unrelated to, worsens, or improves acne severity.
However, since true cysts are rare in those with acne, the term ''severe nodular acne'' is now the preferred terminology.
Salicylic acid is a topically applied beta-hydroxy acid that possesses bacteriostatic and keratolytic properties.
Topical dapsone is not typically used as a first-line antibiotic due to its higher cost and lack of clear superiority over other antibiotics.
Hormonal activity, such as occurs during menstrual cycles and puberty, may contribute to the formation of acne.
Azelaic acid has been shown to be effective for mild-to-moderate acne when applied topically at a 20% concentration.
The use of topical benzoyl peroxide and antibiotics together has been shown to be more effective than antibiotics alone.
Combination therapy — using medications of different classes together, each with a different mechanism of action — has been demonstrated to be a more efficacious approach to acne treatment than monotherapy.
Spironolactone is thought to be a useful acne treatment due to its ability to block the androgen receptor at higher doses.
Acne that first develops between the ages of 21 and 25 is uncommon.
Vitamin B12 may trigger skin outbreaks similar to acne (acneiform eruptions), or exacerbate existing acne, when taken in doses exceeding the recommended daily intake.
Another avenue of early-stage research has focused on how to best use laser and light therapy to selectively destroy sebaceous glands in the skin's hair follicles to reduce sebum production and improve acne appearance.
Anabolic steroids are commonly found in over-the-counter bodybuilding supplements.
Finasteride is also likely to be an effective treatment for acne.
Boxcar scars are round or ovoid indented scars with sharp borders and vary in size from 1.5–4&nbsp;mm across.
It works against ''P.
In general, topically applied medications are considered the first-line approach to acne treatment during pregnancy, as topical therapies have little systemic absorption and are therefore unlikely to harm a developing fetus.
About 20% of people require a second course.
Topical azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and salicylic acid are commonly used treatments.
Sebaceous gland cells also produce more antimicrobial peptides, such as HBD1 and HBD2, in response to binding of TLR2 and TLR4.
acnes'' bacteriophage (PA6) was reported.
They often leave behind an inflamed red mark after the original acne lesion has resolved.
The relationship between diet and acne is unclear, as there is no high-quality evidence which establishes any definitive link.
Topical and oral preparations of nicotinamide (the amide form of vitamin B3) have been suggested as alternative medical treatments for acne.
The earliest pathologic change is the formation of a plug (a microcomedone), which is driven primarily by excessive proliferation of keratinocytes in the hair follicle.
Topical antibiotics deemed safe during pregnancy include clindamycin (category B), erythromycin (category B) and metronidazole (category B), due to negligible systemic absorption.
Another androgenic hormone responsible for increased sebaceous gland activity is DHEA-S. Higher amounts of DHEA-S are secreted during adrenarche (a stage of puberty), and this leads to an increase in sebum synthesis.
No adverse fetal events have been reported in association with topical use of dapsone during pregnancy.
Acne affects 40 to 50 million people in the United States (16%) and approximately 3 to 5 million in Australia (23%).
Typical features of acne include seborrhea (increased oil secretion), microcomedones, comedones, papules, pustules, nodules (large papules), and in many cases scarring.
Unlike antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide does not appear to generate bacterial resistance.
