Although action potentials are generated locally on patches of excitable membrane, the resulting currents can trigger action potentials on neighboring stretches of membrane, precipitating a domino-like propagation.
However the simple models of generator potential and action potential fail to accurately reproduce the near threshold neural spike rate and spike shape, specifically for the mechanoreceptors like the Pacinian corpuscle.
In order to enable fast and efficient transduction of electrical signals in the nervous system, certain neuronal axons are covered with myelin sheaths.
Nearly all cell membranes in animals, plants and fungi maintain a voltage difference between the exterior and interior of the cell, called the membrane potential.
This basic mechanism was demonstrated by Alan Lloyd Hodgkin in 1937.
Instead, the ionic current from an action potential at one node of Ranvier provokes another action potential at the next node; this apparent "hopping" of the action potential from node to node is known as saltatory conduction.
A variety of action potential types exist in many cell types and cell compartments as determined by the types of voltage-gated channels, leak channels, channel distributions, ionic concentrations, membrane capacitance, temperature, and other factors.
Some types of cells, however, are electrically active in the sense that their voltages fluctuate over time.
Action potentials are triggered when enough depolarization accumulates to bring the membrane potential up to threshold.
This concentration gradient along with potassium leak channels present on the membrane of the neuron causes an efflux of potassium ions making the resting potential close to ''E''K≈ –75&nbsp;mV.
One type is generated by voltage-gated sodium channels, the other by voltage-gated calcium channels.
The period during which no new action potential can be fired is called the ''absolute refractory period''.
While glass micropipette electrodes measure the sum of the currents passing through many ion channels, studying the electrical properties of a single ion channel became possible in the 1970s with the development of the patch clamp by Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann.
The interaction of electrical and osmotic relations in plant cells   indicates an osmotic function of  electrical excitability in the common, unicellular ancestors of plants and animals under changing salinity conditions, whereas the present function of rapid signal transmission is seen as a younger accomplishment of metazoan cells in a more stable osmotic environment.
Many types of neurons emit action potentials constantly at rates of up to 10–100 per second; some types, however, are much quieter, and may go for minutes or longer without emitting any action potentials.
Their protrusions, or spines, are designed to capture the neurotransmitters released by the presynaptic neuron.
Their joint efforts can be thwarted, however, by the counteracting inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
A cell membrane consists of a lipid bilayer of molecules in which larger protein molecules are embedded.
The channel is permeable only to sodium ions when it is in the ''activated'' state.
Optical imaging technologies have been developed in recent years to measure action potentials, either via simultaneous multisite recordings or with ultra-spatial resolution.
The positive feedback of the rising phase slows and comes to a halt as the sodium ion channels become maximally open.
Thus, the cell ''fires'', producing an action potential.
However, their model considers only two types of voltage-sensitive ion channels, and makes several assumptions about them, e.g., that their internal gates open and close independently of one another.
The cardiac action potential plays an important role in coordinating the contraction of the heart.
This region is characterized by having a very high concentration of voltage-activated sodium channels.
This lowers the membrane's permeability to sodium relative to potassium, driving the membrane voltage back towards the resting value.
In addition, backpropagating action potentials have been recorded in the dendrites of pyramidal neurons, which are ubiquitous in the neocortex.
Thus, the amplitude, duration, and shape of the action potential are determined largely by the properties of the excitable membrane and not the amplitude or duration of the stimulus.
In nature, myelinated segments are generally long enough for the passively propagated signal to travel for at least two nodes while retaining enough amplitude to fire an action potential at the second or third node.
Sponges seem to be the main phylum of multicellular eukaryotes that does not transmit action potentials, although some studies have suggested that these organisms have a form of electrical signaling, too.
The currents flowing inwards at a point on the axon during an action potential spread out along the axon, and depolarize the adjacent sections of its membrane.
In cardiac muscle cells, on the other hand, an initial fast sodium spike provides a "primer" to provoke the rapid onset of a calcium spike, which then produces muscle contraction.
The critical threshold voltage for this runaway condition is usually around −45&nbsp;mV, but it depends on the recent activity of the axon.
Even after a sufficient number of sodium channels have transitioned back to their resting state, it frequently happens that a fraction of potassium channels remains open, making it difficult for the membrane potential to depolarize, and thereby giving rise to the relative refractory period.
As a result, some parts of the membrane of a neuron may be excitable (capable of generating action potentials), whereas others are not.
The sodium–potassium pump was identified in 1957 and its properties gradually elucidated, culminating in the determination of its atomic-resolution structure by X-ray crystallography.
Although it limits the frequency of firing, the absolute refractory period ensures that the action potential moves in only one direction along an axon.
This mechanism prevents an action potential from traveling back the way it just came.
Each excitable patch of membrane has two important levels of membrane potential:  the resting potential, which is the value the membrane potential maintains as long as nothing perturbs the cell, and a higher value called the threshold potential.
Patch-clamping verified that ionic channels have discrete states of conductance, such as open, closed and inactivated.
Potassium channels are then activated, and there is an outward current of potassium ions, returning the electrochemical gradient to the resting state.
(The "V" stands for "voltage".)
The principal ions involved in an action potential are sodium and potassium cations; sodium ions enter the cell, and potassium ions leave, restoring equilibrium.
At the furthest end, the axon loses its insulation and begins to branch into several axon terminals.
The raised voltage opened many more potassium channels than usual, and some of these do not close right away when the membrane returns to its normal resting voltage.
At the peak of the action potential, the sodium permeability is maximized and the membrane voltage ''Vm'' is nearly equal to the sodium equilibrium voltage ''E''Na.
The point at which depolarization stops is called the peak phase.
Instead, they may convert the signal into the release of a neurotransmitter, or into continuous graded potentials, either of which may stimulate subsequent neuron(s) into firing an action potential.
Part of this function is the tight coordination of mechanical events, such as the contraction of the heart.
Action potentials from the AV node travel through the bundle of His and thence to the Purkinje fibers.
Whether saltatory or not, the mean conduction velocity of an action potential ranges from 1&nbsp;meter per second (m/s) to over 100&nbsp;m/s, and, in general, increases with axonal diameter.
In most types of cells the membrane potential usually stays fairly constant.
The third problem, that of obtaining electrodes small enough to record voltages within a single axon without perturbing it, was solved in 1949 with the invention of the glass micropipette electrode, which was quickly adopted by other researchers.
When the membrane potential is low, the channel spends most of its time in the ''deactivated'' (closed) state.
Recent studies have shown that the most excitable part of a neuron is the part after the axon hillock (the point where the axon leaves the cell body), which is called the initial segment, but the axon and cell body are also excitable in most cases.
The potassium permeability of the membrane is transiently unusually high, driving the membrane voltage ''Vm'' even closer to the potassium equilibrium voltage ''E''K.
This opening has the further effect of changing the local permeability of the cell membrane and, thus, the membrane potential.
Combined, these changes in sodium and potassium permeability cause ''Vm'' to drop quickly, repolarizing the membrane and producing the "falling phase" of the action potential.
The course of the action potential can be divided into five parts: the rising phase, the peak phase, the falling phase, the undershoot phase, and the refractory period.
For small voltage increases from rest, the potassium current exceeds the sodium current and the voltage returns to its normal resting value, typically −70&nbsp;mV.
Although such pacemaker potentials have a natural rhythm, it can be adjusted by external stimuli; for instance, heart rate can be altered by pharmaceuticals as well as signals from the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves.
The course of the action potential is determined by two coupled effects.
Action potentials occur in several types of animal cells, called excitable cells, which include neurons, muscle cells, and endocrine cells, as well as in some plant cells.
Each action potential is followed by a refractory period, which can be divided into an ''absolute refractory period'', during which it is impossible to evoke another action potential, and then a ''relative refractory period'', during which a stronger-than-usual stimulus is required.
(Exceptions are discussed later in the article.)
In reality, there are many types of ion channels, and they do not always open and close independently.
Some diseases degrade myelin and impair saltatory conduction, reducing the conduction velocity of action potentials.
The action potentials of those cells propagate to and through the atrioventricular node (AV node), which is normally the only conduction pathway between the atria and the ventricles.
In some other types of cells, and in plants, an action potential may last three seconds or more.
Myelin is a multilamellar membrane that enwraps the axon in segments separated by intervals known as nodes of Ranvier.
The voltages and currents of the action potential in all of its phases were modeled accurately by Alan Lloyd Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley in 1952, for which they were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1963.
The few ions that do cross are pumped out again by the continuous action of the sodium–potassium pump, which, with other ion transporters, maintains the normal ratio of ion concentrations across the membrane.
If the depolarization is small (say, increasing ''Vm'' from −70&nbsp;mV to −60&nbsp;mV), the outward potassium current overwhelms the inward sodium current and the membrane repolarizes back to its normal resting potential around −70&nbsp;mV.However, if the depolarization is large enough, the inward sodium current increases more than the outward potassium current and a runaway condition (positive feedback) results: the more inward current there is, the more ''Vm'' increases, which in turn further increases the inward current.
When closing after an action potential, sodium channels enter an "inactivated" state, in which they cannot be made to open regardless of the membrane potential—this gives rise to the absolute refractory period.
At the axon hillock of a typical neuron, the resting potential is around –70 millivolts (mV) and the threshold potential is around –55 mV.
The action potential generated at the axon hillock propagates as a wave along the axon.
Not all neurons in vertebrates are myelinated; for example, axons of the neurons comprising the autonomous nervous system are not, in general, myelinated.
In some types of neurons, slow calcium spikes provide the driving force for a long burst of rapidly emitted sodium spikes.
Refinements of this method are able to produce electrode tips that are as fine as 100 Å (10 nm), which also confers high input impedance.
The amplitude of an action potential is independent of the amount of current that produced it.
Slower action potentials in muscle cells and some types of neurons are generated by voltage-gated calcium channels.
When the channels open (in response to depolarization in transmembrane voltage), they allow an inward flow of sodium ions, which changes the electrochemical gradient, which in turn produces a further rise in the membrane potential.
Subsequent to this, there is a falling phase.
In similar manner, in the human retina, the initial photoreceptor cells and the next layer of cells (comprising bipolar cells and horizontal cells) do not produce action potentials; only some amacrine cells and the third layer, the ganglion cells, produce action potentials, which then travel up the optic nerve.
The 20th century was a golden era for electrophysiology.
Thus, a voltage-gated ion channel tends to be open for some values of the membrane potential, and closed for others.
One function of action potentials is rapid, long-range signaling within the organism; the conduction velocity can exceed 110&nbsp;m/s, which is one-third the speed of sound.
The inward flow of sodium ions increases the concentration of positively charged cations in the cell and causes depolarization, where the potential of the cell is higher than the cell's resting potential.
These channels help transmit the signals generated by the dendrites.
The process proceeds explosively until all of the available ion channels are open, resulting in a large upswing in the membrane potential.
At any given moment, the patch of axon behind the actively spiking part is refractory, but the patch in front, not having been activated recently, is capable of being stimulated by the depolarization from the action potential.
The resting potential prior to the action potential is typically −90mV, somewhat more negative than typical neurons.
Due to the direct connection between excitable cells in the form of gap junctions, an action potential can be transmitted directly from one cell to the next in either direction.
Scientists of the 19th century studied the propagation of electrical signals in whole nerves (i.e., bundles of neurons) and demonstrated that nervous tissue was made up of cells, instead of an interconnected network of tubes (a ''reticulum'').
These axons are so large in diameter (roughly 1&nbsp;mm, or 100-fold larger than a typical neuron) that they can be seen with the naked eye, making them easy to extract and manipulate.
A complicating factor is that a single ion channel may have multiple internal "gates" that respond to changes in ''Vm'' in opposite ways, or at different rates.
Neurons are electrically excitable cells composed, in general, of one or more dendrites, a single soma, a single axon and one or more axon terminals.
Several types of channels that are capable of producing the positive feedback necessary to generate an action potential exist.
These up-and-down cycles are known as action potentials.
This insulation prevents significant signal decay as well as ensuring faster signal speed.
In addition, further potassium channels open in response to the influx of calcium ions during the action potential.
The axon is insulated by a myelin sheath.
Action potentials result from the depolarization of the cell membrane (the sarcolemma), which opens voltage-sensitive sodium channels; these become inactivated and the membrane is repolarized through the outward current of potassium ions.
They should be as long as possible to maximize the speed of conduction, but not so long that the arriving signal is too weak to provoke an action potential at the next node of Ranvier.
Muscle action potentials are provoked by the arrival of a pre-synaptic neuronal action potential at the neuromuscular junction, which is a common target for neurotoxins.
Using voltage-sensitive dyes, action potentials have been optically recorded from a tiny patch of cardiomyocyte membrane.
This all-or-nothing property of the action potential sets it apart from graded potentials such as receptor potentials, electrotonic potentials, and synaptic potentials, which scale with the magnitude of the stimulus.
''Mimosa pudica''), arose independently from that in metazoan excitable cells.
Before considering the propagation of action potentials along axons and their termination at the synaptic knobs, it is helpful to consider the methods by which action potentials can be initiated at the axon hillock.
On the other hand, all neuronal voltage-activated sodium channels inactivate within several millisecond during strong depolarization, thus making following depolarization impossible until a substantial fraction of sodium channels have returned to their closed state.
In such cases, the released neurotransmitter is acetylcholine, which binds to the acetylcholine receptor, an integral membrane protein in the membrane (the ''sarcolemma'') of the muscle fiber.
This line of research culminated in the five 1952 papers of Hodgkin, Katz and Andrew Huxley, in which they applied the voltage clamp technique to determine the dependence of the axonal membrane's permeabilities to sodium and potassium ions on voltage and time, from which they were able to reconstruct the action potential quantitatively.
The conduction velocity of action potentials was first measured in 1850 by du Bois-Reymond's friend, Hermann von Helmholtz.
If sufficiently strong, this depolarization provokes a similar action potential at the neighboring membrane patches.
For their discoveries, Golgi and Ramón y Cajal were awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology.
Some fraction of an excitatory voltage may reach the axon hillock and may (in rare cases) depolarize the membrane enough to provoke a new action potential.
This is in contrast to receptor potentials, whose amplitudes are dependent on the intensity of a stimulus.
These channels are shut when the membrane potential is near the resting potential of the cell, but they rapidly begin to open if the membrane potential increases to a precisely defined threshold value.
For comparison, a hormone molecule carried in the bloodstream moves at roughly 8&nbsp;m/s in large arteries.
Action potentials are generated by special types of voltage-gated ion channels embedded in a cell's plasma membrane.
In 1949, Alan Hodgkin and Bernard Katz refined Bernstein's hypothesis by considering that the axonal membrane might have different permeabilities to different ions; in particular, they demonstrated the crucial role of the sodium permeability for the action potential.
For a neuron at rest, there is a high concentration of sodium and chlorine ions in the extracellular fluid compared to the intracellular fluid while there is a high concentration of potassium ions in the intracellular fluid compared to the extracellular fluid.
A typical voltage across an animal cell membrane is –70 mV; this means that the interior of the cell has a negative voltage of approximately one-fifteenth of a volt relative to the exterior.
To establish that nervous tissue is made up of discrete cells, the Spanish physician Santiago Ramón y Cajal and his students used a stain developed by Camillo Golgi to reveal the myriad shapes of neurons, which they rendered painstakingly.
Immediately after the axon hillock is the axon.
Mathematical and computational models are essential for understanding the action potential, and offer predictions  that may be tested against experimental data, providing a stringent test of a theory.
These neurotransmitters then bind to receptors on the postsynaptic cell.
Because the density and subtypes of potassium channels may differ greatly between different types of neurons, the duration of the relative refractory period is highly variable.
Currents produced by the opening of voltage-gated channels in the course of an action potential are typically  significantly larger than the initial stimulating current.
However, action potentials may end prematurely in certain places where the safety factor is low, even in unmyelinated neurons; a common example is the branch point of an axon, where it divides into two axons.
After crushing or cooling nerve segments and thus blocking the action potentials, he showed that an action potential arriving on one side of the block could provoke another action potential on the other, provided that the blocked segment was sufficiently short.
Neurotoxins aimed at the ion channels of insects have been effective insecticides; one example is the synthetic permethrin, which prolongs the activation of the sodium channels involved in action potentials.
In animal cells, there are two primary types of action potentials.
For example, action potentials move at roughly the same speed (25&nbsp;m/s) in a myelinated frog axon and an unmyelinated squid giant axon, but the frog axon has a roughly 30-fold smaller diameter and 1000-fold smaller cross-sectional area.
A sufficiently strong depolarization (increase in ''Vm'') causes the voltage-sensitive sodium channels to open; the increasing permeability to sodium drives ''Vm'' closer to the sodium equilibrium voltage ''E''Na≈ +55&nbsp;mV.
This binding opens various types of ion channels.
Once a channel has activated, it will eventually transition to the ''inactivated'' (closed) state.
The integration of various dendritic signals at the axon hillock and its thresholding to form a complex train of action potentials is another form of computation, one that has been exploited biologically to form central pattern generators and mimicked in artificial neural networks.
Ion channels switch between conformations at unpredictable times: The membrane potential determines the rate of transitions and the probability per unit time of each type of transition.
If, however, the binding decreases the voltage (hyperpolarizes the membrane), it is inhibitory.
There are several ways in which this depolarization can occur.
The cardiac pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial node in the heart provide a good example.
However, the likelihood of a channel's transitioning from the ''inactivated'' state directly to the ''activated'' state is very low: A channel in the ''inactivated'' state is refractory until it has transitioned back to the ''deactivated'' state.
In general, action potentials that reach the synaptic knobs cause a neurotransmitter to be released into the synaptic cleft.
Their work resolved a long-standing controversy in the neuroanatomy of the 19th century; Golgi himself had argued for the network model of the nervous system.
A neuron that emits an action potential is often said to "fire".
This insulation, however, has the restriction that no channels can be present on the surface of the axon.
The external stimuli do not cause the cell's repetitive firing, but merely alter its timing.
Action potentials are found throughout multicellular organisms, including plants, invertebrates such as insects, and vertebrates such as reptiles and mammals.
In other types of cells, their main function is to activate intracellular processes.
Electrical synapses are found in all nervous systems, including the human brain, although they are a distinct minority.
This enzyme quickly reduces the stimulus to the muscle, which allows the degree and timing of muscular contraction to be regulated delicately.
Plant and fungal cells  are also electrically excitable.
Being an all-or-none signal that does not decay with transmission distance, the action potential has similar advantages to digital electronics.
At the same time, the raised voltage opens voltage-sensitive potassium channels; the increase in the membrane's potassium permeability drives ''Vm'' towards ''E''K.
This results in a runaway condition whereby the positive feedback from the sodium current activates even more sodium channels.
The arrival of the action potential opens voltage-sensitive calcium channels in the presynaptic membrane; the influx of calcium causes vesicles filled with neurotransmitter to migrate to the cell's surface and release their contents into the synaptic cleft.
Although glial cells are not involved with the transmission of electrical signals, they communicate and provide important biochemical support to neurons.
Conversely, for a given conduction velocity, myelinated fibers are smaller than their unmyelinated counterparts.
The cardiac cells of the sinoatrial node provide the pacemaker potential that synchronizes the heart.
Unlike the spines, the surface of the soma is populated by voltage activated ion channels.
The lipid bilayer is highly resistant to movement of electrically charged ions, so it functions as an insulator.
The free flow of ions between cells enables rapid non-chemical-mediated transmission.
*  By contrast, in unmyelinated axons, the action potential provokes another in the membrane immediately adjacent, and moves continuously down the axon like a wave.
The absolute refractory period is largely responsible for the unidirectional propagation of action potentials along axons.
At this stage, the membrane potential reaches a maximum.
However, the current is carried by the cytoplasm, which is sufficient to depolarize the first or second subsequent node of Ranvier.
In neurons, the types of ion channels in the membrane usually vary across different parts of the cell, giving the dendrites, axon, and cell body different electrical properties.
In beta cells of the pancreas, they provoke release of insulin.
The large membrane-embedded proteins, in contrast, provide channels through which ions can pass across the membrane.
An action potential occurs when this positive feedback cycle proceeds explosively.
The most intensively studied type of voltage-dependent ion channels comprises the sodium channels involved in fast nerve conduction.
Bernstein's hypothesis was confirmed by Ken Cole and Howard Curtis, who showed that membrane conductance increases during an action potential.
Emerging out from the soma is the axon hillock.
The ions exchanged during an action potential, therefore, make a negligible change in the interior and exterior ionic concentrations.
Electrical synapses allow for faster transmission because they do not require the slow diffusion of neurotransmitters across the synaptic cleft.
In muscle cells, a typical action potential lasts about a fifth of a second.
The efflux of potassium ions decreases the membrane potential or hyperpolarizes the cell.
In sensory neurons, an external signal such as pressure, temperature, light, or sound is coupled with the opening and closing of ion channels, which in turn alter the ionic permeabilities of the membrane and its voltage.
The basic requirement is that the membrane voltage at the hillock be raised above the threshold for firing.
Such inhibitors of ion channels serve an important research purpose, by allowing scientists to "turn off" specific channels at will, thus isolating  the other channels' contributions; they can also be useful in purifying ion channels by affinity chromatography or in assaying their concentration.
It must be assumed that the familiar signalling function of action potentials in some vascular plants (e.g.
Several anti-arrhythmia drugs act on the cardiac action potential, such as quinidine, lidocaine, beta blockers, and verapamil.
The higher the membrane potential the greater the probability of activation.
The properties of the Hodgkin–Huxley and FitzHugh–Nagumo models and their relatives, such as the Bonhoeffer–van der Pol model,* * * *  have been well-studied within  mathematics,* FitzHugh, R in * *  computation* Rinzel, J & Ermentrout, GB; in  and electronics.
This then causes more channels to open, producing a greater electric current across the cell membrane, and so on.
The second problem was addressed with the crucial development of the voltage clamp, which permitted experimenters to study the ionic currents underlying an action potential in isolation, and eliminated a key source of electronic noise, the current ''IC''  associated with the capacitance ''C'' of the membrane.
Rectifying channels ensure that action potentials move only in one direction through an electrical synapse.
Finally, the time during which a subsequent action potential is impossible or difficult to fire is called the refractory period, which may overlap with the other phases.
In some cases, the regulation of frequency can be more complex, leading to patterns of action potentials, such as bursting.
It tends then to stay inactivated for some time, but, if the membrane potential becomes low again, the channel will eventually transition back to the ''deactivated'' state.
However, the ''Loligo'' axons are not representative of all excitable cells, and numerous other systems with action potentials have been studied.
If the binding increases the voltage (depolarizes the membrane), the synapse is excitatory.
These are thought to have a role in spike-timing-dependent plasticity.
During an action potential, most channels of this type go through a cycle ''deactivated''→''activated''→''inactivated''→''deactivated''.
The action potential releases calcium ions that free up the tropomyosin and allow the muscle to contract.
Neurotransmission can also occur through electrical synapses.
If the transmembrane resistance ''rm'' is increased, that lowers the average "leakage" current across the membrane, likewise causing ''λ'' to become longer, increasing the conduction velocity.
Their hypotheses were confirmed in the mid-1970s and 1980s by Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann, who developed the technique of patch clamping to examine the conductance states of individual ion channels.
Myelinated sections of axons are not excitable and do not produce action potentials and the signal is propagated passively as electrotonic potential.
