Acupuncture is the insertion in the skin of thin needles.
Accidents and infections are associated with infractions of sterile technique or neglect on the part of the practitioner.
A lot of emphasis developed on using acupuncture on the ear.
A 2006 Cochrane review found no clear evidence for acupuncture on subacute or chronic stroke.
During one part of the visit, the delegation was shown a patient undergoing major surgery while fully awake, ostensibly receiving acupuncture rather than anesthesia.
''Qi'' was believed to flow from the body's primary organs (zang-fu organs) to the "superficial" body tissues of the skin, muscles, tendons, bones, and joints, through channels called meridians.
It is a generally held belief within the acupuncture community that acupuncture points and meridians structures are special conduits for electrical signals but no research has established any consistent anatomical structure or function for either acupuncture points or meridians.
It became rarer in the following centuries, and was associated with less prestigious professions like alchemy, shamanism, midwifery and moxibustion.
A 2012 review of 88 systematic reviews of acupuncture published in Chinese journals found that less than half of these reviews reported testing for publication bias, and that the majority of these reviews were published in journals with impact factors of zero.
Acupuncture is used in most pain clinics and hospices in the UK.
For the use of acupuncture for post-operative pain, there was contradictory evidence.
A 2012 systematic review of randomised clinical trials (RCTs) using acupuncture in the treatment of cancer pain found that the number and quality of RCTs was too low to draw definite conclusions.
It introduced the concept of using acupuncture to manipulate the flow of life energy (''qi'') in a network of meridian (channels) in the body.
Acupuncture use was commonplace in Korea by the 6th century.
Some acupuncture proponents argue that the long history of acupuncture suggests it is safe.
Acupuncture is generally safe when done by an appropriately trained practitioner using clean needle technique and single-use needles.
According to Needham and Gwei-djen, these "arbitrary predictions" were depicted by acupuncturists in complex charts and through a set of special terminology.
Often the needles are stimulated by hand in order to cause a dull, localized, aching sensation that is called ''de qi'', as well as "needle grasp," a tugging feeling felt by the acupuncturist and generated by a mechanical interaction between the needle and skin.
Later, many needles were heated in boiling water, or in a flame.
Americans and Britains began showing interest in acupuncture in the early 20th century.
Gwei-djen and Needham noted that all the ancient materials that could have been used for acupuncture and which often produce archeological evidence, such as sharpened bones, bamboo or stones, were also used for other purposes.
There is some evidence that acupuncture might have specific effects on perennial allergic rhinitis (PAR), though all of the efficacy studies were small and conclusions should be made with caution.
Scientific research has not supported the existence of ''qi'', meridians, or yin and yang.
One patient receiving open heart surgery while awake was ultimately found to have received a combination of three powerful sedatives as well as large injections of a local anesthetic into the wound.
Inspection focuses on the face and particularly on the tongue, including analysis of the tongue size, shape, tension, color and coating, and the absence or presence of teeth marks around the edge.
It is also speculated that these stones may have been used for bloodletting, due to the ancient Chinese belief that illnesses were caused by demons within the body that could be killed or released.
A 2013 systematic review found 31 cases of vascular injuries caused by acupuncture, three resulting in death.
A 2007 review found that acupuncture was significantly better than sham acupuncture at treating chronic knee pain; the evidence was not conclusive due to the lack of large, high-quality trials.
Classically, acupuncture is individualized and based on philosophy and intuition, and not on scientific research.
Accidents and infections are associated with infractions of sterile technique or neglect of the practitioner.
The specific therapeutic effects of acupuncture were small, whereas its clinically relevant benefits were mostly due to contextual and psychosocial circumstances.
A 2013 meta-analysis found that acupuncture for chronic low back pain was cost-effective as a complement to standard care, but not as a substitute for standard care except in cases where comorbid depression presented.
Canada has acupuncture licensing programs in the provinces of British Columbia, Ontario, Alberta and Quebec; standards set by the Chinese Medicine and Acupuncture Association of Canada are used in provinces without government regulation.
In 1822, the Chinese Emperor signed a decree excluding the practice of acupuncture from the Imperial Medical Institute.
After the National Institute of Health expressed support for acupuncture for a limited number of conditions, adoption in the US grew further.
In traditional acupuncture, the acupuncturist decides which points to treat by observing and questioning the patient to make a diagnosis according to the tradition used.
Ten adverse events were associated with cupping.
A 2010 overview of systematic reviews found that moxibustion was effective for several conditions but the primary studies were of poor quality, so there persists ample uncertainty, which limits the conclusiveness of their findings.
A 2009 Cochrane review of the use of acupuncture for migraine prophylaxis treatment concluded that "true" acupuncture was no more efficient than sham acupuncture, but "true" acupuncture appeared to be as effective as, or possibly more effective than routine care in the treatment of migraines, with fewer adverse effects than prophylactic drug treatment.
The adverse events recorded included retained needles (31%), dizziness (30%), loss of consciousness/unresponsive (19%), falls (4%), bruising or soreness at needle site (2%), pneumothorax (1%) and other adverse side effects (12%).
A 2014 systematic review found moderate quality evidence that acupuncture was more effective than sham acupuncture in the treatment of lateral elbow pain.
According to Dr. Plinio Prioreschi, the earliest known historical record of acupuncture is the Shih-Chi ("Record of History"), written by a historian around 100&nbsp;BC.
Another study showed a rate of adverse events requiring specific treatment of 2.2%, 4,963 incidences among 229,230 patients.
For example, some diseases are believed to be caused by meridians being invaded with an excess of wind, cold, and damp.
A 2011 overview of high-quality Cochrane reviews suggests that acupuncture is effective for certain types of pain.
Examples include those at Harvard University, Stanford University, Johns Hopkins University, and UCLA.
Stephen Barrett states that there is a "risk that an acupuncturist whose approach to diagnosis is not based on scientific concepts will fail to diagnose a dangerous condition".
In Switzerland, acupuncture has become the most frequently used alternative medicine since 2004.
Human tests to determine whether electrical continuity was significantly different near meridians than other places in the body have been inconclusive.
The ''Mawangdui'' texts, which are believed to be from the 2nd century BC, mention the use of pointed stones to open abscesses, and moxibustion, but not for acupuncture.
Traditional acupuncture involves needle insertion, moxibustion, and cupping therapy, and may be accompanied by other procedures such as feeling the pulse and other parts of the body and examining the tongue.
According to the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (Mayo Clinic), a typical session entails lying still while approximately five to twenty needles are inserted; for the majority of cases, the needles will be left in place for ten to twenty minutes.
However, there is an increasing literature on adverse events (e.g.
It was restored for a time, but banned again in 1929 in favor of science-based Western medicine.
The evidence suggests that short-term treatment with acupuncture does not produce long-term benefits.
In China, the practice of acupuncture is regulated by the Chinese Medicine Council that was formed in 1999 by the Legislative Council.
A 2014 ''Nature Reviews Cancer'' review article found that "contrary to the claimed mechanism of redirecting the flow of ''qi'' through meridians, researchers usually find that it generally does not matter where the needles are inserted, how often (that is, no dose-response effect is observed), or even if needles are actually inserted.
Acupuncture is an unproven treatment for allergic-immunologic conditions.
Most such reports originate from Asia, which may reflect the large number of treatments performed there or a relatively higher number of poorly trained Asian acupuncturists.
Adverse reactions from acupuncture, which are unusual and uncommon in typical acupuncture practice, included syncope, galactorrhoea, bilateral nystagmus, pyoderma gangrenosum, hepatotoxicity, eruptive lichen planus, and spontaneous needle migration.
A 2005 Cochrane review concluded that acupuncture use to treat rheumatoid arthritis "has no effect on ESR, CRP, pain, patient's global assessment, number of swollen joints, number of tender joints, general health, disease activity and reduction of analgesics."
Contraindications to acupuncture (conditions that should not be treated with acupuncture) include coagulopathy disorders (e.g.
A 2014 systematic review found supportive but limited evidence for use of acupuncture for acute post-operative pain after back surgery.
Acupuncture needles during this period were much thicker than most modern ones and often resulted in infection.
Scientific investigation has not found any histological or physiological evidence for traditional Chinese concepts such as ''qi'', meridians, and acupuncture points, and many modern practitioners no longer support the existence of life force energy (''qi'') flowing through meridians, which was a major part of early belief systems.
An overview of Cochrane reviews found that acupuncture is not effective for a wide range of conditions, and they suggest it may be effective for only chemotherapy-induced nausea/vomiting, postoperative nausea/vomiting, and idiopathic headache.
Bian Que believed there was a single acupuncture point at the top of one's skull that he called the point "of the hundred meetings."
Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong later reversed this position, arguing that the practice was based on scientific principles.
The tip of the needle should not be made too sharp to prevent breakage, although blunt needles cause more pain.
By the early 2010s, more than 14 million Americans reported having used acupuncture as part of their health care.
Although various different techniques of acupuncture practice have emerged, the method used in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) seems to be the most widely adopted in the US.
A 2014 systematic review found that although manual acupuncture was effective at relieving short-term pain when used to treat tennis elbow, its long-term effect in relieving pain was "unremarkable".
Palpation is focusing on feeling the body for tender ''"A-shi"'' points and feeling the pulse.
Therapy is based on which "pattern of disharmony" can be identified.
Academic discussions of acupuncture still make reference to pseudoscientific concepts such as ''qi'' and meridians despite the lack of scientific evidence.
This has been cited as evidence that practices similar to acupuncture may have been practiced elsewhere in Eurasia during the early Bronze Age; however, ''The Oxford Handbook of the History of Medicine'' calls this theory "speculative".
It has been proposed that acupuncture's effects in gastrointestinal disorders may relate to its effects on the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system, which have been said to be the "Western medicine" equivalent of "yin and yang".
Acupuncture is a substantial part of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM).
inserting needles on meridians not related to the specific condition being studied, or in places not associated with meridians.
A 2010 overview of systematic reviews found insufficient evidence to recommend acupuncture in the treatment of most rheumatic conditions, with the exceptions of osteoarthritis, low back pain, and lateral elbow pain.
For example, a prospective survey of 34,000 acupuncture treatments found no serious adverse events and 43 minor ones, a rate of 1.3 per 1000 interventions.
A 2005 Cochrane review found no clear evidence of benefit for acupuncture on acute stroke.
Acupuncture seems to be safe in people getting anticoagulants, assuming needles are used at the correct location and depth.
In 1971, a ''New York Times'' reporter published an article on his acupuncture experiences in China, which led to more investigation of and support for acupuncture.
The ancient Chinese medical text, Huangdi Neijing, indicates that sharp stones were believed at-the-time to cure illnesses at or near the body's surface, perhaps because of the short depth a stone could penetrate.
Two separate 2016 Cochrane reviews found that acupuncture could be useful in the prophylaxis of tension-type headaches and episodic migraines.
If the ''de-qi'' sensation does not immediately occur upon needle insertion, various manual manipulation techniques can be applied to promote it (such as "plucking", "shaking" or "trembling").
Profession ethical codes set by accrediting organizations such as the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine require practitioners to make "timely referrals to other health care professionals as may be appropriate."
Acupuncture may have been practiced during the Neolithic era, near the end of the stone age, using sharpened stones called Bian shi.
Acupuncture is not better than mainstream treatment in the long term.
The same review found "no reliable evidence for differences in risks of postoperative nausea or vomiting after P6 acupoint stimulation compared to antiemetic drugs."
The same review found evidence that suggested that acupuncture might be considered a helpful non-pharmacological approach for frequent episodic or chronic tension-type headache.
By time ''The Great Compendium of Acupuncture and Moxibustion'' was published during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644&nbsp;AD), most of the acupuncture practices used in the modern era had been established.
However, historians Gwei-djen and Needham said it was unlikely a needle could be made out of the materials available in China during this time period.
An article in ''Rheumatology'' said that the absence of any mention of acupuncture in documents found in the tomb of Ma-Wang-Dui from 198&nbsp;BC suggest that acupuncture was not practiced by that time.
Around this time the surgeon-general of the Dutch East India Company met Japanese and Chinese acupuncture practitioners and later encouraged Europeans to further investigate it.
Many serious adverse events were reported from developed countries.
Although acupuncture is generally considered a safe procedure, a 2013 review stated that the reports of infection transmission increased significantly in the prior decade, including those of mycobacterium.
Once ''de-qi'' is achieved, further techniques might be utilized which aim to "influence" the ''de-qi''; for example, by certain manipulation the ''de-qi'' sensation allegedly can be conducted from the needling site towards more distant sites of the body.
The under-performance of acupuncture in such trials may indicate that therapeutic effects are due entirely to non-specific effects, or that the sham treatments are not inert, or that systematic protocols yield less than optimal treatment.
A 2016 Cochrane review found moderate quality evidence that real acupuncture was more effective than sham acupuncture or inactive for short-term relief of neck pain measured either upon completion of treatment or at short-term follow-up.
In the US, acupuncture is increasingly () used at academic medical centers, and is usually offered through CAM centers or anesthesia and pain management services.
This decision was based in part on socio-political reasons.
Reports included 38 cases of infections and 42 cases of organ trauma.
psychosis), and skin infections or skin trauma (e.g.
A 2014 systematic review found that while the evidence suggested acupuncture could be an effective treatment for postoperative gastroparesis, a firm conclusion could not be reached because the trials examined were of low quality.
It was later revealed that the patient had been given a cocktail of anesthetics.
The Ötzi the Iceman's tattoo marks suggest to some experts that an acupuncture-like treatment was previously used in Europe 5 millennia ago.
A 2008 Cochrane review found that evidence was insufficient to draw any conclusion about the effect of acupuncture on dysphagia after acute stroke.
It is considered unlikely that acupuncture was practiced before 2000&nbsp;BC.
A 2015 meta-analysis suggests that acupuncture might be a good option for people with allergic rhinitis (AR), and a number of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) support the use of acupuncture for AR and itch.
bruising or bleeding).
Infection has also resulted from skin contact with unsterilized equipment or with dirty towels in an unhygienic clinical setting.
A 2012 review found a number of adverse events were reported after acupuncture in the UK's National Health Service (NHS) but most (95%) were not severe, though miscategorization and under-reporting may alter the total figures.
It includes a licensing exam and registration, as well as degree courses approved by the board.
The prevalence of mild adverse events ranged from 10.1% to 13.5%, an estimated 168 incidences among 1,422 patients.
Using the principles of evidence-based medicine to research acupuncture is controversial, and has produced different results.
The same meta-analysis found there was no difference between sham and non-sham acupuncture.
The French doctor Louis Berlioz (the father of the composer Hector Berlioz) is usually credited with being the first to experiment with the procedure in Europe in 1810, before publishing his findings in 1816.
A 2013 meta-analysis found that acupuncture was better than no treatment for reducing lower back pain, but not better than sham acupuncture, and concluded that the effect of acupuncture "is likely to be produced by the nonspecific effects of manipulation".
As the evidence for most types of alternative medicine such as acupuncture is far from strong, the use of alternative medicine in regular healthcare can present an ethical question.
A 2014 systematic review suggests that the nocebo effect of acupuncture is clinically relevant and that the rate of adverse events may be a gauge of the nocebo effect.
Some research suggests acupuncture can alleviate pain but the majority of research suggests that acupuncture's effects are mainly due to placebo.
Reusable needles when used should be sterilized between applications.
A 2014 systematic review found that acupuncture may be effective as an adjunctive treatment to palliative care for cancer patients.
Numerous additional documents were published over the centuries introducing new acupoints.
Between 1980 and 2009, the Chinese-language literature reported 479 adverse events.
From January 2009 to December 2011, 468 safety incidents were recognized within the NHS organizations.
Due to acupuncture's invasive nature, one of the major challenges in efficacy research is in the design of an appropriate placebo control group.
Infection is caused by a lack of sterilization, but at that time it was believed to be caused by use of the wrong needle, or needling in the wrong place, or at the wrong time.
A 2009 Cochrane review found that stimulation of the P6 acupoint on the wrist was as effective (or ineffective) as antiemetic drugs and was associated with minimal side effects.
A 2015 systematic review found limited evidence that the method of ''Xingnao Kaiqiao'' needling had a better effect than ''Xingnao Kaiqiao'' alone or combined with other treatments in reducing disability rate for ischemic stroke, and that the long-term effect was better than traditional acupuncture or combination treatment.
Other belief systems were based on the idea that the human body operated on a rhythm and acupuncture had to be applied at the right point in the rhythm to be effective.
The most frequent mild adverse event was needling or unspecified pain, followed by bleeding.
A 2012 review found that acupuncture seems to be cost-effective for some pain conditions.
Further, electroacupuncture should be avoided at the spot of implanted electrical devices (such as pacemakers).
Publication bias is cited as a concern in the reviews of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of acupuncture.
In some states acupuncture is regulated by a board of medical examiners, while in others by the board of licensing, health or education.
The number of adverse effects reported from the UK appears particularly unusual, which may indicate less under-reporting in the UK than other countries.
The same review concluded that acupuncture can be considered inherently safe when practiced by properly trained practitioners, but the review also stated there is a need to find effective strategies to minimize the health risks.
A 2009 overview of Cochrane reviews found acupuncture is not effective for a wide range of conditions, and suggested that it may be effective for only chemotherapy-induced nausea/vomiting, postoperative nausea/vomiting, and idiopathic headache.
TCM practitioners disagree among themselves about how to diagnose patients and which treatments should go with which diagnoses.
A 2014 overview of systematic reviews found insufficient evidence to suggest that acupuncture is effective for surgical or post-operative pain.
A comparison of the average number of patients treated per hour found significant differences between China (10) and the United States (1.2).
Between 1999 and 2010, the Republic of Korean-literature contained reports of 1104 adverse events.
For other conditions, insurers in Germany were not convinced that acupuncture had adequate benefits over usual care or sham treatments.
A 2012 systematic review and meta-analysis found that acupuncture did not significantly improve the outcomes of in vitro fertilization.
Evidence from the body suggests Otzi suffered from these conditions.
When properly delivered, it has a low rate of mostly minor adverse effects.
Acupuncture can potentially improve a number of common pediatric issues, including gastrointestinal issues, reflux, colic, asthma, allergies, ADHD, and headaches, however, its safety has been debated.
Acupuncture began to spread to Europe in the second half of the 17th century.
A 2012 systematic review found some supporting evidence that acupuncture was more effective than no treatment for chronic non-specific low back pain; the evidence was conflicting comparing the effectiveness over other treatment approaches.
Needles are usually disposed of after each use to prevent contamination.
The Science of the Yin-Yang Cycles (''Yün Chhi Hsüeh'') was a set of beliefs that curing diseases relied on the alignment of both heavenly (thien) and earthly (ti) forces that were attuned to cycles like that of the sun and moon.
Once methods for producing steel were discovered, it would replace all other materials, since it could be used to create a very fine, but sturdy needles.
''De qi'' is more important in Chinese acupuncture, while Western and Japanese patients may not consider it a necessary part of the treatment.
Techniques vary depending on the country.
Some insurers in Germany chose to stop reimbursement of acupuncture because of the trials.
In 1999, the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine was created within the NIH.
It is most heavily practiced in China and is one of the most common alternative medicine practices in Europe.
A 2013 systematic review and network meta-analysis found that the evidence suggests that acupuncture may be considered one of the more effective physical treatments for alleviating pain due to knee osteoarthritis in the short-term compared to other relevant physical treatments, though much of the evidence in the topic is of poor quality and there is uncertainty about the efficacy of many of the treatments.
It is believed that this text was documenting what was established practice at that time.
It is not certain when specific acupuncture points were introduced, but the autobiography of Pien Chhio from around 400–500&nbsp;BC references inserting needles at designated areas.
For seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR), the evidence failed to demonstrate specific effects for acupuncture.
The most common mechanism of stimulation of acupuncture points employs penetration of the skin by thin metal needles, which are manipulated manually or the needle may be further stimulated by electrical stimulation (electroacupuncture).
Infections, mainly hepatitis, after acupuncture are reported often in English-language research, though are rarely reported in Chinese-language research, making it plausible that acupuncture-associated infections have been underreported in China.
It is commonly used for pain relief, though it is also used to treat a wide range of conditions.
In China acupuncture was increasingly associated with lower-class, illiterate practitioners.
Chinese authors use more Chinese studies, which have been demonstrated to be uniformly positive.
A 2012 review found evidence of benefit for acupuncture combined with exercise in treating shoulder pain after stroke.
The ''Zhen Jiu Jia Yi Jing'', which was published in the mid-3rd century, became the oldest acupuncture book that is still in existence in the modern era.
A 2014 overview of systematic reviews and meta-analyses found that the evidence does not demonstrate acupuncture helps reduce the rates of death or disability after a stroke or improve other aspects of stroke recovery, such as poststroke motor dysfunction, but the evidence suggests it may help with poststroke neurological impairment and dysfunction such as dysphagia, which would need to be confirmed with future rigorous studies.
According to historians Lu Gwei-djen and Joseph Needham, there is substantial evidence that acupuncture may have begun around 600&nbsp;BC.
The same review also found that acupuncture is not more effective than conventional therapy and other alternative medicine treatments.
Traditional acupuncture involves the belief that a "life force" (''qi'') circulates within the body in lines called meridians.
Tin, copper, gold and silver are also possibilities, though they are considered less likely, or to have been used in fewer cases.
For efficacy studies to determine whether acupuncture has specific effects, "sham" forms of acupuncture where the patient, practitioner, and analyst are blinded seem the most acceptable approach.
It is generally only used in combination with other forms of treatment.
A 2014 systematic review reached inconclusive results with regard to the effectiveness of acupuncture for treating cancer-related fatigue.
In Japan, acupuncturists are licensed by the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare after passing an examination and graduating from a technical school or university.
Although acupuncture declined in China during this time period, it was also growing in popularity in other countries.
Some hieroglyphs and pictographs from that era suggests acupuncture and moxibustion were practiced.
In 2008 a study determined that the use of acupuncture-needle treatment on children was "questionable" due to the possibility of adverse side-effects and the pain manifestation differences in children versus adults.
Approximately half of users surveyed indicated a likelihood to seek such remedies in the future, while 37% did not.
Meanwhile, acupuncture grew in popularity in the US.
A 2010 systematic review found that the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture could not be concluded.
A 2014 ''Nature Reviews Cancer'' review article found that since the key mouse studies that suggested acupuncture relieves pain via the local release of adenosine, which then triggered close-by A1 receptors "caused more tissue damage and inflammation relative to the size of the animal in mice than in humans, such studies unnecessarily muddled a finding that local inflammation can result in the local release of adenosine with analgesic effect."
Nine needles were recommended in the ''Chen Chiu Ta Chheng'' from 1601, which may have been because of an ancient Chinese belief that nine was a magic number.
migrating broken needles or needling too deeply), four brain injuries, four peripheral nerve injuries, five heart injuries, seven other organ and tissue injuries, bilateral hand edema, epithelioid granuloma, pseudolymphoma, argyria, pustules, pancytopenia, and scarring due to hot-needle technique.
Regulation in the US began in the 1970s in California, which was eventually followed by every state but Wyoming and Idaho.
Over time, the focus shifted from blood to the concept of puncturing specific points on the body, and eventually to balancing Yin and Yang energies as well.
A 1998 review of studies on acupuncture found that trials originating in China, Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan were uniformly favourable to acupuncture, as were ten out of eleven studies conducted in Russia.
Within Korea there is a legend that acupuncture was developed by emperor Dangun, though it is more likely to have been brought into Korea from a Chinese colonial prefecture in 514&nbsp;AD.
Acupuncture practitioners should know, and be prepared to be responsible for, any substantial harm from treatments.
Edzard Ernst later stated that "I fear that, once we manage to eliminate this bias that operators are not blind … we might find that the effects of acupuncture exclusively are a placebo response."
To reduce the risk of serious adverse events after acupuncture, acupuncturists should be trained sufficiently.
China and Korea sent "medical missionaries" that spread traditional Chinese medicine to Japan, starting around 219&nbsp;AD.
A 2013 systematic review concluded that acupuncture might be beneficial in prevention and treatment of PONV.
A 2013 systematic review found supportive evidence that real acupuncture may be more effective than sham acupuncture with respect to relieving lower back pain, but there were methodological limitations with the studies.
By the 19th century, acupuncture had become commonplace in many areas of the world.
