The treatment and prognosis of AML differ from those of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in part because the cellular differentiation is not the same; AML involves higher percentages of dedifferentiated and undifferentiated cells, including more blasts (myeloblasts, monoblasts, and megakaryoblasts).
If no further postremission or consolidation therapy is given, almost all people with AML will eventually relapse.
In 1877, Paul Ehrlich developed a technique of staining blood films which allowed him to describe in detail normal and abnormal white blood cells.
A large number of molecular alterations are under study for their prognostic impact in AML.
A lack of normal white blood cell production makes people more susceptible to infections; while the leukemic cells themselves are derived from white blood cell precursors, they have no infection-fighting capacity.
Several risk factors and chromosomal abnormalities have been identified, but the specific cause is not clear.
These leukemias may be characterized by specific chromosomal abnormalities, and often carry a worse prognosis.
In adults, the highest rates are seen in North America, Europe, and Oceania, while adult AML is rarer in Asia and Latin America.
For people who are not eligible for a stem cell transplant, immunotherapy with a combination of histamine dihydrochloride (Ceplene) and interleukin 2 (Proleukin) after the completion of consolidation has been shown to reduce the absolute relapse risk by 14%, translating to a 50% increase in the likelihood of maintained remission.
The diagnosis and classification of AML can be challenging, and should be performed by a qualified hematopathologist or hematologist.
As an acute leukemia, AML progresses rapidly and is typically fatal within weeks or months if left untreated.
Velpeau noted the blood of this person had a consistency "like gruel", and speculated the appearance of the blood was due to white corpuscles.
The technique of bone marrow examination to diagnose leukemia was first described in 1879 by Mosler.
The term "leukemia" was coined by Rudolf Virchow, the renowned German pathologist, in 1856.
Because acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has the highest curability and requires a unique form of treatment, it is important to quickly establish or exclude the diagnosis of this subtype of leukemia.
Lymph node swelling is rare in AML, in contrast to acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
AML is slightly more common in men, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.3:1.
The combination of a myeloperoxidase or Sudan black stain and a nonspecific esterase stain will provide the desired information in most cases.
The single most important prognostic factor in AML is cytogenetics, or the chromosomal structure of the leukemic cell.
According to the widely used WHO criteria, the diagnosis of AML is established by demonstrating involvement of more than 20% of the blood and/or bone marrow by leukemic myeloblasts, except in the three best prognosis forms of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities (t(8;21), inv(16), and t(15;17)) in which the presence of the genetic abnormality is diagnostic irrespective of blast percent.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 5 and 10 - &#91;t(5;10)(q33;q21);&#93;
Like ATRA, arsenic trioxide does not work with other subtypes of AML.
Occasionally, a person may show no symptoms, and the leukemia may be discovered incidentally during a routine blood test.
Several FLT3 inhibitors have undergone clinical trials, with mixed results.
AML is treated initially with chemotherapy aimed at inducing a remission; people may go on to receive additional chemotherapy or a hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
** AML with unbalanced chromosomal aberrations in chromosome 12 - &#91;del(12p)/t(12p);&#93;
Fluorescent ''in situ'' hybridization performed on blood or bone marrow is often used for this purpose, as it readily identifies the chromosomal translocation &#91;t(15;17)(q22;q12);&#93; that characterizes APL.
The first published description of a case of leukemia in medical literature dates to 1827, when French physician Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau described a 63-year-old florist who developed an illness characterized by fever, weakness, urinary stones, and substantial enlargement of the liver and spleen.
The malignant cell in AML is the myeloblast.
This category includes people who have had a prior documented myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or myeloproliferative disease (MPD) that then has transformed into AML, or who have cytogenetic abnormalities characteristic for this type of AML (with previous history of MDS or MPD that has gone unnoticed in the past, but the cytogenetics is still suggestive of MDS/MPD history).
Survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had an increased rate of AML, as did radiologists exposed to high levels of X-rays prior to the adoption of modern radiation safety practices.
Cure rates in clinical trials have ranged from 20–45%; although clinical trials often include only younger people and those able to tolerate aggressive therapies.
AML accounts for 34% of all leukemia cases in the UK, and around 2,900 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011.
'''Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome'''
The first clue to a diagnosis of AML is typically an abnormal result on a complete blood count.
The symptoms of AML are, in turn, often due to the low numbers of these normal blood elements.
The overall cure rate for all people with AML (including the elderly and those unable to tolerate aggressive therapy) is likely lower.
The prognostic importance of other mutated genes (e.g., ''DNMT3A'', ''IDH1'', ''IDH2'') is less clear.
This category of AML occurs most often in elderly people and often has a worse prognosis.
There is some geographic variation in the incidence of AML.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is usually considered if induction chemotherapy fails or after a person relapses, although transplantation is also sometimes used as front-line therapy for people with high-risk disease.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 5 and 7 - &#91;t(5;7)(q33;q11.2);&#93;
High amounts of ionizing radiation exposure can increase the risk of AML.
* AML with maturation
Older people who are not able to withstand intensive chemotherapy have an average survival of 5–10 months.
Efforts to use tyrosine kinase inhibitors in AML continue.
those with high-risk cytogenetics, underlying MDS, or therapy-related AML), allogeneic stem cell transplantation is usually recommended if the person is able to tolerate a transplant and has a suitable donor.
Rarely, Sweet's syndrome, a paraneoplastic inflammation of the skin, can occur with AML.
** AML with deletions of chromosome 13 - &#91;del(13q);&#93;
This leads to neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
The clinical signs and symptoms of AML result from the growth of leukemic clone cells, which tends to displace or interfere with the development of normal blood cells in the bone marrow.
Wilhelm Ebstein introduced the term "acute leukemia" in 1889 to differentiate rapidly progressive and fatal leukemias from the more indolent chronic leukemias.
DNA extracted from leukemic cells were compared to unaffected skin.
Even after complete remission is achieved, leukemic cells likely remain in numbers too small to be detected with current diagnostic techniques.
Other chemotherapy agents, specifically epipodophyllotoxins and anthracyclines, have also been associated with treatment-related leukemias, which are often associated with specific chromosomal abnormalities in the leukemic cells.
Rarely, the first sign of leukemia may be the development of a solid leukemic mass or tumor outside of the bone marrow, called a chloroma.
Finally, in 1900, the myeloblast, which is the malignant cell in AML, was characterized by Otto Naegeli, who divided the leukemias into myeloid and lymphocytic.
Acute leukemias of ambiguous lineage (also known as mixed phenotype or biphenotypic acute leukemia) occur when the leukemic cells can not be classified as either myeloid or lymphoid cells, or where both types of cells are present.
Normal, +8, +21, +22, del(7q), del(9q), Abnormal 11q23, all other structural or numerical changes
Because of the toxic effects of therapy, including myelosuppression and an increased risk of infection, induction chemotherapy may not be offered to the very elderly, and the options may include less intense chemotherapy or palliative care.
Marrow or blood is examined under light microscopy, as well as flow cytometry, to diagnose the presence of leukemia, to differentiate AML from other types of leukemia (e.g.
Specific cytogenetic abnormalities can be found in many people with AML; the types of chromosomal abnormalities often have prognostic significance.
However, only ''FLT3-ITD'', ''NPM1'', ''CEBPA'' and ''c-KIT'' are currently included in validated international risk stratification schema.
It is expected that additional markers (e.g., ''RUNX1'', ''ASXL1'', and ''TP53'') that have consistently been associated with an inferior outcome will soon be included in these recommendations.
Since treatment options for relapsed AML are so limited, palliative care or enrollment in a clinical trial may be offered.
* AML with complex karyotype
* AML with minimal differentiation
AML has several subtypes; treatment and prognosis vary among subtypes.
* Acute erythroid leukemia
The two most commonly used classification schemata for AML are the older French-American-British (FAB) system and the newer World Health Organization (WHO) system.
In 2008, AML became the first cancer genome to be fully sequenced.
In rare cases, people with AML can develop a chloroma, or solid tumor of leukemic cells outside the bone marrow, which can cause various symptoms depending on its location.
The first publication to address cytogenetics and prognosis was the MRC trial of 1998:
This category includes so-called "blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm"
Such a mutation alone does not cause leukemia; however, when such a "differentiation arrest" is combined with other mutations which disrupt genes controlling proliferation, the result is the uncontrolled growth of an immature clone of cells, leading to the clinical entity of AML.
Recent research into the genetics of AML has resulted in the availability of tests that can predict which drug or drugs may work best for a particular person, as well as how long that person is likely to survive.
In 2000, the monoclonal antibody-linked cytotoxic agent gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg) was approved in the United States for people aged more than 60 years with relapsed AML who are not candidates for high-dose chemotherapy.
'''AML not otherwise categorized'''
This drug was voluntarily withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer, Pfizer in 2010.
In normal hematopoiesis, the myeloblast is an immature precursor of myeloid white blood cells; a normal myeloblast will gradually mature into a mature white blood cell.
A sample of marrow or blood is typically also tested for chromosomal abnormalities by routine cytogenetics or fluorescent ''in situ'' hybridization.
A number of other cytogenetic abnormalities are known to associate with a poor prognosis and a high risk of relapse after treatment.
All FAB subtypes except M3 are usually given induction chemotherapy with cytarabine (ara-C) and an anthracycline (most often daunorubicin).
In contrast, childhood AML is less common in North America and India than in other parts of Asia.
A drop in red blood cell count (anemia) can cause fatigue, paleness, and shortness of breath.
While some studies have suggested a link between occupational exposure to benzene and increased risk of AML, others have suggested the attributable risk, if any, is slight.
Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is given during the developmentally sensitive first trimester.
The early signs of AML are often vague and nonspecific, and may be similar to those of influenza or other common illnesses.
* Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
** AML with unbalanced chromosomal aberrations in chromosome 17 - &#91;i(17q)/t(17p);&#93;
** AML with deletions of chromosome 11 - &#91;del(11q);&#93;
The myeloperoxidase or Sudan black reactions are most useful in establishing the identity of AML and distinguishing it from ALL.
There is also a need to molecularly detect the presence of PML/RARA fusion protein, which is an oncogenic product of that translocation.
acute lymphoblastic leukemia - ALL), and to classify the subtype of disease.
* Acute basophilic leukemia
APL is eminently curable, with well-documented treatment protocols.
Researchers are investigating the clinical significance of ''c-KIT'' mutations in AML.
This category includes myeloid sarcoma.
* Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
"Preleukemic" blood disorders, such as myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or myeloproliferative disease (MPS), can evolve into AML; the exact risk depends on the type of MDS/MPS.
Although AML is a relatively rare disease, accounting for roughly 1.2% of cancer deaths in the United States, its incidence is expected to increase as the population ages.
Certain cytogenetic abnormalities are associated with very good outcomes (for example, the (15;17) translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia).
A lack of platelets can lead to easy bruising or bleeding with minor trauma.
** AML with aberrations in chromosome X - &#91;idic(X)(q13);&#93;
This category includes so-called "transient abnormal myelopoiesis" and "Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome"
* AML without maturation
There are approximately 10,500 new cases each year in the United States, and the incidence rate has remained stable from 1995 through 2005.
''FLT3'' internal tandem duplications (ITDs) have been shown to confer a poorer prognosis in AML with normal cytogenetics.
Several congenital conditions may increase the risk of leukemia; the most common is probably Down syndrome, which is associated with a 10- to 18-fold increase in the risk of AML.
* Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
While an excess of abnormal white blood cells (leukocytosis) is a common finding, and leukemic blasts are sometimes seen, AML can also present with isolated decreases in platelets, red blood cells, or even with a low white blood cell count (leukopenia).
The goal of the induction phase is to reach a complete remission.
First-line treatment of AML consists primarily of chemotherapy, and is divided into two phases: induction and postremission (or consolidation) therapy.
Some people with AML may experience swelling of the gums because of infiltration of leukemic cells into the gum tissue.
* Unbalanced abnormalities
** AML with translocations between chromosome 5 and 12 - &#91;t(5;12)(q33;p12);&#93;
t(8;21), t(15;17), inv(16)
As Virchow was uncertain of the etiology of the white blood cell excess, he used the purely descriptive term "leukemia" (Greek: "white blood") to refer to the condition.
Bennett; he used the term "leucocythemia" to describe this pathological condition.
As a pioneer in the use of the light microscope in pathology, Virchow was the first to describe the abnormal excess of white blood cells in people with the clinical syndrome described by Velpeau and Bennett.
Later, the Southwest Oncology Group and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group and, later still, Cancer and Leukemia Group B published other, mostly overlapping lists of cytogenetics prognostication in leukemia.
Modern classification schemes for AML recognize the characteristics and behavior of the leukemic cell (and the leukemia) may depend on the stage at which differentiation was halted.
Most signs and symptoms of AML are caused by the replacement of normal blood cells with leukemic cells.
While a presumptive diagnosis of AML can be made by examination of the peripheral blood smear when there are circulating leukemic blasts, a definitive diagnosis usually requires an adequate bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.
Further advances in the understanding of acute myeloid leukemia occurred rapidly with the development of new technology.
This category includes people who have had prior chemotherapy and/or radiation and subsequently develop AML or MDS.
Cure rates for promyelocytic leukemia can be as high as 98%.
The chromosomal translocations encode abnormal fusion proteins, usually transcription factors whose altered properties may cause the "differentiation arrest".
AML is the most common acute leukemia affecting adults, and its incidence increases with age.
Therefore, more therapy is necessary to eliminate nondetectable disease and prevent relapse&nbsp;— that is, to achieve a cure.
Occupational chemical exposure to benzene and other aromatic organic solvents is controversial as a cause of AML.
About half of people with AML have "normal" cytogenetics; they fall into an intermediate risk group.
'''Myeloid sarcoma'''
** AML with translocations between chromosome 3 and 21 - &#91;t(3;21)(q26.2;q22.1);&#93;, unrelated to previous chemotherapy or ionizing radiation
the general physical condition and activity level of the person) plays a major role in prognosis as well.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 11 and 16 - &#91;t(11;16)(q23;q13.3);&#93;, unrelated to previous chemotherapy or ionizing radiation
In AML, though, a single myeloblast accumulates genetic changes which "freeze" the cell in its immature state and prevent differentiation.
The French–American–British (FAB) classification is a bit more stringent, requiring a blast percentage of at least 30% in bone marrow (BM) or peripheral blood (PB) for the diagnosis of AML.
** AML with deletions of chromosome 9 - &#91;del(9q);&#93;
'''Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms'''
** AML with deletions of chromosome 7 - &#91;del(7q);&#93;
AML must be carefully differentiated from "preleukemic" conditions such as myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative syndromes, which are treated differently.
The best postremission therapy for intermediate-risk AML (normal cytogenetics or cytogenetic changes not falling into good-risk or high-risk groups) is less clear and depends on the specific situation, including the age and overall health of the person, the person's values, and whether a suitable stem cell donor is available.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 3 and 5 - &#91;t(3;5)(q25;q34);&#93;
For good-prognosis leukemias (i.e.
Complete remission is obtained in about 50%–75% of newly diagnosed adults, although this may vary based on the prognostic factors described above.
In 1845, a series of people who died with enlarged spleens and changes in the "colors and consistencies of their blood" was reported by the Edinburgh-based pathologist J.H.
The symptoms of AML are caused by replacement of normal bone marrow with leukemic cells, which causes a drop in red blood cells, platelets, and normal white blood cells.
The risk is highest about three to five years after chemotherapy.
AML accounts for 1.2% of all cancer deaths in the United States.
The term "myeloid" was coined by Franz Ernst Christian Neumann in 1869, as he was the first to recognize white blood cells were made in the bone marrow (Greek: µυєλός, ''myelos'' = (bone) marrow) as opposed to the spleen.
How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia.
Exposure to anticancer chemotherapy, in particular alkylating agents, can increase the risk of subsequently developing AML.
For relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), arsenic trioxide is approved by the US FDA.
-5, -7, del(5q), Abnormal 3q, Complex cytogenetics
These are prevalent, and potentially clinically relevant because of the availability of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib and sunitinib that can block the activity of ''c-KIT'' pharmacologically.
Genetic studies may also be performed to look for specific mutations in genes such as ''FLT3'', nucleophosmin, and ''KIT'', which may influence the outcome of the disease.
A number of risk factors for developing AML have been identified, including: other blood disorders, chemical exposures, ionizing radiation, and genetics.
Acute myeloid leukemia is a curable disease; the chance of cure for a specific person depends on a number of prognostic factors.
Includes subtypes of AML that do not fall into the above categories
** AML with translocations between chromosome 2 and 11 - &#91;t(2;11)(p21;q23);&#93;, unrelated to previous chemotherapy or ionizing radiation
In some studies, age >60 years and elevated lactate dehydrogenase level were also associated with poorer outcomes.
An important pathophysiological mechanism of leukemogenesis in AML is the epigenetic induction of dedifferentiation by genetic mutations that alter the function of epigenetic enzymes, such as the DNA demethylase TET2 and the metabolic enzymes IDH1 and IDH2, which lead to the generation of a novel oncometabolite, ''D''-2-hydroxyglutarate, which inhibits the activity of epigenetic enzymes such as TET2.
The rate of ''therapy-related AML'' (that is, AML caused by previous chemotherapy) is rising; therapy-related disease currently accounts for about 10–20% of all cases of AML.
For people with relapsed AML, the only proven potentially curative therapy is a hematopoietic stem cell transplant, if one has not already been performed.
Acute myeloid leukemia is a relatively rare cancer.
Two other mutations - ''NPM1'' and biallelic ''CEBPA'' are associated with improved outcomes, especially in people with normal cytogenetics and are used in current risk stratification algorithms.
As with most forms of cancer, performance status (i.e.
The leukemic cells contained acquired mutations in several genes that had not previously been associated with the disease.
The incidence of AML increases with age; the median age at diagnosis is 63 years.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 5 and 17 - &#91;t(5;17)(q33;p13);&#93;
Much of the diversity and heterogeneity of AML is because leukemic transformation can occur at a number of different steps along the differentiation pathway.
** AML with translocations between chromosome 1 and 3 - &#91;t(1;3)(p36.3;q21.1);&#93;
* Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia
These symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, easy bruising and bleeding, and increased risk of infection.
The nonspecific esterase stain is used to identify a monocytic component in AMLs and to distinguish a poorly differentiated monoblastic leukemia from ALL.
Benzene and many of its derivatives are known to be carcinogenic ''in vitro''.
These are expected to increase rapidly in the near future.
Both of these entities are associated with a high rate of unfavorable cytogenetic abnormalities.
AML is cured in 35–40% of people less than 60 years old and 5–15% more than 60 years old.
The specific type of postremission therapy is individualized based on a person's prognostic factors (see above) and general health.
Up to 70% of people with AML will achieve a remission with this protocol.
Other alternative induction regimens, including high-dose cytarabine alone, FLAG-like regimens or investigational agents, may also be used.
Enlargement of the spleen may occur in AML, but it is typically mild and asymptomatic.
The goal of induction therapy is to achieve a complete remission by reducing the number of leukemic cells to an undetectable level; the goal of consolidation therapy is to eliminate any residual undetectable disease and achieve a cure.
* Balanced abnormalities
Complete remission does not mean the disease has been cured; rather, it signifies no disease can be detected with available diagnostic methods.
Care must be taken to prevent disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), complicating the treatment of APL when the promyelocytes release the contents of their granules into the peripheral circulation.
In general, all remissions will fail without additional consolidation therapy.
These differences may be due to population genetics, environmental factors, or a combination of the two.
For people at high risk of relapse (e.g.
In straightforward cases, the presence of certain morphologic features (such as Auer rods) or specific flow cytometry results can distinguish AML from other leukemias; however, in the absence of such features, diagnosis may be more difficult.
This induction chemotherapy regimen is known as "7+3" (or "3+7"), because the cytarabine is given as a continuous IV infusion for seven consecutive days while the anthracycline is given for three consecutive days as an IV push.
People treated with ionizing radiation after treatment for prostate cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, lung cancer, and breast cancer have the highest chance of acquiring AML, but this increased risk returns to the background risk observed in the general population after 12 years.
The hypothesis is that such epigenetic mutations lead to the silencing of tumor suppressor genes and/or the activation of proto-oncogenes.
Some generalized symptoms include fever, fatigue, weight loss or loss of appetite, shortness of breath, anemia, easy bruising or bleeding, petechiae (flat, pin-head sized spots under the skin caused by bleeding), bone and joint pain, and persistent or frequent infections.
'''Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm'''
The M3 subtype of AML, also known as acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), is almost universally treated with the drug all-''trans''-retinoic acid (ATRA) in addition to induction chemotherapy, usually an anthracycline.
inv(16), t(8;21), and t(15;17)), people will typically undergo an additional three to five courses of intensive chemotherapy, known as consolidation chemotherapy.
The length of remission depends on the prognostic features of the original leukemia.
