The fair is organized on a 3.5-hectare area at TÜYAP Exhibition Center every year in October.
Merkez Park (Central Park) is a 33-hectare urban park that is located on both banks of Seyhan river, just north of Sabancı Mosque.
in Adana, Mersin, Tarsus, Antakya, İskenderun, Silifke, Anamur and Aleppo.
On 20 October 1921, the Treaty of Ankara was signed between France and the Turkish Grand National Assembly.
Pathway then connects to Adnan Menderes Boulevard which follows the southern shores of Seyhan Reservoir, and the wide sidewalks of the boulevard extend the pathway to the west end of the reservoir.
The highest recorded temperature was on 8 July 1978 with .
Regülatör bridge, at the southern section of the city, is a road bridge as well as a regulator for the river water.
Orange Blossom Carnival is held every April, inspired by the scent coming from the city's orange tree-lined streets.
Warm weather make the city a haven for sports like rowing, sailing, swimming and water polo.
Designation of coastal areas of Ceyhan and Yumurtalık districts as Energy-specific Industrial Areas has made Adana an attraction for hotel building.
There are a total of 254 neighborhoods in the city.
In 2008, with 3 faculties, it is placed among the top 500 universities of the world according to research conducted by Blackwell Publishing, Quacquarelli Symonds and The Times.
Amphitheaters in Adana host performances from April to November.
The streets around Ziyapaşa and the streets of northern Adana, Özal, Demirel and Evren boulevards also have high-end shops.
Before 2003, the community numbered up to 22,000, but declined when many troops were stationed in Iraq.
Büyük Saat (''The Great Clock Tower''), built by the local governor of Adana in 1882, is the tallest clock tower in Turkey rising  high.
One of the famous sweets of Turkey called "Sweet Sausage" originated from Adana.
According to numerous sources, the name Adana is derived from the Hittite URU''Adaniya'' of Kizzuwatna, while others assert that it is related to the legendary character Danaus, or to the Danaoi, a mythological Greek tribe who came from Egypt and established themselves in the Greek city Argos.
There were 94 events including concerts, poetry, exhibitions, talks and conferences.
Adana ASKİ was founded in Ceyhan in 2000, under the name 'Ceyhan Belediyespor', and renamed and moved to Adana in 2014.
It's campus has many cultural, social and athletic facilities for its 40,000 students.
The population of the four districts of Adana since 2008 are:
The Ramadanids family, one of the Oghuz families brought by the Mamluks, ruled Adana until the Ottomans captured the city.
Old town, located south of D-400, is the market place where traditional and modern shops serve the residents.
No longer a residential bishopric, Adana is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.
The university is  away from the city center at approximately midway to Tarsus.
Baritone Marcin Bronikowski, pianist Vania Batchvarova, guitarist Peter Finger, cellist Ozan Tunca and pianist Zöhrap Adıgüzelzade were some of the musicians who performed at the festival.
'''Çukurova Art Days''' is a regional festival that takes place yearly since 2007.
The carnival parade of 2015 attracted more than 90 thousand people—the highest attendance ever in an outdoor event in Adana.
The only form of payment is by cash.
Academic oriented 2000-seater Alper Akınoğlu Congress Center is expected to  open in 2012 at Çukurova University campus.
Menderes Sports Hall (2000)
Organized concerts and shows in the city's squares, parks and streets are accompanied by spontaneous street celebrations.
Galleria was the first to be built in the early 1990s but did not become popular due to  administrative issues.
Adana Kebab, called "Kebap" locally, is a kebab made from minced meat.
The park holds a statue of Atatürk and hosts public ceremonies.
The Exchange is located across the Metropolitan Theatre Hall.
It goes through the famous Cilician Gates, the rocky pass through which armies have coursed since the dawn of history, and continues to the Anatolian plain.
In 2009, the festival took place for the fifth time with an opening concert from Çukurova State Symphony Orchestra.
Pavyons led the way to Western-style pubs and night clubs by the late 1980s with the socio-economic changes in Adana.
Çukurova district has a large community of seniors from all over Turkey who prefer to enjoy their retirement in the warm climate of Çukurova region.
Adana Metro is a rail rapid transit system that extends  from the north-west to the city center and then to Yüreğir.
Recently opened Optimum Outlet is the first mall east of the river and is also the closest to the city center.
A leading commercial center in southern Turkey, the city hosts regional headquarters of many corporate and public institutions.
In the 1960s, rapid industrialization brought more men to pavyons not only from the city, but from a wide region including Istanbul and Ankara, thus Adana was named ''Pavyon Capital of Turkey''.
Some sections of this pathway have not yet been completed.
Vegetable dishes are also popular in the city.
In 1132, it was captured by the forces of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, under its king, Leo I.
Covered markets around Saydam street, Kilis and Mısır bazaars, were once a haven for shopping for quality foreign goods.
The history of Adana is intrinsically linked to the history of Tarsus; they often seem to be the same city, moving as the neighboring Seyhan River changed its position.
Churchill wanted Turkey to join the Second World War on the side of the Allies; the details of which were later discussed at the Second Cairo Conference in December 1943, which was attended by İnönü, Churchill and Roosevelt.
34 percent of Turkey's peanuts and 29 percent of Turkey's oranges are harvested in Adana.
Semi-democratic provincial governing body, Adana Province Special Administration, has minor powers, dealing mainly with construction and maintenance of primary schools, daycares and other state buildings and some level of social services.
Both teams share 5 Ocak Stadium as their venue, and the matches between them are known as the Adana Derby, an archrival atmosphere that is found in only three cities in Turkey.
The disaster killed 145 and left 1500 people wounded and many thousand homeless in the city.
The bigger clubs such as Life Legend, Uptown, Casara and Lava host world star singers at their elegant locations, mostly along the river and the lake.
It performs regularly from October to May.
The Armenian name of the city is  ''Atana'' or  ''Adana''.
Çukobirlik, Turkey's largest producer co-operative, has 36,064 producer members in ten provinces and services from planting to marketing of cotton, peanut, soybean, sunflower and canola.
There are no bike lanes, but there are two bike paths, one along Fuzuli Street, the other along M. Kemalpaşa Boulevard—the latter not used by cyclists at all.
'''Balcalı Hospital''' of the Çukurova University is a research hospital that was founded in 1987 after the Faculty of Medicine moved to the main campus.
'''Adana''' () is a major city in southern Turkey.
The marathon takes place on the first Sunday following 5 January, Adana's independence day.
Large-scale industries were built along D-400 state road and Karataş road.
On 30 January 1943, British prime minister Winston Churchill secretly met with Turkish president İsmet İnönü inside a train wagon at Yenice Station,  outside of Adana (the so-called Adana Meeting or Adana Conference).
Botaş SK and the Adana ASKİ are the major clubs in Women's Pro-Basketball—both performing in the  Turkish Women's Basketball League (TKBL).
Most of the farming and agricultural-based companies of the region have their offices in Adana.
Adanaspor also performed at the UEFA Cup for three years.
''Yeni Adana'' is the oldest newspaper and dates back to 1918.
Bi-annual Men's European Wheelchair Basketball Championship took place in Adana on 5–15 October 2009.
At that time, the name of the city was ''Uru Adaniyya'', and the inhabitants were called Danuna.
Adana Ethnography Museum was opened in 1983 after Archeological Museum moved to its new location.
Wheelchair basketball clubs, Adana Engelliler and Martı Engelliler appear in the first division of the Turkish Wheelchair Basketball League, both playing their home games at the Serinevler Sports Hall.
Tepebağ, Kayalıbağ, Kuruköprü, Ulucami, Sarıyakup and Alidede are the historical neighborhoods of Adana.
The name also appears as ''Coa'', and may be the place referred to in the Bible, where King Solomon obtained horses.
Adana has two intercity coach terminals providing service to almost all the cities and towns in Turkey.
'''Adana Chamber of Commerce (ATO)''' was founded in 1894 to guide and regulate the cotton trade and it is one of the oldest of its kind in Turkey.
The festival then expanded to include other arts.
First Football League
Several types of fruit, including the apricot, are native to this area.
Adana Half Marathon was inaugurated in 2011 on a national level with the participation of 223 athletes.
Basketball Second League
Nine Community Training Centers support adult residents to improve their skills.
Saint Paul Church (Bebekli Kilise) is a Roman Catholic church that was built in 1870.
It is located at the west bank of the Seyhan River.
The 515-year-old  Ramazanoğlu Hall and 130-year-old former high school for girls (now called the Adana Center for Arts and Culture) serve as cultural centers hosting art exhibitions and cultural events.
The first traces of settlement in the quarter of Tepebağ, can be traced to the neolithic age.
The traditional entertainment district is Sular, near Central Station, but the pubs and clubs nowadays are spread throughout the city.
Conos, a tribe of Romani people of Romania, settled in Adana during the Balkan Wars.
City Library is located in the Adana Center for Arts and Culture.
Football is the most popular sport in Adana; basketball, volleyball and handball are also played widely at professional and amateur levels.
With the construction of new bridges on the river and the extension of metro line to the district, Yüreğir became increasingly important, Adana Court of Justice re-locating to the district and a 47.5-hectare health campus planned to be built in the Kazım Karabekir neighborhood.
There are numerous local radio channels and TRT's Çukurova Radio can be listened to in the city.
Alawi Arabs are locally known as Nusayri or ''Fellah''.
The mall has a view of the river and the Merkez Park.
Yeşiloba Hippodrome is traditionally one of the four race courses of Turkey, hosting horse racing competitions from October to May.
In Hellenistic times, it was known as ''Antiochia in Cilicia'' () or ''Antiochia ad Sarum'' (; "Antiochia on the Sarus").
Around 8000 Romani people live in Adana Province, including Conos.
Current 5-star hotels of the city, Hilton, Seyhan and Sürmeli will be complemented by Sheraton and Türkmen hotels on the river bank, Ramada and Divan hotels in the city center, Anemon hotel at the west end which are all currently under construction.
Young professionals fled the city, contributing to Adana's status as the top brain drain city of Turkey.
After the victory of Alp Arslan at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, the Seljuq Turks overran much of the Byzantine Empire.
Adana is home to a community of around 2000 British and Americans serving at the Incirlik NATO Air Base.
It carries 59 plastic pieces of art.
The mosque is of black and white marble with decorative window surrounds and it is famous for the 16th century Iznik tiling used in its inner space.
Selamlık section, where the government offices were, no longer exists.
The first pavyons opened in the city by 1942 with the arrival of English workers who worked on the Adana-Ulukışla road that was funded by the British Government to persuade Turkey to form a front in World War II.
All these lines are served at the Central Railway Station; some are also served at the other railway stations of the city—Şehitlik and Şakirpaşa stations at the west, Kiremithane, İncirlik and Yakapınar stations at the east.
The Hittites' names and writings have been found in the area, evidencing this possibility.
The team has a record 22 years of straight championship title in Turkish Men's Waterpolo League, 17 years of it without losing a game and thus their given name "''Unbeatables''".
Turhan Cemal Beriker served as mayor and governor for 12 years during this period.
Although some were family entertainment places, pavyons  mostly functioned as adult entertainment clubs, similar to hostess clubs of Japan, with live music, usually two-storey, a stage and a lounge with tables lined up at the main floor and private rooms at the upper floor.
Botaş was the runner up at the Ronchetti Cup in 2000–01 season and played in the Euro Cup Semi-Final in 2011–12.
"Water Symphony" show was greeted by thousands of people with great enthusiasm.
TÜYAP Exhibition and Congress Center hosts fairs, business conferences and currently it is the main meeting point for businesses in Çukurova.
The first Turks moved to the city from Central Asia around the 11th century.
The city's handball club, Şakirpaşa HEM, promoted to the Turkish Women's Handball Super League on 21 April 2016, at the play-off finals in Ankara.
The city has large ethnic communities and education conducted in unofficial languages is only at institutions that do not get government support.
It became a Christian bishopric, a suffragan of the metropolitan see of Tarsus, but was raised to the rank of autocephalous archdiocese after 680, the year in which its bishop appeared as a simple bishop at the Third Council of Constantinople, but before its listing in a 10th-century ''Notitiae Episcopatuum'' as an archdiocese.
Based on the terms of the agreement, France recognized the end of the Cilicia War, and French troops together with the remaining Armenian volunteers withdrew from the city on 5 January 1922.
Bulghur and flour are found in all Çukurova kitchens.
This area covers  around the City Hall excluding the areas out of the Province.
An older legend relates the city's name to Adad (also known as Tesup or Ishkur), the Thunder God in the Akkadian, Sumerian, Babylonian, Assyrian and Hittite mythologies, who was believed to live in the nearby forest, and whose name was given to the region.
Arabs from Şanlıurfa Province are Sunni Muslims.
Çakmak Street is the traditional shopping street that is located in the old town.
Ayas (today Yumurtalık), and Kozan (formerly Sis) were the other major urban and administrative centers in the area, especially during the period of the Cilicians.
Adana is one of the cities of Turkey where horse racing is highly popular.
With the construction of large bridges, roads, government buildings, irrigation and plantation, Adana and Cilicia became the most developed and important trade centers of the region.
Adana is also a stronghold of Alevism, many Alevis having moved to the city from Kahramanmaraş after the incidents in 1978.
Adana-Mersin polycentric metropolitan area, with a population of 3 million, stretches over  east-west and  north-south; encompassing the cities of Mersin, Tarsus and Adana.
Muhtar can voice neighborhood issues to the district municipality and do have a seat at the Adana City Assembly, an umbrella organization for the coordination of public institutions in the city.
It is dedicated to Çukurova native writer Yaşar Kemal.
Adana cuisine is influenced mainly from Yörük, Arabic and Armenian cuisine and the city has kept up its traditions.
Water polo team of Adana Demirspor is a legend in the community, joining the Turkish Waterpolo League in 1942 after the first modern water sport venue of Turkey, Atatürk Swimming Complex, opened in Adana in 1936.
Kentkart and cash are accepted at these buses.
Government of Turkey in Ankara holds most of the power; health, education, police and many other city related services are administered by Ankara through an appointed Governor.
There are four modern shopping malls in the city.
Bicycle use for transportation is low all over Turkey, but when compared to cities like İzmir, Konya and Eskişehir, Adana is less bicycle friendly.
Rowing competitions are held all year long on Seyhan River and Seyhan Reservoir.
Beginning with the collapse of the Hittite Empire, c. 1191–1189 BC, invasions from the west caused a number of small kingdoms to take control of the plain, as follows: Quwê Assyrians, 9th century BC; Persians, 6th century BC; Alexander the Great in 333 BC; Seleucids; the pirates of Cilicia; Roman statesman Pompey the Great; and the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia (Cilician Kingdom).
There is an extensive motorway network (O50-O59) in the region, connecting Adana to as far as Erdemli in the west, Niğde in the north, Şanlıurfa in the east and Iskenderun in the south.
Radish salad with tahini is popular and it is found only in the Çukurova region.
Coach companies that serve transportation to cities west of Adana, depart from '''Central Coach Terminal''', whereas the buses that serve cities east of Adana depart from '''Yüreğir Coach Terminal'''.
The lowest recorded temperature was .
Recently, historic buildings have been restored and converted into cultural centers.
Few of these institutions teach Arabic and Kurdish in Adana.
Factories were shut down and the economy almost came to a standstill in 1915, after the deportation of Armenians who ran most of the businesses in the city.
There are around 20 tele-bars mainly in the city center and around the old dam.
In 2012, the marathon gained IAAF International Marathon status and hosted 610 athletes from 10 nations.
After World War I, the Ottoman government surrendered control of the city to French troops, and the four battalions of the French Armenian Legion were sent to occupy Adana and oversee the repatriation of Armenian refugees.
In 1268, there was a terrible earthquake which destroyed much of the city.
Current capacity of 29 hotels hosting 4200 guests will double in two years; total number of hotel beds rising to 8400.
Piso was among the Arianism-inclined bishops at the Council of Sardica (344) who withdrew and set up their own council at Philippopolis; he later returned to orthodoxy and signed the profession of Nicene faith at a synod in Antioch in 363.
After the permanent split of the Roman Empire in 395 AD, the area became a part of the Byzantine Empire, and was probably developed during the time of Julian the Apostate.
It is the administrative seat of the Adana Province and has a population of 1.7 million, making it the fifth most populous city in Turkey.
Ulu Cami, a külliye built in 1541 during Ramadanid era, is the most interesting medieval structure of Adana with its mosque, madrasah and türbe.
From grades 9 to 11, pupils go to one of the 85 public and 26 private high schools.
Other historical hamams in the city are Mestenzade Bath and Yeni Bath.
Adana was rebuilt and remained a part of the Kingdom of Cilician Armenia until 1359, when the city was ceded by Constantine III to the Mamluk Sultan of Egypt in return for obtaining a peace treaty.
From 1984 to the present, the cityscape has seen revolutionary changes with the revitalization of Seyhan river and the construction of large parks and boulevards.
'''Çatalan Woods''' is a large recreational area between Çatalan and Seyhan reservoirs, north of the city, in the Karaisalı district.
Seyhan, Yüreğir, Sarıçam and Karaisalı also have district public libraries administered by each district.
Town Theatre currently performs weekly at the Metropolitan Theatre Hall and the Ramazanoğlu Center.
The four districts of the city of Adana, though their populations are largely concentrated in the city, do have rural populations.
Urban sprawl east of the river is limited due to large institutions such as Çukurova University and Incirlik Air Base.
Winters are mild and wet and summers are long, hot and dry.
Marsan-Adana is the largest margarine and plant oil factory in Turkey.
Several bridges cross the Seyhan river within the city, the most notable among them is the Taşköprü, a 2nd-century Roman bridge.
Changes in the Greater Municipality Law in 2014 made it difficult to define an area for a city in Turkey.
Bicycles for commuting are currently only used by residents of low-income neighborhoods.
'''Irmak Hamam''' (''Turkish bath of the River''), located next to Seyhan District Hall, was built in 1494 by Ramazanoğlu Halil Bey on the ruins of an ancient Roman bath.
The city administration has launched a campaign to preserve the heritage of this area, particularly the Ottoman houses.
There are several newspapers published daily in Adana, the most popular ones being the Yeni Adana, Ekspres, Toros, Bölge and 5 Ocak papers.
It is built with five domes and the inside is covered with marble.
The street runs from D-400 state road to the Central Train Station and the shops are concentrated towards the north end.
Once completed, within the city there will be almost  of continuous recreational pathway connecting several parks.
The park has the tomb of Çoban Dede, a wise man from Karslı Village.
New generations of Arabs do not speak Arabic as they are mostly assimilated into Turkish culture.
Payment is collected by Kentkart Smartcard system.
The city of Adana is mostly flat and the warm weather makes it convenient for all year cycling and walking.
Although they lost their popularity as private airlines introduced inexpensive flights to major cities, coaches are still the major form of transportation to and from Adana.
Adana Municipality was incorporated in 1871 though the city continued to be governed by the muhtesip system until 1877 by the first mayor Gözlüklü Süleyman Efendi.
205 publishers and volunteer organizations had stands, more than 50 cultural events were performed and 300 authors were present to meet the readers.
Similar to other cities in Turkey, the culture in some sections in the city are very distinct from each other.
The festival takes place every December.
Adana has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Csa) under both the Köppen classification, and a dry-hot summer subtropical climate (Csa) under the Trewartha classification.
Atatürk stayed in one of these houses on Seyhan Caddesi which now houses the Atatürk Museum.
The project is contracted in January 2010 and the construction is expected to start after the funding is received from the Ministry of Transportation.
The venue of Şakirpaşa is Yüreğir Serinevler Arena.
Cyrillus was at the Council of Ephesus in 431 and at a synod in Tarsus in 434.
The influence of Mamluk architecture is visible.
One of the major elements that define the society of Adana is the agriculture-based living and its extension, agriculture-based industrial culture.
Furthermore, the city has a number of famous desserts, such as ''Halka Tatlı'', a round-shaped dessert, and ''Taş Kadayıf'', a bow-shaped dessert.
Adana Equestrian Club is the largest center of horse riding in Turkey, hosting national and international competitions.
Adanaspor and Adana Demirspor are the two clubs of Adana that appear in Turkish Professional Football League.
Adana State Theater opened its stage in 1981 at the Sabancı Cultural Center.
Adana Archaeological Museum was opened in 1924 as one of the oldest ten museums in Turkey.
However, developments in industrial life, improvements in transportation, effects of communication and massive migrations have affected the unique culture of Adana.
The major ethnic groups in Adana are the Turks, Arabs and Kurds.
The hospital has 1050 inpatient beds in 47 service units, a 58-bed intensive care unit and 17-bed emergency unit.
Two-thirds of the residents of Adana live west of the Seyhan River, where the city was first founded.
