Adelaide maintains a franchise in the Australian Baseball League, the Adelaide Bite.
Adelaide relies on its many reservoirs for water supply with the Happy Valley Reservoir supplying around 40% and the much larger Mount Bold Reservoir 10% of Adelaide's domestic requirements respectively.
In 1991 it was renamed the Santos Building and in 2006 it was again renamed Westpac House.
On 1 March 1954 at 3:40&nbsp;am Adelaide experienced its largest recorded earthquake to date, with the epicentre 12&nbsp;km from the city centre at Darlington, and a reported magnitude of 5.6.
In 1980, the Liberal party won government and premier David Tonkin committed his government to selling off the land acquired for the MATS plan, ensuring that even when needs changed, the construction of most MATS-proposed freeways would be impractical.
In order of construction, they are:
However, by mid-1837 the ''South Australian Register'' was warning of escaped convicts from New South Wales and tenders for a temporary gaol were sought.
Adelaide has been recognised as a "City of Music" by the UNESCO Creative Cities Network.
These price increases and large subsides have led to South Australia paying the highest retail price for electricity in the world.
Over half of the population of Adelaide identifies as Christian, with the largest denominations being Catholic (21.3%), Anglican (12.6%), Uniting Church (7.6%) and Eastern Orthodox (3.5%).
The historic Torrens Building in Victoria Square houses Carnegie Mellon University's Heinz College Australia, Cranfield University's Defence College of Management and Technology, and University College London's School of Energy and Resources (Australia), and constitute the city's international university precinct.
Increased media attention also revealed that in 2009 the state government had approved a 46% increase in retail prices to cover expected increases in the costs of generation while generation costs had in fact fallen 35% by 2012.
The Grand Prix became a source of pride and losing the event to Melbourne in a surprise announcement in mid-1993 left a void that has since been filled with the highly successful Clipsal 500 for V8 Supercar racing, held on a modified version of the same street circuit.
Until eventually superseded by the advent of the railways and later, motor vehicles, they played an invaluable economic and social role in transporting heavy loads of goods to, and products from, isolated settlements and mines.
There are several South Australian TAFE (Technical and Further Education) campuses in the metropolitan area which provide a range of vocational education and training.
Many Jews took part in the city councils, such as Judah Moss Solomon (1852–66) and others after him.
The Thunderbirds occasionally play games or finals at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre, while international netball matches are usually played at either the Entertainment Centre or the Adelaide Arena.
His plan, now known as '''Light's Vision''', arranged Adelaide in a grid, with five squares in the Adelaide city centre and a ring of parks, known as the Adelaide Parklands, surrounding it.
Adelaide's early history was wrought by economic uncertainty and incompetent leadership.
The provision of water services is by the government-owned SA Water.
Rainfall is unreliable, light and infrequent throughout summer.
The University of Adelaide, with 25,000 students, is Australia's third-oldest university and a member of the leading "Group of Eight".
The site of the colony's capital was surveyed and laid out by Colonel William Light, the first Surveyor-General of South Australia, through the design made by the architect George Strickland Kingston.
The development of the nearby suburb of Golden Grove in the late 1980s is an example of well-thought-out urban planning.
Speedway City, located adjacent to the Adelaide International Raceway road racing circuit at Virginia ( north of the city centre) has been in continuous operation since 1979.
Suburbs including Newton, Payneham and Campbelltown in the east and Torrensville, West Lakes and Fulham to the west, have large Greek and Italian communities.
Until the 1970s, roofs tended to be clad with corrugated iron or clay tiles (usually red clay).
Folds recorded a song about Adelaide before he moved away.
This led to it being known as ''The City of Churches''.
The median family income was $1,137 per week, compared with $1,171 nationally.
The Foxtel pay TV service is available as cable television in a few areas, and as satellite television to the entire metropolitan area.
The five largest groups of overseas-born were from UK (7.0%), Italy (1.6%), India (1.4%), China (1.3%) and Vietnam (1.0%).
Wakefield's idea was for the Government to survey and sell the land at a rate that would maintain land values high enough to be unaffordable for labourers and journeymen.
The rural area surrounding Adelaide was surveyed by Light in preparation to sell a total of over  of land.
Adelaide's early economy started to get on its feet in 1838 with the arrival of livestock from Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania.
New channels available in addition to ABC, Seven, Nine, Ten and SBS include Ten HD, (Channel Ten broadcast in HD), One, Eleven, TVSN, Spree TV, ABC2/KIDS, ABC3, ABC News 24, SBS HD (SBS broadcast in HD), SBS2, Food Network, NITV, 7HD (Channel 7 broadcast in HD), 7Two, 7mate, 7flix, TV4ME, RACING.COM, 9HD (Channel Nine broadcast in HD), 9Gem, 9Go!, 9Life and eXtra.
The demonym "Adelaidean" is used in reference to the city and its residents.
Overseas-born Adelaideans composed 29.8% of the total population.
The Jewish community of the city dates back to 1840.
Founded in 2003, their home ground is Hindmarsh Stadium, which has a capacity of 17,000 and is one of the few purpose-built soccer stadia in Australia.
In the 1890s Australia was affected by a severe economic depression, ending a hectic era of land booms and tumultuous expansionism.
In 2008, the SA Government announced plans for a network of transport-oriented developments across the Adelaide metropolitan area and purchased a 10 hectare industrial site at Bowden for $52.5&nbsp;million as the first of these developments.
Since then, cement tiles and colourbond corrugated (and other types of) iron have also become popular.
The largest are the Torrens and Onkaparinga catchments.
Almost half of all cars produced in Australia are made in Adelaide at the General Motors Holden plant in Elizabeth.
Being centrally located on the Australian mainland, Adelaide forms a strategic transport hub for east-west and north-south routes.
* The Southern Expressway (M2), connecting the outer southern suburbs with the inner southern suburbs and the city centre.
They have been playing since 2009, and their home stadium is Coopers Stadium.
Adelaide's professional association football team, Adelaide United, play in the A-League.
The yield from these reservoir catchments can be as little as 10% of the city's requirements in drought years and about 60% in average years.
Construction of the Adelaide Festival Centre began under Steele Hall in 1970 and was completed under the subsequent government of Don Dunstan, who also established the South Australian Film Corporation and, in 1976, the State Opera of South Australia.
* FM Band: Classic FM 103.9, Triple J 105.5, Fresh FM 92.7, Radio Adelaide 101.5, Three D Radio 93.7
The Adelaide metropolitan area has one freeway and three expressways.
The Dunstan Governments of the 1970s saw something of an Adelaide 'cultural revival', establishing a wide array of social reforms and overseeing the city becoming a centre of the arts, building upon the biennial "Adelaide Festival of Arts" which commenced in 1960.
Their name stems from the local Great Australian Bight, and from the abundance of local Great White Sharks.
In contrast, the winter has fairly reliable rainfall with June being the wettest month of the year, averaging around 80&nbsp;mm.
The inner ring route (A21) borders the parklands, and the outer route (A3/A13/A16/A17) completely bypasses the inner city via (in clockwise order) Grand Junction Road, Hampstead Road, Ascot Avenue, Portrush Road, Cross Road and South Road.
The most-spoken languages other than English were Italian (2.6%), Greek (1.9%), Standard Mandarin (1.3%), Vietnamese (1.3%), and Cantonese (0.7%).
Some parts of this land have been used for transport, (e.g.
The new 800-bed hospital has a cost of A$1.85 billion and was planned to be named the "Marjorie Jackson-Nelson Hospital" after the former Governor of South Australia.
The only South Australian daily newspaper is ''The Advertiser'', published by News Corporation six days a week.
After the Second World War, British, Italian, Greek, Dutch, Polish and other European immigrants settled in Adelaide.
In addition to the city's existing institutions, foreign institutions have been attracted to set up campuses in order to increase its attractiveness as an education hub.
Despite significant public opposition and the Labor party's anti-privatisation stance which left the Liberal party one vote short of the numbers needed to pass the legislation, ETSA was privatised by the Olsen Government in 1999 by way of a 200-year lease for the distribution network and the outright purchase of ETSA Power by the Cheung Kong Holdings for $3.5 billion (11 times ETSA's annual earnings) after Labor MP Trevor Crothers resigned from the party and voted with the government.
Adelaide also has a community television station, Channel 44.
Adelaide plays host to two of Australia's leading contemporary dance companies.
Adelaide pop-concert venues (past and present) include Adelaide Entertainment Centre; Adelaide Festival Theatre; Adelaide Oval; Apollo Stadium; Memorial Drive Park; Thebarton Theatre.
The Tour Down Under is the largest cycling event outside Europe and was the first event outside Europe to be granted UCI ProTour status.
Gas street lighting was implemented in 1867, the University of Adelaide was founded in 1874, the South Australian Art Gallery opened in 1881 and the Happy Valley Reservoir opened in 1896.
Shipbuilding was expanded at the nearby port of Whyalla.
The World Solar Challenge race attracts teams from around the world, most of which are fielded by universities or corporations, although some are fielded by high schools.
Secret ballots were introduced, and a bicameral parliament was elected on 9 March 1857, by which time 109,917 people lived in the province.
Historically, Adelaide's suburban residential areas have been characterised by single-storey detached houses built on  blocks.
Due to Adelaide's reactive soils (particularly Keswick Clay, black earth and some red-brown earth soils), since then houses have mainly been constructed of "brick veneer" over a timber frame (and more recently, over a steel frame) on a concrete raft slab foundation.
Adelaide's energy requirements were originally met by the Adelaide Electric Supply Company, which was nationalised by the Playford government in 1946, becoming the Electricity Trust of South Australia (ETSA), now known as SA Power Networks.
Adelaide and its surrounding area is one of the most seismically active regions in Australia.
The plan involved the construction of freeways, expressways and the upgrade of certain aspects of the public transport system.
A CBD tram loop too, is being considered and the latest Adelaide Airport master plan has also revealed a tram extension to the airport in the near future.
It is the oldest municipal authority in Australia and was established in 1840, when Adelaide and Australia's first mayor, James Hurtle Fisher, was elected.
The Adelaide metropolitan area has two commercial airports, Adelaide Airport and Parafield Airport.
Of the twenty full coverage stations, there are six commercial stations, six community stations, six national stations and two narrowcast stations.
However, in 2009, at the former governor's request, the state government chose to drop this name and instead transfer the Royal Adelaide Hospital name to the proposed facility.
In June 2007 the State Government announced a series of overhauls to the health sector that would see a new hospital constructed on railyards at the west end of the city, to replace the Royal Adelaide Hospital at the east end of the city.
Torrens University Australia is part of an international network of over 70 higher education institutions in more than 30 countries worldwide.
The Adelaide Rams were formed and played in the breakaway Super League (SL) competition in 1997 before moving to the new National Rugby League in 1998.
The Adelaide College of the Arts, as a school of TAFE SA, provides nationally recognised training in visual and performing arts.
Restless Dance Theatre is also based in Adelaide and is nationally recognised for working with disabled and non-disabled dancers to use movement as a means of expression.
The Adelaide metropolitan area is divided between eighteen local government areas, including, at its centre, the City of Adelaide, which administers the Adelaide city centre, North Adelaide, and the surrounding Adelaide Parklands.
Dutch Colonial architecture is rare in Adelaide, but there are a few noteworthy examples in the style popularised in the United States, in the 1960s.
Flinders University and the Flinders Medical Centre were established in the 1960s at Bedford Park, south of the city.
Adelaide is ageing more rapidly than other Australian capital cities.
As a result of this policy, Adelaide does not share the convict settlement history of other Australian cities like Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Hobart.
Adelaide derives most of its electricity from the Torrens Island Power Station gas-fired plant operated by AGL Energy and the Pelican Point Power Station, along with wind power and connections to the national grid.
The Art Gallery of South Australia, with around 35,000 works, holds Australia's second largest state-based collection.
Much of Adelaide was bushland before British settlement, with some variation – sandhills, swamps and marshlands were prevalent around the coast.
Parafield Airport, Adelaide's second airport  north of the city centre, is used for small aircraft, pilot training and recreational aviation purposes.
In the 1960s and 1970s, many of the older houses were demolished and replaced by "home units" – a group of three-to-five single-storey dwellings on a common title with shared access.
In 2011, over 1,000 Jews were living in the city, operating an orthodox and a reform school, in addition to a virtual Jewish museum.
'''Adelaide'''  ( ) is the capital city of the state of South Australia, and the fifth-most populous city of Australia.
In the Arts the Adelaide Festival, Fringe and Womadelaide became annual events.
Named in honour of Adelaide of Saxe-Meiningen, queen consort to King William IV, the city was founded in 1836 as the planned capital for a freely-settled British province in Australia.
Road transport in Adelaide has historically been comparatively easier than many of the other Australian cities, with a well-defined city layout and wide multiple-lane roads from the beginning of its development.
Adelaide receives enough annual precipitation to avoid Köppen's BSh (semi-arid climate) classification.
Expanding developments in the Adelaide Hills region led to the construction of the South Eastern Freeway to cope with growth, which has subsequently led to new developments and further improvements to that transport corridor.
The median weekly individual income for people aged 15&nbsp;years and over was $447 per week in 2006, compared with $466 nationally.
* AM Band: Cruise 1323, FIVEaa 1395
Since 1884, Adelaide Oval has also hosted an international cricket test every summer, along with a number of One Day International cricket matches.
According to the Regional Development Australia, an Australian government planning initiative, the "Adelaide Metropolitan Region" has a total land area of , while a more expansive definition by the Australia Bureau of Statistics defines a "Greater Adelaide" statistical area totalling .
As part of a peace deal with the Australian Rugby League to end the Super League war, the club's owners News Limited (who were also owners of the SL) suddenly closed the club only weeks before the start of the 1999 season.
Colonel William Light, one of Adelaide's founding fathers, designed the city and chose its location close to the River Torrens, in the area originally inhabited by the Kaurna people.
William Baker Ashton was appointed governor of the temporary gaol in 1839, and in 1840 George Strickland Kingston was commissioned to design Adelaide's new gaol.
Crowley examined the reports of visitors in the early 20th century, noting that "many visitors to Adelaide admired the foresighted planning of its founders", as well as pondering on the riches of the young city.
the O-Bahn Busway and Southern Expressway), while most has been progressively subdivided for residential use.
Similarly, the booming development in Adelaide's South led to the construction of the Southern Expressway.
The national fertility rate fell and immigration was reduced to a trickle.
World War II brought industrial stimulus and diversification to Adelaide under the Playford Government, which advocated Adelaide as a safe place for manufacturing due to its less vulnerable location.
28,000 men were sent to fight in World War I.
Its prosperity was short lived, with the return of droughts, having endured the Great Depression of the 1930s, and later returning to fortune under strong government leadership.
The number of international students studying in Adelaide has increased rapidly in recent years to 30,726 in 2015, of which 1,824 were secondary school students.
* FM Band: Nova 91.9, Mix 102.3, Triple M 104.7, SAFM 107.1
Gawler was recalled and replaced by Governor Grey in 1841.
Additional RAH campuses which specialise in specific patient services are in the suburbs of Adelaide – the Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre in Northfield, and the Glenside Campus Mental Health Service.
Continuation of the motorway is currently under construction at both ends of the motorway, at Darlington and in the "Torrens to Torrens" project.
Both teams play their home games at the Titanium Security Arena.
The later Labor government elected under Don Dunstan shelved the plan, but allowed the purchased land to remain vacant, should the future need for freeways arise.
South Australia's largest employment sector is health care and social assistance, surpassing manufacturing in SA as the largest employer since 2006–07.
In the 1960s, a Metropolitan Adelaide Transport Study Plan was proposed in order to cater for the future growth of the city.
There are further plans to extend the tram to Port Adelaide and Semaphore.
Adelaide's tallest building, built in 1988, was originally known as the State Bank Building.
Drought and poor harvests from 1884 compounded the problems, with some families leaving for Western Australia.
The first sheriff, Mr Samuel Smart, was wounded during a robbery, and on 2 May 1838 one of the offenders, Michael Magee, became the first person to be hanged in South Australia.
The site covers 102,478 square metres, or about 10 hectares, and is bounded by Park Terrace to the south, the Adelaide to Outer Harbour railway line to the west, Drayton Street to the north and Sixth and Seventh Streets to the east.
With the "Global Financial Crisis" of 2008, it remains to be seen if and how these initiatives will proceed.
The style was brought to South Australia by George Gavin Lawson.
Memorial Drive Park, adjacent to the Adelaide Oval, used to host Davis Cup and other major tennis events, including (until 2009) the Adelaide International (now known as the Brisbane International).
In 2009–10, manufacturing in SA had average annual employment of 83,700 persons compared with 103,300 for health care and social assistance.
Kaurna culture and language was almost completely destroyed within a few decades of the European settlement of South Australia in 1836.
* AM Band: Radio National 729, 891 Adelaide (Local Radio), NewsRadio 972
As part of a nationwide phase-out of analogue television in Australia, Adelaide's analogue television service was shut down on 2 April 2013.
South Australia, with a total of 1.7 million inhabitants, has the most centralised population of any state in Australia, with more than 75 percent of its people living in greater Adelaide, while the other population centres in the state are relatively small.
It was also ranked the most liveable city in Australia by the Property Council of Australia in 2011, 2012 and 2013.
Adelaide's NWS-9 is part of the Nine Network.
Adelaide, as the capital of South Australia, is the seat of the Government of South Australia.
South Australia was officially proclaimed as a new British colony on 28 December 1836, near The Old Gum Tree in what is now the suburb of Glenelg North.
However, these roads are now often considered inadequate to cope with Adelaide's growing road traffic, and often experience traffic congestion.
All of the five Australian national television networks broadcast both high definition digital and standard-definition television digital services in Adelaide.
Governor Gawler took over from Hindmarsh in late 1838 and, despite being under orders from the ''Select Committee on South Australia'' in Britain not to undertake any public works, promptly oversaw construction of a governor's house, the Adelaide Gaol, police barracks, a hospital, a customs house and a wharf at Port Adelaide.
Adelaide's two largest tertiary hospitals are the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH), a teaching hospital of the University of Adelaide (705 beds), and the Flinders Medical Centre (580 beds) in Bedford Park, a teaching hospital of Flinders University.
It has been noted for early examples of religious freedom, a commitment to political progressivism and civil liberties.
The South Australian Government in this period built on former wartime manufacturing industries.
Two other transmission sites are located at Grenfell Street and Elizabeth Downs.
The O-Bahn Busway is an example of a unique solution to Tea Tree Gully's transport woes in the 1980s.
The same group publishes a Sunday paper, the ''Sunday Mail''.
The music of Adelaide has produced musical groups and individuals who have achieved national and international fame.
The University of South Australia, with 37,000 students, has two North Terrace campuses, three other campuses in the metropolitan area and campuses at Whyalla and Mount Gambier.
Wakefield had read accounts of Australian settlement while in prison in London for attempting to abduct an heiress, and realised that the eastern colonies suffered from a lack of available labour, due to the practice of giving land grants to all arrivals.
The largest not-for-profit provider of community health care within Adelaide is the Royal District Nursing Service (South Australia)  which provides out of hospital care and hospital avoidance care, which in turn eases pressure on the South Australia public hospital system.
Construction of Adelaide Gaol commenced in 1841.
The loss of the sandhills to urban development had a particularly destructive effect on the coastline due to erosion.
In addition, major upgrades were announced to see the Flinders Medical Centre become the primary centre for health care for the southern suburbs, and the Lyell McEwin Hospital in Elizabeth become the centre for the northern suburbs.
File:SAHMRI.jpg|South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI)
The city itself has a metropolitan-wide public transport system, which is managed by and known as the Adelaide Metro.
The city stretches  from the coast to the foothills, and  from Gawler at its northern extent to Sellicks Beach in the south.
A relative lack of suitable locally available timber for construction purposes led to the early development of a brick-making industry, as well as the use of stone, for houses and other buildings.
As it was believed that in a colony of free settlers there would be little crime, no provision was made for a gaol in Colonel Light's 1837 plan.
The government also invested more than $2 billion to build a desalination plant, powered by renewable energy, as an 'insurance policy' against droughts affecting Adelaide's water supply.
In 2012, the industry came under scrutiny for allegedly reducing supply by shutting down generators during periods of peak demand to force prices up.
Most of these are concentrated in the city centre along the cultural boulevard of North Terrace, King William Street and in various districts of the metropolitan area.
Other major public hospitals in the Adelaide area are the Women's and Children's Hospital (305 beds), on King William Road in North Adelaide; the Queen Elizabeth Hospital (340 beds) in Woodville, the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park (300 beds) in Daw Park, and the Lyell McEwin Hospital (198 beds) in Elizabeth.
* The South Eastern Freeway (M1), connects the south-east corner of the Adelaide Plain to the Adelaide Hills and beyond to Murray Bridge and Tailem Bend, where it then continues as National Highway 1 south-east to Melbourne.
In June 2014, Adelaide had an estimated resident population of 1.31 million.
Australia's largest oil company, Santos, prominent South Australian brewery, Coopers, and national retailer Harris Scarfe also call Adelaide their home.
Its population grew, and it became the 3rd most populous metropolitan area in the country—after Sydney and Melbourne.
The electricity retail market was opened to competition in 2003 and although competition was expected to result in lower retail costs, prices increased by 23.7% in the market's first year.
(''See: Immigration history of Australia.'')
Adelaide stretches  from the coast to the foothills, and  from Gawler at its northern extent to Sellicks Beach in the south.
The "Afghan" community in Australia first became established in the 1860s when camels and their Pathan, Punjabi, Baluchi and Sindhi handlers began to be used to open up settlement in the arid interior of the continent.
After both of the World Wars, the use of red bricks was popular.
Up to the 1970s, the majority of houses were of "double brick" construction on concrete footings, with timber floors laid on joists supported by "dwarf walls".
The conclusion of the Vietnam War in 1975 saw an influx of Indo-Chinese immigrants to Adelaide.
The Repatriation General Hospital was also to expand its range of speciality areas beyond veterans' health to incorporate stroke, orthopaedic rehabilitation and aged care.
From 1919 onwards, the City has had a Lord Mayor, the current being Lord Mayor Martin Haese.
Over time, the Adelaide Festival has expanded to include the Adelaide Cabaret Festival, Adelaide Film Festival, Adelaide Festival of Ideas, Adelaide Writers' Week, and WOMADelaide, all held predominately in the autumnal month of March (sometimes jocularly called 'mad March' by locals due to the hectic clustering of these events).
Other festivals include FEAST (a queer culture celebration), Tasting Australia (a biennial food and wine affair), and the Royal Adelaide Show (an annual agricultural show and state fair).
The two government-funded stations are run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC South Australia) and the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS).
The use of precast concrete panels for floor and wall construction has also increased.
The trio of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, the Modbury Hospital and the Noarlunga Hospital were to become specialist elective surgery centres.
Adelaide was not as badly hit as the larger gold-rush cities of Sydney and Melbourne, and silver and lead discoveries at Broken Hill provided some relief.
Adelaide is the home of two Australian Football League teams: the Adelaide Football Club and Port Adelaide Football Club, and one A-League soccer team, Adelaide United.
There is a public system operated by the South Australian Government and a private system of independent and Catholic schools.
Gas is supplied from the Moomba Gas Processing Plant in the Cooper Basin via the Moomba Adelaide Pipeline System and the SEAGas pipeline from Victoria.
The value of South Australia's exports nearly halved.
ASC Pty Ltd, based in the industrial suburb of Osborne.
The benefits of Light's design are numerous: Adelaide has had wide multi-lane roads from its beginning, an easily navigable cardinal direction grid layout and an expansive green ring around the city centre.
''The Independent Weekly'' was a small independent newspaper providing an alternative view, but ceased publishing its print edition in November 2010 and now exists as a digital daily newsletter only.
The Rann Government invested $535 million in a major upgrade of the Adelaide Oval to enable AFL to be played in the city centre and more than $2 billion to build a new Royal Adelaide Hospital on land adjacent to the Adelaide Railway Station.
Adelaide enjoyed a post-war boom, entering a time of relative prosperity.
The Glenelg tramline was extended through the city to Hindmarsh and the suburban railway line extended south to Seaford.
By 1860, wheat farms had been established from Encounter Bay in the south to Clare in the north.
The Australian Dance Theatre and Leigh Warren & Dancers contribute to state festivals and perform nationally and internationally.
