On election day, 6March 1933, the NSDAP's share of the vote increased to 43.9 percent, and the party acquired the largest number of seats in parliament.
On 29September Hitler, Neville Chamberlain, Édouard Daladier, and Mussolini attended a one-day conference in Munich that led to the Munich Agreement, which handed over the Sudetenland districts to Germany.
In December 1942 and January 1943, Hitler's repeated refusal to allow their withdrawal at the Battle of Stalingrad led to the almost total destruction of the 6th Army.
In addition to eliminating Jews, the Nazis planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan.
According to Bullock, Hitler wanted to wait until after the war before executing this plan.
The Anglo-German Naval Agreement (AGNA) of 18June allowed German tonnage to increase to 35 percent of that of the British navy.
In denial about the dire situation, Hitler placed his hopes on the undermanned and under-equipped ''Armeeabteilung Steiner'' (Army Detachment Steiner), commanded by Waffen SS General Felix Steiner.
In January 1935, over 90 percent of the people of the Saarland, then under League of Nations administration, voted to unite with Germany.
Marshal Pietro Badoglio, placed in charge of the government, soon surrendered to the Allies.
In 1923, he attempted a coup in Munich to seize power.
On a recommendation by Lieutenant Hugo Gutmann, Hitler's Jewish superior, he received the Iron Cross, First Class on 4 August 1918, a decoration rarely awarded to one of Hitler's ''Gefreiter'' rank.
At social events he sometimes gave graphic accounts of the slaughter of animals in an effort to make his dinner guests shun meat.
He worked as a casual labourer and eventually as a painter, selling watercolours of Vienna's sights.
Alfons Heck, a former member of the Hitler Youth, later recalled:
The eastern flank would be secured and land would be added to Germany's ''Lebensraum''.
Hitler's leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality as the war turned against Germany, with the military's defensive strategies often hindered by his slow decision making and frequent directives to hold untenable positions.
After midnight on 29April, Hitler married Eva Braun in a small civil ceremony in the ''Führerbunker''.
Theories about Hitler's medical condition are difficult to prove, and placing too much weight on them may have the effect of attributing many of the events and consequences of Nazi Germany to the possibly impaired physical health of one individual.
The invasion conquered a huge area, including the Baltic republics, Belarus, and West Ukraine.
Hitler's political programme brought about a world war, leaving behind a devastated and impoverished Eastern and Central Europe.
On 15September 1935, Hitler presented two laws—known as the Nuremberg Laws—to the Reichstag.
In August 1936, in response to a growing economic crisis caused by his rearmament efforts, Hitler ordered Göring to implement a Four Year Plan to prepare Germany for war within the next four years.
These partially fulfilled plans resulted in the democidal deaths of an estimated 19.3million civilians and prisoners of war.
He adds that Hitler felt that in the absence of the church the faithful would turn to mysticism, which he considered a step backwards.
Hitler refrained from getting involved.
On 30April 1945, when Soviet troops were within a block or two of the Reich Chancellery, Hitler shot himself and Braun bit into a cyanide capsule.
Deaths took place in concentration and extermination camps, ghettos, and through mass executions.
Ernst-Günther Schenck and several other doctors who met Hitler in the last weeks of his life also formed a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.
In the final days of the war, during the Battle of Berlin in 1945, Hitler married his long-time lover, Eva Braun.
On 9April, Hitler proclaimed the birth of the Greater Germanic Reich, his vision of a united empire of the Germanic nations of Europe, where the Dutch, Flemish, and Scandinavians were joined into a "racially pure" polity under German leadership.
In late 1938 and early 1939, the continuing economic crisis caused by rearmament forced Hitler to make major defence cuts.
The previous day, the cabinet had enacted the "Law Concerning the Highest State Office of the Reich".
A 27January 1932 speech to the Industry Club in Düsseldorf won him support from many of Germany's most powerful industrialists.
The stock market in the United States crashed on 24 October 1929.
To increase its appeal, the DAP changed its name to the ''Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei'' (National Socialist German Workers Party; NSDAP).
Posted to the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 (1st Company of the List Regiment), he served as a dispatch runner on the Western Front in France and Belgium, spending nearly half his time at the regimental headquarters in Fournes-en-Weppes, well behind the front lines.
He was a non-smoker for most of his adult life, but smoked heavily in his youth (25 to 40 cigarettes a day).
Under Hitler's leadership and racially motivated ideology, the Nazi regime was responsible for the genocide of at least 5.5 million Jews and millions of other victims whom he and his followers deemed ''Untermenschen'' ("sub-humans") and socially undesirable.
This forced Hitler to call off ''Fall Grün'', originally planned for 1October 1938.
Hitler forced his War Minister, Field Marshal Werner von Blomberg, to resign by using a police dossier that showed that Blomberg's new wife had a record for prostitution.
Throughout 1943 and 1944, the Soviet Union steadily forced Hitler's armies into retreat along the Eastern Front.
Hitler announced he would rejoin on the condition that he would replace Drexler as party chairman, and that the party headquarters would remain in Munich.
The group, financed with funds channelled from wealthy industrialists, introduced Hitler to the idea of a Jewish conspiracy, linking international finance with Bolshevism.
As a result of intense French and British diplomatic pressure, on 5 September Czechoslovakian President Edvard Beneš unveiled the "Fourth Plan" for constitutional reorganisation of his country, which agreed to most of Henlein's demands for Sudeten autonomy.
Hitler oversaw one of the largest infrastructure improvement campaigns in German history, leading to the construction of dams, autobahns, railroads, and other civil works.
This, along with news from Italy that Mussolini would not honour the Pact of Steel, prompted Hitler to postpone the attack on Poland from 25August to 1September.
Although no direct order from Hitler authorising the mass killings has surfaced, his public speeches, orders to his generals, and the diaries of Nazi officials demonstrate that he conceived and authorised the extermination of European Jewry.
In early 1938, in the wake of the Blomberg–Fritsch Affair, Hitler asserted control of the military-foreign policy apparatus, dismissing Neurath as foreign minister and appointing himself ''Oberster Befehlshaber der Wehrmacht'' (supreme commander of the armed forces).
The move to Hafeld coincided with the onset of intense father-son conflicts caused by Hitler's refusal to conform to the strict discipline of his school.
Historian Richard J. Evans states that "historians now generally agree that his notorious, murderous anti-Semitism emerged well after Germany's defeat in World War I, as a product of the paranoid "stab-in-the-back" explanation for the catastrophe".
He eventually quit, calling the habit "a waste of money".
In private discussions in 1939, Hitler declared Britain the main enemy to be defeated and that Poland's obliteration was a necessary prelude for that goal.
Hitler's policies resulted in the killing of nearly two million Poles, over three million Soviet prisoners of war, communists and other political opponents, homosexuals, the physically and mentally disabled, Jehovah's Witnesses, Adventists, and trade unionists.
In late 1942, German forces were defeated in the second battle of El Alamein, thwarting Hitler's plans to seize the Suez Canal and the Middle East.
Nevertheless, he continued to believe that only his leadership could deliver victory.
Ranks of SA men served as guards inside the building, while large groups outside opposing the proposed legislation shouted slogans and threats towards the arriving members of parliament.
The genocide was ordered by Hitler and organised and executed by Heinrich Himmler and Reinhard Heydrich.
Although Hitler had terminated his Austrian citizenship in 1925, he did not acquire German citizenship for almost seven years.
Many Germans saw the treaty as an unjust humiliation—they especially objected to Article 231, which they interpreted as declaring Germany responsible for the war.
Any pro-Christian public rhetoric was at variance with his private statements, which described Christianity as "absurdity" and nonsense founded on lies.
Hitler's father Alois Hitler, Sr. (1837–1903) was the illegitimate child of Maria Anna Schicklgruber.
Hitler made a prominent appearance at the trial of two Reichswehr officers, Lieutenants Richard Scheringer and Hans Ludin, in late 1930.
By summer 1942, Auschwitz concentration camp was expanded to accommodate large numbers of deportees for killing or enslavement.
At Hitler's urging, Hindenburg responded with the Reichstag Fire Decree of 28February, which suspended basic rights and allowed detention without trial.
From 1905, Hitler lived a bohemian life in Vienna, financed by orphan's benefits and support from his mother.
Historian Sebastian Haffner avers that without Hitler and the displacement of the Jews, the modern nation state of Israel would not exist.
Hitler states in ''Mein Kampf'' that he first became an anti-Semite in Vienna.
The committee members realised that the resignation of their leading public figure and speaker would mean the end of the party.
In addition, 29 million soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the European Theatre of World War II.
On 30January 1933, the new cabinet was sworn in during a brief ceremony in Hindenburg's office.
He ordered preparations for war in the East, to begin as early as 1938 and no later than 1943.
To publicise the meeting, two truckloads of party supporters drove around Munich waving swastika flags and distributing leaflets.
In April, Hitler launched the invasion of Yugoslavia, quickly followed by the invasion of Greece.
These victories prompted Mussolini to have Italy join forces with Hitler on 10 June.
He was decorated for bravery, receiving the Iron Cross, Second Class, in 1914.
Hitler's leadership style was to give contradictory orders to his subordinates and to place them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped with those of others, to have "the stronger one do the job".
By the end of June, the other parties had been intimidated into disbanding.
Hitler's early eugenic policies targeted children with physical and developmental disabilities in a programme dubbed Action Brandt, and he later authorised a euthanasia programme for adults with serious mental and physical disabilities, now referred to as Action T4.
By early February 1938, twelve more generals had been removed.
Hitler continued to face some opposition within the NSDAP: Opponents of Hitler in the leadership had Hermann Esser expelled from the party, and they printed 3,000 copies of a pamphlet attacking Hitler as a traitor to the party.
During the Battle of the Somme in October 1916, he was wounded in the left thigh when a shell exploded in the dispatch runners' dugout.
Activities of the German Communist Party (KPD) were suppressed, and some 4,000 communist party members were arrested.
His decision to mount a risky series of offensives against Norway, France, and the Low Countries in 1940 against the advice of the military proved successful, though the diplomatic and military strategies he employed in attempts to force the United Kingdom out of the war ended in failure.
It was rumoured among contemporaries that Geli was in a romantic relationship with him, and her death was a source of deep, lasting pain.
His cabinet never met after 1938, and he discouraged his ministers from meeting independently.
Hitler urged quick action before Britain and France gained a permanent lead in the arms race.
While the international community and some Germans were shocked by the murders, many in Germany believed Hitler was restoring order.
Hitler also sent troops to Spain to support General Franco during the Spanish Civil War after receiving an appeal for help in July 1936.
On 14July 1933, the NSDAP was declared the only legal political party in Germany.
In response, Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3September, surprising Hitler and prompting him to angrily ask Ribbentrop, "Now what?"
On 6June 1944, the Western Allied armies landed in northern France in one of the largest amphibious operations in history, Operation Overlord.
He announced that he would stay in Berlin until the end and then shoot himself.
At the DAP, Hitler met Dietrich Eckart, one of the party's founders and a member of the occult Thule Society.
The party headquarters was in Munich,  a hotbed of anti-government German nationalists determined to crush Marxism and undermine the Weimar Republic.
France and Britain did not act on their declarations immediately, and on 17September, Soviet forces invaded eastern Poland.
Records in the Soviet archives obtained after the fall of the Soviet Union state that the remains of Hitler, Braun, Joseph and Magda Goebbels, the six Goebbels children, General Hans Krebs, and Hitler's dogs were repeatedly buried and exhumed.
The Austrian federal chancellor rejected the request on the specious grounds that his service in the German Army made his Austrian citizenship void.
In a report prepared for the Office of Strategic Services in 1943, Walter C. Langer of Harvard University described Hitler as a "neurotic psychopath".
Hindenburg had support from various nationalist, monarchist, Catholic, and republican parties, and some Social Democrats.
Neither the army nor the state police joined forces with Hitler.
Hitler's attempt to integrate the Soviet Union into the anti-British bloc failed after inconclusive talks between Hitler and Molotov in Berlin in November, and he ordered preparations for the invasion of the Soviet Union.
The death of his younger brother Edmund, who died from measles in 1900, deeply affected Hitler.
By late 1944, both the Red Army and the Western Allies were advancing into Germany.
In a speech in Wilhelmshaven for the launch of the battleship  on 1April, he threatened to denounce the Anglo-German Naval Agreement if the British continued to guarantee Polish independence, which he perceived as an "encirclement" policy.
His close friend, August Kubizek, claimed that Hitler was a "confirmed anti-Semite" before he left Linz.
In the event of his death, the conference minutes, recorded as the Hossbach Memorandum, were to be regarded as his "political testament".
Shortly before Hitler was eligible for parole, the Bavarian government attempted to have him deported back to Austria.
Recognising the strength and determination of the Red Army, Hitler decided to use his remaining mobile reserves against the American and British troops, which he perceived as far weaker.
Göring set a deadline, after which he would consider Hitler incapacitated.
He directed large-scale rearmament and on 1 September 1939 invaded Poland, resulting in British and French declarations of war on Germany.
Another dispute pitched one side represented by Himmler and Greiser, who championed ethnic cleansing in Poland, against another represented by Göring and Hans Frank, governor-general of the General Government territory of occupied Poland, who called for turning Poland into the "granary" of the Reich.
Sixteen NSDAP members and four police officers were killed in the failed coup.
This included the Nazis' nominal coalition partner, the DNVP; with the SA's help, Hitler forced its leader, Hugenberg, to resign on 29June.
In the final months of the war Hitler refused to consider peace negotiations, regarding the complete destruction of Germany as preferable to surrender.
The laws banned sexual relations and marriages between Aryans and Jews and were later extended to include "Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring".
With this action, Hitler eliminated the last legal remedy by which he could be removed from office.
On 8November 1923 Hitler and the SA stormed a public meeting of 3,000 people organised by Kahr in the Bürgerbräukeller, a beer hall in Munich.
Hitler instructed the two newly appointed Gauleiters of north-western Poland, Albert Forster of Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia and Arthur Greiser of Reichsgau Wartheland, to Germanise their areas, with "no questions asked" about how this was accomplished.
At the time of Hitler's release from prison, politics in Germany had become less combative and the economy had improved, limiting Hitler's opportunities for political agitation.
On 30 April 1945, less than two days later, the two killed themselves to avoid capture by the Red Army, and their corpses were burned.
His trial before the special People's Court in Munich began in February 1924, and Alfred Rosenberg became temporary leader of the NSDAP.
In June 1941, Hitler ordered an invasion of the Soviet Union.
Whereas Polish citizens in Forster's area merely had to sign forms stating that they had German blood, Greiser carried out a brutal ethnic cleansing campaign on the Polish population in his purview.
The Social Democratic Party was banned and its assets seized.
He was involved and appeared in a series of propaganda films throughout his political career—such as ''Der Sieg des Glaubens'' and ''Triumph des Willens''—made by Leni Riefenstahl, regarded as a pioneer of modern filmmaking.
Wages were slightly lower in the mid to late 1930s compared with wages during the Weimar Republic, while the cost of living increased by 25 percent.
His bitterness over the collapse of the war effort began to shape his ideology.
German nationalism had a widespread following in the Mariahilf district, where Hitler lived.
Further, Haffner claims that other than Alexander the Great, Hitler had a more significant impact than any other comparable historical figure, in that he too caused a wide range of worldwide changes in a relatively short time span.
A superb organiser, Gregor Strasser steered a more independent political course, emphasising the socialist elements of the party's programme.
One million copies were sold in 1933, Hitler's first year in office.
Poland was to either become a German satellite state or be neutralised to secure the Reich's eastern flank and to prevent a possible British blockade.
By January 1942, he had decided that the Jews, Slavs, and other deportees considered undesirable should be killed.
On 19August, the merger of the presidency with the chancellorship was approved by 90 percent of the electorate voting in a plebiscite.
These laws could (with certain exceptions) deviate from the constitution.
He met his lover, Eva Braun, in 1929, and married her in April 1945.
Hitler's suicide was likened by contemporaries to a "spell" being broken.
Accordingly, on 22&nbsp;August 1939 Hitler ordered a military mobilisation against Poland.
According to a U.S. Office of Strategic Services report, "The Nazi Master Plan", Hitler planned to destroy the influence of Christian churches within the Reich.
In the ruined garden of the Reich Chancellery, he awarded Iron Crosses to boy soldiers of the Hitler Youth, who were now fighting the Red Army at the front near Berlin.
On 15March 1939, in violation of the Munich accord and possibly as a result of the deepening economic crisis requiring additional assets, Hitler ordered the Wehrmacht to invade Prague, and from Prague Castle he proclaimed Bohemia and Moravia a German protectorate.
Pardoned by the Bavarian Supreme Court, he was released from jail on 20December 1924, against the state prosecutor's objections.
In August 1934, Hitler appointed ''Reichsbank'' President Hjalmar Schacht as Minister of Economics, and in the following year, as Plenipotentiary for War Economy in charge of preparing the economy for war.
Speer wrote that Hitler had a negative view of Himmler's and Alfred Rosenberg's mystical notions and Himmler's attempt to mythologise the SS.
Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer has commented that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust.
The offensive failed after some temporary successes.
While many trade union delegates were in Berlin for May Day activities, SA stormtroopers demolished union offices around the country.
Germany reoccupied the demilitarised zone in the Rhineland in March 1936, in violation of the Versailles Treaty.
The German Labour Front was formed as an umbrella organisation to represent all workers, administrators, and company owners, thus reflecting the concept of national socialism in the spirit of Hitler's ''Volksgemeinschaft'' ("people's community").
Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz and Joseph Goebbels assumed Hitler's roles as head of state and chancellor respectively.
After a wedding breakfast with his new wife, Hitler dictated his will to his secretary Traudl Junge.
Albert Speer, instrumental in implementing Hitler's classicist reinterpretation of German culture, was placed in charge of the proposed architectural renovations of Berlin.
On 22February, Hitler was recorded saying, "we shall regain our health only by eliminating the Jews".
Others, including William L. Shirer and Alan Bullock, are of the opinion that the NSDAP itself was responsible.
Army commander Colonel-General Werner von Fritsch was removed after the Schutzstaffel (SS) produced allegations that he had engaged in a homosexual relationship.
Germany was dependent on imported oil; a confrontation with Britain over the Czechoslovakian dispute could curtail Germany's oil supplies.
Brüning's austerity measures brought little economic improvement and were extremely unpopular.
Many German officers concluded that defeat was inevitable and that continuing under Hitler's leadership would result in the complete destruction of the country.
On 23March 1933, the Reichstag assembled at the Kroll Opera House under turbulent circumstances.
Between 1939 and 1945, there were many plans to assassinate Hitler, some of which proceeded to significant degrees.
Hitler described the war as "the greatest of all experiences", and was praised by his commanding officers for his bravery.
Hitler ran out of money and was forced to live in homeless shelters and men's hostels.
Nazi official Hans Frank suggested that Alois's mother had been employed as a housekeeper for a Jewish family in Graz, and that the family's 19-year-old son Leopold Frankenberger had fathered Alois.
The pause provided the Red Army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh reserves; historian Russel Stolfi considers it to be one of the major factors that caused the failure of the Moscow offensive, which was resumed in October 1941 and ended disastrously in December.
Hitler began using amphetamine occasionally after 1937 and became addicted to it in late 1942.
Hitler and the Nazi regime were also responsible for the killing of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war.
Hitler did not speak publicly about the killings, and seems never to have visited the concentration camps.
Hitler took care to give his dictatorship the appearance of legality.
The book, dedicated to Thule Society member Dietrich Eckart, was an autobiography and exposition of his ideology.
Hitler had insisted on the ministerial positions as a way to gain control over the police in much of Germany.
Kershaw feels that it is better to take a broader view of German history by examining what social forces led to the Nazi dictatorship and its policies rather than to pursue narrow explanations for the Holocaust and World WarII based on only one person.
Hitler assumed Blomberg's title of Commander-in-Chief, thus taking personal command of the armed forces.
According to Bullock, Hitler did not believe in God, was anticlerical, and held Christian ethics in contempt because they contravened his preferred view of "survival of the fittest".
The average work week increased during the shift to a war economy; by 1939, the average German was working between 47 and 50 hours a week.
Both men had fallen into disfavour because they objected to Hitler's demand to make the Wehrmacht ready for war as early as 1938.
The plan envisaged an all-out struggle between "Judeo-Bolshevism" and German national socialism, which in Hitler's view required a committed effort of rearmament regardless of the economic costs.
No Frankenberger was registered in Graz during that period, and no record has been produced of Leopold Frankenberger's existence, so historians dismiss the claim that Alois's father was Jewish.
The Reichstag renewed the Enabling Act twice, each time for a four-year period.
The impact in Germany was dire: millions were thrown out of work and several major banks collapsed.
The demands of the SA for more political and military power caused anxiety among military, industrial, and political leaders.
Alois was brought up in the family of Hiedler's brother, Johann Nepomuk Hiedler.
In April Hitler ordered the OKW to prepare for ''Fall Grün'' (Case Green), the code name for an invasion of Czechoslovakia.
He was present at the First Battle of Ypres, the Battle of the Somme, the Battle of Arras, and the Battle of Passchendaele, and was wounded at the Somme.
He was depressed but calm when arrested on 11 November 1923 for high treason.
Many of his decrees were explicitly based on the Reichstag Fire Decree and hence on Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution.
Hitler later dramatised an episode from this period when his father took him to visit a customs office, depicting it as an event that gave rise to an unforgiving antagonism between father and son, who were both strong-willed.
In September 1931, his half-niece, Geli Raubal, committed suicide with Hitler's gun in his Munich apartment.
Britain, China, Italy, and Poland were also invited to join the Anti-Comintern Pact, but only Italy signed in 1937.
In public, Hitler often praised Christian heritage and German Christian culture, though professing a belief in an "Aryan Jesus", one who fought against the Jews.
Together, the Hunger Plan and ''Generalplan Ost'' would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union.
In April 1938 Henlein told the foreign minister of Hungary that "whatever the Czech government might offer, he would always raise still higher demands&nbsp;... he wanted to sabotage an understanding by any means because this was the only method to blow up Czechoslovakia quickly".
After World War I, Hitler returned to Munich.
The fall of Poland was followed by what contemporary journalists dubbed the "Phoney War" or ''Sitzkrieg'' ("sitting war").
At a meeting in the Reich Chancellery with his foreign ministers and military chiefs that November, Hitler restated his intention of acquiring ''Lebensraum'' for the German people.
This goal informed Hitler's movement early on, but he saw it as inexpedient to express this extreme position publicly.
After he was deemed unfit for service—he failed his physical exam in Salzburg on 5 February 1914—he returned to Munich.
Hitler's foreign minister and former Ambassador to London, Joachim von Ribbentrop, assured him that neither Britain nor France would honour their commitments to Poland.
He favoured aspects of Protestantism that suited his own views, and adopted some elements of the Catholic Church's hierarchical organisation, liturgy, and phraseology in his politics.
In a Reichstag speech on 28April, he renounced both the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish Non-Aggression Pact.
After his release in 1924, Hitler gained popular support by attacking the Treaty of Versailles and promoting Pan-Germanism, anti-Semitism, and anti-communism with charismatic oratory and Nazi propaganda.
