Eichmann was taken to a fortified police station at Yagur in Israel, where he spent nine months.
Following a widely publicised trial in Israel, he was found guilty of war crimes and hanged in 1962.
Eichmann was hanged at a prison in Ramla hours later—the hanging, scheduled for midnight at the end of 31 May, was slightly delayed and thus took place a few minutes into 1 June 1962.
Eichmann, resentful that Kurt Becher and others were becoming involved in Jewish emigration matters, and angered by Himmler's suspension of deportations to the death camps, requested reassignment in July.
In addition to wartime documents, material presented as evidence included tapes and transcripts from Eichmann's interrogation and Sassen's interviews in Argentina.
He was found guilty of crimes against humanity, war crimes, and crimes against Poles, Slovenes and Gypsies.
After about six months, Eichmann was invited by Leopold von Mildenstein to join his Jewish Department, Section II/112 of the SD, at its Berlin headquarters.
When Germany failed to defeat the Royal Air Force in the Battle of Britain, the invasion of Britain was postponed indefinitely.
On 24 December 1944, Eichmann fled Budapest just before the Soviets completed their encirclement of the capital.
Eichmann immediately petitioned Israeli President Yitzhak Ben-Zvi for clemency.
Eichmann arrived the same day, and was soon joined by top members of his staff and five or six hundred members of the SD, SS, and ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (SiPo; security police).
These events were factors in Eichmann's decision to return to Germany.
1955 in Buenos Aires).
Harel himself arrived in person in May 1960 to oversee the capture.
His wife, who disliked Berlin, resided in Prague with the children.
In a series of meetings beginning on 25 April, Eichmann met with Joel Brand, a Hungarian Jew and member of the Relief and Rescue Committee (RRC).
Eichmann attended the Kaiser Franz Joseph ''Staatsoberrealschule'' (state secondary school) in Linz, the same high school Adolf Hitler had attended some 17 years before.
After Germany's defeat in 1945, Eichmann fled to Austria.
In his role as minister responsible for the Four Year Plan, on 24 March 1940 Hermann Göring forbade any further transports into the General Government unless cleared first by himself or Frank.
His department was in constant contact with the Foreign Office, as Jews of conquered nations such as France could not as easily be stripped of their possessions and deported to their deaths.
The family built a house at 14 Garibaldi Street (now 6061 Garibaldi Street) and moved in during 1960.
Most of the victims were sent to Auschwitz concentration camp, where 75 to 90 per cent were murdered upon arrival.
In 1948 Eichmann obtained a landing permit for Argentina and false identification under the name of "Ricardo Klement" through an organisation directed by Bishop Alois Hudal, an Austrian cleric then residing in Italy with known Nazi sympathies.
When additional information was brought forward that forced Eichmann into admitting what he had done, Eichmann would insist he had not had any authority in the Nazi hierarchy and had only been following orders.
Hitler's appointment of a Hungarian government more amenable to the Nazis meant that the Hungarian Jews, who had remained essentially unharmed until that point, would now be deported to Auschwitz to serve as forced labour or be gassed.
The plan was stymied by Hans Frank, governor-general of the occupied territories, who was disinclined to accept the deportees as to do so would have a negative impact on economic development and his ultimate goal of Germanisation of the region.
He was held there for nine days, during which time his identity was double-checked and confirmed.
On 23 June the Council passed Resolution 138, which agreed that Argentine sovereignty had been violated and requested that Israel should make reparations.
The memoirs were later used as the basis for a series of articles that appeared in ''Life'' and ''Der Stern'' magazines in late 1960.
He left without attaining a degree and joined his father's new enterprise, the Untersberg Mining Company, where he worked for several months.
After further negotiations, on 3 August, Israel and Argentina issued a joint statement admitting the violation of Argentinian sovereignty but agreeing to end the dispute.
On 19 December 1939, Eichmann was assigned to head RSHA ''Referat'' IV B4 (RSHA Sub-Department IV-B4), tasked with overseeing Jewish affairs and evacuation.
They arrived in Israel on 22 May, and Ben-Gurion announced Eichmann's capture to the Knesset—Israel's parliament—the following afternoon.
After returning to Germany in 1933, he joined the ''Sicherheitsdienst'' (SD; Security Service), where he was appointed head of the department responsible for Jewish affairs—especially emigration, which the Nazis encouraged through violence and economic pressure.
Under the Nisko Plan, Eichmann chose Nisko as the location for a new transit camp where Jews would be temporarily housed before being deported elsewhere.
In his testimony throughout the trial, Eichmann insisted he had no choice but to follow orders, as he was bound by an oath of loyalty—the same superior orders defence used by some defendants in the 1945–1946 Nuremberg trials.
On 27 September 1939 the SD and ''Sicherheitspolizei'' (comprising the Gestapo and Kripo police agencies) were combined into the new SS-''Reichssicherheitshauptamt'' (RSHA; Reich Main Security Office), which was placed under Heydrich's control.
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) documents declassified in 2006 show that the capture of Eichmann caused alarm at the CIA and West German ''Bundesnachrichtendienst'' (BND).
When the prosecution rested, the defence opened its case with a motion to dismiss based on the trial itself being illegal.
The defence demanded that the men should be brought to Israel so that the defence's right to cross-examination would not be abrogated.
He was assigned to study and prepare reports on the Zionist movement and various Jewish organisations.
His pardon plea, released in 2016, did not contradict this: "There is a need to draw a line between the leaders responsible and the people like me forced to serve as mere instruments in the hands of the leaders", Eichmann wrote.
Regarding the Wannsee Conference, Eichmann stated that he felt a sense of satisfaction and relief at its conclusion.
The plan was almost abandoned on the designated day when Eichmann was not present on the bus he usually took home.
Funding came from money seized from other Jewish people and organisations, as well as donations from overseas, which were placed under SD control.
The content of his letter to the President pleading for pardon and other original court documents of the trial were made public on 27 January 2016.
Appeal hearings took place between 22 and 29 March 1962.
After Germany invaded Hungary in March 1944, Eichmann oversaw the deportation of much of that country's Jewish population.
Mossad operative Rafi Eitan was named leader of the eight-man team, most of whom were Shin Bet agents.
Heydrich announced Eichmann to be his "special expert", in charge of arranging for all deportations into occupied Poland.
Eichmann collected information for Heydrich, attended the conference, and prepared the minutes.
The documents also revealed that both agencies had used some of Eichmann's former Nazi colleagues to spy on European communist countries.
The interrogator was Chief Inspector Avner Less of the national police.
After discussions with Hitler in the preceding weeks, on 21 September SS-''Obergruppenführer'' Reinhard Heydrich, head of the SD, advised his staff that Jews were to be collected into cities in Poland with good rail links to facilitate their expulsion from territories controlled by Germany, starting with areas that had been incorporated into the Reich.
1940 in Vienna), Dieter Helmut (b.
The film intercuts dramatic scenes with historical footage from the trial.
Eichmann later testified that Berlin had authorised him to allow emigration of a million Jews in exchange for 10,000 trucks equipped to handle the wintry conditions on the Eastern Front.
When considering the sentence, the judges concluded that Eichmann had not merely been following orders, but believed in the Nazi cause wholeheartedly and had been a key perpetrator of the genocide.
In 1957 Bauer passed along the information in person to Mossad director Isser Harel, who assigned operatives to undertake surveillance, but no concrete evidence was initially found.
Eichmann initially visited them weekly, but as time went on his visits tapered off to once a month.
Eichmann was promoted to SS-''Obersturmführer'' (first lieutenant) in July 1938, and appointed to the Central Agency for Jewish Emigration in Vienna, created in August.
After the death of Maria in 1916, Eichmann's father married Maria Zawrzel, a devout Protestant with two sons.
Eichmann held a series of low-paying jobs until finding employment at Mercedes-Benz, where he rose to department head.
He played the violin and participated in sports and clubs, including a ''Wandervogel'' woodcraft and scouting group that included some older boys who were members of various right-wing militias.
Nazi Germany used violence and economic pressure to encourage Jews to leave Germany of their own volition; around 250,000 of the country's 437,000 Jews emigrated between 1933 and 1939.
"I was not a responsible leader, and as such do not feel myself guilty."
In 1938, Eichmann was posted to Vienna to help organise Jewish emigration from Austria, which had just been integrated into the Reich through the ''Anschluss''.
In late December, when this unit was dissolved, Eichmann was promoted to SS-''Scharführer'' (squad leader, equivalent to corporal).
Polkes suggested that more Jews should be allowed to leave under the terms of the Haavara Agreement, but Hagen refused, surmising that a strong Jewish presence in Palestine might lead to their founding an independent state, which would run contrary to Reich policy.
The trial was presided over by three judges: Moshe Landau, Benjamin Halevy and Yitzhak Raveh.
From the start of the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, ''Einsatzgruppen'' (task forces) followed the army into conquered areas and rounded up and killed Jews, Comintern officials, and ranking members of the Communist Party.
He does not agree that his father's "following orders" argument excuses his actions and notes how his father's lack of remorse caused "difficult emotions" for the Eichmann family.
The prosecution proved that Eichmann had visited places where exterminations had taken place, including Chełmno extermination camp, Auschwitz, and Minsk (where he witnessed a mass shooting of Jews), and therefore was aware that the deportees were being killed.
Defence attorney Servatius repeatedly tried to curb the presentation of material not directly related to Eichmann, and was mostly successful.
In Argentina, the abduction was met with a violent wave of antisemitism carried out by far-right sectors, including the Tacuara Nationalist Movement.
The trial adjourned on 14 August, and the verdict was read on 12 December.
Meanwhile, at the Nuremberg trials of major war criminals starting in 1946, damning evidence about Eichmann's activities was given by former commandant of Auschwitz Rudolf Höss and others.
The judges declared him not guilty of personally killing anyone and not guilty of overseeing and controlling the activities of the ''Einsatzgruppen''.
At 8:00 PM on 31 May, Eichmann was informed that his final appeal had been declined.
The chief prosecutor was Israeli Attorney General Gideon Hausner, assisted by Gabriel Bach of the Department of Justice and Tel Aviv District Attorney Yaakov Bar-Or.
His last meal was the usual prison fare of cheese, bread, olives, and tea, along with a half bottle of wine.
1936 in Berlin), Horst Adolf (b.
Hitler continued to mention the Plan until February 1942, when the idea was permanently shelved.
Found guilty on many of these charges, he was sentenced to death by hanging and executed on 1 June 1962.
In Israel, the testimony of witnesses at the trial led to a deeper understanding of the impact of the Holocaust on survivors, especially among younger citizens who had never suffered state-sponsored oppression.
On many of the trains in this period, up to a third of the deportees died in transit.
On the advice of family friend and local ''Schutzstaffel'' (SS; protection squadron) leader Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Eichmann joined the Austrian branch of the NSDAP, member number 889,895.
On 1 March 1960 Harel dispatched to Buenos Aires the Shin Bet chief interrogator Zvi Aharoni, who over the course of weeks of investigation was able to confirm the identity of the fugitive.
As the Nazis began the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, their Jewish policy changed from emigration to extermination.
To co-ordinate planning for the proposed genocide, Heydrich hosted the Wannsee Conference, which brought together administrative leaders of the Nazi regime on 20 January 1942.
Many major newspapers from all over the globe sent reporters and published front-page coverage of the story.
He travelled across Europe, staying in a series of monasteries that had been set up as safe houses.
The elder Adolf moved to Linz, Austria, in 1913 to take a position as commercial manager for the Linz Tramway and Electrical Company, and the rest of the family followed a year later.
Also instrumental in exposing Eichmann's identity was Lothar Hermann, a half-Jewish German who had emigrated to Argentina in 1938.
Information collected by Mossad, Israel's intelligence agency, confirmed Eichmann's location in 1960.
In his covering letter, Heydrich specified that Eichmann would act as his liaison with the departments involved.
On 15 December 1961, Eichmann was sentenced to death.
Finally, almost half an hour late, Eichmann got off a bus.
Eichmann initially lived in Tucumán Province, where he worked for a government contractor.
Several Jews and other survivors of the Holocaust dedicated themselves to finding Eichmann and other Nazis.
Tapes, transcripts, and handwritten notes by Eichmann were produced.
As a clear decision to exterminate had been made by his superiors, the matter was out of his hands; he felt absolved of any guilt.
The building was modified to allow journalists to watch the trial on closed-circuit television, and 750 seats were available in the auditorium itself.
Both organizations had known for at least two years where Eichmann was hiding, but did not act, because it did not serve their interests in the Cold War to do so.
In the ensuing debate, the Israeli representative Golda Meir claimed that the abductors were not Israeli agents but private individuals and so the incident was only an "isolated violation of Argentine law".
The genocide was code-named Operation Reinhard in honour of Heydrich, who died in Prague in early June from wounds suffered in an assassination attempt.
From the start of the war until April 1941, around 63,000 Jews were transported into the General Government.
As Argentina had a history of turning down extradition requests for Nazi criminals, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion made the decision that Eichmann should be captured rather than extradited, and brought to Israel for trial.
Among them was the Jewish Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal.
Servatius challenged Eichmann's kidnapping and the basis for the Israeli law under which he had been indicted.
His regiment was SS-''Standarte'' 37, responsible for guarding the party headquarters in Linz and protecting party speakers at rallies, which would often become violent.
Eichmann was promoted to SS-''Hauptscharführer'' (head squad leader) in 1936 and was commissioned as an SS-''Untersturmführer'' (second lieutenant) the following year.
Otto Adolf Eichmann, the eldest of five children, was born in 1906 to a Calvinist Protestant family in Solingen, Germany.
A few months after the Nazi seizure of power in Germany in January 1933, Eichmann lost his job due to staffing cutbacks at Vacuum Oil.
He later came to consider this as his big break.
Servatius also proposed that decisions of the Nazi government were acts of state and therefore not subject to normal judicial proceedings.
His parents were Adolf Karl Eichmann, a bookkeeper, and Maria (''née'' Schefferling), a housewife.
The execution was attended by a small group of officials, four journalists and the Canadian clergyman William Lovell Hull, who had been his spiritual counselor while in prison.
Barracks were planned but never completed.
Eichmann's battalion of the Deutschland Regiment was quartered at barracks next door to Dachau concentration camp.
He provided these photographs to Mossad agents on 18 February.
He argued that if the trial were to continue, it should transfer its jurisdiction to West Germany.
He worked as a travelling oil salesman beginning in 1927, and joined the Nazi Party and SS in 1932.
He escaped from a work detail at Cham when he realised that his actual identity had been discovered.
Informed that Klaus was not home, she sat down to wait.
Israelis had the opportunity to watch live television broadcasts of the proceedings, and videotape was flown daily to the United States for broadcast the following day.
After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, Eichmann and his staff arranged for Jews to be concentrated into ghettos in major cities with the expectation they would be transported farther east or overseas.
In June 1944 Eichmann was involved in negotiations with Rudolf Kasztner that resulted in the rescue of 1,684 people, who were sent by train to safety in Switzerland in exchange for three suitcases full of diamonds, gold, cash, and securities.
Political theorist Hannah Arendt, a Jew who fled Germany after Hitler's rise to power, reported on Eichmann's trial for ''The New Yorker''.
Along with many other SS officers who fled in the closing months of the war, Eichmann and his family were living in relative safety in Austria when the war in Europe ended on 8 May 1945.
The legal basis of the charges against Eichmann was the 1950 Nazi and Nazi Collaborators (Punishment) Law, under which he was indicted on 15 criminal charges, including crimes against humanity, war crimes, crimes against the Jewish people, and membership in a criminal organisation.
For this Eichmann was awarded the Iron Cross, Second Class.
Eichmann's youngest son Ricardo says he is not resentful toward Israel for executing his father.
Within hours Eichmann's body had been cremated, and his ashes scattered in the Mediterranean Sea, outside of Israeli territorial waters by an Israeli Navy patrol boat.
By the time the transports were stopped in July 1944,  437,000 of Hungary's 725,000 Jews had been killed.
Eichmann toured northeastern Hungary in the last week of April and visited Auschwitz in May to assess the preparations.
Eichmann attended the conference, oversaw the stenographer who took the minutes, and prepared the official distributed record of the meeting.
Eichmann drew up plans for a Jewish reservation, first at Nisko in south-east Poland and later in Madagascar, but neither of these plans were ever carried out.
Eichmann and his staff became responsible for Jewish deportations to extermination camps, where the victims were gassed.
Eichmann was one of the officials who received regular detailed reports of their activities.
The initial plan was to implement ''Generalplan Ost'' after the conquest of the Soviet Union.
In spite of the orders to stop, Eichmann personally made arrangements for additional trains of victims to be sent to Auschwitz on 17 and 19 July.
While Eichmann claimed at his trial to be upset by the appalling conditions on the trains and in the transit camps, his correspondence and documents of the period show that his primary concern was to achieve the deportations economically and with minimal disruption to Germany's ongoing military operations.
Eichmann was tasked by SS-''Obergruppenführer'' (general/lieutenant general) Reinhard Heydrich with facilitating and managing the logistics of mass deportation of Jews to ghettos and extermination camps in German-occupied Eastern Europe during World War II.
During these days, Harel tried to locate Josef Mengele, the notorious Nazi doctor from Auschwitz concentration camp, as the Mossad had information that he was also living in Buenos Aires.
We know that one doesn't need to be fanatical, sadistic, or mentally ill to murder millions; that it is enough to be a loyal follower eager to do one's duty."
Near midnight on 20 May, Eichmann was sedated by an Israeli doctor on the Mossad team and dressed as a flight attendant.
His poor school performance resulted in his father withdrawing him from the ''Realschule'' and enrolling him in the ''Höhere Bundeslehranstalt für Elektrotechnik, Maschinenbau und Hochbau'' vocational college.
Using documents provided primarily by Yad Vashem and Nazi hunter Tuviah Friedman, Less was often able to determine when Eichmann was lying or being evasive.
When in 1956 Hermann's daughter Sylvia began dating a man named Klaus Eichmann who boasted about his father's Nazi exploits, Hermann alerted Fritz Bauer, prosecutor-general of the state of Hesse in West Germany.
Ricardo is now a professor of archaeology at the German Archaeological Institute.
He even learned a smattering of Hebrew and Yiddish, gaining a reputation as a specialist in Zionist and Jewish matters.
After a tense delay at the airport getting the flight plan approved, the plane took off for Israel, stopping over in Dakar, Senegal, to refuel.
When Klaus returned, he addressed Eichmann as "Father".
In his 1988 book ''Justice, Not Vengeance'', Wiesenthal said: "The world now understands the concept of 'desk murderer'.
The agents had arrived in Buenos Aires in April 1960 after Eichmann's identity was confirmed.
To co-ordinate planning for the genocide, Heydrich hosted the regime's administrative leaders at the Wannsee Conference on 20 January 1942.
They promised a strong central government, increased ''Lebensraum'' (living space) for Germanic peoples, formation of a national community based on race, and racial cleansing via the active suppression of Jews, who would be stripped of their citizenship and civil rights.
Within a few days of his appointment, Eichmann formulated a plan to deport 600,000 Jews into the General Government.
He was hoping to bring Mengele back to Israel on the same flight.
Within weeks of the invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939, Nazi policy toward the Jews changed from voluntary emigration to forced deportation.
Servatius appealed the verdict, mostly relying on legal arguments about Israel's jurisdiction and the legality of the laws under which Eichmann was charged.
Next, between 1927 and early 1933, Eichmann worked in Upper Austria and Salzburg as district agent for the Vacuum Oil Company AG.
Horrendous conditions in the ghettos—severe overcrowding, poor sanitation, and a lack of food—resulted in a high death rate.
Eichmann and Hagen attempted to return to Palestine a few days later, but were denied entry after the British authorities refused them the required visas.
Hausner's opening address began, "It is not an individual that is in the dock at this historic trial and not the Nazi regime alone, but anti-Semitism throughout history."
On 21 March 1935 Eichmann married Veronika (Vera) Liebl (1909–93).
The trial was widely followed in the media and was later the subject of several books, including Hannah Arendt's work ''Eichmann in Jerusalem'', in which Arendt coined the phrase "the banality of evil" to describe Eichmann.
On his own initiative, Eichmann also laid plans to deport Jews from Vienna.
His last words were:
In the case of the Sassen interviews, only Eichmann's hand-written notes were admitted into evidence.
Eichmann's trial before the Jerusalem District Court began on 11 April 1961.
1942 in Prague) and Ricardo Francisco (b.
They planned to seize him when he was walking beside an open field from the bus stop to his house.
The cabinet decided not to recommend to President Ben-Zvi to grant clemency to Eichmann.
Eichmann pursued party activities in Linz on weekends while continuing in his position at Vacuum Oil in Salzburg.
Some of the evidence submitted by the prosecution took the form of depositions made by leading Nazis.
But Hausner, in his role as Attorney General, declared that he would be obliged to arrest any war criminals who entered Israel.
In ''Eichmann in Jerusalem'', Arendt calls Eichmann the embodiment of the "banality of evil", as he appeared to have an ordinary and normal personality, displaying neither guilt nor hatred.
From 1925 to 1927 he worked as a sales clerk for the ''Oberösterreichische Elektrobau AG'' radio company.
The trial received widespread coverage by the press in West Germany, and many schools added material studying the issues to their curriculum.
On 29 May, the Israeli Supreme Court rejected the appeal and upheld the District Court's judgement on all counts.
Jews were concentrated into ghettos in major cities with the expectation that at some point they would be transported further east or even overseas.
Eichmann stated at his later interrogations that Heydrich told him in mid-September that Hitler had ordered that all Jews in German-controlled Europe were to be killed.
Round-ups began on 16 April, and from 14 May, four trains of 3,000 Jews per day left Hungary and travelled to the camp at Auschwitz II-Birkenau, arriving along a newly built spur line that terminated a few hundred metres away from the gas chambers.
The prosecution case was presented over the course of 56 days, involving hundreds of documents and 112 witnesses (many of them Holocaust survivors).
When Hausner produced evidence that Eichmann had stated in 1945 that "I will leap into my grave laughing because the feeling that I have five million human beings on my conscience is for me a source of extraordinary satisfaction", Eichmann said he meant "enemies of the Reich" such as the Soviets.
After an unremarkable school career, Eichmann briefly worked for his father's mining company in Austria, where the family had moved in 1914.
Inspector Less noted that Eichmann did not seem to realise the enormity of his crimes and showed no remorse.
Eichmann admitted to not liking the Jews and viewing them as adversaries, but stated that he never thought their annihilation was justified.
Under international pressure, the Hungarian government halted deportations on 6 July 1944, by which time over 437,000 of Hungary's 725,000 Jews had died.
Eichmann's office was responsible for collecting information on the Jews in each area, organising the seizure of their property, and arranging for and scheduling trains.
In Eichmann's trial and subsequent appeal, the Israeli court determined that the circumstances of his capture had no bearing on the legality of his trial.
After observing the suspect's routine for many days, they determined that he arrived home by bus from work at around the same time every evening.
Specific deportation orders came from Himmler.
However, Mengele had already left his last known residence in the city, and Harel was unable to get any leads on where he had gone, so the plans for his capture had to be abandoned.
These documents enabled him in 1950 to obtain an International Committee of the Red Cross humanitarian passport and the remaining entry permits that would allow emigration to Argentina.
Many of the deportees were driven by the SS into Soviet-occupied territory and others were eventually placed in a nearby labour camp.
The party platform included removal of the Weimar Republic in Germany, rejection of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, radical antisemitism, and anti-Bolshevism.
Eichmann did not make policy, but acted in an operational capacity.
