caregiving, appropriate attachment), although these skills are not strongly developed until late adolescence.
Cultures vary in how overt this double standard is—in some it is legally inscribed, while in others it is communicated through social convention.
The principle of the importance of timing in one's life refers to the different impact that life events have on development based on when in one's life they occur.
During their peak height velocity (the time of most rapid growth), adolescents grow at a growth rate nearly identical to that of a toddler—about 4&nbsp;inches (10.3&nbsp;cm) a year for males and 3.5&nbsp;inches (9&nbsp;cm) for females.
Adolescents also develop a more sophisticated understanding of probability.
Fashion has played a major role when it comes to teenagers "finding their selves"; Fashion is always evolving, which corresponds with the evolution of change in the personality of teenagers.
He described the resolution of this process as a stage of "identity achievement" but also stressed that the identity challenge "is never fully resolved once and for all at one point in time".
The production of these hormones increases gradually until sexual maturation is met.
Peer groups can have positive influences on an individual, such as on academic motivation and performance.
Since choices made during adolescent years can influence later life, high levels of self-awareness and self-control during mid-adolescence will lead to better decisions during the transition to adulthood.
Often, crowd identities may be the basis for stereotyping young people, such as jocks or nerds.
For females, it is menarche, the onset of menstruation, which occurs, on average, between ages 12 and 13.
In permissive societies, overt sexual behavior among unmarried teens is perceived as acceptable, and is sometimes even encouraged.
For older adolescents, though, sexual activity in the context of romantic relationships was actually correlated with lower levels of deviant behavior after controlling for genetic risks, as opposed to sex outside of a relationship (hook-ups)
This association conducts youth interventions that mutually assist both the needs of the community as well as psychologically stranded youth by focusing on risky and inappropriate behaviors while promoting positive self-development along with self-esteem among adolescents.
For example, adolescents find it easier than children to comprehend the sorts of higher-order abstract logic inherent in puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies.
"Barometric self-esteem" fluctuates rapidly and can cause severe distress and anxiety, but baseline self-esteem remains highly stable across adolescence.
The years of adolescence create a more conscientious group of young adults.
These factors can also contribute to precocious and delayed puberty.
This process is different for females and males.
The final major aspect of identity formation is self-esteem.
While most adolescents date people approximately their own age, boys typically date partners the same age or younger; girls typically date partners the same age or older.
Between the ages of 10 and 25, the brain undergoes changes that have important implications for behavior (see Cognitive development below).
The validity of global self-esteem scales has been questioned, and many suggest that more specific scales might reveal more about the adolescent experience.
Differentiation appears fully developed by mid-adolescence.
In fact, studies suggest that more significantly than actual drug norms, an individual's perception of the illicit drug use by friends and peers is highly associated with his or her own habits in substance use during both middle and high school, a relationship that increases in strength over time.
During these years, adolescents are more open to 'trying on' different behaviours and appearances to discover who they are.
This barrage consciously or subconsciously registers into the mind causing issues with self-image a factor that contributes to an adolescence sense of identity.
Some qualities of adolescents' lives that are often correlated with risky sexual behavior include higher rates of experienced abuse, lower rates of parental support and monitoring.
This effect does not hold true for sexual activity in late adolescence that takes place within a romantic relationship.
Sociologists interested in adolescence might focus on the acquisition of social roles (e.g., worker or romantic partner) and how this varies across cultures or social conditions.
At the conclusion of puberty, the ends of the long bones close during the process called epiphysis.
These include the lateral and prefrontal cortices, among other regions.
The extent to which an adolescent is expected to share family responsibilities is one large determining factor in normative adolescent behavior.
Adolescents also associate with friends of the opposite sex much more than in childhood and tend to identify with larger groups of peers based on shared characteristics.
Wisdom, or the capacity for insight and judgment that is developed through experience, increases between the ages of fourteen and twenty-five, then levels off.
This constant increase in the likelihood of a long-term relationship can be explained by sexual maturation and the development of cognitive skills necessary to maintain a romantic bond (e.g.
A thorough understanding of adolescence in society depends on information from various perspectives, including psychology, biology, history, sociology, education, and anthropology.
For example, an adolescent with positive self-confidence is likely to consider themselves a more successful partner, whereas negative experiences may lead to low confidence as a romantic partner.
These studies provided the background for Glen Elder in the 1960s, to propose a life-course perspective of adolescent development.
Adolescents are more aware of their thought processes and can use mnemonic devices and other strategies to think more efficiently.
The corresponding increase in emotional variability also can increase adolescents' vulnerability.
Coming to terms with and creating a positive LGBT identity can be difficult for some youth for a variety of reasons.
The typical duration of relationships increases throughout the teenage years as well.
The Oakland Growth Study, initiated by Harold Jones and Herbert Stolz in 1931, aimed to study the physical, intellectual, and social development of children in the Oakland area.
However, the Internet can be significantly useful in educating teens because of the access they have to information on many various topics.
Girls who experience malnutrition or are in societies in which children are expected to perform physical labor also begin menstruating at later ages.
Studies also confirm the impermanence of the stages; there is no final endpoint in identity development.
This includes protecting children against unchecked child labor, enrollment in the military, prostitution, and pornography.
Menarche, the beginning of menstruation, is a relatively late development which follows a long series of hormonal changes.
For example, half of all 16-year-olds in China were employed in 1980, whereas less than one fourth of this same cohort were employed in 1990.
While children that grow up in nice suburban communities are not exposed to bad environments they are more likely to participate in activities that can benefit their identity and contribute to a more successful identity development.
This age varies greatly cross-culturally, spanning from 10 to 18, which further reflects the diverse ways formal education is viewed in cultures around the world.
The adolescent growth spurt is a rapid increase in the individual's height and weight during puberty resulting from the simultaneous release of growth hormones, thyroid hormones, and androgens.
College Professor Lucia O'Sullivan and her colleagues found that there were no significant gender differences in the relationship events adolescent boys and girls from grades 7-12 reported.
Emotional autonomy is defined in terms of an adolescent's relationships with others, and often includes the development of more mature emotional connections with adults and peers.
Jean Macfarlane founded the University of California, Berkeley's Institute of Human Development, formerly called the Institute of Child Welfare, in 1927.
However, while peers may facilitate social development for one another they may also hinder it.
As children begin to bond with various people and create friendships, it later helps them when they are adolescent and sets up the framework for adolescence and peer groups.
The average onset of puberty is at 10 or 11 for girls and age 11 or 12 for boys.
In Hong Kong, female participants most frequently reported drinking for social enjoyment, while males most frequently reported drinking to feel the effects of alcohol.
From these social media encounters, a further relationship may begin.
For the most part, evidence has supported Erikson's stages: each correlates with the personality traits he originally predicted.
In studying adolescent development, adolescence can be defined biologically, as the physical transition marked by the onset of puberty and the termination of physical growth; cognitively, as changes in the ability to think abstractly and multi-dimensionally; or socially, as a period of preparation for adult roles.
Adolescence is a critical period in social development because adolescents can be easily influenced by the people they develop close relationships with.
Studies have shown that early maturing boys are more likely to be sexually active and are more likely to participate in risky behaviors.
Adolescence is frequently characterized by a transformation of an adolescent's understanding of the world, the rational direction towards a life course, and the active seeking of new ideas rather than the unquestioning acceptance of adult authority.
The first stage, known as sensitization, usually starts in childhood, and is marked by the child's becoming aware of same-sex attractions.
However, specific household responsibilities for adolescents may vary by culture, family type, and adolescent age.
Within the past ten years, the amount of social networking sites available to the public has greatly increased as well as the number of adolescents using them.
The environment in which an adolescent grows up also plays an important role in their identity development.
Teens are heavy users of newer forms of communication such as text message and social-networking websites such as Facebook, especially when communicating with peers.
Thus, the brain does not grow in size much during adolescence.
In some countries, such as the United States, adolescence can last nearly a decade, but in others, the transition—often in the form of a ceremony—can last for only a few days.
Converging influences from adolescent cognitive development, expanding social relationships, an increasingly adultlike appearance, and the acceptance of more rights and responsibilities enhance feelings of autonomy for adolescents.
For example, girls tend to reduce their physical activity in preadolescence and may receive inadequate nutrition from diets that often lack important nutrients, such as iron.
As a result, adolescents experience a significant shift from the simple, concrete, and global self-descriptions typical of young children; as children, they defined themselves by physical traits whereas as adolescents, they define themselves based on their values, thoughts, and opinions.
In this context, they refer to the fallibility of official assumptions about what is good or bad for an individual, concluding that paternalistic "rights" may harm the individual.
These environmental influences in turn affect female physical development.
The biggest changes in the folds of the brain during this time occur in the parts of the cortex that process cognitive and emotional information.
A 2002 American study found that those aged 15–44 reported that the average age of first sexual intercourse was 17.0 for males and 17.3 for females.
The balance of excitatory to inhibitory neurotransmitters and increased dopamine activity in adolescence may have implications for adolescent risk-taking and vulnerability to boredom (see Cognitive development below).
Out of a polled body of students, 4.4% of 8th graders reported having been on at least one occasion been drunk within the previous month; for 10th graders, the number was 13.7%, and for 12th graders, 25%.
Three neurotransmitters that play important roles in adolescent brain development are glutamate, dopamine and serotonin.
Facial hair in males normally appears in a specific order during puberty: The first facial hair to appear tends to grow at the corners of the upper lip, typically between 14 and 17 years of age.
Adolescents can conceptualize multiple "possible selves" that they could become and long-term possibilities and consequences of their choices.
Among young adolescents, "heavy" sexual activity, marked by genital stimulation, is often associated with violence, depression, and poor relationship quality.
The relationships adolescents have with their peers, family, and members of their social sphere play a vital role in the social development of an adolescent.
Compared to children, adolescents are more likely to question others' assertions, and less likely to accept facts as absolute truths.
The major landmark of puberty for males is the first ejaculation, which occurs, on average, at age 13.
For example, without a willingness to take risks, teenagers would not have the motivation or confidence necessary to leave their family of origin.
The appearance of more systematic, abstract thinking is another notable aspect of cognitive development during adolescence.
The researchers state that these results are important because the results focus on the more positive aspects of adolescents and their social and romantic interactions rather than focusing on sexual behavior and its consequences.
These people tend to support the notion that a more interconnected brain makes more precise distinctions (citing Pavlov's comparisons of conditioned reflexes in different species)and that there is a non-arbitrary threshold at which distinctions become sufficiently precise to correct assumptions afterward as opposed to being ultimately dependent on exterior assumptions for communication.
Peer groups offer members the opportunity to develop social skills such as empathy, sharing, and leadership.
Some research suggest that there are genetic causes of early sexual activity that are also risk factors for delinquency, suggesting that there is a group who are at risk for both early sexual activity and emotional distress.
In 1989, Troiden proposed a four-stage model for the development of homosexual sexual identity.
It is, therefore, clear that cultural differences exist in perceptions of adolescent autonomy, and such differences have implications for the lifestyles and development of adolescents.
Many countries also specify a minimum school leaving age, at which a person is legally allowed to leave compulsory education.
So many factors contribute to the developing social identity of an adolescent from commitment, to coping devices, to social media.
Identity development is a stage in the adolescent life cycle.
These cultures may attempt to restrict sexual activity by separating males and females throughout their development, or through public shaming and physical punishment when sexual activity does occur.
Across the country, clinicians report rising diagnoses of herpes and human papillomavirus (HPV), which can cause genital warts, and is now thought to affect 15 percent of the teen population.
The forming of an adolescent's identity is a crucial time in their life.
From the '50s until the '80s, the focus of the field was mainly on describing patterns of behavior as opposed to explaining them.
Wisdom is not the same as intelligence: adolescents do not improve substantially on IQ tests since their scores are relative to others in their same age group, and relative standing usually does not change—everyone matures at approximately the same rate in this way.
A broad way of defining adolescence is the transition from child-to-adulthood.
Adolescents begin by defining themselves based on their crowd membership.
Social engagement and personal enjoyment appear to play a fairly universal role in adolescents' decision to drink throughout separate cultural contexts.
This phenomenon also has consequences for behavioral treatments based on the principle of extinction, such as cue exposure therapy for anxiety or drug addiction.
This reported aggression includes hitting, throwing things, or slaps, although most of this physical aggression does not result in a medical visit.
Custody disputes soon after a divorce often reflect a playing out of control battles and ambivalence between parents.
They also believe students should be able to be tested for STIs.
Every person's individual timetable for puberty is influenced primarily by heredity, although environmental factors, such as diet and exercise, also exert some influences.
Several sources report a high proportion of adolescents who use social media: 73% of 12–17 year olds reported having at least one social networking profile; two-thirds (68%) of teens text every day, half (51%) visit social networking sites daily, and 11% send or receive tweets at least once every day.
Most theories on self-esteem state that there is a grand desire, across all genders and ages, to maintain, protect and enhance their self-esteem.
Frequently, the increase in fat for girls happens in their years just before puberty.
Recent studies have indicated that the average teenager watches roughly 1500 hours of television per year.
One-quarter of all new HIV cases occur in those under the age of 21.
The first places to grow are the extremities—the head, hands and feet—followed by the arms and legs, then the torso and shoulders.
Because of their bodies' developing in advance, pubescent girls can become more insecure and dependent.
Thus age provides only a rough marker of adolescence, and scholars have found it difficult to agree upon a precise definition of adolescence.
In females, secondary sex changes involve elevation of the breasts, widening of the hips, development of pubic and underarm hair, widening of the areolae, and elevation of the nipples.
Another set of significant physical changes during puberty happen in bodily distribution of fat and muscle.
Bullied adolescents are more likely to both continue to be bullied and to bully others in the future.
Generally, a girl is not fully fertile until several years after menarche, as regular ovulation follows menarche by about two years.
Peer pressure is a large factor when youth who are questioning their sexuality or gender identity are surrounded by heteronormative peers and can cause great distress due to a feeling of being different from everyone else.
They begin to differentiate between rules instituted out of common sense—not touching a hot stove—and those that are based on culturally-relative standards (codes of etiquette, not dating until a certain age), a delineation that younger children do not make.
For example, menarche (the first menstrual period of a female), or semenarche (the first ejaculation of a male) are frequent sexual defining points for many cultures.
Over the course of adolescence, the amount of white matter in the brain increases linearly, while the amount of grey matter in the brain follows an inverted-U pattern.
Developmental Intervention Science (DIS) is a fusion of the literature of both developmental and intervention sciences.
In males, the first stages of puberty involve growth of the testes and scrotum, followed by growth of the penis.
Some of the most developmentally significant changes in the brain occur in the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in decision making and cognitive control, as well as other higher cognitive functions.
The first ejaculation of seminal fluid generally occurs about one year after the beginning of accelerated penis growth, although this is often determined culturally rather than biologically, since for many boys first ejaculation occurs as a result of masturbation.
Time management, financial roles, and social responsibilities of adolescents are therefore closely connected with the education sector and processes of career development for adolescents, as well as to cultural norms and social expectations.
The heightened usage of ecstasy most likely ties in at least to some degree with the rising popularity of rave culture.
Nonetheless, new legal privileges converge with shifting social expectations to usher in a phase of heightened independence or social responsibility for most legal adolescents.
Some adolescents use these newer channels to enhance relationships with peers however there can be negative uses as well such as cyberbullying, as mentioned previously, and negative impacts on the family.
Greater enhancement motives for alcohol consumption tend to reflect high levels of extraversion and sensation-seeking in individuals; such enjoyment motivation often also indicates low conscientiousness, manifesting in lowered inhibition and a greater tendency towards aggression.
This provides the ability to plan ahead, see the future consequences of an action and to provide alternative explanations of events.
Perhaps the strong correlation between peer influence in middle school and cigarette smoking in high school may be explained by the addictive nature of cigarettes, which could lead many students to continue their smoking habits from middle school into late adolescence.
The weight gained during adolescence constitutes nearly half of one's adult body weight.
Research also indicates that baseline sensation seeking may affect risk-taking behavior throughout the lifespan.
Most teens said they had kissed their partners, held hands with them, thought of themselves as being a couple and told people they were in a relationship.
Recent studies have shown that male late adolescents are far more likely to smoke cigarettes rather than females.
Thus, it is during the adolescence-adulthood transition that individuals acquire the type of wisdom that is associated with age.
These reference groups are the peers of adolescents.
Household chores are frequently divided into self-care tasks and family-care tasks.
This means that private thoughts about the relationship as well as public recognition of the relationship were both important to the adolescents in the sample.
Despite some genetic sex differences, environmental factors play a large role in biological changes during adolescence.
The age of menarche is influenced by heredity, but a girl's diet and lifestyle contribute as well.
This is triggered by the pituitary gland, which secretes a surge of hormonal agents into the blood stream, initiating a chain reaction to occur.
In extreme cases of instability and abuse in homes, divorce can have a positive effect on families due to less conflict in the home.
Dopamine is associated with pleasure and attuning to the environment during decision-making.
Empirical studies suggest that this process might be more accurately described as identity development, rather than formation, but confirms a normative process of change in both content and structure of one's thoughts about the self.
Adolescents are much better able than children to understand that people do not have complete control over their mental activity.
In contrast, though both sexes experience an increase in body fat, the increase is much more significant for girls.
The first areas of the brain to be pruned are those involving primary functions, such as motor and sensory areas.
Self-esteem is defined as one's thoughts and feelings about one's self-concept and identity.
There can be ethnic differences in these skeletal changes.
The accelerated growth in different body parts happens at different times, but for all adolescents it has a fairly regular sequence.
While adolescents may engage in casual sexual encounters (often referred to as hookups), most sexual experience during this period of development takes place within romantic relationships.
Other critics of the concept of adolescence do point at individual differences in brain growth rate, citing that some (though not all) early teens still have infantile undeveloped corpus callosums, concluding that "the adult in *every* adolescent" is too generalizing.
Therefore, this model estimates that the process of coming out begins in childhood, and continues through the early to mid 20s.
In the final stage, known as commitment, the young adult adopts their sexual identity as a lifestyle.
The age of consent to sexual activity varies widely between jurisdictions, ranging from 12 to 20 years, as does the age at which people are allowed to marry.
Even with their different theories, these three psychologists agreed that adolescence was inherently a time of disturbance and psychological confusion.
Peer groups are especially important during adolescence, a period of development characterized by a dramatic increase in time spent with peers and a decrease in adult supervision.
Hall's assertions stood relatively uncontested until the 1950s when psychologists such as Erik Erikson and Anna Freud started to formulate their theories about adolescence.
In large, multi-ethnic high schools, there are often ethnically determined crowds.
The testes primarily release testosterone, and the ovaries predominantly dispense estrogen.
However, other research suggests that Internet communication brings friends closer and is beneficial for socially anxious teens, who find it easier to interact socially online.
This understanding of youth was based on two then new ways of understanding human behavior: Darwin's evolutionary theory and Freud's psychodynamic theory.
Sexual orientation has been defined as "an erotic inclination toward people of one or more genders, most often described as sexual or erotic attractions".
However, most research suggests a negative effect on adolescence as well as later development.
Cliques also have become somewhat a "collective parent", i.e.
Physical aggression in relationships tends to decline from high school through college and young adulthood.
This means that who the teen chooses/accepts as their friends and who they communicate with on a frequent basis often makes up their reference groups and can therefore have a huge impact on who they become.
Drinking habits and the motives behind them often reflect certain aspects of an individual's personality; in fact, four dimensions of the Five-Factor Model of personality demonstrate associations with drinking motives (all but 'Openness').
During adolescence, myelination and synaptic pruning in the prefrontal cortex increases, improving the efficiency of information processing, and neural connections between the prefrontal cortex and other regions of the brain are strengthened.
However, the time frame of this transition varies drastically by culture.
Specifically, developments in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are important for controlling impulses and planning ahead, while development in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex is important for decision making.
Some theorists believe that there are many different possible developmental paths one could take, and that the specific path an individual follows may be determined by their sex, orientation, and when they reached the onset of puberty.
Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter.
Egocentrism in adolescents forms a self-conscious desire to feel important in their peer groups and enjoy social acceptance.
Multrine also states in her article that according to a March survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation, eighty-one percent of parents want schools to discuss the use of condoms and contraception with their children.
The changes in secondary sex characteristics that take place during puberty are often referred to in terms of five Tanner stages, named after the British pediatrician who devised the categorization system.
In teenagers, body dissatisfaction is often associated with body mass, low self-esteem, and atypical eating patterns.
Adolescents think more quickly than children.
When they fail to win friends' approval or couldn't find someone with whom to share common activities and common interests, in these cases, girls suffer from low self-esteem.
The more conclusive finding has been that Internet use has a negative effect on the physical health of adolescents, as time spent using the Internet replaces time doing physical activities.
The most prevalent answers among Canadian adolescents were to "get in a party mood," 18%; "because I enjoy it," 16%; and "to get drunk," 10%.
Accordingly, youth, a period that spans late adolescence and early adulthood, has become a more prominent stage of the life course.
The male and female gonads are subsequently activated, which puts them into a state of rapid growth and development; the triggered gonads now commence the mass production of the necessary chemicals.
In addition to the sharing of household chores, certain cultures expect adolescents to share in their family's financial responsibilities.
Pubescent boys often tend to have a good body image, are more confident, secure, and more independent.
The areas of the brain involved in more complex processes lose matter later in development.
Everyone has a self-concept, whereas Erik Erikson argued that not everyone fully achieves identity.
Changes in secondary sex characteristics include every change that is not directly related to sexual reproduction.
Adolescence is also a time for rapid cognitive development.
