Adoption/live birth ratio
A specific concern for many parents is accommodating an adoptee in the classroom.
In the largest study to date (based on the responses of 1,007 adoptees and relinquishing parents), 90% responded that reunion was a beneficial experience.
Such children are at risk of developing a disorganized attachment.
While the general population experienced more behavioral problems, substance use, lower school achievement, and impaired social competence after parental divorce, the adoptee population appeared to be unaffected in terms of their outside relationships, specifically in their school or social abilities.
Simultaneously, groups such as Origins USA (founded in 1997) started to actively speak about family preservation and the rights of mothers.
0.2 per 100 live births
In some countries, such as the United States, "Homecoming Day" is the day when an adoptee is officially united with their new adoptive family.
More recent research found that in a sample of mothers who had released their children for adoption four to 12 years prior, every participant had frequent thoughts of their lost child.
The externally focused rationale for reunion suggests adoptees may be well adjusted and happy within their adoptive families, but will search as an attempt to resolve experiences of social stigma.
Anti-institutional forces gathered momentum.
The Church's innovation, however, was the practice of oblation, whereby children were dedicated to lay life within monastic institutions and reared within a monastery.
In the 1970s, as adoption search and support organizations developed, there were challenges to the language in common use at the time.
This suggests that there will always be some children who fare well, who are resilient, regardless of their experiences in early childhood.
This controversy illustrates the problems in adoption, as well as the fact that coining new words and phrases to describe ancient social practices will not necessarily alter the feelings and experiences of those affected by them.
Its importance as an avenue for adoption varies by country.
For example, in one of the earliest studies conducted, Professor Goldfarb in England concluded that some children adjust well socially and emotionally despite their negative experiences of institutional deprivation in early childhood.
The term Gotcha Day is also used to refer to this day.
These differences in development appear to play out in the way young adoptees deal with major life events.
0.7 per 100 live births
While the general population experienced more behavioral problems, substance use, lower school achievement, and impaired social competence after parental divorce, the adoptee population appeared to be unaffected in terms of their outside relationships, specifically in their school or social abilities.
The stigmas associated with adoption are amplified for children in foster care.
Some adoptions continued to occur, however, but became informal, based on ad hoc contracts.
In addressing the linguistic problem of naming, Edna Andrews says that using "inclusive" and "neutral" language is based upon the concept that "language represents thought, and may even control thought."
Therefore, exposing transracial and transnational adoptees to their "cultures of origin" is important in order to better develop a sense of identity and appreciation for cultural diversity.
Abandonment levels rose with the fall of the empire and many of the foundlings were left on the doorstep of the Church.
One author suggests a common question adoptive parents have is: "Will we love the child even though he/she is not our biological child?"
Similar mechanisms appear to be at work in the physical development of adoptees.
Moreover, about one-half of inter-individual differences were due to individual non-shared influences.
It is believed that children who are adopted may not feel as though they fit in with their adoptive families knowing that their adoptive parents are not the people who gave birth to them.
In another study that compared mothers who released their children to those who raised them, mothers who released their children were more likely to delay their next pregnancy, to delay marriage, and to complete job training.
The next stage of adoption's evolution fell to the emerging nation of the United States.
England and Wales established their first formal adoption law in 1926.
However, both groups reached lower levels of education than their peers who were never pregnant.
Breakdown: 50 non-relative, 50 relative, 17 step-parent, 12 surrogacy, 1 foster parent, 18 international relative, 6 international non-relative
This includes adoptions that end prior to legal finalization and those that end after that point (in U.S. law, the latter cases are referred to as having been dissolved).
Typically associated with a time of experimentation, there are endless factors that go in to the construction of one's identity.
In response, family preservation efforts grew so that few children born out of wedlock today are adopted.
The rest were international adoptions.
approx 127,000 (2001)
The children were generally indentured, rather than adopted, to families who took them in.
To believe that good relationships will develop on such a foundation is psychologically unsound" (Lawrence).
It can be said that adoptees, in some respect, tend to develop differently from the general population.
They may begin to question everything about themselves.
Charles Loring Brace, a Protestant minister became appalled by the legions of homeless waifs roaming the streets of New York City.
Europe's cultural makeover marked a period of significant innovation for adoption.
1.1 per 100 live births
It established three new principles including "to prevent placements of children...," reflecting the belief that children would be better served by staying with their biological families, a striking shift in policy that remains in force today.
West Germany enacted its first laws in 1977.
The majority of people state that their primary source of information about adoption comes from friends and family and the news media.
Some adoption blogs, for example, criticized ''Meet the Robinsons'' for using outdated orphanage imagery as did advocacy non-profit The Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute.
This theory is supported in another more qualitative study where in adoptive relationships marked by sameness in likes, personality, and appearance, both adult adoptees and adoptive parents report being happier with the adoption.
The U.S. example, however, indicates there is wide variation by country since adoptions from abroad account for less than 15% of its cases.
These relationships can be friendly, familial or romantic.
Likely contributing factors in the 1960s and 1970s include a decline in the fertility rate, associated with the introduction of the pill, the completion of legalization of artificial birth control methods, the introduction of federal funding to make family planning services available to the young and low income, and the legalization of abortion.
''Table 2: Adoptions, Live Births, and Adoption/Live Birth Ratios are provided in the table below (alphabetical, by country) for a number of Western countries''
However, levels of comfort over both groups were high, and those who released their child were similar to those who kept their child in ratings of life satisfaction, relationship satisfaction, and positive future outlook for schooling, employment, finances, and marriage.
Nevertheless, the popularity of eugenic ideas in America put up obstacles to the growth of adoption.
Adoption, for some, precludes a complete or integrated sense of self.
The intellectual tone of these recent reform movements was influenced by the publishing of ''The Primal Wound'' by Nancy Verrier.
The book "Adoption Detective: Memoir of an Adopted Child" by Judith and Martin Land provides insight into the mind of an adoptee from childhood through to adulthood and the emotions invoked when reunification with their birth mothers is desired.
The Code of Hammurabi, for example, details the rights of adopters and the responsibilities of adopted individuals at length.
English Common Law, for instance, did not permit adoption since it contradicted the customary rules of inheritance.
Ginni Snodgrass answers these questions in the following way.
The United States, for example, now has the 1978 Indian Child Welfare Act, which allows the tribe and family of a Native American child to be involved in adoption decisions, with preference being given to adoption within the child's tribe.
Although there are a range of possible reasons, the most recent study of experiences of women who adopt suggests they are most likely to be 40–44 years of age, currently married, have impaired fertility, and childless.
Infertility is the main reason parents seek to adopt children they are not related to.
Following its Roman predecessor, Americans severed the rights of the original parents while making adopters the new parents in the eyes of the law.
The secrecy in an adoptive family and the denial that the adoptive family is different builds dysfunction into it.
The sense of guilt towards adoptive parents comes from curiosity about biological families.
Adoptees may also fear that their adoptive family may love them less because of their curiosity.
From an perspective of looking at issues in adoption circumstances, the people involved and affected by adoption (the biological parent, the adoptive parent and the adoptee) can be known as the "triad members and state".
It appears the desire for reunion is linked to the adoptee's interaction with and acceptance within the community.
Similar ideas were taking hold globally with grass-roots organizations like Parent Finders in Canada and Jigsaw in Australia.
What characteristics come from the biological family and which come from the adoptive family?
Proponents of HAL liken this to the mother being treated as a "breeder" or "incubator".
This suggests that conclusions such that adoptees are more likely to have behavioral problems such as ODD and ADHD may be biased.
The fear of being left or forgotten is what often holds adoptees back from creating such relationships.
The formation of identity is a complicated process and there are many factors that affect its outcome.
Another study found that pregnant adolescents whose mothers had a higher level of education were more likely to release their babies for adoption.
In Western culture, many see that the common image of a family being that of a heterosexual couple with biological children.
Without support from the nobility, the practice gradually shifted toward abandoned children.
In the same vein, France's Napoleonic Code made adoption difficult, requiring adopters to be over the age of 50, sterile, older than the adopted person by at least fifteen years, and to have fostered the adoptee for at least six years.
For example, it has been found that many adoptees experience difficulty in establishing a sense of identity.
For transracial and international adoptees, tension is generally found in the categories of racial, ethnic and national identification.
As well as being many factors, there are many types of identities one can associate with.
0.4 per 100 live births
As a consequence, research indicates, disparaging views of adoptive families exist, along with doubts concerning the strength of their family bonds.
Thus nature "ensures some initial flexibility with respect to the particular adults who take on the parental role."
This idea places alternative family forms outside the norm.
The laws of different countries vary in their willingness to allow international adoptions.
The number of adoptions is reported to be constant since 1987.
At the end of a designated term of (voluntary) co-habitation, as witnessed by the public, the adoption is then considered binding, in some courts of law, even though not initially sanctioned by the court.
While the modern form of adoption emerged in the United States, forms of the practice appeared throughout history.
It has been found that multicultural and transnational youth tend to identify with their parents origin of culture and ethnicity rather than their residing location, yet it is sometimes hard to balance an identity between the two because school environments tend to lack diversity and acknowledgment regarding such topics.
Secrecy erects barriers to forming a healthy identity.
Under Islamic Law, for example, adopted children must keep their original surname to be identified with blood relations, and, traditionally, observe hijab (the covering of women in the presence of non-family) in their adoptive households.
A common example of this is a "stepparent adoption", where the new partner of a parent may legally adopt a child from the parent's previous relationship.
Includes all adoption orders in England and Wales
Additionally, the Asian powers opened their orphanage systems to adoption, influenced as they were by Western ideas following colonial rule and military occupation.
Other researchers also found that prolonged institutionalization does not necessarily lead to emotional problems or character defects in all children.
These kinds of recommendations encouraged people to be more aware of their use of adoption terminology.
Many adoptees call their adoptive parents "mom" and "dad" and refer to adoptive siblings as such, which adoptees feel may hurt their biological families, should they find out.
Estimates suggest that 11–24% of Americans who cannot conceive or carry to term attempt to build a family through adoption, and that the overall rate of ever-married American women who adopt is about 1.4%.
This guilt is felt towards both their birth families as well as their adoptive families.
Externally focused theories, in contrast, suggest that reunion is a way for adoptees to overcome social stigma.
One's identity tends to lack stability in the beginning years of life but gains a more stable sense in later periods of childhood and adolescence.
The Stolen Generation of Aboriginal people in Australia were affected by similar policies, as were Native Americans in the United States and First Nations of Canada.
~3 per 100 live births
Concerning developmental milestones, studies from the Colorado Adoption Project examined genetic influences on adoptee maturation, concluding that cognitive abilities of adoptees reflect those of their adoptive parents in early childhood but show little similarity by adolescence, resembling instead those of their biological parents and to the same extent as peers in non-adoptive families.
In sum, reunions can bring a variety of issues for adoptees and parents.
White adolescents tend to give up their babies to non-relatives, whereas black adolescents are more likely to receive support from their own community in raising the child and also in the form of informal adoption by relatives.
For many, this uncertainty can be unsettling and uncomfortable.
Abandoned children were often picked up for slavery and composed a significant percentage of the Empire's slave supply.
Although adoption is today practiced globally, the United States has the largest number of children adopted per 100 live births.
Private domestic adoption accounts for a significant portion of all adoptions; in the United States, for example, nearly 45% of adoptions are estimated to have been arranged privately.
The experience of the Boston Female Asylum (BFA) is a good example, which had up to 30% of its charges adopted out by 1888.
* Embryo adoption: based on the donation of embryos remaining after one couple's in vitro fertilization treatments have been completed; embryos are given to another individual or couple, followed by the placement of those embryos into the recipient woman's uterus, to facilitate pregnancy and childbirth.
Another common feeling that many people who are adopted deal with is a feeling of guilt.
It is uncertain what caused the subsequent decline.
Subsequent research found that adolescent mothers who chose to release their babies for adoption were more likely to experience feelings of sorrow and regret over their decision than those who kept their babies.
Nevertheless, most reunion results appear to be positive.
and Lee Campbell and other birthmothers established CUB (Concerned United Birthparents).
The UK Office for National Statistics has projected that 33% of all adoptees would eventually request a copy of their original birth records, exceeding original forecasts made in 1975 when it was believed that only a small fraction of the adoptee population would request their records.
'''Adoption''' is a process whereby a person assumes the parenting of another, usually a child, and or animal from that person's biological or legal parent or parents, and, in so doing, permanently transfers all rights and responsibilities, along with filiation, from the biological parent or parents.
One study found that those who released their babies for adoption were less comfortable with their decision than those who kept their babies.
Yet, such assumptions have been clarified as flawed due to methodological failures.
For example, based upon specific laws and regulations of the United States, the Child Citizen Act of 2000 makes sure to grant immediate U.S. citizenship to adoptees.
Such opportunities include loving homes and environments, parents who are able to provide and care for all their financial needs as well as access to education.
Anxiety over lack of medical history may become worse for those who are seeking to get married and start a family.
These practices have become significant social and political issues in recent years, and in many cases the policies have changed.
The research says that the dysfunction, untruths and evasiveness that can be present in adoptive families not only makes identity formation impossible, but also directly works against it.
This influenced Pat Johnston's "Positive Adoption Language" (PAL) and "Respectful Adoption Language" (RAL).
Negative perceptions result in the belief that such children are so troubled it would be impossible to adopt them and create "normal" families.
There are many ways in which the concept of identity can be defined.
The orphan trains eventually shipped an estimated 200,000 children from the urban centers of the East to the nation's rural regions.
Brace considered the abandoned youth, particularly Catholics, to be the most dangerous element challenging the city's order.
Two innovations were added: 1) adoption was meant to ensure the "best interests of the child;" the seeds of this idea can be traced to the first American adoption law in Massachusetts, and 2) adoption became infused with secrecy, eventually resulting in the sealing of adoption and original birth records by 1945.
The projection is known to underestimate the true search rate, however, since many adoptees of the era get their birth records by other means.
What effect on identity formation is present if the adoptee knows they are adopted but has no information about their biological parents?
Some of these practices were generally accepted but have later been considered abusive; others were uncontroversially reprehensible.
Under the direction of social welfare activists, orphan asylums began to promote adoptions based on sentiment rather than work; children were placed out under agreements to provide care for them as family members instead of under contracts for apprenticeship.
This claim devalues heritage or "cultural" claims and emphasizes the child's existence as a human being rather than a "property" of specific nations or, for example, abusive caregivers.
Therefore, these factors may explain how tension is created with transracial and transnational adoptees.
Recognizing the difficulties and challenges associated with international adoption, and in an effort to protect those involved from the corruption and exploitation which sometimes accompanies it, the Hague Conference on Private International Law developed the Hague Adoption Convention, which came into force on 1 May 1995 and has been ratified by 85 countries as of November 2011.
More than 60,000 Russian children have been adopted in the United States since 1992, and a similar number of Chinese children were adopted from 1995 to 2005.
Will tensions arise if this is the case?
Danish and American researchers conducting studies on the genetic contribution to body mass index found correlations between an adoptee's weight class and his biological parents' BMI while finding no relationship with the adoptive family environment.
Despite its intent, though, in practice, the system operated much the same as earlier incarnations.
In Egypt, these cultural distinctions have led to making adoption illegal.
Illegitimate births rose three-fold after World War II, as sexual mores changed.
They state that they lack feelings of well-being, integration, or solidity associated with a fully developed identity.
'''Open records:''' Movements to unseal adoption records for adopted citizens proliferated along with increased acceptance of illegitimacy.
The number of adoptions in the United States peaked in 1970.
Ironically, adoption is far more visible and discussed in society today, yet it is less common.
Adoption gives many children great opportunities that they may have never otherwise received.
Some children from foster care have histories of maltreatment, such as physical and psychological neglect, physical abuse, and sexual abuse, and are at risk of developing psychiatric problems.
Most of the research that exists on adoption effects on the natural parents was conducted with samples of adolescents, or with women who were adolescents when carrying their babies—little data exists for natural parents from other populations.
0.26 per 100 live births
There have been many cases of remediation or the reversibility of early trauma.
Unlike guardianship or other systems designed for the care of the young, adoption is intended to effect a permanent change in status and as such requires societal recognition, either through legal or religious sanction.
It is true in all cases that identity construction is an ongoing process of development, change and maintenance of identifying with the self.
However, research on The Mental and Social Life of Babies suggested that the "parent-infant system," rather than a bond between biologically related individuals, is an evolved fit between innate behavior patterns of all human infants and equally evolved responses of human adults to those infant behaviors.
Terms included in HAL include terms that were used before PAL, including "natural mother," "first mother," and "surrendered for adoption."
For many adopted children, their adoptive families are given little to none of their medical history, especially if the adoption was international.
More recently the military dictatorship in Argentina from 1976 to 1983 is known to have given hundreds of babies born to women captives who were then murdered to be brought up by military families.
"What is my purpose?"
Swedish researchers found both international and domestic adoptees undertook suicide at much higher rates than non-adopted peers; with international adoptees and female international adoptees, in particular, at highest risk.
(1990, 1995) found that 80% of abused and maltreated infants in their sample exhibited disorganized attachment styles.
459 international adoptions were also recorded.
In medieval society, bloodlines were paramount; a ruling dynasty lacking a natural-born heir apparent was replaced, a stark contrast to Roman traditions.
In some countries, such as Sweden, these adoptions account for the majority of cases (see above Table).
Adoption in the United States still occurs at nearly three times those of its peers although the number of children awaiting adoption has held steady in recent years, hovering between 133,000 and 129,000 during the period 2002 to 2006.
This created the first system in European history in which abandoned children did not have legal, social, or moral disadvantages.
The period 1945 to 1974, the baby scoop era, saw rapid growth and acceptance of adoption as a means to build a family.
In contrast, the same study indicated adoptive parents were viewed favorably, with nearly 90% describing them as "lucky, advantaged, and unselfish."
"Primal wound" is described as the "devastation which the infant feels because of separation from its birth mother.
Identity (gender/sexual/ethnic/religious/family) is still forming during adolescence and family holds a vital key to this.
His solution was outlined in ''The Best Method of Disposing of Our Pauper and Vagrant Children'' (1859) which started the Orphan Train movement.
This lack of identity may lead adoptees, particularly in adolescent years, to seek out ways to belong in a more extreme fashion than many of their non-adopted peers.
# When labeling is a conscious activity, the described person's ''individual'' merits become apparent, rather than his or her stereotype.
The particular terms of a common-law adoption are defined by each legal jurisdiction.
These differences in development appear to play out in the way young adoptees deal with major life events.
In 1975, England and Wales opened records on moral grounds.
They include how to respond to stereotypes, answering questions about heritage, and how best to maintain connections with biological kin when in an open adoption.
Nevertheless, work on adult adoptees has found that the additional risks faced by adoptees are largely confined to adolescence.
Unrelated adoptions may occur through the following mechanisms:
The research literature states adoptees give four reasons for desiring reunion: 1) they wish for a more complete genealogy, 2) they are curious about events leading to their conception, birth, and relinquishment, 3) they hope to pass on information to their children, and 4) they have a need for a detailed biological background, including medical information.
Numerous suggestions have been made to substitute new lessons, e.g., focusing on "family orchards."
One study shows this accounted for 80% of unrelated infant adoptions and half of adoptions through foster care.
Furthermore, there is a lack of longitudinal data that may elucidate long-term social and psychological consequences for natural parents who choose to release their children for adoption
Internally focused theories suggest some adoptees possess ambiguities in their sense of self, impairing their ability to present a consistent identity.
The nobility of the Germanic, Celtic, and Slavic cultures that dominated Europe after the decline of the Roman Empire denounced the practice of adoption.
Psychologists' findings regarding the importance of early mother-infant bonding created some concern about whether parents who adopt older infants or toddlers after birth have missed some crucial period for the child's development.
In some adoptive families, this day marks an especially important event and is celebrated annually from thereafter.
Adopting older children presents other parenting issues.
Brace feared the impact of the parents' poverty, in general, and their Catholic religion, in particular, on the youth.
Researchers from the University of Minnesota studied adolescents who had been adopted and found that adoptees were twice as likely as non-adopted people to suffer from oppositional defiant disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (with an 8% rate in the general population).
In the United States, embryo adoption is governed by property law rather than by the court systems, in contrast to traditional adoption.
Moreover, about one-half of inter-individual differences were due to individual non-shared influences.
