The Lim Canal is a  ria of the Pazinčica river.
In Slovenia, the marine and coastal protected nature areas are the Sečovlje Salina Landscape Park, Strunjan Landscape Park, Škocjan Inlet Nature Reserve, and the Debeli Rtič, Cape Madona and Lakes in Fiesa natural monuments.
The depleted fish stock, and Croatia's Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone (ZERP) contributed to accusations of overfishing exchanged between Italian and Croatian fishermen.
Sixty-four known species are threatened with extinction, largely because of overfishing.
In 1993, the area was designated a Ramsar site; it is also a site of international importance for waterbird species.
The Kornati national park was established in 1980; it covers approximately , including 89 islands and islets.
In 2007, Albanian fisheries production amounted to , including aquaculture production, which reached  in 2006.
The 17th century's final territorial changes were caused by the Morean or Sixth Ottoman–Venetian War, when in 1699 Venice slightly enlarged its possessions in Dalmatia.
Italy and Yugoslavia defined their Adriatic continental shelf delimitation in 1968, with an additional agreement signed in 1975 on the Gulf of Trieste boundary, following the Treaty of Osimo.
The  deep Palagruža Sill is south of the Middle Adriatic Pit, separating it from the  deep South Adriatic Pit and the Middle Adriatic basin from the South Adriatic Basin.
Both countries also declared their economic zones, which partially overlap.
In 1202, the Fourth Crusade was diverted to conquer Zadar at the behest of the Venetians—the first instance of a Crusader force attacking a Catholic city—before proceeding to sack Constantinople.
In the last 600&nbsp;years, fifteen tsunamis have occurred in the Adriatic Sea.
In the 13th century, Venice established itself as a leading maritime nation.
It is estimated that if a major oil spill happened, a million people would lose their livelihoods in Croatia alone.
The Mljet national park was established in 1960, covering a  marine protection area.
The volume of sediments carried from the eastern shore by the Rječina, Zrmanja, Krka, Cetina, Ombla, Dragonja, Mirna, Raša and Neretva rivers is negligible, because these sediments are mostly deposited at the river mouths.
The coastal currents on the opposite shore are far more complex, due to the jagged shoreline, several large islands and the Dinaric Alps' proximity to the shore.
The SAG measures  in diameter.
In the Late Oligocene, the motion was reversed and the Apennine Mountains' orogeny took place.
During the reign of Augustus it became a major naval base as part of his program to re-organize the Roman navy to better protect commerce in the Mediterranean.
The Isole Tremiti reserve has been protected since 1989, while the Tremiti islands themselves are part of the Gargano National Park.
A number of rare and threatened species are also found along the Adriatic's eastern coast; it is relatively clearer and less polluted than the western Adriatic coast—in part because the sea currents flow through the Adriatic in a counterclockwise direction, thus bringing clearer waters up the eastern coast and returning increasingly polluted water down the western coast.
The tidal movement is normally slight, usually remaining below .
The largest volume of fish harvesting was in Italy, where the total production volume in 2007 stood at .
However, proposed export oil pipelines were objected to specifically because of this issue.
The Adriatic Sea ecosystem is threatened by excessive input of nutrients through drainage from agricultural land and wastewater flowing from cities; this includes both along its coast and from rivers draining into the sea—especially from the Po River.
The origins of the name ''Adriatic'' are linked to the Etruscan settlement of Adria, which probably derives its name from the Illyrian ''adur'' meaning water or sea.
The treaty provided the basis for all the following divisions between Italy and Yugoslavia.
Most of the eastern shore of the Adriatic was part of Dalmatia, except for the southernmost portion, part of the province of Macedonia, and the peninsula of Istria on the northern part of the eastern shore; Istria contained the important Roman colony at Pula and was incorporated into the province of Italy.
Another short-lived, unrecognised state established in 1918 was the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, formed from parts of Austria-Hungary, comprising most of the former monarchy's Adriatic coastline.
Such flooding is caused by a combination of factors, including the alignment of the Sun and Moon, meteorological factors such as sirocco related storm surges, and the basin's geometric shape (which amplifies or reduces the astronomical component).
In January 2012, INA commenced prospecting for oil off Dubrovnik, marking the resumption of oil exploration along the eastern Adriatic coast after surveys commenced in the late 1980s around the island of Brač were cancelled because of Yugoslavia's breakup and war in Croatia.
In this period, the Republic of Venice began to expand its territory and influence.
Roman economic and military influence in the region began to grow with the creation by 246 BC of a major naval base at Brundisium (now Brindisi), which was established to bar Carthaginian ships from the Adriatic during the Punic Wars.
In May 2003, then-Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi inaugurated the MOSE project (), an experimental model for evaluating the performance of inflatable gates.
The end of the period brought about the Holy Roman Empire's control over the Kingdom of Italy (which would last until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648), the establishment of an independent Kingdom of Croatia and the Byzantine Empire's return to the southern Apennine peninsula.
The 2006 marine capture catch in Croatian waters consisted of sardines&nbsp;(44.8%), anchovies&nbsp;(31.3%), tunas&nbsp;(2.7%), other pelagic fish&nbsp;(4.8%), hake&nbsp;(2.4%), mullet&nbsp;(2.1%), other demersal fish&nbsp;(8.3%), crustaceans (largely lobster and ''Nephrops norvegicus'')&nbsp;(0.8%), shellfish (largely oysters and mussels)&nbsp;(0.3%), cuttlefish&nbsp;(0.6%), squids&nbsp;(0.2%) and octopuses and other cephalopods (1.6%).
In addition, Albania is home to two Ramsar wetland reserves: Karavasta Lagoon, and Butrint.
The Ottoman Empire lost all territories along the Adriatic following the First Balkan War and consequent 1913 Treaty of London that established an independent Albania.
Similarly, karst developed in Apulia from the Apulian Carbonate Platform.
The Otranto Sill, an underwater ridge, is located at the border between the Adriatic and Ionian Seas.
The Venetian territory was then handed over to Austria and briefly ruled as part of the Archduchy of Austria.
A further risk is presented by ballast water discharge by ships, especially tankers.
Four out of five Mediterranean seagrass species are found in the Adriatic Sea.
The submarine springs include thermal springs, discovered offshore near the town of Izola.
In 2000, the nominal—on a live weight basis—total landings of all Adriatic fisheries reached .
Only a small fraction of the fish found in the Adriatic are attributed to recent processes such as Lessepsian migration, and escape from mariculture.
Later that year, the Kingdom of Serbia and the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs formed the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes—subsequently renamed Yugoslavia.
The Ostrogothic Kingdom ruled Italy following the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 AD.
The new kingdom included the province of Romagna, thus removing the Papal State from the Adriatic coast; however, Trieste, Istria and Dalmatia were joined into a set of separate provinces of the French Empire: the Illyrian Provinces.
The period also saw the Adriatic Sea as the theatre of several NATO operations, including the blockade of Yugoslavia, intervention in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 1999 bombing of Yugoslavia.
The Adriatic's surface temperature usually ranges from  in the summer, or  in the winter, except along the western Adriatic coast's northern part, where it drops to  in the winter.
Sediments deposited in the Adriatic Sea today generally come from the northwest coast, being carried by the Po, Reno, Adige, Brenta, Tagliamento, Piave and Soča rivers.
Oil spills are a major concern in terms of potential environmental impact and damage to tourism and fisheries.
This made the sea passage across the Adriatic between Brundisium and Dyrrachium (or Apollonia) a link in the primary route for travelers, trade, and troop movements, between Rome and the East.
This arrangement was made permanent in the 1975 Treaty of Osimo.
It is estimated that the Adriatic's entire volume is exchanged through the Strait of Otranto in 3.4±0.4&nbsp;years, a comparably short period.
This route played a major role in some of the military operations that marked the end of the Roman Republic and start of the imperial period.
The Adriatic Sea contains more than 1300 islands and islets, most along the Adriatic's eastern coast—especially in Croatia, with 1,246 counted.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea defines the Adriatic Sea as an enclosed or semi-enclosed sea.
In addition, there is a Ramsar wetland reserve in Croatia—the Neretva river's delta.
The World War I Adriatic Campaign was largely limited to blockade attempts by the Allies and the effort of the Central Powers to thwart the British, French and Italian moves.
The park covers a total of .
The Adriatic's shores are populated by more than 3.5&nbsp;million people; the largest cities are Bari, Venice, Trieste and Split.
The Brijuni national park encompasses the  archipelago itself and  of surrounding sea; it became a national park in 1999.
The Miramare protected area was established in 1986 and covers  of coast and  of sea.
Marc Antony and Octavian (later Augustus) crossed the Adriatic to Dyrrachium with their armies in their campaign against two of Caesar's assassins, Brutus and Cassius, that culminated in the Battle of Philippi.
All types of seafloor sediments are found in the Adriatic Sea.
Maritime transport is also a significant branch of the area's economy—there are 19 seaports in the Adriatic that each handle more than a million tonnes of cargo per year.
By the 2nd century BC, the shores were under Rome's control.
Oil was discovered in the Northern Adriatic at a depth of approximately ; the discovery was assessed as not viable because of its location, depth and quality.
This circulation has significantly contributed to the biodiversity of the countries along the eastern Adriatic coast; the common bottlenose dolphin is frequent in the eastern coast's waters only, and the Croatian coast provides refuge for the critically endangered monk seal and sea turtles.
The former disintegrated during the 1990s, resulting in four new states on the Adriatic coast.
Rocks of the same type are found in Albania and on the western Adriatic coast.
The proponents of the new union in the Croatian parliament saw the move as a safeguard against Italian expansionism as stipulated in the Treaty of London.
The Croatian National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan identified more than 7,000 animal and plant species in the Adriatic Sea.
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defines the boundary between the Adriatic and the Ionian seas as a line running from the Butrinto River's mouth (latitude 39°44'N) in Albania to the Karagol Cape in Corfu, through this island to the Kephali Cape (these two capes are in latitude 39°45'N), and on to the Santa Maria di Leuca Cape (latitude 39°48'N).
Historical earthquakes in the area include the 1627 Gargano peninsula and the 1667 Dubrovnik earthquakes, both followed by strong tsunamis.
This is reflected in its biogeography and ecology, and particularly in the composition and properties of its ecosystems.
The two terms were not synonymous, however.
(For instance, approximately 500&nbsp;years are necessary to exchange all the Black Sea's water.)
The project proposes laying a series of 79 inflatable pontoons across the sea bed at the three entrances to the Venetian Lagoon.
Names for the sea in the languages of the surrounding countries include: ; ; Istro-Romanian: ''marea Adriatică''; ; ;  ''Adriatiki Thalassa''.
The Adriatic's western shores are largely either alluvial or terraced, whereas the eastern shores are predominantly rocky, except for the southernmost part of the shore located in Albania that consists of sandy coves and rocky capes.
Air pollution in the Adriatic Basin is associated with the large industrial centres in the Po River valley and the large industrial cities along the coast.
The Debeli Rtič natural monument covers , the Cape Madona natural monument covers , and the Lakes in Fiesa natural monument, with the coastal lake as the only brackish lake in Slovenia, covers .
In the Middle Adriatic Basin, there is evidence of Permian volcanism in the area of Komiža on the island of Vis and the volcanic islands of Jabuka and Brusnik.
''Mare Adriaticum'' generally corresponds to the Adriatic Sea's extent, spanning from the Gulf of Venice to the Strait of Otranto.
In 2007, Croatia's production in live weight reached .
The Lastovo nature park was established in 2006, and it includes 44 islands and islets,  of land and  of sea surface.
Tidal movements in the Adriatic are slight, although larger amplitudes are known to occur occasionally.
The Torre Guaceto protected area, located near Brindisi and Carovigno, covers a sea surface of  and is adjacent to the Torre Guaceto State Reserve covering  of coast and sharing an  coastline with the marine protected area.
In Italy, these are Miramare in the Gulf of Trieste (in the Northern Adriatic), Torre del Cerrano and Isole Tremiti in the Middle Adriatic basin and Torre Guaceto in southern Apulia.
Further on to the south, the sea floor rises to  to form the Otranto Sill at the boundary to the Ionian Sea.
The Napoleonic Wars resulted in the First French Empire gaining coastal control and the British effort to counter the French in the area, ultimately securing most of the eastern Adriatic shore and the Po Valley for Austria.
The treaty reversed all wartime annexations, guaranteed the independence of Albania, created the Free Territory of Trieste (FTT) as a city-state, and gave communist Yugoslavia most of the Slovenian Littoral, as well as Istria, the islands of Cres, Lastovo and Palagruža, and the cities of Zadar and Rijeka.
In the Eocene and early Oligocene, the plate moved north and north-east, contributing to the Alpine orogeny (along with the African and Eurasian Plates' movements) via the tectonic uplift of the Dinarides and Alps.
In 1648, the Holy Roman Empire lost its claim on its former Italian lands, formally ending the Kingdom of Italy; however, its only outlet on the Adriatic Sea, the Duchy of Ferrara, was already lost to the Papal States.
Karstification there largely began after the Dinarides' final uplift in the Oligocene and the Miocene, when carbonate deposits were exposed to atmospheric effects; this extended to the level of  below the present sea level, exposed during the Last Glacial Maximum.
The Congress of Vienna also created the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia which encompassed the city of Venice, the surrounding coast and a substantial hinterland, and was controlled by Austria.
The  Strunjan Landscape Park was established in 2004 and comprises two nature reserves.
In terms of the annual total discharge into the entire Mediterranean Sea, the Po is ranked second, followed by the Neretva and Drin, which rank as third and fourth.
It covers  and has a volume of .
In the 17th century, the delta began to become a human-controlled environment, as the excavation of artificial channels started; the channels and new distributaries of the Po have been prograding at rates of  per year or more since then.
The additional boundary agreed upon in 1975 consists of 5&nbsp;points, extending from an end point of the 1968 line.
The Northern Adriatic in particular is rich in endemic fish fauna.
The sea is geographically divided into the Northern Adriatic, Central (or Middle) Adriatic, and Southern Adriatic.
Following the repression of the revolt the Roman province of Illyricum was split into Dalmatia and Pannonia.
There are five geomorphological units in the Adriatic: the Northern Adriatic (up to  deep); the North Adriatic islands area protected against sediments filling it in by outer islands (pre-Holocene karst relief); the Middle Adriatic islands area (large Dalmatian islands); the Middle Adriatic (characterized by the Middle Adriatic Depression); and the Southern Adriatic consisting of a coastal shelf and the Southern Adriatic Depression.
Italy joined the Allies in April 1915 with the Treaty of London, which promised Italy the Austrian Littoral, northern Dalmatia, the port of Vlorë, most of the eastern Adriatic islands and Albania as a protectorate.
In the Adriatic's southernmost areas the border was not determined in order to avoid prejudicing the location of the tripoint with the Albanian continental shelf border, which remains undefined.
The Adriatic extends northwest from 40° to 45°47' north, representing the Mediterranean's northernmost portion.
In the 12th century, the delta advanced at a rate of  per year.
This short period is particularly important as the rivers flowing into the Adriatic discharge up to .
Basking sharks and manta rays are some of migrant species to the sea.
Major rivers discharging into the Adriatic include the Po, Soča, Krka, Neretva, Drin, Bojana, and Vjosë.
During the campaign, the Royal Navy occupied Vis and established its base there in Port St. George.
It extends  from the northwest to the southeast and is  wide.
The Sečovlje Salina Landscape Park was established in 1990, covers , and includes four nature reserves.
During Caesar's Civil War, there was a three-month delay in Caesar's Balkan campaign against Pompey caused when winter storms on the Adriatic and a naval blockade held up Mark Antony from reaching him from Brundisium with reinforcements; after the reinforcements finally arrived Caesar made an unsuccessful attempt to capture Dyrrachium before the campaign moved inland.
Among the largest are Bari, Venice, Trieste, and Rimini in Italy, Split, Rijeka and Zadar in Croatia, Durrës and Vlorë in Albania and Koper in Slovenia.
There are 45 known subspecies endemic to the Adriatic's coasts and islands.
The normal tide levels are known to increase significantly in a conducive environment, leading to coastal flooding; this phenomenon is most famously known in Italy—especially Venice—as ''acqua alta''.
An active  fault has been identified to the northwest of Dubrovnik, adding to the Dalmatian islands as the Eurasian Plate slides over the Adriatic microplate.
In the late 19th century, Austria-Hungary established a geodetic network with an elevation benchmark using the average Adriatic Sea level at the Sartorio pier in Trieste, Italy.
During the 4th century AD the emperors of the Western Roman Empire had moved their official residence north from Rome to Mediolanum (now Milan) in order to be better able to control the military frontier with the Germanic tribes.
Neither Bosnia–Herzegovina nor Montenegro have or plan to establish any marine protection areas.
After the fall of communism, Yugoslavia broke apart: Slovenia and Croatia declared independence in 1991, and Bosnia–Herzegovina followed in 1992, while Montenegro remained in a federation with Serbia, officially called Serbia and Montenegro.
There are more than 20 other rivers flowing into the Adriatic Sea in Italy alone, also forming alluvial coastlines, including the lagoons of Venice, Grado and Caorle.
The maritime boundary between Bosnia–Herzegovina and Croatia was formally settled in 1999, but a few issues are still in dispute—the Klek peninsula and two islets in the border area.
After sixteen months of the Regency's existence, the 1920 Treaty of Rapallo redefined the Italian–Yugoslav borders, among other things transferring Zadar and the islands of Cres, Lastovo and Palagruža to Italy, securing the island of Krk for Yugoslavia and establishing the Free State of Fiume; this new state was abolished in 1924 by the Treaty of Rome that awarded Fiume (modern Rijeka) to Italy and Sušak to Yugoslavia.
Overexploited species include common dentex, red scorpionfish, monkfish, John Dory, blue shark, spiny dogfish, mullet, red mullet, Norway lobster, as well as European hake, and sardines.
The coast's ruggedness is exacerbated by the Dinaric Alps' proximity to the coast, in contrast to the opposite (Italian) coast where the Apennine Mountains are further away from the shoreline.
The Greeks soon expanded further north establishing several cities, including Epidaurus, Black Corcyra, Issa and Ancona, with trade established as far north as the Po River delta, where the emporion (trading station) of Adria was founded.
Fisheries and tourism are significant sources of income all along the Adriatic coast.
The Adriatic Sea is a semi-enclosed sea, bordered in the southwest by the Apennine or Italian Peninsula, in the northwest by the Italian regions of Veneto and Friuli-Venezia Giulia, and in the northeast by Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Albania—the Balkan peninsula.
These defeats spelled the end of an independent Hungarian kingdom, and both Croatian and Hungarian nobility chose Ferdinand I of the House of Habsburg as their new ruler, bringing the Habsburg Monarchy to the shore of the Adriatic Sea, where it would remain for nearly four hundred years.
The Middle and South Adriatic Gyres (SAG), are significant cyclonic circulation features, with the former being intermittent and the latter permanent.
Finally, the Montenegrin fisheries production stood at  in 2006, with only 11 tonnes coming from aquaculture.
Natural gas is produced through several projects, including a joint venture of the Eni and INA companies that operates two platforms—one is in Croatian waters and draws gas from six wells, and the other (which started operating in 2010) is located in Italian waters.
The benchmark was subsequently retained by Austria, adopted by Yugoslavia, and retained by the states that emerged after its dissolution.
The plate's movement contributed to the formation of the surrounding mountain chains and Apennine tectonic uplift after its collision with the Eurasian plate.
The Republic of Venice was founded during this period and went on to become a significant maritime power after receiving a Byzantine tax exemption in 1082.
All successor states of former Yugoslavia accepted the agreements.
The discovery was followed by further surveys off the Croatian coast.
If this movement continues, the seafloor will be completely consumed and the Adriatic Sea closed off in 50–70&nbsp;million years.
The Adriatic Sea is a unique water body in respect of its overall biogeochemical physiognomy.
Adriatic Croatia's tourism industry has grown faster economically than the rest of the Adriatic Basin's.
In 1918, the Montenegrin national assembly voted to unite with the Kingdom of Serbia, giving the latter access to the Adriatic.
Geophysical and geological information indicate that the Adriatic Sea and the Po Valley are associated with a tectonic microplate—identified as the Apulian or Adriatic Plate—that separated from the African Plate during the Mesozoic era.
The Torre del Cerrano protected area was created in 2009, extending  into the sea and along  of coastline.
The Middle Adriatic basin is south of the Ancona–Zadar line, with the  deep Middle Adriatic Pit (also called the Pomo Depression or the Jabuka Pit).
These gas and oil reserves are part of the Po basin Province of Northern Italy and the Northern Mediterranean Sea.
Another city on the Italian coast of the Adriatic that increased in importance during the Roman era was Ravenna.
The earliest settlements on the Adriatic shores were Etruscan, Illyrian, and Greek.
The Škocjan Inlet Nature Reserve was established in 1998 and covers .
During much of the 12th and 13th centuries, Venice and the Republic of Genoa were engaged in warfare culminating in the War of Chioggia, ousting the Genoese from the Adriatic.
The 1919 Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye did transfer the Austrian Littoral and Istria to Italy, but awarded Dalmatia to Yugoslavia.
In the Northern Adriatic, the coast of the Gulf of Trieste and western Istria is gradually subsiding, having sunk about  in the past two thousand years.
Aside from the EU membership difficulty, even before its settling the dispute has caused no major practical problems.
These were created in 1809 through the Treaty of Schönbrunn; they represented the end of Venetian rule on the eastern Adriatic coast, as well as the end of the Republic of Ragusa.
The North Adriatic basin, extending between Venice and Trieste towards a line connecting Ancona and Zadar, is only  deep at its northwestern end; it gradually deepens towards the southeast.
Venice regained Dalmatia in 1409 and held it for nearly four hundred years, with the republic's apex of trading and military power in the first half of the 15th century.
Remnants of the former are found in the Adriatic Sea, as well as in the southern Alps and the Dinaric Alps, and remnants of the latter are seen as the Gargano Promontory and the Maiella mountain.
During the Roman period Brundisium, on the western shore, and Apollonia and Dyrrachium (originally called Epidamnos, now Durrës in Albania) on the eastern shore became important ports.
In the Apennine peninsula's south, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was formed in 1816 by unifying the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily.
These disputes with Slovenia were eventually settled with an agreement to accept the decision of an international arbitration commission set up via the UN, enabling Croatia to progress towards EU membership.
INA estimates, however, are 50% lower than those supplied by Eni.
The Slovenian government and municipalities, the municipal council of Trieste, and non-governmental organisations have voiced concern over their environmental hazards, effect on transport and effect on tourism.
The territory was turned back over to France after the Peace of Pressburg in 1805, when the territory in the Po valley became an integral part of the new Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy.
Around thirty species of fish are found in only one or two countries bordering the Adriatic Sea.
Between the Norian and Late Cretaceous, the Adriatic and Apulia Carbonate Platforms formed as a thick series of carbonate sediments (dolomites and limestones), up to  deep.
The IHO boundary places a few smaller Greek islands (ones northwest of Corfu) in the Adriatic Sea.
During World War II, the Adriatic saw only limited naval action, starting with the Italian invasion of Albania and the joint Axis invasion of Yugoslavia.
Moreover, the Adriatic's long and narrow rectangular shape is the source of an oscillating water motion () along the basin's minor axis.
Two additional marine protection areas are planned in Albania: the Cape of Rodon () and Porto Palermo.
The Adriatic Sea was a minor theatre in the Napoleonic Wars; the Adriatic campaign of 1807–1814 involved the British Royal Navy contesting the Adriatic's control by the combined navies of France, Italy and the Kingdom of Naples.
The largest part of the eastern coast consists of carbonate rocks, while flysch (a particular type of sedimentary rock) is significantly represented in the Gulf of Trieste coast, especially along Slovenia's coast where the  Strunjan cliff—the highest cliff on the entire Adriatic and the only one of its type on the eastern Adriatic coast—is located, on the Kvarner Gulf coast opposite Krk, and in Dalmatia north of Split.
The rest of the territory was made a part of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia, which in turn was also in the Transleithanian part of the dual monarchy.
In the Early Middle Ages, after the Roman Empire's decline, the Adriatic's coasts were ruled by Ostrogoths, Lombards and the Byzantine Empire.
That boundary became more consistently defined by Roman authors—early Greek sources place the boundary between the Adriatic and Ionian seas at various places ranging from adjacent to the Gulf of Venice to the southern tip of the Peloponnese, eastern shores of Sicily and western shores of Crete.
Surveys indicate reserves of 3 billion barrels of oil in place and  of gas in place.
The Northern Adriatic's comparatively shallow seabed is characterised by relict sand (from times when the water level was lower and the area was a sandy beach), while a muddy bed is typical at depths below .
Notes: a The distance between the extreme points of each state's coastline, b Not including islands in coastal lagoons
This engineering work is due to be completed by 2014.
In Croatian, Montenegrin and Slovene, the sea is often referred to simply as ''Jadran''.
27 such hotspots have been determined as of 2011, 6 warranting an urgent response.
The amphidromic point is at the mid-width east of Ancona.
The park covers  of coastline,  of land and  of sea.
It is the largest Mediterranean shelf and is simultaneously a dilution basin and a site of bottom water formation.
Another source of pollution of the Adriatic is solid waste.
In 2007, the fisheries production in Bosnia–Herzegovina reached volume of  and  in Slovenia.
The Ottomans and Venetians fought a series of wars, but until the 17th century these were not fought in the Adriatic area.
The 15th and the 16th centuries brought about the Byzantine Empire's destruction in 1453 and the Ottoman Empire's expansion that reached Adriatic shores in present-day Albania and Montenegro as well as the immediate hinterland of the Dalmatian coast, defeating the Hungarian and Croatian armies at Krbava in 1493 and Mohács in 1526.
The greatest portion of the discharge from any single river comes from the Po (28%), with an average discharge from it alone of .
In 568 AD the Lombards invaded northern Italy, and over the course of the next century or so the importance of the Exarchate declined as the territory under Lombard control expanded and as the Byzantine outpost of Venice became increasingly independent.
In addition, the Papal States were carved out in the area around Rome and central Italy in the 8th century.
This led to conflict with the Illyrians, who lived in a collection of semi-Hellenized kingdoms that covered much of the Balkans and controlled the eastern shore of the sea, resulting in the Illyrian Wars from 229–168 BC.
The prevailing currents flow counterclockwise from the Strait of Otranto, along the eastern coast and back to the strait along the western (Italian) coast.
