Six US states (Hawaii, North Carolina, Mississippi, New Mexico, South Dakota, and Utah) allow the possibility of the tort action of alienation of affections (brought by a deserted spouse against a third party alleged to be responsible for the failure of the marriage).
Australian states and territories had previously repealed their respective adultery criminal laws.
The head of the United Nations expert body charged with identifying ways to eliminate laws that discriminate against women or are discriminatory to them in terms of implementation or impact, Kamala Chandrakirana, has stated that: "Adultery must not be classified as a criminal offence at all".
Honor killings continue to be practiced in some parts of the world, particularly (but not only) in parts of South Asia and the Middle East.
Up until the mid 20th century most US states (especially Southern and Northeastern states) had laws against fornication, adultery or cohabitation.
In their research (2012-2014), 108 families in the cities of Mozhga, Izhevsk, Sarapul, and Glazov (Russia, the Udmurt Republic) that were directly involved in this social phenomenon were interviewed in order to examine conjugal infidelity.
Specifically, it is considered part of the avoidance of sexual misconduct (''kamesu miccha-cara veramani'' in Pali), which defines who is an illicit or inappropriate sexual partner for a man or a woman, depending on their marital status, age, etc.
Four types of adultery were established: 1) male infidelity (43.5%); 2) female infidelity (37.0%); 3) infidelity of both partners (16.7%) - a type of marital infidelity when both the man and woman had sexual contact with extramarital partners - 4) pseudoinfidelity (2.8%) - a type of conjugal infidelity when there is no real adultery but it leads to an acute, often irreversible, crisis of family relations-.
In 2016 there was a bill in Virginia to decriminalize adultery and make it only a civil offense, but the Virginia Senate did not advance the bill.
Human rights organizations have stated that legislation on sexual crimes must be based on consent, and must recognize consent as central, and not trivialize its importance; doing otherwise can lead to legal, social or ethical abuses.
The Roman Lex Julia, ''Lex Iulia de Adulteriis Coercendis'' (17 BC), punished adultery with banishment.
Proving adultery under Muslim law can be a very difficult task as it requires the accuser to produce four eyewitnesses to the act of sexual intercourse, each of whom should have a good reputation for truthfulness and honesty.
Establishing correct paternity may have major legal implications, for instance in regard to inheritance.
Prague: Vědecko vydavatelské centrum «Sociosféra-CZ», 2015.
Originally this commandment forbade male Israelites from having sexual intercourse with the wife of another Israelite; the prohibition did not extend to their own slaves.
In recent years, Jordan has amended its Criminal Code to modify its laws which used to offer a complete defense for honor killings.
Philip IV of France had all three of his daughters-in-law imprisoned, two (Margaret of Burgundy and Blanche of Burgundy) on the grounds of adultery and the third (Joan of Burgundy) for being aware of their adulterous behaviour.
It also prescribes the same for engaged women who lie with another man, under the premise that if she allows the action without protesting, this indicates willingness.
Book of Mormon prophets and civil leaders often list adultery as an illegal activity along with murder, robbing, and stealing.
Legal fees can add up into the tens of thousands of dollars.
In the United States, laws vary from state to state.
Furthermore, Deuteronomic code prescribes stoning not only for female extramarital sex, but also for female premarital sex in the case where the woman lies about her virginity:
Among many cultures the penalty was—and to this day still is, as noted below—capital punishment.
Another tort, alienation of affection, arises when one spouse deserts the other for a third person.
Further, sex with a married woman was not a punishable crime provided the woman initiates the sex of her own volition, and she has been abandoned by her husband or if her husband is eunuch or her husband does not care.
In Florida adultery ("Living in open adultery", Art 798.01) is illegal; while cohabitation of unmarried couples was decriminalized in 2016.
Ancient texts of Hinduism offer different views on adultery.
The law was overturned because the court found that adultery is a private matter which the state should not intervened in.
Support for the preservation of the adultery laws comes from religious groups and from political parties who feel quite independent of morality, that the government has reason to concern itself with the consensual sexual activity of its citizens … The crucial question is: when, if ever, is the government justified to interfere in consensual bedroom affairs?
Adultery is often seen as a breach of trust and of the commitment that had been made during the act of marriage.
The term ''adultery'' refers to sexual acts between a married person and someone who is not that person's spouse.
Swinging and open marriages are both a form of non-monogamy, and the spouses would not view the sexual relations as objectionable.
This act was also known as desertion, which was often a crime as well.
Until the 1990s, most Latin American countries had laws against adultery.
In medieval Europe, early Jewish law mandated stoning for an adulterous wife and her partner.
UN Women has also stated in regard to the defense of provocation and other similar defenses that "laws should clearly state that these defenses do not include or apply to crimes of 'honour', adultery, or domestic assault or murder."
In the Greco-Roman world, there were stringent laws against adultery, but these applied to sexual intercourse with a married woman.
The term ''adultery'', rather than ''extramarital sex'', implies a moral condemnation of the act; as such it is usually not a neutral term because it carries an implied judgment that the act is wrong.
Adultery may lead to ostracization from certain religious or social groups.
Pennsylvania abolished its fornication and adultery laws in 1973.
This concept of adultery stems from the economic aspect of Israelite marriage whereby the husband has an exclusive right to his wife, whereas the wife, as the husband's possession, did not have an exclusive right to her husband.
David's sexual intercourse with the wife of Uriah did not count as adultery since Uriah was no Jew, and only Jewish men were protected by the legal code from Sinai.
Smirnov studied some aspects of marital infidelity as a separate component of society.
There are also incidents of extrajudicial floggings, ordered by informal religious courts.
Different Buddhist-influenced cultures have interpreted the specifics of this prohibition differently with respect to practices like multiple marriage and concubinage; in 2015, for example, a Japanese court ruled that paying for prostitution did not constitute adultery, though traditional rules of sexual misconduct forbid a man from having sex with a woman who might be obliged to him for financial reasons.
Examples of women who have been executed for adultery in Medieval and Early Modern Europe include Maria of Brabant, Duchess of Bavaria (in 1256), Agnese Visconti (in 1391), Beatrice Lascaris di Tenda (in 1418), Anne Boleyn (in 1536), and Catherine Howard (in 1542).
Extramarital sexual acts not fitting this definition are not "adultery" though they may constitute "unreasonable behavior", also a ground of divorce.
In the United Kingdom, case law restricts the definition of adultery to penetrative sexual intercourse between a man and a woman, no matter the gender of the spouses in the marriage, although infidelity with a person of the same gender can be grounds for a divorce as unreasonable behavior; this situation was discussed at length during debates on the Marriage (Same-Sex Couples) Bill.
In addition, women's actual adultery always leads to disintegration of nuclear type of families (55.2% of all households).
In Somerset, England, a somewhat common practice was for husbands to encourage their wives to seduce another man, who they would then sue or blackmail, under laws (for examples see Criminal conversation) prohibiting men from having sex with women married to other men.
Adultery is not a crime in Australia.
The Government is yet to act.
A survey in Diyarbakir, Turkey, found that, when asked the appropriate punishment for a woman who has committed adultery, 37% of respondents said she should be killed, while 21% said her nose or ears should be cut off.
Like any sexual contact, extramarital sex opens the possibility of the introduction of sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs) into a marriage.
Prague: Vědecko vydavatelské centrum «Sociosféra-CZ», 2015.
In some countries, adultery laws have been struck down by courts on the ground that they discriminated against women, such as Guatemala (1996), where the Guatemalan Constitutional Court struck down the adultery law based both on the Constitution’s gender equality clause and on human rights treaties including CEDAW.
Because of the nature of adultery - illicit or illegal in many societies - this type of intimate partner violence may go underreported or may not be prosecuted when it is reported; and in some jurisdictions this type of violence is not covered by the specific domestic violence laws meant to protect persons in 'legitimate' couples.
The Roman husband often took advantage of his legal immunity.
The third type includes two subtypes: a) asynchronous adultery (13.9%) – infidelity of partners took place (alternate infidelity – 9.3%) or began (parallel infidelity – 4.6%) at different time; b) synchronous adultery (2.8%) – independently of each other partners involved in extramarital sexual relations nearly at the same time.
The '' My Body My Rights'' campaign has condemned state control over individual sexual and reproductive decisions; stating "All over the world, people are coerced, criminalized and discriminated against, simply for making choices about their bodies and their lives".
In Scandinavia, in the 17th century, adultery and bigamy were subject to the death penalty, although few people were actually executed.
Adultery laws vary between nations in Africa.
Historically, paternity of children born out of adultery has been seen as a major issue.
1 (1751) noted the legal double standard from that period, it wrote:
Amputation of the nose - rhinotomy - was a punishment for adultery among many civilizations, including ancient India, ancient Egypt, among Greeks and Romans, and in Byzantium and among the Arabs.
At the same time, men were free to maintain sexual relations with any women (polygyny) provided that the women did not already have husbands or "owners".
In France, for instance, a law that stated that the inheritance rights of a child born under such circumstances were, on the part of the married parent, half of what they would have been under ordinary circumstances, remained in force until 2001, when France was forced to change it by a ruling of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) (and in 2013 the ECtHR also ruled that the new 2001 regulations must be also applied to children born ''before'' 2001).
The ECtHR had ruled both in favor of the religious organization (in the case of Obst) and in favor of the fired person (in the case of Schüth).
The United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice is deeply concerned at the criminalization and penalization of adultery whose enforcement leads to discrimination and violence against women.
In India, adultery is the sexual intercourse of a man with a married woman without the consent of her husband when such sexual intercourse does not amount to rape.
Under federal law enacted in 1994, sexual conduct between consenting adults (18 years of age or older) is their private matter throughout Australia, irrespective of marital status.
Yet, because of the wrong done to the husband only, the Athenian lawgiver Solon allowed any man to kill an adulterer whom he had taken in the act.''
For instance, Abinadi cites the Ten Commandments when he accuses Noah's priests of sexual immorality.
This fact shows the instability of a young nuclear family and difficulty/inefficiency to resolve intrafamilial problems.
In Pakistan, adultery is a crime under the Hudood Ordinance, promulgated in 1979.
Prague: Vědecko vydavatelské centrum «Sociosféra-CZ», 2015.
In the Philippines, the law differentiates based on the gender of the spouse.
For example, living expenses and taxes are generally cheaper for married couples than for divorced couples.
Richard W. Lariviere notes that verse 13.60-61 of Nāradasmṛti qualifies when adultery is not a punishable crime; for example, if a woman comes to a man's house on her own volition and has consensual sex with him even though she is not married to him, then it is not adultery.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has had the opportunity to rule in recent years on several cases involving the legitimacy of firing a person from their job due to adultery.
Among the Aztecs, wives caught in adultery were occasionally impaled, although the more usual punishment was to be stoned to death.
Depending on studies, it was estimated that 26–50% of men and 21–38% of women, or 22.7% of men and 11.6% of women, had extramarital sex.
If the cheating spouse has hinted at divorce in order to continue the affair, the third person may feel deceived if that does not happen.
Since the 20th century, criminal laws against adultery have become controversial, with international organizations calling for their abolition, especially in the light of several high-profile stoning cases that have occurred in some countries.
Today, therefore, no death penalty applies.
Some aspects of adultery of the urban population in Udmurt Republic // The theory and practice of gender studies in world science: materials of the VI international scientific conference on May 5–6, 2015.
It has also been the theme of many movies.
Sexual intercourse between an Israelite man, married or not, and a woman who was neither married or betrothed was not considered adultery.
Most countries nevertheless have a legal presumption that a woman's husband is the father of her children who were born during that marriage.
Modern advances such as reliable contraception and paternity testing have changed the situation (in Western countries).
Adultery in Judaism is prohibited by the Seventh Commandment, "Thou shalt not commit adultery.".
Article 242 says that a judge may reduce a sentence for murders that were done in rage and caused by an illegal act committed by the victim.
In the tenth century, the Arab explorer Ibn Fadlan noted that adultery was unknown among the pagan Oghuz Turks.
The enforceability of adultery laws in the United States is unclear following Supreme Court decisions since 1965 relating to privacy and sexual intimacy of consenting adults.
In countries where adultery is a criminal offense, punishments range from fines to caning and even capital punishment.
It has been said that these legal procedural requirements were instituted to protect women from slander and false accusations: i.e.
It was revealed that in the process of the dissolution of the conjugal relationships there was a declining of live quality and health conditions of those involved, and all family members were affected by it.
Another text, Manusmriti, declares adultery by husband or wife to be wrong, as well as includes a discussion about sex outside marriage after both the husband and wife consent.
In practice, however, the church seemed to have accepted the traditional double standard which punished the adultery of the wife more harshly than that of the husband.
'''Adultery''' (anglicised from Latin ''adulterium'') is extramarital sex that is considered objectionable on social, religious, moral or legal grounds.
A small number of jurisdictions still allow suits for criminal conversation and/or alienation of affection.
In Alabama "A person commits adultery when he engages in sexual intercourse with another person who is not his spouse and lives in cohabitation with that other person when he or that other person is married."
The World Health Organisation (WHO) found that women in violent relations were at increased risk of HIV/AIDS, because they found it very difficult to negotiate safe sex with their partners, or to ask medical advice if they thought they have been infected.
Note, that contraceptives offer little protection against some of the STDs, like HPV.
There is a history of adultery laws being abused.
In Utah, the adultery law only applies to the married party (the law states that "A married person commits adultery when he voluntarily has sexual intercourse with a person other than his spouse.").
Her punishment was ordered by villagers under Sharia law.
The Hebrew Bible prohibits adultery in the Seventh Commandment, "Thou shalt not commit adultery."
Adultery in traditional Judaism applies to both parties, but depends on the marital status of the woman (Lev.
In England and its successor states, it has been high treason to engage in adultery with the King's wife, his eldest son's wife and his eldest unmarried daughter.
(see Goldberg-Altyntsev A.V., Dedyukhin A.S., Smirnov K.D.
Some churches have interpreted adultery to include all sexual relationships outside of marriage, regardless of the marital status of the participants.
A death sentence could be issued only during the period when the Holy Temple stood, and only so long as the Supreme Torah Court convened in its chamber within the Temple complex.
A joint statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that: "Adultery as a criminal offence violates women’s human rights".
The christianization of Europe came to mean that, in theory, and unlike with the Romans, there was supposed to be a single sexual standard, where adultery was a sin and against the teachings of the church, regardless of the sex of those involved.
She admits that Paul the Apostle made the same mistake as Coogan.
Ibn Fadlan writes that "adultery is unknown among them; but whomsoever they find by his conduct that he is an adulterer, they tear him in two.
In Indian law, adultery is defined as sex between a man and a woman without the consent of the woman's husband.
('''Wife' connotes rank, not sexual pleasure'', or more literally "Wife is the name of dignity, not bliss") (Verus, V).
The theme of adultery has been used in many literary works, and has served as a theme for notable books such as ''Anna Karenina'', ''Madame Bovary'', ''Lady Chatterley's Lover'', ''The Scarlet Letter'' and ''Adultery''.
These laws were enacted in fear of cuckoldry and thus sexual jealousy.
Among Germanic tribes, each tribe had its own laws for adultery, and many of them allowed the husband to "take the law in his hands" and commit acts of violence against a wife caught committing adultery.
By analogy, in cultures which value and normally practice exclusive interpersonal relationships, sexual relations with a person outside the relationship may also be described as infidelity or cheating, and is subject to sanction.
In common-law countries, adultery was also known as ''criminal conversation.''
And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
four witnesses of good character are required for conviction, who were present at that time and saw the deed taking place; and if they saw it they were not of good moral character, as they were looking at naked adults; thus no one can get convicted of adultery unless both of the accused also agree and give their confession under oath four times.
However, irrespective of the stated views of the partners, extra-marital relations could still be considered a crime in some legal jurisdictions which criminalize adultery.
(see Goldberg-Altyntsev A.V., Dedyukhin A.S., Smirnov K.D.
Adultery often incurred severe punishment, usually for the woman and sometimes for the man, with penalties including capital punishment, mutilation or torture.
The Code of Hammurabi, a well-preserved Babylonian law code of ancient Mesopotamia, dating back to about 1772 BC, provided drowning as punishment for adultery.
Similar laws exist in some other Muslim countries, such as Saudi Arabia and Brunei.
Although  does say that "and that is what some of you were.
The Ten Commandments were meant exclusively for Jewish males.
Minnesota law provides: "when a married woman has sexual intercourse with a man other than her husband, whether married or not, both are guilty of adultery."
In 2015 South Korea's Constitutional Court overturned that country's law against adultery.
In South Carolina, the fine for adultery is up to $500 and/or imprisonment for no more than one year (South Carolina code 16-15-60), and South Carolina divorce laws deny alimony to the adulterous spouse.
In the early Roman Law, the ''jus tori'' belonged to the husband.
Adultery is a crime in Taiwan and the Philippines.
If adultery leads to divorce, it also carries higher financial burdens.
In Turkey adultery laws were held to be invalid in 1996/1998 because the law was deemed discriminatory as it differentiated between women and men.
This became the name of the civil tort arising from adultery, being based upon compensation for the other spouse's injury.
The application of the term to the act appears to arise from the idea that "criminal intercourse with a married woman ... tended to adulterate the issue children of an innocent husband ... and to expose him to support and provide for another man's children".
In the last conviction for adultery in Massachusetts in 1983, it was held that the statute was constitutional and that "no fundamental personal privacy right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty guaranteed by the United States Constitution bars the criminal prosecution of such persons  adulterers."
Massachusetts, Idaho, Oklahoma, Michigan, and Wisconsin consider adultery a felony, while in the other states it is a misdemeanor.
These cases dealt with people working for religious organizations and raised the question of the balancing of the right of a person to respect for their private life (recognized in the EU) and the right of religious communities to be protected against undue interference by the State (recognized also in the EU).
Whether a conviction under this statute would be possible today is not known.
This comes about so: they bring together the branches of two trees, tie him to the branches and then let both trees go, so that he is torn in two."
A conviction for rape is only possible with evidence from no fewer than four witnesses.
Russian sociologists A.V.
Opponents of adultery laws regard them as painfully archaic, believing they represent sanctions reminiscent of nineteenth-century novels.
:''We keep mistresses for our pleasures, concubines for constant attendance, and wives to bear us legitimate children and to be our faithful housekeepers.
In some jurisdictions, having sexual relations with the king's wife or the wife of his eldest son constitutes treason.
In some cases, this "third person" may encourage divorce (either openly or subtly).
Significantly, the penalty does not extend to sex by an unmarried woman and irrespective of the marital status of the man.
Today, domestic violence is outlawed in most countries.
But you were washed", it still acknowledges adultery to be immoral and a sin.
UN Women has called for the decriminalization of adultery.
(see Goldberg-Altyntsev A.V., Dedyukhin A.S., Smirnov K.D.
The two brothers accused of being lovers of the king's daughters-in-law were executed immediately after being arrested.
The  Council of Europe Recommendation Rec(2002)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the protection of women against violence states that member states should: (...) "57. preclude adultery as an excuse for violence within the family".
When Jesus Christ visits the Americas he reinforces the law and teaches them the higher law (also found in the New Testament):
Australia changed to no-fault divorce in 1975, abolishing adultery as a ground for divorce.
This can be a public health issue in regions of the world where STDs are common, but addressing this issue is very difficult due to legal and social barriers - to openly talk about this situation would mean to acknowledge that adultery (often) takes place, something that is taboo in certain cultures, especially those strongly influenced by religion.
Most countries that criminalize adultery are those where the dominant religion is Islam, and several Sub-Saharan African Christian-majority countries, but there are some notable exceptions to this rule, namely Philippines, Taiwan, and several US states.
An argument against the criminal status of adultery is that the resources of the law enforcement are limited, and that they should be used carefully; by investing them in the investigation and prosecution of adultery (which is very difficult) the curbing of serious violent crimes may suffer.
For example, Wendy Doniger notes Rigveda verse 4.5 as declaring adultery is evil.
Adultery is against the governing law of the U.S. military.
They further object to the legislation of morality, especially a morality so steeped in religious doctrine.
The defendant also must have been warned immediately before performing the act.
Prague: Vědecko vydavatelské centrum «Sociosféra-CZ», 2015.
Historically, many cultures have considered adultery as a very serious crime.
Extramarital sex without the consent of one's partner can be a valid grounds for monetary penalty on government employees, as ruled by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
A marriage in which both spouses agree ahead of time to accept sexual relations by either partner with others is sometimes referred to as an open marriage or the swinging lifestyle.
In Southwest Asia, adultery has attracted severe sanctions, including death penalty.
Adultery can be emotionally traumatic for both spouses and often results in divorce.
The method of execution was typically through stoning.
:''Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart.''
Penalties vary from a $10 fine (Maryland) to four years in prison (Michigan).
In the U.S. military, adultery is a potential court-martial offense.
Children born out of adultery suffered, until recently, adverse legal and social consequences.
Thus, the "purity" of the children of a marriage is corrupted, and the inheritance is altered.
The adultery law of the Federal Criminal Code of Mexico was repealed in 2011.
The United States is one of few industrialized countries to have laws criminalizing adultery.
In some parts of the world, honor killings enjoy considerable public support: in one survey, 33.4% of teenagers in Jordan's capital city, Amman, approved of honor killings.
Since adultery can lead to divorce, it may have long-term consequences for children in the family.
In a highly publicized case in 2010, a woman in North Carolina won a $9 million suit against her husband's mistress.
This feature is well illustrated by the high rates of items “sexual dissatisfaction of his partner” (♀ – 25.9%; ♂ – 33.8%) and “desire to diversify sex life/feel piquancy of polygamous relationships” (♀ – 15.5%; ♂ – 13.8%) for both sexes.
/ … But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel: / Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die.
Some aspects of adultery of the urban population in Udmurt Republic // The theory and practice of gender studies in world science: materials of the VI international scientific conference on May 5–6, 2015.
Many indigenous customs, such as female genital mutilation and even menstrual taboos, have been theorized to have originated as preventive measures against cuckolding.
It is also argued that adultery laws are rooted in religious doctrines; which should not be the case for laws in a secular state.
In the United States, six states still maintain this tort.
A police officer cannot arrest a person without a warrant in a case of adultery as adultery is a non-cognizable offence.
Adultery is not a ground for divorce in jurisdictions which have adopted a no-fault divorce model.
Though what sexual activities constitute adultery varies, as well as the social, religious and legal consequences, the concept exists in many cultures and is similar in Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
Men have called the law gender discrimination in that women cannot be prosecuted for adultery and the National Commission of Women has criticized the British era law of being anti-feminist as it treats women as the property of their husbands and has consequently recommended deletion of the law or reducing it to a civil offense.
Until a few decades ago, adultery was a criminal offense in many countries where the dominant religion is Christianity, especially in Roman Catholic countries (see also the section on Europe).
Some adultery laws differentiate based on the sex of the participants, and as a result such laws are often seen as discriminatory, and in some jurisdictions they have been struck down by courts, usually on the basis that they discriminated against women.
This arrangement has been deplored by many modern intellectuals.
"The fact that we eat most meals at home with spouses and partners does not preclude eating out in restaurants to sample different cuisines and ambiences, with friends or colleagues."
