Art is the first stage in which the absolute spirit is manifest immediately to sense-perception, and is thus an objective rather than subjective revelation of beauty.
Short vowels are not included in the alphabet, being indicated by signs placed above or below the consonant or long vowel that they follow.
Schmidhuber's theory explicitly distinguishes between what's beautiful and what's interesting, stating that interestingness corresponds to the first derivative of subjectively perceived beauty.
While the date of composition varies widely among scholars, ranging from the era of Plato and Aristotle to the seventh century CE.
More recently, James Page has suggested that aesthetic ethics might be taken to form a philosophical rationale for peace education.
Another example is that body symmetry is an important aspect of physical attractiveness which may be due to this indicating good health during body growth.
Sculpture and performance art are prominent, and abstract and partially abstracted forms are valued, and were valued long before influence from the Western tradition began in earnest.
Aesthetic ethics refers to the idea that human conduct and behaviour ought to be governed by that which is beautiful and attractive.
Modern aestheticians have asserted that will and desire were almost dormant in aesthetic experience, yet preference and choice have seemed important aesthetics to some 20th-century thinkers.
George Dickie suggested that the sociological institutions of the art world were the glue binding art and sensibility into unities.
Likewise aesthetic judgments seem often to be at least partly intellectual and interpretative.
Gu Kaizhi has left three surviving books on the theory of painting.
The Qur'an is less specific but condemns idolatry and uses the Arabic term musawwir ("maker of forms," or artist) as an epithet for God.
By "art" we may frame several artistic "works" or "creations" as so though this reference remains within the institution or special event which creates it and this leaves some works or other possible "art" outside of the frame work, or other interpretations such as other phenomenon which may not be considered as "art".
The 9th–10th century master of the religious system known as "the nondual Shaivism of Kashmir" (or "Kashmir Shaivism") and aesthetician, Abhinavagupta brought rasa theory to its pinnacle in his separate commentaries on the Dhvanyāloka, the Dhvanyāloka-locana (translated by Ingalls, Masson and Patwardhan, 1992) and the Abhinavabharati, his commentary on the Nātyashāstra, portions of which are translated by Gnoli and Masson and Patwardhan.
What rasa actually is, in a theoretical sense, is not discussed and given the Nātyashāstra's pithy wording it is unlikely the exact understanding of the original author(s) will be known.
"Rules of composition" that might be read into Duchamp's ''Fountain'' or John Cage's ''4′33″'' do not locate the works in a recognizable style (or certainly not a style recognizable at the time of the works' realization).
Theodor Adorno felt that aesthetics could not proceed without confronting the role of the culture industry in the commodification of art and aesthetic experience.
The philosophy of aesthetics as a practice has been criticized by some sociologists and writers of art and society.
Perhaps art should be thought of as a cluster of related concepts in a Wittgensteinian fashion (as in Weitz or Beuys).
Likewise, aesthetic judgments may be culturally conditioned to some extent.
'''Aesthetics''' (; also spelled '''æsthetics''' and '''esthetics''' also known in Greek as Αισθητική, or ''"Aisthētiké"'') is a branch of philosophy dealing with the nature of art, beauty, and taste, with the creation and appreciation of beauty.
African art has existed in many forms and styles, with relatively little influence from outside Africa.
His opponent Mozi, however, argued that music and fine arts were classist and wasteful, benefiting the rich over the poor.
Artists, philosophers, anthropologists, psychologists and programmers all use the notion of art in their respective fields, and give it operational definitions that vary considerably.
In the 1970s, Abraham Moles and Frieder Nake were among the first to analyze links between aesthetics, information processing, and information theory.
Here the premise is that any observer continually tries to improve the predictability and compressibility of the observations by discovering regularities such as repetitions and symmetries and fractal self-similarity.
People can appreciate a Renaissance Madonna for aesthetic reasons, but such objects often had (and sometimes still have) specific devotional functions.
For example, the installations of the contemporary artist Thomas Hirschhorn deliberately eschew technical virtuosity.
As time passed, these calligraphic works began to be prized as works of art, growing increasingly elaborate in the illumination and stylizing of the text.
Marshall McLuhan suggested that art always functions as a "counter-environment" designed to make visible what is usually invisible about a society.
Whenever the observer's learning process (which may be a predictive neural network; see also Neuroesthetics) leads to improved data compression such that the observation sequence can be described by fewer bits than before, the temporary interestingness of the data corresponds to the number of saved bits.
Victorians in Britain often saw African sculpture as ugly, but just a few decades later, Edwardian audiences saw the same sculptures as being beautiful.
Mathematical considerations, such as symmetry and complexity, are used for analysis in theoretical aesthetics.
A relation between Max Bense's mathematical formulation of aesthetics in terms of "redundancy" and "complexity" and theories of musical anticipation was offered using the notion of Information Rate.
Thus, the sensory discrimination is linked to capacity for pleasure.
The Acquine engine, developed at Penn State University, rates natural photographs uploaded by users.
For Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, the philosophy of art is the "organon" of philosophy concerning the relation between man and nature.
For Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury this was identical to the moral sense, beauty just is the sensory version of moral goodness.
Therefore, due to impossibility for precision, there is confusion about what interpretations can be culturally negotiated.
Viewer interpretations of beauty possess two concepts of value: aesthetics and taste.
These unconscious reactions may even be partly constitutive of what makes our judgment a judgment that the landscape is sublime.
It is more scientifically defined as the study of sensory or sensori-emotional values, sometimes called judgments of sentiment and taste.
However, scientists including the mathematician David Orrell and physicist Marcelo Gleiser have argued that the emphasis on aesthetic criteria such as symmetry is equally capable of leading scientists astray.
This is different from the aesthetic considerations of applied aesthetics used in the study of mathematical beauty.
Judgments of beauty are sensory, emotional and intellectual all at once.
Notable in this area is Michael Leyton, professor of psychology at Rutgers University.
More broadly, scholars in the field define aesthetics as "critical reflection on art, culture and nature."
Gregory Loewen has suggested that the subject is key in the interaction with the aesthetic object.
Gaut and Livingston define the intentionalists as distinct from formalists stating that: "Intentionalists, unlike formalists, hold that reference to intentions is essential in fixing the correct interpretation of works."
Abhinavagupta offers for the first time a technical definition of rasa which is the universal bliss of the Self or Atman coloured by the emotional tone of a drama.
Several later artists or scholars both created art and wrote about the creation of it.
Analytic theorists like Henry Home, Lord Kames, William Hogarth, and Edmund Burke hoped to reduce beauty to some list of attributes.
The intuitionists believed that aesthetic experience was disclosed by a single mental faculty of some kind.
Likewise there has been long debate on how perception of beauty in the natural world, especially perception of the human form as beautiful, is supposed to relate to perceiving beauty in art or artefacts.
Most people did not consider the depiction of a store-bought urinal or Brillo Box to be art until Marcel Duchamp and Andy Warhol (respectively) placed them in the context of art (i.e., the art gallery), which then provided the association of these objects with the associations that define art.
According to Kant, beauty is subjective and universal; thus certain things are beautiful to everyone.
As well, art is used to memorialize individuated biographies in a manner that allows persons to imagine that they are part of something greater than themselves.
This fallacy would later be repudiated by theorists from the reader-response school of literary theory.
Croce suggested that "expression" is central in the way that beauty was once thought to be central.
Later analytic aestheticians strove to link beauty to some scientific theory of psychology (such as James Mill) or biology (such as Herbert Spencer).
even though his later definition in the fragment ''Aesthetica'' (1750) is more often referred to as the first definition of modern aesthetics.
Defining it requires a description of the entire phenomenon, as Wittgenstein argued in his lectures on aesthetics.
At the same time, there is seemingly quite a lack of words to express oneself accurately when making an aesthetic judgment.
Chinese art has a long history of varied styles and emphases.
The argument continues that the only justification humanity could give for its continued existence would be the past creation and continued creation of things like a Shakespeare play, a Rembrandt painting or a Bach concerto.
It is, to speak more exactly, the search after the secret of life.
For Immanuel Kant the aesthetic experience of beauty is a judgment of a subjective but similar human truth, since all people should agree that "this rose is beautiful" if it in fact is.
Art is an autonomous entity for philosophy, because art deals with the senses (i. e. the etymology of aesthetics) and art is as such free of any moral or political purpose.
To some extent, the value of art, for Tolstoy, is one with the value of empathy.
Functionalists like Monroe Beardsley argue that whether or not a piece counts as art depends on what function it plays in a particular context; the same Greek vase may play a non-artistic function in one context (carrying wine), and an artistic function in another context (helping us to appreciate the beauty of the human figure). '
'Sat' is the truth value, 'Shiv' is the good value & 'Sundaram' is the beauty value.
The suggestion is that these are the things of value which define humanity.
Limited possibilities have been explored by artists as an outlet to artistic expression, and has been cultivated to become a positive style and tradition, emphasizing the decorative function of art, or its religious functions via non-representational forms such as Geometric patterns, floral patterns, and arabesques.
For Hegel, all culture is a matter of "absolute spirit" coming to be manifest to itself, stage by stage, changing to a perfection that only philosophy can approach.
Aesthetic coupling between art-objects and medical topics was made by speakers working for the US Information Agency This coupling was made to reinforce the learning paradigm when English-language speakers used translators to address audiences in their own country.
Similarly, in the ''Metaphysics'', Aristotle found that the universal elements of beauty were order, symmetry, and definiteness.
The discipline of aesthetics, which originated in the eighteenth century, mistook this transient state of affairs for a revelation of the permanent nature of art.
For Francis Hutcheson beauty is disclosed by an inner mental sense, but is a subjective fact rather than an objective one.
For Oscar Wilde, the contemplation of beauty for beauty's sake (augmented by John Ruskin's search for moral grounding) was more than the foundation for much of his literary career; he once stated, "Aestheticism is a search after the signs of the beautiful.
This concept of Satyam-Shivam-Sundaram, a kind of Value Theory is the cornerstone of Indian Aesthetics.
The Dadaist Tristan Tzara on the other hand saw the function of art in 1918 as the destruction of a mad social order.
One of his examples: mathematicians enjoy simple proofs with a short description in their formal language.
The contemporary view of beauty is not based on innate qualities, but rather on cultural specifics and individual interpretations.
For David Hume, delicacy of taste is not merely "the ability to detect all the ingredients in a composition", but also our sensitivity "to pains as well as pleasures, which escape the rest of mankind."
If a poet writes down several lines, intending them as a poem, the very procedure by which it is written makes it a poem.
What characteristics do they share which give them that status?
Judgments of aesthetical values seem often to involve many other kinds of issues as well.
This compression progress is proportional to the observer's internal reward, also called curiosity reward.
Hence his viewpoint can be paraphrased as "That which constitutes aesthetics lies outside the realm of the language game".
Hogarth, for example, thinks that beauty consists of (1) fitness of the parts to some design; (2) variety in as many ways as possible; (3) uniformity, regularity or symmetry, which is only beautiful when it helps to preserve the character of fitness; (4) simplicity or distinctness, which gives pleasure not in itself, but through its enabling the eye to enjoy variety with ease; (5) intricacy, which provides employment for our active energies, leading the eye on "a wanton kind of chase"; and (6) quantity or magnitude, which draws our attention and produces admiration and awe.
Affirm the cleanliness of the individual after the state of madness, aggressive complete madness of a world abandoned to the hands of bandits."
In 1946, William K. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley published a classic and controversial New Critical essay entitled "The Intentional Fallacy", in which they argued strongly against the relevance of an author's intention, or "intended meaning" in the analysis of a literary work.
In chapter fifteen of ''What Is Art?
For Arthur Schopenhauer aesthetic contemplation of beauty is the most free that the pure intellect can be from the dictates of will; here we contemplate perfection of form without any kind of worldly agenda, and thus any intrusion of utility or politics would ruin the point of the beauty.
Even as late as 1912 it was normal in the West to assume that all art aims at beauty, and thus that anything that wasn't trying to be beautiful couldn't count as art.
Confucius emphasized the role of the arts and humanities (especially music and poetry) in broadening human nature and aiding ''li'' (etiquette, the rites) in bringing us back to what is essential about humanity.
In a current context, one might judge a Lamborghini to be beautiful partly because it is desirable as a status symbol, or we might judge it to be repulsive partly because it signifies for us over-consumption and offends our political or moral values.
However, beauty cannot be reduced to any more basic set of features.
Often, if the skill is being used in a functional object, people will consider it a craft instead of art, a suggestion which is highly disputed by many Contemporary Craft thinkers.
Art usually implies no function other than to convey or communicate an idea.
There have also been relatively successful attempts with regard to chess and music.
During the first half of the twentieth century, a significant shift to general aesthetic theory took place which attempted to apply aesthetic theory between various forms of art, including the literary arts and the visual arts, to each other.
Indianapolis, Literary Classics 5, 1987.)
For example, Tolstoy asserts that empathy for decadent members of the ruling class makes society worse, rather than better.
The term "Islamic" refers not only to the religion, but to any form of art created by people in an Islamic culture or in an Islamic context, whether the artist is Islamic or not.
Since about 2005, computer scientists have attempted to develop automated methods to infer aesthetic quality of images.
Yet disgust can often be a learned or cultural issue too; as Darwin pointed out, seeing a stripe of soup in a man's beard is disgusting even though neither soup nor beards are themselves disgusting.
Even in contemporary India the term ''rasa'' denoting "flavour" or "essence" is used colloquially to describe the aesthetic experiences in films; "māsala mix" describes popular Hindi cinema films which serve a so-called balanced emotional meal for the masses, savoured as rasa by these spectators.
Jean-François Lyotard re-invokes the Kantian distinction between taste and the sublime.
Shānta-rasa functions as an equal member of the set of rasas but is simultaneously distinct being the most clear form of aesthetic bliss.
Raymond Williams argues that there is no unique and or individual aesthetic object which can be extrapolated from the art world, but that there is a continuum of cultural forms and experience of which ordinary speech and experiences may signal as art.
Here we mean that skill is being used to express the artist's creativity, or to engage the audience's aesthetic sensibilities, or to draw the audience towards consideration of the "finer" things.
It is what a thing means or symbolizes for us that is often what we are judging.
Modern Chinese aesthetic theory took shape during the modernization of China from Empire to republic in early 20th century.
Tolstoy defined art as the following: "Art is a human activity consisting in this, that one man consciously, by means of certain external signs, hands on to others feelings he has lived through, and that other people are infected by these feelings and also experience them."
Islamic art frequently adopts secular elements and elements that are frowned upon, if not forbidden, by some Islamic theologians.
For Friedrich Schiller aesthetic appreciation of beauty is the most perfect reconciliation of the sensual and rational parts of human nature.
By beautifying the outward aspects of life, one would beautify the inner ones."
Thus thinkers like Kant, Hegel, Marx and Heidegger have all been incorporated into contemporary Chinese aesthetic theory, through philosophers like Li Zehou.
Many goals have been argued for art, and aestheticians often argue that some goal or another is superior in some way.
Religious and philosophical influences on art were common (and diverse) but never universal.
A third major topic in the study of aesthetic judgments is how they are unified across art forms.
Aesthetic considerations such as symmetry and simplicity are used in areas of philosophy, such as ethics and theoretical physics and cosmology to define truth, outside of empirical considerations.
For Wimsatt and Beardsley, the words on the page were all that mattered; importation of meanings from outside the text was considered irrelevant, and potentially distracting.
Perhaps some notion like "expression" (in Croce's theories) or "counter-environment" (in McLuhan's theory) can replace the previous role of beauty.
Abhinavagupta likens it to the string of a jeweled necklace; while it may not be the most appealing for most people, it is the string that gives form to the necklace, allowing the jewels of the other eight rasas to be relished.
Arabic is written from right to left, like other Semitic scripts, and consists of 17 characters, which, with the addition of dots placed above or below certain of them, provide the 28 letters of the Arabic alphabet.
For Kant "enjoyment" is the result when pleasure arises from sensation, but judging something to be "beautiful" has a third requirement: sensation must give rise to pleasure by engaging our capacities of reflective contemplation.
Beauty and Truth have been argued to be nearly synonymous, as reflected in the statement "Beauty is truth, truth beauty" in the poem Ode on a Grecian Urn by John Keats, or by the Hindu motto "Satyam Shivam Sundaram" (Satya (Truth) is Shiva (God), and Shiva is Sundaram (Beautiful)).
We can call a person, a house, a symphony, a fragrance, and a mathematical proof beautiful.
With the exception of six letters, which can be joined only to the preceding ones, the initial and medial letters are much abbreviated, while the final form consists of the initial form with a triumphant flourish.
Fish criticizes Wimsatt and Beardsley in his essay "Literature in the Reader" (1970).
Evolutionary aesthetics refers to evolutionary psychology theories in which the basic aesthetic preferences of ''Homo sapiens'' are argued to have evolved in order to enhance survival and reproductive success.
Modern approaches mostly come from the fields of cognitive psychology or neuroscience (neuroaesthetics).
Rasa theory blossoms beginning with the Sanskrit text Nātyashāstra (''nātya'' meaning "drama" and ''shāstra'' meaning "science of"), a work attributed to Bharata Muni where the Gods declare that drama is the 'Fifth Veda' because it is suitable for the degenerate age as the best form of religious instruction.
Not all Muslims are in agreement on the use of art in religious observance, the proper place of art in society, or the relation between secular art and the demands placed on the secular world to conform to religious precepts.
The principles can be implemented on artificial agents which then exhibit a form of artificial curiosity.
The fact that judgments of beauty and judgments of truth both are influenced by processing fluency, which is the ease with which information can be processed, has been presented as an explanation for why beauty is sometimes equated with truth.
Eight rasas and associated bhāvas are named and their enjoyment is likened to savouring a meal: rasa is the enjoyment of flavours that arise from the proper preparation of ingredients and the quality of ingredients.
Another approach is to say that "art" is basically a sociological category, that whatever art schools and museums and artists define as art is considered art regardless of formal definitions.
At issue was the question of whether the aesthetic intentions of the artist in creating the work of art, whatever its specific form, should be associated with the criticism and evaluation of the final product of the work of art, or, if the work of art should be evaluated on its own merits independent of the intentions of the artist.
"We must sweep and clean.
Seeing a sublime view of a landscape may give us a reaction of awe, which might manifest physically as an increased heart rate or widened eyes.
John Dewey has pointed out that the unity of aesthetics and ethics is in fact reflected in our understanding of behaviour being "fair" — the word having a double meaning of attractive and morally acceptable.
What was new was a refusal to credit the higher status of certain types, where the taxonomy implied a preference for tragedy and the sublime to comedy and the Rococo.
Thus, judgments of aesthetic value can become linked to judgments of economic, political, or moral value.
Sublime painting, unlike kitsch realism, "...&nbsp;will enable us to see only by making it impossible to see; it will please only by causing pain."
The essential part of the characters, however, remains unchanged.
Individuals idea of 'Daksha' and 'Mahana' is relative to the development of the concept of 'Satyam-Shivam-Sundaram.'
Furthermore, it is clear that even the basic meaning of the term "art" has changed several times over the centuries, and has continued to evolve during the 20th century as well.
So details of the act of creating a work, though possibly of interest in themselves, have no bearing on the correct interpretation of the work."
Indeed, recent research found that people use beauty as an indication for truth in mathematical pattern tasks.
Some thinkers, for instance, have argued that the difference between fine art and applied art has more to do with the actual function of the object than any clear definitional difference.
He argues that Kant's "aesthetic" merely represents an experience that is the product of an elevated class habitus and scholarly leisure as opposed to other possible and equally valid "aesthetic" experiences which lay outside Kant's narrow definition.
Clement Greenberg, for instance, argued in 1960 that each artistic medium should seek that which makes it unique among the possible mediums and then purify itself of anything other than expression of its own uniqueness as a form.
In chapter sixteen, he asserts that the best art is "universal art" that expresses simple and accessible positive feeling.
Iconoclasm was previously known in the Byzantine period and aniconicism was a feature of the Judaic world, thus placing the Islamic objection to figurative representations within a larger context.
Evaluations of beauty may well be linked to desirability, perhaps even to sexual desirability.
How best to define the term "art" is a subject of constant contention; many books and journal articles have been published arguing over even the basics of what we mean by the term "art".
An aesthetic judgment cannot be an empirical judgement.
Although the often cited opposition in Islam to the depiction of human and animal forms holds true for religious art and architecture, in the secular sphere, such representations have flourished in nearly all Islamic cultures.
Leyton is the president of the International Society for Mathematical and Computational Aesthetics and the
The theory of the rasas develops significantly with the Kashmiri aesthetician Ãndandavardhana's classic on poetics, the Dhvanyāloka which introduces the ninth rasa, shānta-rasa as a specifically religious feeling of peace (''śānta'') which arises from its bhāva, weariness of the pleasures of the world.
Thus aesthetic judgments might be seen to be based on the senses, emotions, intellectual opinions, will, desires, culture, preferences, values, subconscious behaviour, conscious decision, training, instinct, sociological institutions, or some complex combination of these, depending on exactly which theory one employs.
André Malraux explains that the notion of beauty was connected to a particular conception of art that arose with the Renaissance and was still dominant in the eighteenth century (but was supplanted later).
Hal Foster attempted to portray the reaction against beauty and Modernist art in ''The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture''.
Aesthetic judgments may be linked to emotions or, like emotions, partially embodied in our physical reactions.
The English Renaissance was, he said, "like the Italian Renaissance before it, a sort of rebirth of the spirit of man".
Taste is a result of an education process and awareness of elite cultural values learned through exposure to mass culture.
Revising some concepts of the Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser, Gary Tedman defines art in terms of social reproduction of the relations of production on the aesthetic level.
He felt that beautiful objects incorporated proportion, harmony, and unity among their parts.
The Nok culture is testimony to this.
This capacity of art to endure over time — what precisely it is and how it operates — has been widely neglected in modern aesthetics.
So aesthetics began now to be the name for the ''philosophy of art''.
They quote Richard Wollheim as stating that, "The task of criticism is the reconstruction of the creative process, where the creative process must in turn be thought of as something not stopping short of, but terminating on, the work of art itself."
Aesthetic judgments usually go beyond sensory discrimination.
It can also be used in topics as diverse as mathematics, gastronomy, fashion and website design.
A reinforcement learning algorithm is used to maximize future expected reward by learning to execute action sequences that cause additional interesting input data with yet unknown but learnable predictability or regularity.
For Ludwig Wittgenstein aesthetics consisted in the description of a whole culture which is a linguistic impossibility.
For Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten aesthetics is the science of the sense experiences, a younger sister of logic, and beauty is thus the most perfect kind of knowledge that sense experience can have.
As well as being applied to art, aesthetics can also be applied to cultural objects such as crucifix or tools.
Another view, as important to the philosophy of art as "beauty," is that of the "sublime," elaborated upon in the twentieth century by the postmodern philosopher Jean-François Lyotard.
In another essay, "The Affective Fallacy," which served as a kind of sister essay to "The Intentional Fallacy" Wimsatt and Beardsley also discounted the reader's personal/emotional reaction to a literary work as a valid means of analyzing a text.
The calligraphic arts grew out of an effort to devote oneself to the study of the Quran.
The written letters undergo a slight external change according to their position within a word.
Another very concrete example describes an aesthetically pleasing human face whose proportions can be described by very few bits of information, drawing inspiration from less detailed 15th century proportion studies by Leonardo da Vinci and Albrecht Dürer.
An argument for the value of art, used in the fictional work ''The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy'', proceeds that, if some external force presenting imminent destruction of Earth asked humanity what its value was—what should humanity's response be?
These audiences were generally not fluent in the English language.
In his speech he proposed that Beauty and Aesthetics was "not languid but energetic.
What makes a painting beautiful is quite different from what makes music beautiful, which suggests that each art form has its own language for the judgement of aesthetics.
The British were largely divided into intuitionist and analytic camps.
He travelled across the United States spreading the idea of Aesthetics in a speech called "The English Renaissance."
It is the science of the beautiful through which men seek the correlation of the arts.
The main recent sense of the word "art" is roughly as an abbreviation for '''''creative art''''' or "fine art."
This tendency affected the narrowing field of artistic possibility to such forms of art as Arabesque, mosaic, Islamic calligraphy, and Islamic architecture, as well as any form of abstraction that can claim the status of non-representational art.
This resulted in the rise of the New Criticism school and debate concerning ''the intentional fallacy''.
A person who has mastered great amounts of knowledge of the grammars, rules, & language of an art-form are adepts (Daksha), whereas those who have worked through the whole system and journeyed ahead of these to become a law unto themselves is called a Mahana.
Whereas if a journalist writes exactly the same set of words, intending them as shorthand notes to help him write a longer article later, these would not be a poem.
The relation of Marxist aesthetics to post-modern aesthetics is still a contentious area of debate.
