They are imported from the United Arab Emirates through Pakistan and Iran.
Like other highlanders, they are regarded with mingled apprehension and condescension, for their high regard for personal honor, for their tribe loyalty and for their readiness to use force to settle disputes.
The Afghan Defense University (ADU) houses various educational establishments for the Afghan Armed Forces, including the National Military Academy of Afghanistan.
Although literacy is low, classic Persian and Pashto poetry plays an important role in the Afghan culture.
Like many of its neighboring countries, Afghanistan has an ethnically, linguistically and religiously diverse population.
By the 11th century, Mahmud of Ghazni defeated the remaining Hindu rulers and effectively Islamized the wider region, with the exception of Kafiristan.
The root name "Afghan" was used historically in reference to a member of the ethnic Pashtuns, and the suffix "-stan" means "place of" in Persian.
The police receive most of their training from Western forces under the NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan.
Over 100,000 have been injured.
The $200 million Afghan Defense University is under construction near Qargha in Kabul.
In the early 16th century, Babur arrived from Fergana and captured Kabul from the Arghun dynasty.
, vehicles more than 10 years old are banned from being imported into the country.
In 1893, Mortimer Durand made Amir Abdur Rahman Khan sign a controversial agreement in which the ethnic Pashtun and Baloch territories were divided by the Durand Line.
Through the ages the land has been home to various peoples and witnessed numerous military campaigns; notably by Alexander the Great, Mauryas, Muslim Arabs, Mongols, British, Soviet, and in the modern-era by Western powers.
Much of the northeastern and southern areas of the country remained dominated by Buddhist culture.
The national team has never competed or qualified for the FIFA World Cup, but has recently won an international football trophy in 2013.
The provincial governors are representatives of the central government in Kabul and are responsible for all administrative and formal issues within their provinces.
Afghanistan is a member of WTO, SAARC, ECO, and OIC.
The Afghan National Security Forces are provided with mandatory literacy courses.
The National Military Academy of Afghanistan, modeled after the United States Military Academy at West Point, is a four-year military development institution dedicated to graduating officers for the Afghan Armed Forces.
The United States is building six faculties of education and five provincial teacher training colleges around the country, two large secondary schools in Kabul, and one school in Jalalabad.
By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to form in parts of the country.
Its unemployment rate was reported in 2008 at about 35%.
The only city with over a million residents is its capital, Kabul.
Non-governmental charities such as Save the Children and Mahboba's Promise assist orphans in association with governmental structures.
For civilians there was little security from murder, rape, and extortion.
The Afghan culture has been around for over two millennia, tracing back to at least the time of the Achaemenid Empire in 500 BCE.
Cricket is the country's most popular sport, followed by association football.
The national team plays its home games at the Ghazi Stadium in Kabul, while football in Afghanistan is governed by the Afghanistan Football Federation.
The Taliban's early victories in late 1994 were followed by a series of defeats that resulted in heavy losses.
In the north of the country is the Shrine of Hazrat Ali, believed by many to be the location where Ali was buried.
Many major Bollywood film stars have roots in Afghanistan, including Salman Khan, Saif Ali Khan, Shah Rukh Khan (SRK), Aamir Khan, Feroz Khan, Kader Khan, Naseeruddin Shah, Zarine Khan and Celina Jaitly.
In 2010, President Karzai attempted to hold peace negotiations with the Taliban leaders, but the rebel group refused to attend until mid-2015 when the Taliban supreme leader finally decided to back the peace talks.
Afghanistan is administratively divided into 34 provinces (''wilayats''), with each province having its own capital and a provincial administration.
There are an estimated 60 major Pashtun tribes, and the Afghan nomads are estimated at about 2–3 million.
Therefore, Afghanistan translates to ''land of the Afghans'' or, more specifically in a historical sense, to ''land of the Pashtuns''.
While the nation's current account deficit is largely financed with donor money, only a small portion is provided directly to the government budget.
These include Air India, Emirates, Gulf Air, Iran Aseman Airlines, Pakistan International Airlines, and Turkish Airlines.
Another of Zahir Shah's uncles, Shah Mahmud Khan, became Prime Minister in 1946 and began an experiment allowing greater political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he expected.
This and the fact that around one million Afghans were internally displaced made the United States worry.
The US government suspected Osama bin Laden as the perpetrator of the attacks, and demanded that the Taliban hand him over.
Meanwhile, the Afghan government was able to build some democratic structures, and the country changed its name to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Afghan rugs are becoming popular again, allowing many carpet dealers around the country to hire more workers.
In 2010, the United States began establishing a number of Lincoln learning centers in Afghanistan.
According to article 140 of the constitution and the presidential decree on electoral law, mayors of cities should be elected through free and direct elections for a four-year term.
Government officials estimate that 30% of the country's untapped mineral deposits are worth between  and .
Only Turkmens (totally) and Uzbeks (mostly) are to be identified with languages that they speak.
The United States blamed rogue elements within the Pakistani government for the increased attacks.
The United States began working with the Northern Alliance to remove the Taliban from power.
Afghanistan has experienced a gradual urbanization since the late 1990s but the country remains one of the world's least urban societies.
In late 1994, forces of Ahmad Shah Massoud held on to Kabul.
Newer automobiles have recently become more widely available after the rebuilding of roads and highways.
The rest is provided to non-budgetary expenditure and donor-designated projects through the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations.
The average life expectancy is estimated to be around 60 years for both sexes.
The National Directorate of Security (NDS) is the nation's domestic intelligence agency, which operates similar to that of the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and has between 15,000 and 30,000 employees.
One official asserted that "this will become the backbone of the Afghan economy" and a Pentagon memo stated that Afghanistan could become the "Saudi Arabia of lithium".
In 2011, Afghanistan signed an oil exploration contract with China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) for the development of three oil fields along the Amu Darya river in the north.
The nation has less than $1.5 billion in external debt.
Former Interior Minister Hanif Atmar said that security officials from the US (FBI), Britain (Scotland Yard), and the European Union will train prosecutors in the unit.
This has been so since the inception of the state in AD 1747."
The last parliamentary election was held in September 2010, but due to disputes and investigation of fraud, the swearing-in ceremony took place in late January 2011.
The government started programs to help reduce poppy cultivation, and by 2010 it was reported that 24 out of the 34 provinces were free from poppy growing.
Afghanistan remained neutral and was neither a participant in World War II nor aligned with either power bloc in the Cold War.
The last strong earthquakes were in 1998, which killed about 6,000 people in Badakhshan near Tajikistan.
Several other stadiums are under construction.
Following the Third Anglo-Afghan War in 1919, King Amanullah unsuccessfully attempted to modernize the country.
Hekmatyar started a bombardment campaign against the capital city Kabul, which marked the beginning of a new phase in the war.
Improvements to the business environment have resulted in more than $1.5 billion in telecom investment and created more than 100,000 jobs since 2003.
In the meantime, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto got neighboring Pakistan involved in Afghanistan.
According to Physicians for Human Rights (PHR), "no other regime in the world has methodically and violently forced half of its population into virtual house arrest, prohibiting them on pain of physical punishment from showing their faces, seeking medical care without a male escort, or attending school."
More than 5,000 schools were built or renovated in the last decade, with more than 100,000 teachers being trained and recruited.
According to Transparency International's 2014 corruption perceptions index results, Afghanistan was ranked as the fourth most corrupt country in the world.
, the population of Afghanistan is around 32,564,342, which includes the roughly 2.7 million Afghan refugees still living in Pakistan and Iran.
Mahmud led the Afghan army in 1722 to the Persian capital of Isfahan, captured the city after the Battle of Gulnabad and proclaimed himself King of Persia.
The following is a list of all the 34 provinces in alphabetical order:
The Afghan Border Police (ABP) are responsible for protecting the nation's airports and borders, especially the disputed Durand Line border, which is often used by members of criminal organizations and terrorists for their illegal activities.
Both lines are used for freight only and there is no passenger service as of yet.
The ANA also has a commando brigade, which was established in 2007.
In 1219&nbsp;AD, Genghis Khan and his Mongol army overran the region.
Some experts suggest that Bhutto paved the way for the April 1978 Saur Revolution.
In 1837, during the Battle of Jamrud near the Khyber Pass, Akbar Khan and the Afghan army failed to capture the Jamrud fort from the Sikh Khalsa Army, but killed Sikh Commander Hari Singh Nalwa, thus ending the Afghan-Sikh Wars.
The conflict between the two militias soon escalated into a full-scale war.
The city of Kabul has been home to many musicians who were masters of both traditional and modern Afghan music.
He moved to end his country's traditional isolation by establishing diplomatic relations with the international community and, following a 1927–28 tour of Europe and Turkey, introduced several reforms intended to modernize his nation.
Human habitation in Afghanistan dates back to the Middle Paleolithic Era, and the country's strategic location along the Silk Road connected it to the cultures of the Middle East and other parts of Asia.
It is similar to polo, played by horsemen in two teams, each trying to grab and hold a goat carcass.
One of the main drivers for the current economic recovery is the return of over 5 million expatriates, who brought with them fresh energy, entrepreneurship and wealth-creating skills as well as much needed funds to start up businesses.
Today, a number of NATO member states deploy about 38,000 troops in Afghanistan as part of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
The National Assembly is the legislature, a bicameral body having two chambers, the House of the People and the House of Elders.
Mohammed Zahir Shah, Nadir Shah's 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to 1973.
The Afghan Ministry of Counter Narcotics is tasked to deal with these issues by bringing to justice major drug traffickers.
The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimated in 2006 that northern Afghanistan has an average  (bbl) of crude oil, 15.7 trillion cubic feet ( bn m3) of natural gas, and  of natural gas liquids.
Afghanistan's basketball team won the first team sports title at the 2010 South Asian Games.
There was a small Jewish community in Afghanistan who had emigrated to Israel and the United States by the end of the twentieth century; only one Jew, Zablon Simintov, remained by 2005.
Millions of Afghans who have been living in Pakistan and Iran over the last 30 years have been influenced by the cultures of those neighboring nations.
Thousands of Afghan Sikhs and Hindus are also found in the major cities.
Jack Kem, deputy to the commander of NATO Training Mission Afghanistan and Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan, stated that the literacy rate in the ANP would rise to over 50% by January 2012.
The country sits at a unique nexus point where numerous civilizations have interacted and often fought.
Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such as the abolition of the traditional burqa for women and the opening of a number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious leaders.
This, coupled with the internal collapse of his government, led to his ousting from power in April 1992.
Many empires and kingdoms have also risen to power in Afghanistan, such as the Greco-Bactrians, Kushans, Hephthalites, Kabul Shahis, Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Khiljis, Kartids, Timurids, Mughals, and finally the Hotak and Durrani dynasties that marked the political origins of the modern state.
Postal services in Afghanistan are provided by the publicly owned Afghan Post and private companies such as FedEx, DHL, and others.
However, the modern Constitution of Afghanistan states that "the word Afghan shall apply to every citizen of Afghanistan."
Despite having numerous rivers and reservoirs, large parts of the country are dry.
However, many of its historic monuments have been damaged in recent wars.
After his death, they rebelled and divided up the provinces of the empire between themselves.
There are also plans to finish a rail line between Khaf, Iran and Herat, Afghanistan.
Its main purpose is to train the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF).
Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul told the media in 2011 that his nation's "goal is to achieve an Afghan economy whose growth is based on trade, private enterprise and investment".
By the middle of the 6th century BCE, the Achaemenids overthrew the Medes and incorporated Arachosia, Aria, and Bactria within its eastern boundaries.
Half a million people fled Afghanistan.
In September 1979, Nur Muhammad Taraki was assassinated in a coup within the PDPA orchestrated by fellow Khalq member Hafizullah Amin, who assumed the presidency.
A landlocked mountainous country with plains in the north and southwest, Afghanistan is located within South Asia and Central Asia.
As a result, however, the Soviets were now directly involved in what had been a domestic war in Afghanistan.
Between the 16th and 18th century, the Khanate of Bukhara, Safavids, and Mughals ruled parts of the territory.
The nation has a complex history that has survived either in its current cultures or in the form of various languages and monuments.
From 1989 until 1992, Najibullah's government tried to solve the ongoing civil war with economic and military aid, but without Soviet troops on the ground.
The Afghanistan national football team has been competing in international football since 1941.
In the decade following 2002, over five million Afghans were repatriated, including some who were forcefully deported from Western countries.
The Punjab region was lost to Ranjit Singh, who invaded Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and in 1834 captured the city of Peshawar.
It enjoys strong economic relations with a number of NATO and allied states, particularly the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and Turkey.
In a 2011 news story, the ''CSM'' reported, "The United States and other Western nations that have borne the brunt of the cost of the Afghan war have been conspicuously absent from the bidding process on Afghanistan's mineral deposits, leaving it mostly to regional powers."
The Afghan economy has been growing at about 10% per year in the last decade, which is due to the infusion of over $50 billion in international aid and remittances from Afghan expats.
Education Minister Ghulam Farooq Wardak stated that another 8,000 schools are required to be constructed for the remaining 3 million children who are deprived of education.
In 2012, the country's 3x3 basketball team won the gold medal at the 2012 Asian Beach Games, in 2013, Afghanistan's football team followed as it won the SAFF Championship.
Daoud Khan sought a closer relationship with the Soviet Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan.
Much of it soon broke away from them and became part of the Indo-Greek Kingdom.
Mirwais died of a natural cause in 1715 and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz, who was soon killed by Mirwais' son Mahmud for treason.
A cloak reputedly worn by Islam's prophet Muhammad is kept inside the Shrine of the Cloak in Kandahar, a city founded by Alexander and the first capital of Afghanistan.
On 9 September 2001, Massoud was assassinated by two Arab suicide attackers in Panjshir province of Afghanistan.
The country's highest point is Noshaq, at  above sea level.
In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a political-religious force.
The development of the nation's road network is a major boost for the economy due to trade with neighboring countries.
Soon after the Persian and Afghan forces invaded India.
, the country has only two rail links, one a 75&nbsp;km line from Kheyrabad to the Uzbekistan border and the other a 10&nbsp;km long line from Toraghundi to the Turkmenistan border.
Later, the Samanids extended their Islamic influence south of the Hindu Kush.
The institution of slavery was abolished in 1923.
There are several smaller IVC colonies to be found in Afghanistan as well.
The buses are usually older model Mercedes-Benz and owned by private companies.
An estimated 25,000 people died during the most intense period of bombardment by Hekmatyar's Hezb-i Islami and the Junbish-i Milli forces of Abdul Rashid Dostum, who had created an alliance with Hekmatyar in 1994.
Other popular sports in Afghanistan include basketball, volleyball, taekwondo, and bodybuilding.
The state has been a member of the United Nations since 1946.
It continues to develop diplomatic relations with other countries around the world.
The citadel of Alexander in the western city of Herat has been renovated in recent years and is a popular attraction for tourists.
The Taliban seized Kabul in the same month and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.
However, two-thirds of the country's water flows into the neighboring countries of Iran, Pakistan, and Turkmenistan.
The Afghan National Police (ANP) is under the Ministry of the Interior and serves as a single law enforcement agency all across the country.
An inscription on the tombstone of Darius I of Persia mentions the Kabul Valley in a list of the 29 countries that he had conquered.
The Afghan National Civil Order Police is the main branch of the ANP, which is divided into five Brigades, each commanded by a Brigadier General.
The Afghan Armed Forces are under the Ministry of Defense, which includes the Afghan National Army (ANA) and the Afghan Air Force (AAF).
Every province has an appointed provincial Chief of Police who is responsible for law enforcement throughout the province.
These tribes later migrated further into South Asia, Western Asia, and toward Europe via the area north of the Caspian Sea.
The Taliban first took control of southern Afghanistan in 1994 and forced the surrender of dozens of local Pashtun leaders.
In 2009, President Karzai created two anti-corruption units within the Interior Ministry.
Billions in cash and weapons, which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles, were provided by the United States and Saudi Arabia to Pakistan.
Other languages, including Uzbek, Arabic, Turkmen, Balochi, Pashayi, and Nuristani languages (Ashkunu, Kamkata-viri, Vasi-vari, Tregami, and Kalasha-ala), are the native tongues of minority groups across the country and have official status in the regions where they are widely spoken.
In 2009 and 2010, a 5,000 OLPC – One Laptop Per Child schools deployment took place in Kandahar with funding from an anonymous foundation.
Poetry has always been one of the major educational pillars in the region, to the level that it has integrated itself into culture.
It borders Pakistan in the south and east; Iran in the west; Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikistan in the north; and China in the far east.
The nation has one of the highest incidences of people with disabilities, with around a million people affected.
, the nation's GDP stands at about $60.58 billion with an exchange rate of $20.31 billion, and the GDP per capita is $1,900.
The National Museum of Afghanistan is located in Kabul.
A small percentage of Afghans are also fluent in Urdu, English, and other languages.
Approximately 17% of them tested positive for illegal drug use.
He defeated Gurgin Khan and made Afghanistan independent.
Opium production in Afghanistan soared to a record in 2007 with about 3 million people reported to be involved in the business, but then declined significantly in the years following.
The French Medical Institute for Children and Indira Gandhi Childrens Hospital in Kabul are the leading children's hospitals in the country.
Faced with overwhelming armed opposition, Amanullah Khan was forced to abdicate in January 1929 after Kabul fell to rebel forces led by Habibullah Kalakani.
The state-run Steel Authority of India won the mining rights to develop the huge Hajigak iron ore deposit in central Afghanistan.
Following the 2014 presidential election President Karzai left power and Ashraf Ghani became President in September 2014.
The nation is led by President Ashraf Ghani with Abdul Rashid Dostum and Sarwar Danish as vice presidents.
In 2010, US and Afghan government officials estimated that untapped mineral deposits located in 2007 by the US Geological Survey are worth between  and .
After the Third Anglo-Afghan War and the signing of the Treaty of Rawalpindi on 19 August 1919, King Amanullah Khan declared Afghanistan a sovereign and fully independent state.
The Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs is in charge of maintaining the foreign relations of Afghanistan.
In the late 19th century, Afghanistan became a buffer state in the "Great Game" between British India and the Russian Empire.
ISAF forces also began to train the Afghan National Security Forces.
Michael E. O'Hanlon of the Brookings Institution estimated that if Afghanistan generates about $10 bn per year from its mineral deposits, its gross national product would double and provide long-term funding for Afghan security forces and other critical needs.
It has a population of approximately 32 million, making it the 42nd most populous country in the world.
Mongol rule continued with the Ilkhanate in the northwest while the Khilji dynasty administered the Afghan tribal areas south of the Hindu Kush until the invasion of Timur, who established the Timurid Empire in 1370.
In 1838, the British marched into Afghanistan and arrested Dost Mohammad Khan (Emir of Afghanistan), sent him into exile in India and replaced him with the previous ruler, Shah Shuja.
Ahmad Zahir, Nashenas, Ustad Sarahang, Sarban, Ubaidullah Jan, Farhad Darya, and Naghma are some of the notable Afghan musicians, but there are many others.
3G services are provided by Etisalat and MTN Group.
, Afghanistan had around 17 million GSM phone subscribers and over 1 million internet users, but only had about 75,000 fixed telephone lines and a little over 190,000 CDMA subscribers.
The nation's education system was destroyed due to the decades of war, but it began reviving after the Karzai administration came to power in late 2001.
Afghanistan became one of the main centers in the Muslim world during this Islamic Golden Age.
Until the 1890s, the region around Nuristan was known as Kafiristan (land of the kafirs (unbelievers)) because of its non-Muslim inhabitants, the Nuristanis, an ethnically distinct people whose religious practices included animism, polytheism, and shamanism.
In April 1978, the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) seized power in Afghanistan in the Saur Revolution.
the Shia Hazaras, Sayyids, Kizilbash), group memory (e.g.
The country has one of the highest maternal mortality rate in the world as well as the highest infant mortality rate in the world (deaths of babies under one year), estimated in 2015 to be 115.08 deaths/1,000 live births.
This was a standard divide and rule policy of the British and would lead to strained relations, especially with the later new state of Pakistan.
The Ghaznavid dynasty was overthrown by the Ghurids, who expanded and advanced the already powerful Islamic empire.
In 2012, the United States designated Afghanistan as a major non-NATO ally and created the U.S.–Afghanistan Strategic Partnership Agreement.
During the first century BCE, the Parthian Empire subjugated the region, but lost it to their Indo-Parthian vassals.
Saudi Arabia and Iran supported different Afghan militias and instability quickly developed.
Within months, opponents of the communist government launched an uprising in eastern Afghanistan that quickly expanded into a civil war waged by guerrilla mujahideen against government forces countrywide.
Serious traffic accidents are common on Afghan roads and highways, particularly on the Kabul–Kandahar and the Kabul–Jalalabad Road.
The literacy rate of the entire population has been very low but is now rising because more students go to schools.
Afghanistan remains one of the poorest countries in the world due to a lack of foreign investment, government corruption, and the Taliban insurgency.
Many sources indicate that as much as 11% or more of Afghanistan's economy is derived from the cultivation and sale of opium, and Afghanistan is widely considered the world's largest producer of opium despite Afghan government and international efforts to eradicate the crop.
Since 2003, over 16 new banks have opened in the country, including Afghanistan International Bank, Kabul Bank, Azizi Bank, Pashtany Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, and First Micro Finance Bank.
