From the most northerly point, Ras ben Sakka in Tunisia (37°21' N), to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas in South Africa (34°51'15" S), is a distance of approximately ; from Cape Verde, 17°33'22" W, the westernmost point, to Ras Hafun in Somalia, 51°27'52" E, the most easterly projection, is a distance of approximately .
The Berlin Conference held in 1884–85 was an important event in the political future of African ethnic groups.
In August 2008, the World Bank announced revised global poverty estimates based on a new international poverty line of $1.25 per day (versus the previous measure of $1.00).
Most present states in Africa originate from a process of decolonization in the 20th century.
Italian is spoken by some in former Italian colonies in Africa.
In addition, Africa has the largest number of megafauna species, as it was least affected by the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna.
''Afri'' was a Latin name used to refer to the inhabitants of Africa, which in its widest sense referred to all lands south of the Mediterranean (Ancient Libya).
Great instability was mainly the result of marginalization of ethnic groups, and graft under these leaders.
Arabic, Portuguese, Afrikaans and Spanish are examples of languages that trace their origin to outside of Africa, and that are used by millions of Africans today, both in the public and private spheres.
They set up the political divisions of the continent, by spheres of interest, that exist in Africa today.
Dutch and British diasporas represent the largest communities of European ancestry on the continent today.
As of 2014, the population of Africa is estimated at 1.2 billion.
The Khoi and San peoples are considered the original inhabitants of this part of Africa.
In the Sahara-Nile complex, people domesticated many animals, including the donkey and a small screw-horned goat which was common from Algeria to Nubia.
By the ninth century AD, a string of dynastic states, including the earliest Hausa states, stretched across the sub-Saharan savannah from the western regions to central Sudan.
Africa's largest country is Algeria, and its smallest country is the Seychelles, an archipelago off the east coast.
Asante and Dahomey concentrated on the development of "legitimate commerce" in the form of palm oil, cocoa, timber and gold, forming the bedrock of West Africa's modern export trade.
Over 90% of Madagascar's original forests have been destroyed since the arrival of humans 2000 years ago.
In numerous countries, English and French (''see African French'') are used for communication in the public sphere such as government, commerce, education and the media.
The powers and authority of the President of the African Parliament derive from the Constitutive Act and the Protocol of the Pan-African Parliament, as well as the inheritance of presidential authority stipulated by African treaties and by international treaties, including those subordinating the Secretary General of the OAU Secretariat (AU Commission) to the PAP.
Other migrations of modern humans within the African continent have been dated to that time, with evidence of early human settlement found in Southern Africa, Southeast Africa, North Africa, and the Sahara.
In a short while, the local Berber elite had been integrated into Muslim Arab tribes.
The name is usually connected with Hebrew or Phoenician '' 'dust', but a 1981 hypothesis has asserted that it stems from the Berber ''ifri'' (plural ''ifran'') "cave", in reference to cave dwellers.
Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as the policies of the International Monetary Fund, also played a role in instability.
(Geopolitically, Egypt's Sinai Peninsula east of the Suez Canal is often considered part of Africa, as well.)
It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan-African Parliament.
During US President Barack Obama's visit to Africa in July 2013, he announced a US$7 billion plan to further develop infrastructure and work more intensively with African heads of state.
During the 20th century, small but economically important communities of Lebanese and Chinese have also developed in the larger coastal cities of West and East Africa, respectively.
Africa's population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4.
The population trekked out of the Sahara region towards the Nile Valley below the Second Cataract where they made permanent or semi-permanent settlements.
Bantu-speaking Africans also predominate in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, and are found in parts of southern Cameroon.
Africa's total population surpassing other continents is fairly recent; African population surpassed Europe in the 1990s, while the Americas was overtaken sometime around the year 2000; Africa's rapid population growth is expected to overtake the only two nations currently larger than its population, at roughly the same time - India and China's 1.4 billion people each will swap ranking around the year 2022.
The three countries jointly hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup.
Separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, it is joined to Asia at its northeast extremity by the Isthmus of Suez (transected by the Suez Canal),  wide.
* The 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (''Ant.
The Ka is the energetic double of every person and the "opening of the Ka" refers to a womb or birthplace.
From 1995 to 2005, Africa's rate of economic growth increased, averaging 5% in 2005.
The DRC also has more than 30% of the world's diamond reserves.
Fifty-three African countries have football (soccer) teams in the Confederation of African Football.
Since this time, dry conditions have prevailed in Eastern Africa and, increasingly during the last 200 years, in Ethiopia.
Today, Africa contains 54 sovereign countries, most of which have borders that were drawn during the era of European colonialism.
The Niger–Congo-speaking Yoruba, Igbo, Fulani, Akan and Wolof ethnic groups are the largest and most influential.
The record for the highest-ever recorded temperature, in Libya in 1922 (), was discredited in 2013.
Ironworking was fully established by roughly 500 BC in many areas of East and West Africa, although other regions didn't begin ironworking until the early centuries AD.
Following the breakup of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464–1492) founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan and took control of the trans-Saharan trade.
Human encroachment, civil unrest and the introduction of non-native species threaten biodiversity in Africa.
In many countries, the military was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order, and it ruled many nations in Africa during the 1970s and early 1980s.
In Sudan, although Arabic and Arab culture predominate, it is mostly inhabited by groups that originally spoke Nilo-Saharan, such as the Nubians, Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa, who, over the centuries, have variously intermixed with migrants from the Arabian peninsula.
Large Indian communities are found in South Africa, and smaller ones are present in Kenya, Tanzania, and some other southern and southeast African countries.
The most devastating military conflict in modern independent Africa has been the Second Congo War; this conflict and its aftermath has killed an estimated 5.5 million people.
Morocco in northern Africa has also hosted the 2002 Morocco Cup, but the national team has never qualified for a major tournament.
He also announced a new programme named Trade Africa, designed to boost trade within the continent as well as between Africa and the US.
During the above-mentioned period, Islam spread to sub-Saharan Africa, mainly through trade routes and migration.
The Semitic Phoenicians (who founded Carthage) and Hyksos, the Indo-Iranian Alans, the Indo- European Greeks, Romans, and Vandals settled in North Africa as well.
The Malagasy people of Madagascar are an Austronesian people, but those along the coast are generally mixed with Bantu, Arab, Indian and European origins.
Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example against "the usurping King of Lagos", deposed in 1851.
Another notable tragic event is the 1994 Rwandan Genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were murdered.
A significant part of this growth, which is sometimes referred to as Africa Rising, can also be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone.
Africa has over 3,000 protected areas, with 198 marine protected areas, 50 biosphere reserves, and 80 wetlands reserves.
In the 21st century, however, the number of armed conflicts in Africa has steadily declined.
Syro-Greek missionaries, who arrived by way of the Red Sea, were responsible for this theological development.
The vast majority of African states are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule.
suggests "Africa comes from the Latin ''aprica'', meaning "sunny".
Although South Africa was one of the first African countries to gain independence, the state remained under the control of the country's white minority through a system of racial segregation known as apartheid until 1994.
This has been exacerbated by administrative problems, inadequate personnel and funding problems.
At the end of the Ice ages, estimated to have been around 10,500 BC, the Sahara had again become a green fertile valley, and its African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in Sub-Saharan Africa, with rock art paintings depicting a fertile Sahara and large populations discovered in Tassili n'Ajjer dating back perhaps 10 millennia.
Cricket is popular in some African nations.
Between 1975 and 1977, over a million colonials returned to Portugal alone.
The union was formed, with Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, as its headquarters, on 26 June 2001.
The largest powers of West Africa (the Asante Confederacy, the Kingdom of Dahomey, and the Oyo Empire) adopted different ways of adapting to the shift.
'''Africa''' is the world's second-largest and second-most-populous continent.
There is a policy in effect to decentralize the African Federation's institutions so that they are shared by all the states.
South Africa hosted the 2010 World Cup tournament, becoming the first African country to do so.
Fraser and Cole assert that, in Igboland, some art objects "lack the vigor and careful craftsmanship of the earlier art objects that served traditional functions.
European colonization also brought sizable groups of Asians, particularly from the Indian subcontinent, to British colonies.
* The ''Niger–Congo'' language family covers much of Sub-Saharan Africa and is probably the largest language family in the world in terms of different languages.
The bronzes have been dated from as far back as the ninth century.
ergaster'' – with the earliest ''Homo sapiens'' (modern human) found in Ethiopia being dated to circa 200,000 years ago.
* Isidore of Seville in ''Etymologiae'' XIV.5.2.
It was convened by King Leopold II of Belgium, and attended by the European powers that laid claim to African territories.
The 1950s through the 1970s saw a conglomeration of these various styles with the popularization of Afrobeat and Highlife music.
For example, African customs were discouraged, and African languages were prohibited in mission schools.
* The ''Afroasiatic'' languages are a language family of about 240 languages and 285 million people widespread throughout the Horn of Africa, North Africa, the Sahel, and Southwest Asia.
For political gain, many leaders fanned ethnic conflicts, some of which had been exacerbated, or even created, by colonial rule.
By most estimates, well over a thousand languages (UNESCO has estimated around two thousand) are spoken in Africa.
Around 4000 BC, the Saharan climate started to become drier at an exceedingly fast pace.
The country with the largest white African population is South Africa.
In Mauritania, there is a small but near-extinct Berber community in the north and Niger–Congo-speaking peoples in the south, though in both regions Arabic and Arab culture predominates.
Since the conflict began in 1998, the estimated death toll has reached 5 million.
In 332 BC, Alexander the Great was welcomed as a liberator in Persian-occupied Egypt.
African art and architecture reflect the diversity of African cultures.
When a country became independent for the first time, it was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers.
Portugal's overseas presence in Sub-Saharan Africa (most notably in Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and São Tomé and Príncipe) lasted from the 16th century to 1975, after the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in a military coup in Lisbon.
A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85–165 AD), indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa.
It contains 54 fully recognized sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two ''de facto'' independent states with limited or no recognition.
It is also one of the oldest kingdoms in present-day Nigeria and was ruled by the Eze Nri.
The peoples of North Africa consist of three main indigenous groups: Berbers in the northwest, Egyptians in the northeast, and Nilo-Saharan-speaking peoples in the east.
Between the 7th and 20th centuries, Arab slave trade (also known as slavery in the East) took 18 million slaves from Africa via trans-Saharan and Indian Ocean routes.
In Soweto, the West Rand Administrative Board established a Cultural Section to collect, read, and review scripts before performances could occur.
Decolonization during the 1960s and 1970s often resulted in the mass emigration of white settlers – especially from Algeria and Morocco (1.6 million ''pieds-noirs'' in North Africa), Kenya, Congo, Rhodesia, Mozambique and Angola.
However, few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis, and many have instead cycled through a series of coups, producing military dictatorships.
The Ife model of government was adapted at the Oyo Empire, where its obas or kings, called the ''Alaafins of Oyo'', once controlled a large number of other Yoruba and non-Yoruba city-states and kingdoms; the Fon ''Kingdom of Dahomey'' was one of the non-Yoruba domains under Oyo control.
Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of central Africa.
Arab influences are visible in North African music and dance and, in Southern Africa, Western influences are apparent due to colonization.
South Africa and Zimbabwe have Test status, while Kenya is the leading non-test team and previously had One-Day International cricket (ODI) status (from 10 October 1997, until 30 January 2014).
Since 2003 there has been an ongoing conflict in Darfur which has become a humanitarian disaster.
An independent centre of civilization with trading links to Phoenicia was established by Phoenicians from Tyre on the north-west African coast at Carthage.
Africa would be, for the Egyptians, "the birthplace."
The first Roman emperor native to North Africa was Septimius Severus, born in Leptis Magna in present-day Libya—his mother was Italian Roman and his father was Punic.
Africa is the hottest continent on earth and 60% of the entire land surface consists of drylands and deserts.
Islamic North Africa had become diverse, and a hub for mystics, scholars, jurists, and philosophers.
A Harvard University study led by professor Calestous Juma showed that Africa could feed itself by making the transition from importer to self-sufficiency.
Their migration resulted in the fusion of the Arabs and Berbers, where the locals were Arabized, and Arab culture absorbed elements of the local culture, under the unifying framework of Islam.
He founded Alexandria in Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic dynasty after his death.
It is speculated that by 6000 BC, cattle were domesticated in North Africa.
For instance, the civil war in Angola came to an end in 2002 after nearly 30 years.
European exploration of Africa began with Ancient Greeks and Romans.
Small communities of Afro-Asiatic-speaking Beja nomads can also be found in Egypt and Sudan.
In 1951, Libya, a former Italian colony, gained independence.
The African Union (AU) is a 54-member federation consisting of all of Africa's states except Morocco.
In the forested regions of the West African coast, independent kingdoms grew with little influence from the Muslim north.
Fossil remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern man, such as ''Australopithecus afarensis'' (radiometrically dated to approximately 3.9–3.0&nbsp;million years BP, ''Paranthropus boisei'' (c. 2.3–1.4&nbsp;million years BP) and ''Homo ergaster'' (c. 1.9&nbsp;million–600,000 years BP) have been discovered.
The Oyo Empire, unable to adapt, collapsed into civil wars.
A small number of Africans are Hindu, Buddhist, Confucianist, Baha'i, or have beliefs from the Judaic tradition.
Border and territorial disputes were also common, with the European-imposed borders of many nations being widely contested through armed conflicts.
In the late 19th century, the European imperial powers engaged in a major territorial scramble and occupied most of the continent, creating many colonial territories, and leaving only two fully independent states: Ethiopia (known to Europeans as "Abyssinia"), and Liberia.
Egypt has long been a cultural focus of the Arab world, while remembrance of the rhythms of sub-Saharan Africa, in particular West Africa, was transmitted through the Atlantic slave trade to modern samba, blues, jazz, reggae, hip hop, and rock.
The most powerful of these states were Ghana, Gao, and the Kanem-Bornu Empire.
Africa is the most multilingual continent in the world, and it is not rare for individuals to fluently speak not only multiple African languages, but one or more European ones as well.
The Kingdom of Ife, historically the first of these Yoruba city-states or kingdoms, established government under a priestly oba ('king' or 'ruler' in the Yoruba language), called the ''Ooni of Ife''.
The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos.
According to Encyclopedia Britannica, 45% of the population are Christians, 40% are Muslims, and 10% follow traditional religions.
Following the conquest of North Africa's Mediterranean coastline by the Roman Empire, the area was integrated economically and culturally into the Roman system.
Imperial rule by Europeans would continue until after the conclusion of World War II, when almost all remaining colonial territories gradually obtained formal independence.
At about 3300 BC, the historical record opens in Northern Africa with the rise of literacy in the Pharaonic civilization of Ancient Egypt.
Namibia is the other African country to have played in a World Cup.
Editors F. Abiola Irele and Simon Gikandi comment that the current identity of African literature had its genesis in the "traumatic encounter between Africa and Europe."
The 1970s saw an escalation of Cold War intrigues, as newly independent Angola and Mozambique aligned themselves with the Soviet Union, and the West and South Africa sought to contain Soviet influence by supporting friendly regimes or insurgency movements.
Slavery had long been practised in Africa.
Roman settlement occurred in modern Tunisia and elsewhere along the coast.
In Rhodesia, Soviet and Chinese-backed leftist guerrillas of the Zimbabwe Patriotic Front waged a brutal guerrilla war against the country's white government.
The improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many African nations, mainly from China, which has spurred quick economic growth in many countries, seemingly ending decades of stagnation and decline.
Africa boasts perhaps the world's largest combination of density and "range of freedom" of wild animal populations and diversity, with wild populations of large carnivores (such as lions, hyenas, and cheetahs) and herbivores (such as buffalo, elephants, camels, and giraffes) ranging freely on primarily open non-private plains.
There was a major famine in Ethiopia, when hundreds of thousands of people starved.
In 1956, Tunisia and Morocco won their independence from France.
Independence movements in Africa gained momentum following World War II, which left the major European powers weakened.
Other etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name "Africa":
In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as the Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present.
By the eleventh century, some Hausa states – such as Kano, jigawa, Katsina, and Gobir – had developed into walled towns engaging in trade, servicing caravans, and the manufacture of goods.
Egyptian influence reached deep into modern-day Libya and Nubia, and, according to Martin Bernal, as far north as Crete.
AIDS in post-colonial Africa has also been a prevalent issue.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has 70% of the world's coltan, a mineral used in the production of tantalum capacitors for electronic devices such as cell phones.
Significant habitat destruction, increases in human population and poaching are reducing Africa's biological diversity.
Following the end of colonialism, nearly all African countries adopted official languages that originated outside the continent, although several countries also granted legal recognition to indigenous languages (such as Swahili, Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa).
The size of the Sahara has historically been extremely variable, with its area rapidly fluctuating and at times disappearing depending on global climactic conditions.
In some African states, more than half the population is under 25 years of age.
This climate change caused lakes and rivers to shrink significantly and caused increasing desertification.
There is also a minority of Africans who are irreligious.
The Bantu-speaking peoples from The Sahel progressively expanded over most of Sub-Saharan Africa.
A major climatic recession occurred, lessening the heavy and persistent rains in Central and Eastern Africa.
Kanem accepted Islam in the eleventh century.
According to the Romans, Africa lay to the west of Egypt, while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east.
Cameroon, Nigeria, Senegal, Ghana, and Algeria have advanced to the knockout stage of recent FIFA World Cups.
Author Chika Okeke-Agulu states that "the racist infrastructure of British imperial enterprise forced upon the political and cultural guardians of empire a denial and suppression of an emergent sovereign Africa and modernist art."
Around 3500 BC, due to a tilt in the earth's orbit, the Sahara experienced a period of rapid desertification.
Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.
* The ''Khoisan'' languages number about fifty and are spoken in Southern Africa by approximately 120,000 people.
Ghana followed suit the next year (March 1957), becoming the first of the sub-Saharan colonies to be granted independence.
Some aspects of traditional African cultures have become less practised in recent years as a result of neglect and suppression by colonial and post-colonial regimes.
* Massey, in 1881, stated that Africa is derived from the Egyptian ''af-rui-ka'', meaning "to turn toward the opening of the Ka."
"African agriculture is at the crossroads; we have come to the end of a century of policies that favoured Africa's export of raw materials and importation of food.
Obidoh Freeborn posits that colonialism is one element that has created the character of modern African art.
A person becomes AU President by being elected to the PAP, and subsequently gaining majority support in the PAP.
It sought to end the European powers' Scramble for Africa, by agreeing on political division and spheres of influence.
In recent years, the People's Republic of China has built increasingly stronger ties with African nations and is Africa's largest trading partner.
Africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited territory on Earth, with the human species originating from the continent.
There are clear signs of increased networking among African organizations and states.
After the evolution of ''Homo sapiens sapiens'' approximately 150,000 to 100,000 years BP in Africa, the continent was mainly populated by groups of hunter-gatherers.
His successor Askia Mohammad I (1493–1528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques, and brought to Gao Muslim scholars, including al-Maghili (d.1504), the founder of an important tradition of Sudanic African Muslim scholarship.
Poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition and inadequate water supply and sanitation, as well as poor health, affect a large proportion of the people who reside in the African continent.
But there are also several Nilotic groups in South Sudan and East Africa, the mixed Swahili people on the Swahili Coast, and a few remaining indigenous Khoisan ("San" or "Bushmen") and Pygmy peoples in southern and central Africa, respectively.
The Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt was the world's tallest structure for 4,000 years, until the completion of Lincoln Cathedral around the year 1300.
This name seems to have originally referred to a native Libyan tribe; see Terence#Biography for discussion.
Christianity spread across these areas at an early date, from Judaea via Egypt and beyond the borders of the Roman world into Nubia; by AD 340 at the latest, it had become the state religion of the Aksumite Empire.
As the growth in Africa has been driven mainly by services and not manufacturing or agriculture, it has been growth without jobs and without reduction in poverty levels.
The union was officially established on 9 July 2002 as a successor to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU).
More than 1 million Europeans were captured by Barbary pirates and sold as slaves in North Africa between the 16th and 19th centuries.
Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors, as well as later ones that have been dated to around seven million years ago, including ''Sahelanthropus tchadensis'', ''Australopithecus africanus'', ''A.
The African Union, not to be confused with the AU Commission, is formed by the Constitutive Act of the African Union, which aims to transform the African Economic Community, a federated commonwealth, into a state under established international conventions.
The San are physically distinct from other Africans and are the indigenous people of southern Africa.
Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom in 1965, under the white minority government of Ian Smith, but was not internationally recognized as an independent state (as Zimbabwe) until 1980, when black nationalists gained power after a bitter guerrilla war.
In the Horn of Africa, some Ethiopian and Eritrean groups (like the Amhara and Tigrayans, collectively known as Habesha) speak languages from the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, while the Oromo and Somali speak languages from the Cushitic branch of Afro-Asiatic.
* Robert R. Stieglitz of Rutgers University proposed: "The name Africa, derived from the Latin *Aphir-ic-a, is cognate to Hebrew Ophir."
The domestication of cattle in Africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter-gatherer cultures.
Indigenous musical and dance traditions of Africa are maintained by oral traditions, and they are distinct from the music and dance styles of North Africa and Southern Africa.
Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent's many countries.
Some countries experienced still higher growth rates, notably Angola, Sudan and Equatorial Guinea, all of which had recently begun extracting their petroleum reserves or had expanded their oil extraction capacity.
However, the warming and drying climate meant that by 5000 BC, the Sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and hostile.
Geologically, Africa includes the Arabian Peninsula; the Zagros Mountains of Iran and the Anatolian Plateau of Turkey mark where the African Plate collided with Eurasia.
The large Indian community in Uganda was expelled by the dictator Idi Amin in 1972, though many have since returned.
