Due to the return of British rule, Boers fled to the frontiers to the north-west of the Drakensberg mountains, and onto the highveld of the ''Transvaal'' and ''Transoranje''.
Some prominent Afrikaner ANC Cabinet Ministers include the Minister of Science and Technology Derek Hanekom, the Minister of Tourism and former leader of the New National Party Marthinus van Schalkwyk, Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development Andries Nel, Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation Gert Oosthuizen and former ANC Spokesman Carl Niehaus.
This combined with a wave of violent crime has led to vast numbers of Afrikaners and English-speaking South Africans leaving the country.
The first wave of migrants consisted of individual families, followed by larger multiple-family treks.
However the majority of these speakers come from the Coloured and Baster communities.
Since 1994 close to three thousand farmers have been murdered in thousands of farm attacks, with many being brutally tortured and/or raped.
The Boers of Trekboer descent who developed on the Cape frontier from the late 17th century are an anthropologically distinct group from the Afrikaners who developed in the southwestern Cape region who were often known as the Cape Dutch.
They also comprised 9.3% of the population in neighbouring South-West Africa.
Van Breda (1903), followed by John de Waal and Frans Arnoldi at Nakuru (1906).
Although this attempt was unsuccessful, Portugal's continued interest in the continent made possible the later voyages of Bartholomew Diaz in 1487 and Vasco de Gama ten years later.
Afrikaner diaspora in Africa and the world.
The discovery of goldfields awakened British interest in the Boer republics, and the two Boer Wars resulted: The First Boer War (1880–1881) and the Second Boer War (1899–1902).
Non-white political participation was outlawed, black citizenship revoked, and the entire public sphere, including education, residential areas, medical care and common areas such as public transportation, beaches and amenities, was segregated.
Drawing heavily on Christoffel Coetzee de Villiers's ''Geslacht Register der Oude Kaapsche Familien'', British historian George McCall Theal estimated an admixture of 67% Dutch, with a nearly equal contribution of roughly 17% from the Huguenots and Germans.
On his return to the Transvaal, van Rensburg recruited about 280 Afrikaners (comprising either 47 or 60 families) to accompany him to British East Africa.
Between 1995 and 2005, more than one million South Africans have emigrated, citing violent and racially motivated black on white crime as the main reason.
It is believed that "Afrikaner" in question initially indicated Cape Coloureds or other groups claiming mixed ancestry.
The attributes they shared came to serve as a basis for the evolution of Afrikaner identity and consciousness.
Heese achieved this conclusion by recording all the wedding dates and number of children of each immigrant.
As a direct result of the Union, a number of the traditions and values of the Boer minority were assimilated within a militant new Afrikaner nationalism.
Another was the astonishingly high occurrence of inter-family marriages from the matrilineal aspect.
There was much objection to the attempt to legislate the creation of Afrikaans as a new language.
There are thus currently large Afrikaner and English-speaking South African communities in the UK and other developed countries.
From the late 17th century, the form of Dutch spoken at the Cape developed differences, mostly in morphology but also in pronunciation and accent and, to a lesser extent, in syntax and vocabulary, from that of the Netherlands, although the languages are still similar enough to be mutually intelligible.
A combination of factors spurred on Boer migration.
The degree of intermixing among Afrikaners may be attributed to the unbalanced sex ratio which existed under Dutch governance.
Ancestry of some 15,994,181 Union nationals was projected by various sources through sampling language, religion, and ethnicity.
This suggested an intriguing 98% increase since 1806.
During the early colonial period, Afrikaners were generally known as "Christians", "colonists", "emigrants", or ''ingezeetenen'' ("inhabitants").
Both men presented a report advocating the Table valley as a fort and garden for the East India fleets.
While the traditional ''Boeremusiek'' ("Boer music") and ''Volkspele'' ("people games") folk dancing enjoyed popularity in the past, most Afrikaners today favour a variety of international genres and light popular Afrikaans music.
Afrikaners are descended, to varying degrees, from Dutch, Frisian, German, and French Huguenot immigrants, along with minor percentages of other Europeans and indigenous African peoples.
However, private enterprise adheres to this legislation voluntarily.
The negotiations went well and a contract between Retief and Dingane was signed.
The earliest Afrikaner communities in South Africa were formed at the Cape of Good Hope, mainly through the introduction of free Dutchmen, Huguenot refugees, and erstwhile servants of the Dutch East India Company.
Settlers who arrived speaking German and French soon shifted to using Dutch and later Afrikaans.
In 1424 Henry and Fernando de Castro besieged the Canary Islands, under the impression that they might be of use to further Portuguese expeditions around Africa's coast.
As of 2011, Georgia is encouraging Afrikaner immigration to assist in reviving the country's agriculture industry, which has fallen on hard times.
Historically, the terms "burgher" and "Boer" have both been used to describe white Afrikaans speakers as a group; neither is particularly objectionable but Afrikaner has been considered a more appropriate term.
Around 8,288,145 South Africans reported wholly or partial European ancestry - roughly 2,576,184 of whom represented Afrikaners.
Shortly afterwards the Dutch Republic sent merchant vessels to India, and in 1602 founded the Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie (''Dutch East India Company''; VOC).
In an online poll of the Beeld newspaper during November 2012, in which nearly 11,000 Afrikaners participated, 42% described themselves as conservative and 36% as liberal.
Rugby in particular is considered one of the central pillars of the Afrikaner community.
The terms under which the Huguenots agreed to immigrate were the same offered to other VOC subjects, including free passage and requisite farm equipment on credit.
Another group emigrated to British-ruled Kenya, from where most returned to South Africa during the 1930s as a result of warfare there amongst indigenous people.
Some reports indicate a growing number of whites suffering poverty compared to the pre-apartheid years and attribute this to such laws&nbsp;— over 350,000 Afrikaners may be classified as poor, with some research claiming that up to 150,000 are struggling for survival.
Between 1657 and 1806 no more than 454 women arrived at the Cape, as compared to the 1,590 male colonists.
Afrikaners have a long literary tradition, and have produced a number of notable novelists and poets, including Nobel Prize winner J.M.
Some of the later colonists, such as German missionaries in the employ of the Company, and settlers from other parts of Europe (e.g.
Many migrants were extremely poor and had subsisted on others' property.
As in other cases where the establishment of a population group has been propagated by many of the same progenitors and their children, Afrikaners have also experienced a dramatic increase in the frequency of some otherwise rare deleterious ailments, including ''Variegate porphyria''.
It is to the ambitions of Prince Henry the Navigator that historians attribute the discovery of the Cape as a settling ground for Europeans.
In contrast, a handful of Afrikaners have joined the ruling African National Congress party, which is overwhelmingly supported by South Africa's black majority.
The Boers who entered Natal discovered that the land they wanted came under the authority of the Zulu King ''Dingane ka Senzangakhona'', who ruled that part of what subsequently became KwaZulu-Natal.
Others reached the Portuguese colony of Delagoa Bay, later called ''Lourenço Marques'' and subsequently ''Maputo'' – the capital of Mozambique.
In 1911 the last of the large trek groups departed for Kenya, when some 60 families from the Orange Free State boarded the ''SS Skramstad'' in Durban under leadership of C.J.
Over time, the boundaries of the colony expanded.
In 1914 the National Party was formed to promote Afrikaner economic interests and sever South Africa's ties to the United Kingdom.
The Boers suffered three injuries without any fatalities.
The factual end to apartheid, however, is widely regarded as the election of 1994.
The proposed ''Fort de Goede Hoop'' was to be an easily defensible refreshment station serving its ships plying the Indian Ocean.
The strategy was employed effectively but an estimated 27,000 Boers (mainly women and children under sixteen) died in these camps from hunger and disease.
Although the soil and climate in Cape Town was suitable for farming, willing immigrants were in short supply; the Company often secured orphans, refugees, or foreign exiles accordingly.
''Note'' - Figures do not include expatriate soldiers or officials from other British possessions.
However, this defiant secession from Dutch law and sovereignty was a leap towards defining another consciousness for white South Africa, suggesting for the first time a group identification with the Cape Colony rather than any ancestral homeland in Europe.
These distinctions overlapped with economic differences, as the Trekkers generally had fewer material resources on the frontier than those who remained behind.
But migration dwindled, partly due to the British secretary of state's (then Lord Crewe) cash requirements for immigrants.
Beginning in 1685, Dutch orphan girls found themselves dispatched in small parties.
Some Boers subsequently moved to South West Africa, which was administered by South Africa until its independence in 1990, after which the country adopted the name Namibia.
The number of permanent settlers of both sexes and all ages, according to figures available at the onset of British rule, numbered 26,720, of whom 50% were Dutch, 27% German, 17% French, and 5.5% other blood.
Their numbers can be easily reconstructed from censuses of the Cape rather than passenger lists, taking into account VOC employees who later returned to Europe.
One of the most fundamental demographic consequences was that white South African women, much like their counterparts in colonial North America, began to marry much younger and consequently bear more children than Western Europeans.
North Eastern Congo) to develop efficient commercial farming there.
It is likely that the genetic representation of various European groups has reached equilibrium due to intermarriage.
Probably the first to arrive was W.J.
The television Channel MK (channel) also supports local Afrikaans music and mainly screens videos from the Afrikaans Rock genre.
A large number of young Afrikaners are taking advantage of working holiday visas made available by the United Kingdom, as well as the Netherlands and Belgium, to gain work experience.
The second wave of migrants is exemplified by Jan Janse van Rensburg's trek.
However, the vast majority of Afrikaners support South Africa's official opposition, the Democratic Alliance.
Another online poll conducted in February 2013 by a newspaper revealed that just over 30% of Afrikaners read the Bible at home.
VOC officials did not favour the permanent settlement of Europeans in their trading empire, although during the 140 years of Dutch rule many VOC servants retired or were discharged and remained as private citizens.
This demographic breakdown of the community just prior to the end of the Dutch administration has been used in many subsequent studies to represent the ethnic makeup of modern Afrikaners, a practise criticised by contemporary academics such as Dr. Johannes Heese.
They have often been considered a slightly separate people from the Afrikaners.
Some Boers ventured far beyond the present-day borders of South Africa, north as far as present-day Zambia and Angola.
Only approximately 2% of Afrikaans-speaking white South Africans vote for the ruling ANC,.
During this period they established friendly relations with the locals, who sold them sheep, cattle, and vegetables.
In the 1890s, some Boers trekked into Mashonaland, where they were concentrated at the town of Enkeldoorn, now Chivhu.
The term "Afrikaner" presently denotes the politically, culturally, and socially dominant group among white South Africans, or the Afrikaans-speaking population of Dutch origin&mdash;although their original progenitors also included Flemish, French Huguenot, and German immigrants.
In a 1925 act of Parliament, Afrikaans was given equal status with Dutch as one of the two official languages (English being the second) of the Union of South Africa.
They wanted to escape British rule and to preserve their religious conservatism.
Freedom Front Plus leader Dr&nbsp;Pieter Mulder served as Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in the Cabinet of President Jacob Zuma from 2009 to 2014.
Coetzee, Eugene Marais, Uys Krige, Elisabeth Eybers, Breyten Breytenbach, André Brink, C. J. Langenhoven and Etienne Leroux.
The term was in common usage in both the Boer republics and the Cape Colony by the late nineteenth century.
In 1601 a Captain Paul van Corniden came ashore at St. Sebastion's Bay near Overberg.
After a long series of negotiations involving the apartheid government under President Frederik Willem de Klerk the ANC under Nelson Mandela, and other parties a democratic, multi-racial election was held, transitioning power from the National Party to the African National Congress.
Afrikaners make up approximately 5.2% of the total South African population based on the number of white South Africans who speak Afrikaans as a first language in the South African National Census of 2011.
Their concept of being rooted in Africa - as opposed to the Company's expatriate officialdom - did not find widespread expression until the late eighteenth century.
Biebouw was flogged for his insolence and later banished to Jakarta.
At one time, ''burghers'' merely denoted ''Cape Dutch'', settlers who were influential in the administration, able to participate in urban affairs, and did so regularly.
Employment Equity legislation favours employment of black (African, Indian, Chinese and Coloured population groups, white women, disabled people) South Africans over white men.
Some of the more common Afrikaner surnames include Botha, Pretorius and van der Merwe.
Afrikaner families thus became larger in size, more interconnected, and clannish than those of any other colonial establishment in the world.
During the Batavian Republic, "burgher" was popularised among Dutch communities both at home and abroad as a popular revolutionary form of address, or ''citizen''.
As important as the Trek was to the formation of Boer ethnic identity, so were the running conflicts with various indigenous groups along the way.
When Joubert visited the Transvaal that year, Janse van Rensburg met with him.
Furthermore, the exigencies of supplying local garrisons and passing fleets compelled the administration to confer free status upon employees and oblige them to become independent farmers.
While the Dutch of the Netherlands remained the official language, the new dialect, often known as Cape Dutch, African Dutch, "kitchen Dutch", or ''taal'' (meaning "language" in Afrikaans) developed into a separate language by the 19th century, with much work done by the Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners and other writers such as Cornelis Jacobus Langenhoven.
:Excerpt from Jansz and Proot's report.
The pastoral Afrikaans-speakers who developed on the Cape frontier were called ''Boers'' (''boer'' is the Dutch word for farmer).
Zulu ''impis'' (regiments) attacked Boer encampments in the Drakensberg foothills at what was later called Blaauwkrans and Weenen, killing women and children along with men.
Some, like Janse van Rensburg and Cloete, had collaborated with the British, or had surrendered during the Boer War.
The Boers saw their victory at the Battle of Blood River as evidence that they had found divine favour for their exodus from British rule.
''Die Voortrekkers'' is a youth movement for Afrikaners in South Africa and Namibia with a membership of over 10 000 active members to promote cultural values, maintaining norms and standards as Christians, and being accountable members of public society.
Afrikaners are mostly found in Windhoek and in the Southern provinces and have a population of around 100,000 in Namibia.
However, in order to ensure the viability of the refreshment station, some employees of the Company were freed from their contracts (so-called ''vrijburgers'' or free citizens) and allowed to farm.
Some Europeans also arrived from elsewhere in Holland's sphere, especially German soldiers being discharged from colonial service.
In present-day South Africa, 16 December remains a celebrated public holiday, initially called "Dingane's Day".
In the 1830s and 1840s, an estimated 10,000 Boers, later referred to as ''Voortrekkers'' or "First Movers", migrated to the future Northern Cape, Natal, Orange Free State, and Transvaal/Northern Interior provinces.
Due to the value of the spice trade between Europe and their outposts in the East Indies, Dutch ships began to call sporadically at the Cape in search of provisions after 1598.
After the British East India Company was founded in 1599, London merchants began to take advantage of the route to India by the Cape.
2001 census figures indicate that Afrikaner communities represented the eighth largest ethnolinguistic group in the country, or no more than 5.7% of the total population.
In 1902, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle became the earliest English author to use "Africander" in reference to the Boers' eastward expansion from the Cape.
Heese argued that previous studies wrongly classified some German progenitors as Dutch, although for the purposes of his own study he also reclassified a number of Danish and Russian progenitors as German.
The scheme under which UK working holiday visas were issued ended on 27 November 2008 and has been replaced by the Tier 5 (Youth Mobility) visa.
During the Anglo-Boer War of 1899–1902, a number of Cape Afrikaners assisted the British in fighting against the Boers due to their long historical pro-colonial outlook.
Since 1994 there has been significant emigration of white people from South Africa.
Very rapidly one European power followed another, all eager to trade along this route.
White free burghers, now outnumbered by slaves imported from West Africa, Mozambique, Madagascar, and the Dutch East Indies, only totaled about 6,000.
The South African census of 1960 was the final census undertaken in the Union of South Africa.
Janse van Rensburg left the Transvaal on an exploratory trip to British East Africa in 1906 from Lourenço Marques (then Portuguese), Mozambique.
The Afrikaans language changed over time from the Dutch spoken by the first white settlers at the Cape.
There are 40,000 white farmers in South Africa.
Due to the blood of 3,000 slain Zulus that stained the Ncome River, the conflict afterwards became known as the Battle of Blood River.
Scandinavian, Belgian
Encouraged by the success of this experiment, the Company extended free passage from 1685 to 1707 for Hollanders wishing to settle at the Cape.
As it was desirable to take formal possession of this territory the Portuguese erected a stone cross in Algoa Bay.
In 1754, Cape governor Ryk Tulbagh conducted a census of his non-indigenous subjects.
Diaz made known to the world a "Cape of Storms", rechristened "Good Hope" by John II.
Genocide Watch has theorised that farm attacks constitute early warning signs of genocide against Afrikaners and has criticised the South African government for its inaction on the issue, pointing out that the murder rate for them ("ethno-European farmers" in their report, which also included non-Afrikaner farmers of European race) is four times that of the general South African population.
, Afrikaners make up approximately 5.2% of the total South African population based on the number of white South Africans who speak Afrikaans as a first language in the South African National Census of 2011.
Rugby, cricket, and golf are generally considered to be the most popular sports among Afrikaners.
Scandinavia, Ireland and Scotland) were also incorporated into what became the Boers (Farmers) and Cape Dutch.
A third group, under the leadership of General Ben Viljoen, emigrated to Chihuahua in northern Mexico and to states of Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas in the south-western USA.
Marthinus Steyn, a prominent jurist and politician, and others were vocal in their opposition.
The Boers won the first war and retained their independence.
Afrikaans, South Africa's third most widely spoken home language, is the mother tongue of Afrikaners and most Cape Coloureds.
The Freedom Front Plus is also leading the Volkstaat initiative and is closely associated with the small town of Orania.
''Note'' - Figures do not include expatriate soldiers, sailors, or servants of the Company.
At least 1.6 million South Africans represented white Afrikaans speakers, or 10% of the total population.
They eventually settled on Saint Helena as an alternative port of refuge.
It evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland, incorporating words brought from the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) and Madagascar by slaves.
After the second Boer War, more Boers left South Africa.
By 1614 the British had planted a penal colony on the site, and in 1621 two Englishmen claimed Table Bay on behalf of King James I, but this action was not ratified.
The second ended with British victory and annexation of the Boer areas into the British colonies.
Da Gama and his successors, however, did not take kindly to the notion, especially following a skirmish with the Khoikhoi in 1497, when one of his admirals was wounded.
Under recommendation from Jan van Riebeeck, the Heeren XVII wasted no time in establishing a bastion at the Cape, and this the more hurriedly to preempt any further imperial maneuvers by Britain, France, or Portugal.
Today, Afrikaans is recognised as one of the eleven official languages of the new South Africa, and is the third largest mother tongue spoken in South Africa.
They constituted a closed community which rejected integration as well as innovation, became impoverished in the course of several decades, and returned to South West Africa and South Africa in waves.
As the volume of traffic rounding the Cape increased, the Company recognised its natural harbour as an ideal watering point for the long voyage around Africa to the Orient and established a victualling station there in 1652.
Nevertheless, after a futile attempt to recruit Khoikhoi slaves, Holland became convinced of the need to grant land to permanent settlers better motivated to raise crops and livestock for their own profit.
On 16 December 1838, the Voortrekkers under the command of Andries Pretorius confronted about 10,000 Zulus at the prepared positions.
In 1648, Hollanders Leendert Jansz and Nicholas Proot had been shipwrecked in Table Bay and marooned for five months until picked up by a returning ship.
A commando of 470 men arrived to help the settlers.
Although some two-thirds of this figure were Hollanders, there were 150 Huguenots and a nearly equal number of Low German speakers identical in racial characteristics to the Dutch.
The Dutch East India Company did not wish to plant a European settlement at the Cape of Good Hope; until 1679 the only whites permitted to hold land were Company employees who were expected to produce by their own labour the commodities needed to provision passing ships.
They were swiftly joined by Huguenots, driven from France by the Edict of Fontainebleau, who had accepted free passage to Africa.
A relatively large group of Boers settled in Kenya.
After 1952, the holiday was officially named Day of the Covenant, changed to Day of the Vow in 1980 (Mackenzie 1999:69)  and to Day of Reconciliation in 1994.
They were augmented by VOC soldiers returning from Asia, predominantly Germans channeled into Amsterdam by the Company's extensive recruitment network and thence overseas.
Smaller numbers are involved in nationalist or separatist political organisations.
When the magistrate, Johannes Starrenburg, ordered an unruly crowd to desist, a white teenager named Hendrik Biebouw retorted, "''Ik ben een Afrikaander - al slaat de landdrost mij dood, of al zetten hij mij in de tronk, ik zal, nog wil niet zwijgen!''"
''Boers'' often referred to the settled European farmers or nomadic cattle herders.
The South African National Census of 2001 was the first census conducted in post-apartheid South Africa.
By 1934 some 700 Boers lived here, near the Uganda border.
Collaborators tended to move to British East Africa, while those who had fought to the end (called ''bittereinders'') initially preferred German South West Africa.
Biebouw himself had numerous half-caste siblings and may have identified with Coloureds socially.
Jannie De Beer's family resided at Athi River, while Ignatius Gouws resided at Solai.
Apartheid was officially ended in 1990 after widespread unrest, led by supporters of the United Democratic Front, Pan-African Congress, South African Communist Party and African National Congress and a long embargo against South Africa.
Rising to prominence by winning the 1948 general elections, it has also been noted for enforcing a harsh policy of racial separation (''apartheid'') while simultaneously declaring South Africa a republic and withdrawing from the British Commonwealth.
Residents would associate amiably with the natives for the sake of livestock trade, but otherwise keep to themselves and their task of becoming self-sufficient.
Approximately 100 black families who identify as Afrikaners live in the settlement of Onverwacht established in 1886 near the mining town of Cullinan.
Despite their diverse nationalities, the colonists used a common language and adopted similar attitudes towards politics.
In April 2007, the South African Mint coined a collectors R1 gold coin commemorating the Afrikaner people as part of its cultural series, depicting the Great Trek across the Drakensberg mountains.
Although the Cape Colony was administered and initially settled by the Dutch East India Company (VOC), a number of foreigners also boarded ships in the Netherlands to settle there.
The arrival in 1688 of some French Huguenot refugees, who had fled to the Dutch colony to escape Roman Catholic religious persecution following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, increased the number of settlers.
One of the best known Boer settlements in the British East Africa Protectorate became established at Eldoret, in the south west of what became known as Kenya in 1920.
The process of language change was influenced by the languages spoken by slaves, Khoikhoi and people of mixed descent, as well as by Cape Malay, Zulu, British and Portuguese.
These efforts include the Volkstaat movement.
Efforts are being made by some Afrikaners to secure minority rights even though protection of minority rights is fundamental to the new 1996 post-apartheid Constitution of South Africa.
Sources disagree about whether Janse van Rensburg received guarantees for land from the Governor of the East Africa Protectorate, Sir James Hayes Sadler.
James Lancaster, who had visited Robben Island some years earlier, anchored in Table Bay in 1601.
Prior attempts at cultivating vineyards or exploiting olive groves for fruit had been unsuccessful, and it was hoped that Huguenot colonists accustomed to Mediterranean agriculture could succeed where the Dutch had failed.
In 1688 it sponsored the immigration of 200 French Huguenot refugees forced into exile by the Edict of Fontainebleau.
Some had arrived by 1904, as documented by the caption of a newspaper photograph noting a tent town for "some of the early settlers from South Africa" on what became the campus of the University of Nairobi.
He discovered a small inlet which he named ''Vleesch Bay'', after the cattle trade, and another ''Visch Bay'' after the abundance of fish.
White population in the Dutch Cape Colony, 1691
These were reinforced by the familial interdependence of the Cape's credit and mortgage obligations.
The first recorded instance of a colonist identifying as an "Afrikaner" occurred in March 1707, during a disturbance in Stellenbosch.
Only a handful of VOC employees who sailed from the Netherlands were allowed to bring their families with them, and the Dutch never employed European women in a full-time capacity.
The Trek resulted in a cultural split between the Voortrekkers, later known as the Boers, and the Cape Afrikaners.
