The Civil Rights Movement marked an enormous change in American social, political, economic and civic life.
By 1860, there were 3.5 to 4.4 million enslaved African Americans in the United States due to the Atlantic slave trade, and another 488,000–500,000 African Americans lived free (with legislated limits) across the country.
The channel also shows syndicated television series, original programs, and some public affairs programs.
Clarence Thomas became the second African-American Supreme Court Justice.
Additionally, there are many literary uses of this variety of English, particularly in African-American literature.
After the founding of the United States, black people continued to be enslaved, with four million denied freedom from bondage prior to the Civil War.
Even with the rise of inventive names, it is still common for African Americans to use biblical, historical, or traditional European names.
By the late 1890s, Southern states enacted Jim Crow laws to enforce racial segregation and disenfranchisement.
The term ''Afro-Usonian'', and variations of such, are more rarely used.
The characteristic West African haplogroups L1b, L2b,c,d, and L3b,d and West-Central African haplogroups L1c and L3e in particular occur at high frequencies among African Americans.
Although the Scottish had been frying chicken before they emigrated, they lacked the spices and flavor that African Americans had used when preparing the meal.
Founded and controlled by Catherine Hughes, it is one of the nation's largest radio broadcasting companies and the largest African-American-owned radio broadcasting company in the United States.
It is the first African-American video news site that focuses on underrepresented stories in existing national news.
''Free negro'' was the legal status in the territory of an African-American person who was not a slave.
New York City, Chicago, and Los Angeles have the highest decline in African Americans, while Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston have the highest increase respectively.
According to an mtDNA study by Salas et al.
African Americans have a combined buying power of over $892 billion currently and likely over $1.1 trillion by 2012.
Although the first African-American business is unknown, slaves captured from West Africa are believed to have established commercial enterprises as peddlers and skilled craftspeople as far back as the 17th century.
In 1975, Warith Deen Mohammed, the son of Elijah Muhammad took control of the Nation after his father's death and guided the majority of its members to orthodox Islam.
Forty percent of prison inmates are African American.
(Washington was a slave trading center.)
Confirmed atheists are less than one half of one-percent, similar to numbers for Hispanics.
News of third grade students reading at ninth grade level, four-year-olds learning to read in only a few months, outstanding test scores, disappearance of behavioral problems, second-graders studying Shakespeare, and other incredible reports, astounded the public.
Among the most notable inventors were Jan Matzeliger, who developed the first machine to mass-produce shoes, and Elijah McCoy, who invented automatic lubrication devices for steam engines.
In 2002, African American-owned businesses accounted for 1.2 million of the US's 23 million businesses.
The landowner received 50 acres of land from the state (headrights) for each servant purchased (around £6 per person, equivalent to 9 months income in the 17th century) from a ship's captain.
Poverty itself is a hardship as it is related to marital stress and dissolution, health problems, low educational attainment, deficits in psychological functioning, and crime.
The phrase "last hired and first fired" is reflected in the Bureau of Labor Statistics unemployment figures.
According to DNA analysis led in 2006 by Penn State geneticist Mark D. Shriver, around 58 percent of African Americans have at least 12.5% European ancestry (equivalent to one European great-grandparent and his/her forebears), 19.6 percent of African Americans have at least 25% European ancestry (equivalent to one European grandparent and his/her forebears), and 1 percent of African Americans have at least 50% European ancestry (equivalent to one European parent and his/her forebears).
The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom and the conditions which brought it into being are credited with putting pressure on President John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.
The public sector is also a critical source of decent-paying jobs for Black Americans.
Where African American Vernacular English differs from Standard American English (SAE) is in certain pronunciation characteristics, tense usage and grammatical structures that were derived from West African languages, particularly those belonging to the Niger-Congo family.
For adult Black women, the rate of obesity was 41.2% in 2010.
African American males are more likely to be killed by police.
It is closely related to the cuisine of the Southern United States.
The cultivation and use of many agricultural products in the United States, such as yams, peanuts, rice, okra, sorghum, grits, watermelon, indigo dyes, and cotton, can be traced to West African and African-American influences.
The majority of HBCUs were established in the southeastern United States, Alabama has the most HBCUs of any state.
Similar viewpoints have been expressed by Stanley Crouch in a ''New York Daily News'' piece, Charles Steele, Jr. of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and African-American columnist David Ehrenstein of the ''LA Times'' who accused white liberals of flocking to blacks who were "Magic Negros", a term that refers to a black person with no past who simply appears to assist the mainstream white (as cultural protagonists/drivers) agenda.
The network primarily owned by Radio One.
However, a few members rejected these changes, in particular Louis Farrakhan, who revived the Nation of Islam in 1978 based on its original teachings.
In 1640, the Virginia General Court recorded the earliest documentation of lifetime slavery when they sentenced John Punch, a Negro, to lifetime servitude under his master Hugh Gwyn for running away.
As a compound adjective the term is usually hyphenated as African-American.
There were 8,936 black officeholders in the United States in 2000, showing a net increase of 7,467 since 1970.
Economically, African Americans have benefited from the advances made during the Civil Rights era, particularly among the educated, but not without the lingering effects of historical marginalization when considered as a whole.
Most of these Jews are part of mainstream groups such as the Reform, Conservative, or Orthodox branches of Judaism; although there are significant numbers of people who are part of non-mainstream Jewish groups, largely the Black Hebrew Israelites, whose beliefs include the claim that African Americans are descended from the Biblical Israelites.
An indentured servant (who could be white or black) would work for several years (usually four to seven) without wages.
With over 2 million black residents, New York City had the largest black urban population in the United States in 2000, overall the city has a 28% black population.
During the twentieth century, some African Americans converted to Islam, mainly through the influence of black nationalist groups that preached with distinctive Islamic practices; including the Moorish Science Temple of America, and the largest organization, the Nation of Islam, founded in the 1930s, which attracted at least 20,000 people by 1963, prominent members included activist Malcolm X and boxer Muhammad Ali.
Mixed-race usage of ''nigga'' is still considered taboo, particularly if the speaker is white.
Racially mixed marriages have become increasingly accepted in the United States since the Civil Rights movement and up to the present day.
This is one of the factors that led to the creation of the Black Lives Matter movement.
Du Bois and George Padmore.
Drymon, many African Americans identify as having Scots-Irish ancestry.
By 1966, the emergence of the Black Power movement, which lasted from 1966 to 1975, expanded upon the aims of the Civil Rights Movement to include economic and political self-sufficiency, and freedom from white authority.
After over 50 years, marriage rates for all Americans began to decline while divorce rates and out-of-wedlock births have climbed.
The best way to market the census process toward any of the three groups is to reach them through their own unique communication channels and not treat the entire black population of the U.S. as though they are all African Americans with a single ethnic and geographical background.
By the 1640s and 1650s, several African families owned farms around Jamestown and some became wealthy by colonial standards and purchased indentured servants of their own.
They not only helped build the U.S. Capitol, they built the White House and other District of Columbia buildings.
There are also large numbers of Roman Catholics, constituting 5% of the African-American population.
African Americans have also had an important role in American dance.
TV One is another African-American-oriented network and a direct competitor to BET, targeting African-American adults with a broad range of programming.
A famous example was Thomas Jefferson's mistress, Sally Hemings.
Some argued further that, because of the historical circumstances surrounding the capture, enslavement and systematic attempts to de-Africanize blacks in the United States under chattel slavery, most African Americans are unable to trace their ancestry to a specific African nation; hence, the entire continent serves as a geographic marker.
The name LaKeisha is typically considered American in origin, but has elements of it that were drawn from both French and West/Central African roots.
In 1900, White men lived an average of 46.3 years and White women lived an average of 48.3 years.
The book ''Baby Names Now: From Classic to Cool--The Very Last Word on First Names'' places the origins of "La" names in African-American culture in New Orleans.
Altogether, genetic studies suggest that African Americans are a multiracial people.
The Civil Rights Movement from 1954 to 1968 was directed at abolishing racial discrimination against African Americans, particularly in the Southern United States.
In 1900, when information on Black life expectancy started being collated, a Black man could expect to live to 32.5 years and a Black woman 33.5 years.
The overwhelming majority of African immigrants identify instead with their own respective ethnicities (~95%).
Life expectancy for Black women was 77.5 years in 2008.
The network airs original lifestyle and entertainment-oriented shows, movies, fashion and music programming, as well as classic series such as 227, Good Times, Martin, Boston Public and It's Showtime at the Apollo.
Twenty-five percent of blacks had white-collar occupations (management, professional, and related fields) in 2000, compared with 33.6% of Americans overall.
For adult Black men, the rate of obesity was 31.6% in 2010.
This usage has been popularized by the rap and hip-hop music cultures and is used as part of an in-group lexicon and speech.
In 2007, the average African-American income was $33,916, compared with $54,920 for whites.
African American Vernacular English evolved during the antebellum period through interaction between speakers of 16th and 17th century English of Great Britain and Ireland and various West African languages.
As a result, the variety shares parts of its grammar and phonology with the Southern American English dialect.
38% of black males graduated in the state of New York but in Maine 97% graduated and exceeded the white male graduation rate by 11 percentage points.
Meanwhile, during the 2007–2008 year, Chicago public school officials claimed that their budget of $11,300 per student was not enough.
Both before and after the onset of the Great Recession, African Americans were 30% more likely than other workers to be employed in the public sector.
De Ayllón and many of the colonists died shortly afterwards of an epidemic and the colony was abandoned.
Now 59% of African Americans support same-sex marriage, which is higher than support among the national average (53%) and white Americans (50%).
This is the most common genetic paternal lineage found today among West/Central African males, and is also a signature of the historical Bantu migrations.
One of Dutch African arrivals, Anthony Johnson, would later own one of the first black "slaves", John Casor, resulting from the court ruling of a civil case.
The U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation categorizes black or African-American people as "A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa" through racial categories used in the UCR Program adopted from the Statistical Policy Handbook (1978) and published by the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, U.S. Department of Commerce, derived from the 1977 Office of Management and Budget classification.
The main route of transmission for women is through unprotected heterosexual sex.
These circumstances were changed by Reconstruction, development of the black community, participation in the great military conflicts of the United States, the elimination of racial segregation, and the Civil Rights Movement which sought political and social freedom.
Many African-American authors have written stories, poems, and essays influenced by their experiences as African Americans.
In 1960, nearly a third of African Americans voted for Republican Richard Nixon.
(2014) observed that around 50% of the overall ancestry of African Americans traces back to the Niger-Congo-speaking Yoruba of southwestern Nigeria and southern Benin, reflecting the centrality of this West Africa region in the Atlantic Slave Trade.
The term embraces pan-Africanism as earlier enunciated by prominent African thinkers such as Marcus Garvey, W. E. B.
Lloyd Quarterman worked with six other black scientists on the creation of the atomic bomb (code named the Manhattan Project.)
Most programming on the network consists of rap and R&B music videos and urban-oriented movies and series.
The gains made by African Americans in the Civil Rights Movement and in the Black Power movement not only obtained certain rights for African Americans, but changed American society in far-reaching and fundamentally important ways.
Dr. Ray Martins, Chief Medical Officer at the Whitman-Walker Clinic, the largest provider of HIV care in Washington D.C., estimated that the actual underlying percent with HIV/AIDS in the city is "closer to five percent".
In the 1980s the term ''African American'' was advanced on the model of, for example, German-American or Irish-American to give descendants of American slaves and other American blacks who lived through the slavery era a heritage and a cultural base.
Bill T. Jones, a prominent modern choreographer and dancer, has included historical African-American themes in his work, particularly in the piece "Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land".
Subsequently, major media outlets adopted its use.
One article about Marva Collins' school stated,
However, trends indicate that usage of the term in intragroup settings is increasing even among white youth due to the popularity of rap and hip hop culture.
The Scottish American settlers therefore adopted the African-American method of seasoning chicken.
He also received overwhelming support from young and educated whites, a majority of Asians, Hispanics, and Native Americans picking up a number of new states in the Democratic electoral column.
(2009) note that populations from other parts of the continent may also constitute adequate proxies for the ancestors of some African-American individuals; namely, ancestral populations from Guinea Bissau, Senegal and Sierra Leone in West Africa and Angola in Southern Africa.
Slavery, which by then meant almost exclusively African Americans, was the most important political issue in the antebellum United States, leading to one crisis after another.
African-American history starts in the 16th century, with peoples from West Africa forcibly taken as slaves to Spanish America, and in the 17th century with West African slaves taken to English colonies in North America.
The African-American trend of voting for Democrats can be traced back to the 1930s during the Great Depression, when Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal program provided economic relief to African Americans; Roosevelt's New Deal coalition turned the Democratic Party into an organization of the working class and their liberal allies, regardless of region.
Black women are enrolled in college more than any other race and gender group, leading all with 9.7% enrolled according to the 2011 U.S. Census Bureau.
Garrett A. Morgan developed the first automatic traffic signal and gas mask.
This rate is comparable to what is seen in West Africa, and is considered a severe epidemic.
To combat this, Robert L. Johnson founded Black Entertainment Television, a network that targets young African Americans and urban audiences in the United States.
African-American women are 19 times more likely to contract HIV than other women.
African Americans have higher rates of mortality than does any other racial or ethnic group for 8 of the top 10 causes of death.
A Gallup poll conducted in 2013 found that 84% of whites and 96% of blacks approved of interracial marriage, and 87% overall.
It constitutes a little over 10% of their overall ancestry, and is most similar to the Northwest European ancestral component also carried by Barbadians.
On May 9, 2012, Barack Obama, the first African-American president, became the first US president to support same-sex marriage.
Prefixes such as La/Le, Da/De, Ra/Re and Ja/Je, and suffixes like -ique/iqua, -isha and -aun/-awn are common, as are inventive spellings for common names.
By the 1970s and 1980s, it had become common among African Americans to invent new names for themselves, although many of these invented names took elements from popular existing names.
Gregory was also on the team that pioneered the microwave instrumentation landing system.
Historian David Brion Davis notes the racial mixing that occurred during slavery was frequently attributed by the planter class to the "lower-class white males" but Davis concludes that "there is abundant evidence that many slaveowners, sons of slaveowners, and overseers took black mistresses or in effect raped the wives and daughters of slave families."
African slaves and their descendants have also had a history of cultural exchange and intermarriage with Native Americans, although they did not necessarily retain social, cultural or linguistic ties to Native peoples.
In the last decade of the 19th century, racially discriminatory laws and racial violence aimed at African Americans began to mushroom in the United States.
From the ICC perspective, African Americans are one of three groups of black people in the United States.
Until the New Deal, African Americans were supporters of the Republican Party because it was Republican President Abraham Lincoln who helped in granting freedom to American slaves; at the time, the Republicans and Democrats represented the sectional interests of the North and South, respectively, rather than any specific ideology, and both right and left were represented equally in both parties.
Ehrenstein went on to say "He's there to assuage white 'guilt' they feel over the role of slavery and racial segregation in American history."
Historically, "race mixing" between black and white people was taboo in the United States.
In 1965, 43 percent of all black families fell into the poverty bracket, earning under $3,000 a year.
The ICC plan was to reach the three groups by acknowledging that each group has its own sense of community that is based on geography and ethnicity.
All the colony's slaves, however, were freed upon its surrender to the British.
It survives today with a vibrant and active civic community.
The terms (such as ''colored'', ''person of color'', or ''negro'') were included in the wording of various laws and legal decisions which some thought were being used as tools of white supremacy and oppression.
In much of the southeastern United States and some parts of the southwestern United States the graduation rate of white males was in fact below 70% such as in Florida where a 62% of white males graduated high school.
Dr. Mark Dean holds three of the original nine patents on the computer on which all PCs are based.
The term is rarely used by younger black people, but remained in use by many older African Americans who had grown up with the term, particularly in the southern U.S.
The term remains in use in some contexts, such as the United Negro College Fund, an American philanthropic organization that funds scholarships for black students and general scholarship funds for 39 private historically black colleges and universities, as well as in Latin America where Spanish and Portuguese are spoken.
Black people have higher rates of obesity, diabetes and hypertension than the US average.
African Americans quickly set up congregations for themselves, as well as schools and community/civic associations, to have space away from white control or oversight.
Daniel, Christopher, Michael, David, James, Joseph, and Matthew were thus among the most frequent names for African-American boys in 2013.
In 2001 there were 484 black mayors.
In 2005, employed blacks earned 65% of the wages of whites, down from 82% in 1975.
The Grio consists of a broad spectrum of original video packages, news articles, and contributor blogs on topics including breaking news, politics, health, business, entertainment and Black History.
There are many other deliberately insulting terms.
African-American life expectancy at birth is persistently five to seven years lower than European Americans.
The NAACP denounces the use of both ''nigga'' and ''nigger''.
The income gap between black and white families is also significant.
Consequently, the 365 African Americans in their sample have a genome-wide average of 78.1% West African ancestry and 18.5% European ancestry, with large variation among individuals (ranging from 99% to 1% West African ancestry).
Punctuation marks are seen more often within African-American names than other American names, such as the names Mo'nique and D'Andre.
African Americans were the first peoples in the United States to make fried chicken, along with Scottish immigrants to the South.
Working with students having the worst of backgrounds, those who were working far below grade level, and even those who had been labeled as 'unteachable,' Marva was able to overcome the obstacles.
As with all linguistic forms, AAVE's usage is influenced by various factors, including geographical, educational and socioeconomic background, as well as formality of setting.
A report from the U.S. Department of Justice states "In 2005, homicide victimization rates for blacks were 6 times higher than the rates for whites".
In addition to BET there is Centric, which is a spin-off cable television channel of BET, created originally as ''BET on Jazz'' to showcase jazz music-related programming, especially that of black jazz musicians.
In 1863, during the American Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
Granville Woods had 35 patents to improve electric railway systems, including the first system to allow moving trains to communicate.
To maintain self-esteem and dignity, African Americans such as Anthony Overton and Mary McLeod Bethune continued to build their own schools, churches, banks, social clubs, and other businesses.
Since 1977, in an attempt to keep up with changing social opinion, the United States government has officially classified black people (revised to ''black'' or ''African American'' in 1997) as "having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa."
Queens County, New York is the only county with a population of 65,000 or more where African Americans have a higher median household income than White Americans.
Although there is an African-American lobby in foreign policy, it has not had the impact that African-American organizations have had in domestic policy.
The remaining African Americans mainly belong to the paternal haplogroup I (~7%), which is also frequent in Northwestern Europe.
Another form of dance, Stepping, is an African-American tradition whose performance and competition has been formalized through the traditionally black fraternities and sororities at universities.
Most African Americans obeyed the Jim Crow laws, in order to avoid racially motivated violence.
In 2004, 24.7% of African-American families lived below the poverty level.
Believed to be inferior to white people, they were treated as second-class citizens.
In Chicago, Marva Collins, an African-American educator, created a low cost private school specifically for the purpose of teaching low-income African-American children whom the public school system had labeled as being "learning disabled".
Four years later, Obama was reelected president by a similar margin on November 6, 2012.
Similar building projects existed in slaveholding states.
The majority of African Americans are Protestant, many of whom follow the historically black churches.
A growing percentage of African-Americans from the west and north are migrating to the southern region of the U.S. for economic and cultural reasons.
Around 1900, Booker T. Washington became the most famous proponent of African American businesses.
African American-owned businesses account for approximately 2 million US businesses.
In 1960, the median level of education for blacks had been 10.8 years, and by the late Sixties the figure rose to 12.2 years, half a year behind the median for whites.
The descriptive terminology may have originated in the mid-1960s, when ''soul'' was a common definer used to describe African-American culture (for example, soul music).
'''African Americans''' (also referred to as '''Black Americans''' or '''Afro-Americans''') are an ethnic group of Americans (citizens or residents of the United States) with total or partial ancestry from any of the black racial groups of Africa.
More recent inventors include Frederick McKinley Jones, who invented the movable refrigeration unit for food transport in trucks and trains.
In 2004, African-American men had the third-highest earnings of American minority groups after Asian Americans and non-Hispanic whites.
In her book ''The End of Blackness'', as well as in an essay on the liberal website ''Salon'', author Debra Dickerson has argued that the term "black" should refer strictly to the descendants of Africans who were brought to America as slaves, and not to the sons and daughters of black immigrants who lack that ancestry.
Former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice (who was famously mistaken for a "recent American immigrant" by French President Nicolas Sarkozy), said "descendants of slaves did not get much of a head start, and I think you continue to see some of the effects of that."
By 2012, African Americans had advanced greatly in education attainment.
By an act of 1699, the colony ordered all free blacks deported, virtually defining as slaves all persons of African descent who remained in the colony.
This lineage is most common today among Northwestern European males.
After more than 70 years of racial parity black marriage rates began to fall behind whites.
In 2008, Barack Obama became the first African American to be elected president of the United States.
In 1662 Virginia passed a law that children of enslaved women (who were of African descent and thus foreigners) took the status of the mother, rather than that of the father, as under English common law.
During 2008–2010, 21.2% of all Black workers were public employees, compared with 16.3% of non-Black workers.
Many were in common use (e.g., ''nigger''), but had become unacceptable in normal discourse before the end of the 20th century.
The life expectancy for Black men in 2008 was 70.8 years.
In 1670 the colonial assembly passed a law prohibiting free and baptized negroes (and Indians) from purchasing Christians (in this act meaning English or European whites) but allowing them to buy persons "of their owne nation".
(2009), the overall ancestry of African Americans was formed through historic admixture between West/Central Africans (more frequently females) and Europeans (more frequently males).
In 1989, Douglas Wilder became the first African American elected governor in U.S. history.
African Americans collectively attain higher levels of education than immigrants to the United States.
They were often the victims of extreme cruelty and violence, sometimes resulting in deaths: by the post WWII era, African Americans became increasingly discontented with their long-standing inequality.
These discriminatory acts included racial segregation—upheld by the United States Supreme Court decision in Plessy v. Ferguson in 1896—which was legally mandated by southern states and nationwide at the local level of government, voter suppression or disenfranchisement in the southern states, denial of economic opportunity or resources nationwide, and private acts of violence and mass racial violence aimed at African Americans unhindered or encouraged by government authorities.
In preparation for the United States 2010 Census, a marketing and outreach plan, called ''2010 Census Integrated Communications Campaign Plan'' (ICC) recognized and defined African Americans as black people born in the United States.
Some of the new words used by the people include "fleek" which means on point and "throwing shade" which means offending someone.
Between 1995 and 2009, freshmen college enrollment for African Americans increased by 73 percent and only 15 percent for whites.
Historically, between 15 and 30% of enslaved Africans brought to the Americas were Muslims, but most of these Africans were converted to Christianity during the era of American slavery.
On November 4, 2008, Democratic Senator Barack Obama defeated Republican Senator John McCain to become the first African American to be elected President.
Many policy makers have proposed that this gap can and will be eliminated through policies such as affirmative action, desegregation, and multiculturalism.
Historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), which were originally set up when segregated colleges did not admit African Americans, continue to thrive and educate students of all races today.
According to a Gallup survey conducted from June to September 2012, it found that 4.6 percent of Black or African Americans self identify as LGBT; this is greater than the estimated 3.4 percent of American adults that self identify as LGBT in the total population.
