Standard Afrikaans pronounces "'n" as a schwa vowel.
In 1983 a fresh translation marked the 50th anniversary of the 1933 version and provided a much-needed revision.
Before independence, Afrikaans had equal status with German as an official language.
For example, '''' instead of ''equatoriaal'', and '''' instead of ''excuus''.
A particular feature of Afrikaans is its use of the double negative; it is classified in Afrikaans as ''ontkennende vorm'' and is something that is absent from the other West Germanic standard languages.
* The 1st person singular pronoun ''ik'' as in Dutch as opposed to Afrikaans ''ek''
Indeed, there is a groundswell movement within Afrikaans to be inclusive, and to promote itself along with the other indigenous official languages.
Whereas ''Ek wil nie dit doen nie'' emphasizes a lack of want to act, ''Ek wil dit nie doen nie'' emphasizes the act itself.
Ik wist dat hij niet zou komen.
With about 7 million native speakers in South Africa, or 13.5% of the population, it is the third-most-spoken language in the country.
In general, mutual intelligibility between Dutch and Afrikaans is better than between Dutch and Frisian or between Danish and Swedish.
The ''-ne'' was the Middle Dutch way to negate but it has been suggested that since ''-ne'' became highly non-voiced, '''''nie''''' or '''''niet''''' was needed to complement the ''-ne''.
The Afrikaans Language Monument (Afrikaans: ''Afrikaanse Taalmonument'') is located on a hill overlooking Paarl, Western Cape Province, South Africa.
Another difference is the indefinite article, '''' in Afrikaans and  in Dutch.
Remnants of these dialects still remain in present-day Afrikaans, although the standardising effect of Standard Afrikaans has contributed to a great levelling of differences in modern times.
And I'm telling you, what are you looking for here?
heb, hebt, heeft, hebben
The new policy means that the use of Afrikaans is now often reduced in favour of English, or to accommodate the other official languages.
Afrikaans speakers) should be used for people of any ethnic origin who speak Afrikaans.
Most Afrikaans-speaking people living outside Africa are emigrants and their descendants.
The film ''Platteland'' was also released in 2011.
Linguistic identity has not yet established which terms shall prevail, and all three are used in common parlance.
While double negation is still found in Low Franconian dialects in West-Flanders and in some "isolated" villages in the centre of the Netherlands (i.e.
Ik heb geweten dat hij niet zou komen.
Afrikaans speakers are able to learn Dutch within a comparatively short time.
A major landmark in the development of the language was the translation of the whole Bible into Afrikaans.
Ik soek' ve' djille nie!
The official languages of the Union of South Africa were English and Dutch until Afrikaans was subsumed under Dutch on 5 May 1925.
The Khoi and mixed-race groups became collectively referred to as 'Coloureds'.
Afrikaans is also widely spoken in Namibia.
"earth pig"), ''trek'' ("pioneering journey", in Afrikaans lit.
And I say to you, what seek you here by me?
In modern Afrikaans, these words are always written in lower case (except if the entire line is uppercase), and if they occur at the beginning of a sentence, the next word is capitalised.
In April 2009, SABC3 started screening several Afrikaans-language programmes.
Although Afrikaans has adopted words from other languages, including Portuguese, the Bantu languages, Malay, German and the Khoisan languages, an estimated 90 to 95% of Afrikaans vocabulary is of Dutch origin.
The manuscript is to be found in the South African National Library, Cape Town.
The Afrikaans film trilogy ''Bakgat'' (first released in 2008) caused a reawakening of the Afrikaans film Industry (which has been dead since the mid to late 1990s) and Belgian-born singer Karen Zoid's debut single Afrikaners is Plesierig (released 2001) caused a resurgence in the Afrikaans music industry as well as gave rise to the Afrikaans Rock genre.
When the British design magazine ''Wallpaper'' described Afrikaans as "one of the world's ugliest languages" in its September 2005 article about the monument, South African billionaire Johann Rupert (chairman of the Richemont Group), responded by withdrawing advertising for brands such as Cartier, Van Cleef & Arpels, Montblanc and Alfred Dunhill from the magazine.
Such media also prove popular with the extensive Afrikaans-speaking expatriate communities who seek to retain language proficiency in a household context.
''kjen'' as opposed to Afrikaans ''ken''.
This monumental work established Afrikaans as '''', that is "a pure and proper language" for religious purposes, especially amongst the deeply Calvinist Afrikaans religious community that previously had been rather sceptical of a Bible translation that varied from the Dutch version that they were used to.
SABC3 announced early in 2009 that it would increase Afrikaans programming due to the "growing Afrikaans-language market and their need for working capital as Afrikaans advertising is the only advertising that sells in the current South African television market".
The term ''Kaapse Afrikaans'' ("Cape Afrikaans") is sometimes erroneously used to refer to the entire Western Cape dialect; it is more commonly used for a particular sociolect spoken in the Cape Peninsula of South Africa.
Hij is in het ziekenhuis, maar hij eet niet.
Northern Cape dialect may have resulted from contact between Dutch settlers and the Khoi-Khoi people between the Great Karoo and the Kunene, and Eastern Cape dialect between the Dutch and the Xhosa.
''kombuistaal''), lacking the prestige accorded, for example even by the educational system in Africa, to languages spoken outside Africa; other early epithets setting apart ''Kaaps Hollands'' ("Cape Dutch", i.e.
* The use of the form ''seg'', cf.
The South African poet writer Breyten Breytenbach, attempting to visualize the language distance for anglophones once remarked that the differences between (Standard) Dutch and Afrikaans are comparable to those between the Received Pronunciation and Southern American English.
Ik heb niet geweten dat hij niet zou komen.
I want this not do not.)
This '''' is usually pronounced as just a weak vowel, .
Certain words in Afrikaans arise due to grammar.
"field"), ''commando'' from Afrikaans ''kommando'' meaning small fighting unit, ''boomslang'' ("tree snake") and ''apartheid'' ("segregation"; more accurately "apartness" or "the state or condition of being apart").
Because of emigration and migrant labour, more than 100,000 Afrikaans speakers may live in the United Kingdom.
The 2007 film ''Ouma se slim kind'', the first full-length Afrikaans movie since Paljas of 1998, is seen as the dawn of a new era in Afrikaans cinema.
Ek het nie geweet dat hy nie sou kom nie.
Hy sal nie kom nie, want hy is siek.
In Namibia, the percentage of Afrikaans speakers declined from 11.4% (2001 Census) to 10.4% (2011 Census).
An estimated 90 to 95% of Afrikaans vocabulary is ultimately of Dutch origin, and there are few lexical differences between the two languages; however, Afrikaans has a considerably more regular morphology, grammar, and spelling.
Despite the challenges of demotion and emigration that it faces in South Africa, the Afrikaans vernacular remains competitive, being popular in DSTV pay channels and several internet sites, while generating high newspaper and music CD sales.
It has the widest geographical and racial distribution of all the eleven official languages of South Africa, and is widely spoken and understood as a second or third language.
A few words in standard English are derived from Afrikaans, such as ''aardvark'' (lit.
Dutch (literally translated)
Er ist im Krankenhaus, aber er isst nicht.
Nevertheless, Afrikaans remains more prevalent in the media – radio, newspapers and television – than any of the other official languages, except English.
Uncommon, more common: Ek't dit gesê
Afrikaans is rooted in seventeenth century dialects of Dutch; see , , , .
He will not come, as he is sick.
* Compare with ''Ek wil nie dit doen nie'', which changes the meaning to "I want not to do this."
Ek wil dit nie doen nie.
Afrikaans is variously described as a creole, a partially creolised language, or a deviant variety of Dutch; see .
An example of characteristic Kaapse Afrikaans:
Hij komt niet, want hij is ziek.
The final editing of this edition was done by E. P. Groenewald, A. H. van Zyl, P. A. Verhoef, J. L. Helberg and W. Kempen.
Dis (Dit is) nie so moeilik om Afrikaans te leer nie.
In 1976, secondary school pupils in Soweto began a rebellion in response to the government's decision that Afrikaans be used as the language of instruction for half the subjects taught in non-White schools (with English continuing for the other half).
Also, Afrikaans and some Dutch dialects make no distinction between  and , having merged the latter into the former; while the word for "south" is written '''' in Dutch, it is spelled '''' in Afrikaans (as well as dialectal Dutch writings) to represent this merger.
Hy is in die hospitaal, maar hy eet nie.
"A book" is '''' in Afrikaans, whereas it is either '''' or '''' in Dutch.
The First and Second Boer Wars further strengthened the position of Afrikaans.
Ik wist niet dat hij zou komen.
Diacritics are ignored when alphabetising, though they are still important, even when typing the diacritic forms may be difficult.
Native Dutch speakers pick up written Afrikaans even more quickly, due to its simplified grammar, whereas understanding spoken Afrikaans might need more effort.
The term is ultimately derived from Dutch "Afrikaans-Hollands" meaning "African Dutch".
: '''French:''' Il ''ne'' parle ''pas'' Afrikaans.
Further latent support for the language derives from its de-politicised image in the eyes of younger-generation South Africans, who less and less often view it as "the language of the oppressor".
The linguist Paul Roberge suggested the earliest 'truly Afrikaans' texts are doggerel verse from 1795 and a dialogue transcribed by a Dutch traveller in 1825.
In 1925, Afrikaans was recognised by the South African government as a real language, rather than simply a slang version of Dutch proper.
Ik zoek jullie niet!
habe, hast, hat, habt, haben
The terms "boerseun" (farm boy) and "boeremeisie" (farm girl) became popular among young white Afrikaners for expressing national pride, whether-or-not they actually grew up on a farm.
A large number of Afrikaans books are still published every year, mainly by the publishers Human & Rousseau, Tafelberg Uitgewers, Struik, and Protea Boekhuis.
Gospel according to Mark); however, this translation was never published.
It is the majority language of the western half of South Africa—the provinces of the Northern Cape and Western Cape—and the first language of 75.8% of Coloured South Africans (3.4 million people), 60.8% of White South Africans (2.7 million) and at 4.6% the second most spoken first-language among Asian South Africans (58,000).
: '''German:''' Er spricht ''kein'' Afrikaans.
Geographical distribution of Afrikaans in South Africa: density of Afrikaans home-language speakers.
I don't want you here!
Similarly original ''qu'' and ''x'' are spelt ''kw'' and ''ks'' respectively.
Abu Bakr Effendi also compiled his Arabic Afrikaans Islamic instruction book between 1862 and 1869, although this was only published and printed in 1877.
Ek het geweet dat hy nie sou kom nie.
/ Hij kan ''geen'' Afrikaans praten.
The Black community's opposition to Afrikaans and preference for continuing English instruction was underlined when the government rescinded the policy one month after the uprising: 96% of Black schools chose English (over Afrikaans or native languages) as the language of instruction.
The white Afrikaans-speaking community started being referred to colloquially as "The Boere".
Several short films have been created and more feature-length movies, such as ''Poena is Koning'' and ''Bakgat'' (both in 2008) have been produced, besides the 2011 Afrikaans-language film ''Skoonheid'', which was the first Afrikaans film to screen at the Cannes Film Festival.
The first was erected in Burgersdorp, South Africa, in 1893, and the second, nowadays better-known Afrikaans Language Monument (''''), was built in Paarl, South Africa, in 1975.
This is usually because words that had ''c'' and ''ch'' in the original Dutch are spelled with ''k'' and ''g'', respectively, in Afrikaans.
Therefore, differences with Dutch often lie in the more analytic morphology and grammar of Afrikaans, and a spelling that expresses Afrikaans pronunciation rather than standard Dutch.
Afrikaans has been influential in the development of South African English.
Some of the characteristics of Oranjerivierafrikaans are the plural form ''-goed'' (''Ma-goed'', ''meneergoed''), variant pronunciation such as in ''kjerk'' (''Church'') and ''gjeld'' (''money'') and the ending ''-se'', which indicates possession.
It evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland (Hollandic dialect) spoken by the mainly Dutch settlers of what is now South Africa, where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the course of the 18th century.
I knew (did know) that he would not come.
There is also a prison cant, known as soebela or sombela, which is based on Afrikaans, yet heavily influenced by Zulu.
Kaapse Afrikaans was once spoken by all population groups.
En ik zeg (tegen) jullie: wat zoeken jullie hier bij mij?
Here are a few examples:
The diminutive suffix in Afrikaans is ''-tjie'', whereas in Dutch it is ''-tje'', hence a "bit" is  in Afrikaans and  in Dutch.
Some state that instead of ''Afrikaners'', which refers to an ethnic group, the terms ''Afrikaanses'' or ''Afrikaanssprekendes'' (lit.
Therefore, there is no distinction in Afrikaans between ''I drank'' and ''I have drunk''.
In spite of these moves, the language has remained strong, and Afrikaans newspapers and magazines continue to have large circulation figures.
South African census figures suggest a growing number of speakers in all nine provinces, a total of 6.85 million in 2011 compared to 5.98 million a decade earlier.
All other verbs use the perfect tense (''hê'' + past participle) for the past.
This was hard for Dutch and Cape Dutch speakers to understand, and increasingly unintelligible for Afrikaans speakers.
More than 300 book titles in Afrikaans are published annually.
Also, due to Afrikaans being viewed as the language of the white oppressor by some, pressure has been increased to remove Afrikaans as a teaching language in South African universities, resulting in bloody student protests in 2015.
The Afrikaans Film industry started gaining international recognition via the likes of big Afrikaans Hollywood film stars, like Charlize Theron ( Monster (2003 film)) and Sharlto Copley (District 9) promoting their mother tongue.
C. P. Hoogehout, Arnoldus Pannevis, and Stephanus Jacobus du Toit were the first Afrikaans Bible translators.
Afrikaans has two monuments erected in its honour.
Afrikaans) as putatively beneath official Dutch standards included ''geradbraakt/gebroken/onbeschaafd Hollands'' ("mutilated/broken/uncivilised Dutch"), as well as ''verkeerd Nederlands'' ("incorrect Dutch").
The official orthography of Afrikaans is the ''Afrikaanse Woordelys en Spelreëls'', compiled by Die Taalkommissie.
Hij zal niet komen, want hij is ziek.
Afrikaans speakers experience higher employment rates than other South African language groups, though half a million remain unemployed.
The last (the indefinite article) is the only apostrophed word that is common in modern written Afrikaans, since the other examples are shortened versions of other words ('''' and '''' respectively) and are rarely found outside of a poetic context.
There is a degree of mutual intelligibility between the two languages, particularly in written form.
: '''Afrikaans:''' Hy kan ''nie'' Afrikaans praat ''nie''.
The workers and slaves who contributed to the development of Afrikaans were Asians (especially Malays) and Malagasys, as well as the Khoi, San, and Bantu peoples who also lived in the area.
The Dutch word ''het'' ("it" in English) does not correspond to ''het'' in Afrikaans.
The double negative construction has been fully grammaticalized in standard Afrikaans and its proper use follows a set of fairly complex rules as the examples below show:
In this case there is only a single negation.
The first Afrikaans grammars and dictionaries were published in 1875 by the '''' ('Society for Real Afrikaners') in Cape Town.
In neighbouring Namibia, Afrikaans is widely spoken as a second language and used as ''lingua franca'', while as a native language it is spoken in 10.4% of households, mainly concentrated in the capital Windhoek and the southern regions of Hardap and ǁKaras.
Although English is the mother tongue of only 8.2% of the population, it is the language most widely understood, and the second language of a majority of South Africans.
These dialects are the Northern Cape, Western Cape, and Eastern Cape dialects.
This Statenvertaling had its origins with the Synod of Dordrecht of 1618 and was thus in an archaic form of Dutch.
Garderen), it takes a different form, which is not found in Afrikaans.
Similarly, South Africa's diplomatic missions overseas now only display the name of the country in English and their host country's language, and not in Afrikaans.
The main Afrikaans dictionary is the Woordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal (WAT) (Dictionary of the Afrikaans Language), which is as yet incomplete owing to the scale of the project, but the one-volume dictionary in household use is the Verklarende Handwoordeboek van die Afrikaanse Taal (HAT).
Printed material among the Afrikaners at first used only standard European Dutch.
Mutual intelligibility thus tends to be asymmetrical, as it is easier for Dutch speakers to understand Afrikaans than for Afrikaans speakers to understand Dutch.
This language is used as a secret language in prison and is taught to initiates.
He can not Afrikaans speak not.)
Both Afrikaans and German survive as recognised regional language in the country, although only English has official status within the government.
Apostrophed Version
Ik wil dit niet doen.
The author of the article, Bronwyn Davies, was an English-speaking South African.
Although Afrikaans is mainly spoken in South Africa and Namibia, smaller Afrikaans-speaking populations live in Argentina, Australia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Lesotho, Malawi, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Swaziland, the UAE, the United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, the USA, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
Nevertheless, Dutch speakers are confronted with fewer noncognates when listening to Afrikaans than the other way round.
They have access to Afrikaans websites, news sites such as  Netwerk24.com and  Sake24, and radio broadcasts over the web, such as those from Radio Sonder Grense and Radio Pretoria.
When telling a longer story, Afrikaans speakers usually avoid the perfect and simply use the present tense, or historical present tense instead (as is possible, but less common, in English as well).
En ek sê vir julle, wat soek julle hier by my?
About 1.5% of black South Africans (600,000 people) speak it as their first language.
African creole people in the early 18th century — documented on the cases of Hendrik Bibault and patriarch Oude Ram — were the first to call themselves ''Afrikaner'' (Africans).
Large numbers of speakers of Bantu languages and English-speaking South Africans also speak it as their second language.
In addition, a pay-TV channel in Afrikaans called KykNet was launched in 1999, and an Afrikaans music channel, MK (Musiek kanaal) (lit.
Afrikaans was also a medium of instruction for schools in Bophuthatswana Bantustan.
/ He can ''not'' speak Afrikaans.
For example, ''slechts'' ('only') in Dutch becomes ''slegs'' in Afrikaans.
This is the strongest feature of Kaapse Afrikaans.
The following is an example:
The Dutch words corresponding to Afrikaans ''het'' are ''heb'', ''hebt'', ''heeft'' and ''hebben''.
One reason for the expansion of Afrikaans is its development in the public realm: it is used in newspapers, radio programs, TV, and several translations of the  Bible have been published since the first one was completed in 1933.
There is a large degree of mutual intelligibility between the two languages—especially in written form.
Ik heb niet geweten dat hij zou komen.
Hence, it is a daughter language of Dutch, and was previously referred to as "Cape Dutch" (a term also used to refer collectively to the early Cape settlers) or "kitchen Dutch" (a derogatory term used to refer to Afrikaans in its earlier days).
I do not want to do this.
For example, ''moet nie'', which literally means "must not", usually becomes ''moenie''; although one does not have to write or say it like this, virtually all Afrikaans speakers will change the two words to ''moenie'' in the same way as ''do not'' shifts to ''don't'' in English.
En ik seg ve' djille, wat soek djille hie' by my?
By the mid-19th century, more and more were appearing in Afrikaans, which was very much still regarded as a set of regional dialects.
Only much later in the second half of the 19th century did the Boers adopt this attribution, too.
: '''English:''' He speaks ''no'' Afrikaans.
Both French and San origins have been suggested for double negation in Afrikaans.
I did not know that he would come.
There is a much smaller number of Afrikaans speakers among Zimbabwe's white minority, as most have left the country since 1980.
The apostrophe and the following letter are regarded as two separate characters, and are never written using a single glyph, although a single character variant of the indefinite article appears in Unicode, ŉ.
Kaapse Afrikaans preserves some features more similar to Dutch than to Afrikaans.
Meurant published his '''' ("Conversation between Claus Truthsayer and John Doubter"), which is considered by some to be the first authoritative Afrikaans text.
The first official translation of the entire Bible into Afrikaans was in 1933 by J. D. du Toit, E. E. van Rooyen, J. D. Kestell, H. C. M. Fourie, and BB Keet.
Many South Africans living and working in Belgium, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States and Kuwait are also Afrikaans-speaking.
/ He ''can't'' speak Afrikaans.
Estimates of the total number of Afrikaans-speakers range between 15 and 23 million.
Modern Dutch and Afrikaans share over 90 per cent of their vocabulary.
For example, '''' instead of the 3 e's alongside each other: ''geeet'', which can never occur in Afrikaans, or '''', which translates to "say", whereas '''' is a possessive form.
It, along with German, was among the official languages of Namibia until the country became independent in 1990, 25% of the population of Windhoek spoke Afrikaans at home.
A recent trend is the increased availability of pre-school educational CDs and DVDs.
The major concentrations are in Hardap (41.0%), ǁKaras (36.1%), Erongo (20.5%), Khomas (18.5%), Omaheke (10.0%), Otjozondjupa (9.4%), Kunene (4.2%), and Oshikoto (2.3%).
'''Afrikaans''' (, , or ) is a West Germanic language spoken in South Africa, Namibia, and to a lesser extent, Botswana and Zimbabwe.
Similarly, the Dutch digraph ''ĳ'', normally pronounced as , is written as ''y'', except where it replaces the Dutch suffix ''–lijk'' which is pronounced as  or , as in '' > ''.
Dutch ''zegt'' as opposed to Afrikaans ''sê''
It is the first language of most of the Afrikaner and Coloured people of Southern Africa.
Kaapse Afrikaans is also characterised by much code-switching between English and Afrikaans, especially in the inner-city and lower socio-economic status areas of Cape Town.
Important landmarks in the translation of the Scriptures were in 1878 with C. P. Hoogehout's translation of the ''Evangelie volgens Markus'' (Gospel of Mark, lit.
