Others view this period to include spiritual discomfort for past wrongs.
According to the Talmud, extinction of the soul is reserved for a far much smaller group of malicious and evil leaders, either whose very evil deeds go way beyond norms, or who lead large groups of people to utmost evil.
Different tastes are said to be born which a person given to carnal passions finds no enjoyment.
Jesus also maintained that the time would come when the dead would hear the voice of the Son of God, and all who were in the tombs would come out, who have done good deeds to the resurrection of life, but those who have done wicked deeds to the resurrection of condemnation.
A notable example is Emanuel Swedenborg who wrote some 18 theological works which describe in detail the nature of the afterlife according to his claimed spiritual experiences, the most famous of which is ''Heaven and Hell''.
The third of the nine soul realms is ruled by Earth and is associated with the Earthly pleasures.
The Romans had a similar belief system about the afterlife, with Hades becoming known as Pluto.
... and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me."
The Angel of Moroni visited the boy, Joseph Smith, after living out his mortal life in ancient America.
In the book of Job it is stated:
The type of rebirth will be conditioned by the moral tone of the person's actions (kamma or karma).
When it was full, men drew it ashore and sat down and sorted the good into vessels but threw away the bad.
On the Last Day, resurrected humans and jinn will be judged by Allah according to their deeds.
This is similar to the Harrowing of Hell doctrine of some mainstream Christian faiths.
There is mention of ghostly bodies of past prophets, and the transfiguration.
In contrast to heaven, hell is a condition of punishment and torment for the wicked, traditionally defined as eternal separation from God and confinement with other sinful souls and fallen angels.
So man lies down and does not rise.
Adventists believe that the body + the breath of God = a living soul.
You wear another one.
In the 1990s, the Catechism of the Catholic Church defined hell not as punishment imposed on the sinner but rather as the sinner's self-exclusion from God.
Who knows the spirit of the sons of men, which goes upward, and the spirit of the animal, which goes down to the earth?"
Ahmadi Muslims believe that the afterlife is not material but of a spiritual nature.
They believe that Christ visited spirit prison    (1 Peter 3:18-20) and opened the gate for those who repent to cross over to Paradise. ''"
Therefore, these souls neither merit the beatific vision, nor are subjected to any punishment, because they are not guilty of any personal sin although they have not received baptism, so still bear original sin.
Shraga Simmons commented that within the Bible itself, the idea of reincarnation is intimated in Deut.
Some belief systems, such as those in the Abrahamic tradition, hold that the dead go to a specific plane of existence after death, as determined by a god, gods, or other divine judgment, based on their actions or beliefs during life.
Not all Christian sects accept this doctrine, leading to many controversies on grace and free will, and the idea of predestination.
The Fields of Punishment were for people that had sinned often, but not so much as to be deserving of Tartarus.
Reincarnation refers to an afterlife concept found among Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs, Rosicrucians, Theosophists, Spiritists, and Wiccans.
It is revealed as the scene of an extensive missionary effort by righteous spirits in paradise to redeem those still in darkness—a spirit prison or "hell" where the spirits of the dead remain until judgment.
Adventists believe God will grant eternal life to the redeemed who are resurrected at Jesus' second coming.
''Jahannam'' possess 7 deep terrible layers.
According to Hartshorne people do not experience subjective (or personal) immortality in the afterlife, but they do have objective immortality because their experiences live on forever in God, who contains all that was.
The Elysian Fields were for the ones that lived pure lives.
Its members continue to conduct scientific research on the paranormal to this day.
God will reign in perfect harmony forever.(Rom.
That is a higher philosophy.
After three nights, the soul of the wicked is taken by the demon Vizaresa (Vīzarəša), to Chinvat bridge, and is made to go to darkness (hell).
21 But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God."
The Greek god Hermes, the messenger of the gods, would take the dead soul of a person to the underworld (sometimes called Hades or the House of Hades).
Maimonides describes the Olam Haba ("World to Come") in spiritual terms, relegating the prophesied physical resurrection to the status of a future miracle, unrelated to the afterlife or the Messianic era.
However it's been a matter of great debate amongst the Sikhs about Sikhism's belief in afterlife.
Hermes would leave the soul on the banks of the River Styx, the river between life and death.
Although Unitarians historically believed in a literal hell, and Universalists historically believed that everyone goes to heaven, modern Unitarian Universalists can be categorized into those believing in a heaven, reincarnation and oblivion.
According to True to the Faith, (A handbook on doctrines in the LDS faith) "The celestial kingdom is the place prepared for those who have "received the testimony of Jesus" and been "made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood" (D&C 76:51, 69).
(Job 14:10,12,14a NKJV)
Atma  moves with "Parmatma" or the greatest soul.
Martin Buber's early collection of stories of the Baal Shem Tov's life includes several that refer to people reincarnating in successive lives.
Some of the earliest attempts to apply scientific methods to the study of phenomena relating to an afterlife were conducted by this organization.
Sikhism has a very strong belief in after life.
After 25 years of parapsychological research, Susan Blackmore came to the conclusion that there is no empirical evidence for an afterlife.
They are either granted admission to Paradise, where they will enjoy spiritual and physical pleasures forever, or condemned to Hell to suffer spiritual and physical torment for eternity.
And Saul answered, I am greatly distressed...Then said Samuel, Why then dost thou ask of me, seeing the Lord has departed from thee, and is become thy enemy?
On the other hand, where a person has performed skillful actions based on generosity, loving-kindness (metta), compassion and wisdom, rebirth in a happy realm, i.e.
Arriving at one's reward in afterlife was a demanding ordeal, requiring a sin-free heart and the ability to recite the spells, passwords and formulae of the Book of the Dead.
It is believed that each Buddha has their own pure land, created out of their merits for the sake of sentient beings who recall them mindfully to be able to be reborn in their pure land and train to become a Buddha there.
Certain problems arise with the idea of a particular person continuing after death.
The Wiccan afterlife is most commonly described as The Summerland.
Belief in an afterlife, which may be naturalistic or supernatural, is in contrast to the belief in oblivion after death.
Orthodoxy therefore uses the description of Jesus' judgment in John 3:19-21 as their model: "19 And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.
So it will be at the close of the age also known as the Last Day.
For example, if a person has committed harmful actions of body, speech and mind based on greed, hatred and delusion, rebirth in a lower realm, i.e.
If we like it, it is paradise; if we do not, it is hell.
You’re just changing one form into another one.
Here, the Lord Krishna says that just as a man discards his old clothes and wears new ones; similarly the soul discards the old body and takes on a new one.
The power of love works in two ways: it torments sinners .
4:13-17; John 5:28, 29; Rev.
Despite popular opinion, Limbo, which was elaborated upon by theologians beginning in the Middle Ages, was never recognized as a dogma of the Roman Catholic Church, yet, at times, it has been a very popular theological theory within the Church.
Pure Land Buddhism of Mahayana believes in a special place apart from the 31 planes of existence called Pure Land.
Surely, they all have one breath; man has no advantage over animals, for all is vanity.
33:6 and Isaiah 22:14, 65:6.
The deceased will find the bright light of wisdom, which shows a straightforward path to move upward and leave the cycle of reincarnation.
After the resurrection, spirits are assigned "permanently" to three degrees of heavenly glory, determined by how they lived– Celestial, Terrestrial, and Telestial.
Its earliest members included noted scientists like William Crookes, and philosophers such as Henry Sidgwick and William James.
Hindus also believe in 'Karma'.
Reincarnation is also a belief described in Kabbalistic Judaism as gilgul neshamot (Reincarnation of Souls).
Together these are also known as the Spirit World (also Abraham's Bosom; see Luke 16:19-25).
It consisted of green fields, valleys and mountains, everyone there was peaceful and contented, and the Sun always shone there.
Lastly, his father shows him all of the future heroes of Rome who will live if Aeneas fulfills his destiny in founding the city.
This is why an oil lamp is lit and kept beside the head of the corpse, to light the dark tunnel and allow the soul to travel comfortably.
In American pop culture depictions of Heaven, particularly in vintage cartoons such as those by Looney Tunes in the mid-20th century, the souls of virtuous people ascend to Heaven and are converted into angels.
For each soul remains distinct and each birth represents a new soul."
MacDougall weighed dying patients in an attempt to prove that the soul was material, tangible and thus measurable.
Torah scholar, commentator and kabbalist, Nachmanides (Ramban 1195–1270), attributed Job's suffering to reincarnation, as hinted in Job's saying "God does all these things twice or three times with a man, to bring back his soul from the pit to&nbsp;... the light of the living' (Job 33:29,30)."
Only the fallen angels will be left alive.
Every knee will bend before the Lord.
Onkelos, a righteous convert and authoritative commentator of the same period, explained the verse, "Let Reuben live and not die&nbsp;..." (Deuteronomy 33:6) to mean that Reuben should merit the World to Come directly, and not have to die again as a result of being reincarnated.
Scientists who have worked in this area include Raymond Moody, Susan Blackmore, Charles Tart, William James, Ian Stevenson, Michael Persinger, Pim van Lommel and Penny Sartori among others.
Rituals which are done on the first three days are vital and important, as they protect the soul from evil powers and give it strength to reach the underworld.
Rashnu is the yazata who holds the scales of justice.
Jesus will call to life all those who are unrighteous.
(1 Cor 15:44-42; Doctrine and Covenants, Section 76) Sons of Perdition, or those who have known and seen God and deny it, will be sent to the realm of Satan, which is called Outer Darkness, where they shall live in misery and agony forever.
The higher the level the better it is and the happier you are.
The fourth realm is where we find out about love and is ruled by Venus.
The fourth level is that from which evolved souls teach and direct those on Earth.
For a wicked person, a very old, ugly, naked hag appears.
''Jannah'' and ''Jahannam'' both have different levels.
Those who have led pristine lives enter immediately into the "Olam Haba" or World to Come.
But not all will rejoice in God’s gift of forgiveness, and that choice will be judgment, the self-inflicted source of their sorrow and pain."
The non-canonical Acts of Paul and Thecla speak of the efficacy of prayer for the dead, so that they might be "translated to a state of happiness".
Many believe that Sikhism endorses afterlife and the concept of reward and punishment as there are verses given in Guru Granth sahib, but a large number of Sikhs believe otherwise and treat those verses as metaphorical or poetic.
Peter van Inwagen, in his argument regarding resurrection, notes that the materialist must have some sort of physical continuity.
Many deist freethinkers held that belief in an afterlife with reward and punishment was a necessity of reason and good morals.
They also used the "opening of the mouth".
The eighth afterlife realm is ruled by Uranus and develops psychic ability.
Each human consisted of the physical body, the 'ka', the 'ba', and the 'akh'.
Writing that would later be incorporated into the Hebrew Bible names Sheol as the place of the dead.
However, they begin to feel immediately a taste of their destiny to come.
Although punishments are made part of certain Christian conceptions of the afterlife, the prevalent concept of "eternal damnation" is a tenet of the Christian afterlife.
Similarly Psalms 146:2-4 (NKJV) states:
The life dies in which life condition it reborn in the same life condition."
The Upanishads describe reincarnation (''punarjanma'') (see also: samsara).
Pope Gregory I repeats the concept, articulated over a century earlier by Gregory of Nyssa that the saved suffer purification after death, in connection with which he wrote of "purgatorial flames".
This succession leads toward an eventual liberation.
If the replica had all the same experiences, traits, and physical appearances of the first person, we would all attribute the same identity to the second, according to Hick.
Your soul is a part of God and hence lives forever.
If the bad deeds outweigh the good, the bridge narrows down to the width of a blade-edge, and a horrid hag pulls the soul in her arms, and takes it down to hell with her.
There are various reasons why the deceased do not follow that light.
For the three days that it rests on Earth, righteous souls sit at the head of their body, chanting the Ustavaiti Gathas with joy, while a wicked person sits at the feet of the corpse, wails and recites the Yasna.
In the Catholic Church, all those who die in God's grace and friendship, but still imperfectly purified, are indeed assured of their eternal salvation; but after death they undergo purification, so as to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven or the final purification of the elect, which is entirely different from the punishment of the damned.
He sees the river of forgetfulness, Lethe, which the dead must drink to forget their life and begin anew.
Here, souls rest, recuperate from life, and reflect on the experiences they had during their lives.
The Zohar makes frequent and lengthy references to reincarnation.
The list is expanded sometimes, and include Vahman and Ormazd.
On March 30, 2010, a spokesman for the Egyptian Culture Ministry claimed it had unearthed a large red granite door in Luxor with inscriptions by User, a powerful adviser to the 18th dynasty Queen Hatshepsut who ruled between 1479 BC and 1458 BC, the longest of any woman.
Joseph F. Smith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints presents an elaborate vision of the Afterlife.
Latter Day Saints believe that the soul existed before earth life and will exist in the hereafter.
Individuals will arrive at both everlasting homes during Judgment Day, which commences after the Angel Israfil blows the trumpet the second time.
According to Theravada Buddhism, there are 31 realms of existence that one can be reborn into.
There are 10 life states of any life: Hell, hunger, anger, animality, rapture, humanity, learning, realization, bodhisatva and buddhahood.
In metaphysical models, theists generally believe some type of afterlife awaits people when they die.
On the new earth God will provide an eternal home for all the redeemed and a perfect environment for everlasting life, where Eden will be restored.
John Hick also raises some questions regarding personal identity in his book, ''Death and Eternal Life'' using an example of a person ceasing to exist in one place while an exact replica appears in another.
21:1-7; 22:1-5; 11:15.)
"Now Samuel was dead...Then said Saul to his servants, Seek me a woman who is a medium...and he said...Bring me up Samuel... And Saul knew that it was Samuel... And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up?
It believes the false door is a 'door to the Afterlife'.
Thus the main practice of pure land Buddhism is to chant a Buddha's name.
Also their love, their hatred, and their envy have now perished; Nevermore will they have a share in anything done under the sun."
The God of Death Yama sends his representatives to collect the soul from a person's body whenever he is due for death and they take the soul to Yama.
One might take this as implying that Sheol is literally underground, although it is as easily read literally, as signifying an earthquake or split in the earth.
The notion of purgatory is associated particularly with the Catholic Church.
According to those beliefs events in our current life are consequences of actions taken in previous lives, or Karma.
You are merely an instrument in MY hands.
The Book of Enoch describes Sheol as divided into four compartments for four types of the dead: the faithful saints who await resurrection in Paradise, the merely virtuous who await their reward, the wicked who await punishment, and the wicked who have already been punished and will not be resurrected on Judgment Day.
By the River Styx, he sees the souls of those not given a proper burial, forced to wait by the river until someone buries them.
The righteous will live in heaven for a thousand years (the millennium) where they will sit with God in judgment over the unredeemed and the fallen angels.
In some societies like the Mende, multiple beliefs coexist.
Most do not enter the World to Come immediately, but now experience a period of review of their earthly actions and they are made aware of what they have done wrong.
The universe will be then free from sin forever.
Statues were placed in the tombs to serve as substitutes for the deceased.
The teachings of the Bahá'í Faith state that the nature of the afterlife is beyond the nature of those living, just as an unborn fetus cannot understand the nature of the world outside of the womb.
"For what happens to the sons of men also happens to animals; one thing befalls them: as one dies, so dies the other.
When Jesus the Christ, who is the Word and the Bread of Life, comes a second time, the righteous will be raised incorruptible and will be taken in the clouds to meet their Lord.
It is also a teaching of such eminent Orthodox theologians as Olivier Clément, Metropolitan Kallistos Ware, and Bishop Hilarion Alfeyev.
For example, sacrifice of one's own's rights over that of other's becomes enjoyable, or that forgiveness becomes second nature.
human or one of the many heavenly realms, can be expected.
According to Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of Ahmadiyya sect in Islam, the soul will give birth to another rarer entity and will resemble the life on this earth in the sense that this entity will bear a similar relationship to the soul as the soul bears relationship with the human existence on earth.
The Name and Shadow were also living entities.
In the ancient Greek myth about the Labours of Heracles, the hero Heracles had to travel to the underworld to capture Cerberus, the three-headed guard dog, as one of his tasks.
Charon, also known as the ferry-man, would take the soul across the river to Hades, if the soul had gold: Upon burial, the family of the dead soul would put coins under the deceased's tongue.
In reincarnation, spiritual development continues after death as the deceased begins another earthly life in the physical world, acquiring a superior grade of consciousness and altruism by means of successive reincarnations.
According to Hinduism the basic concept of Karma is 'As you sow, you shall reap'.
If a man dies, shall he live again?"
35; 65:17-25; Matt.
At the sixth plane, the soul is finally aligned with the cosmic consciousness and has no sense of separateness or individuality.
But also the study of the near death experience.
For instance, St. Isaac the Syrian observes that "those who are punished in Gehenna, are scourged by the scourge of love.
Jehovah's Witnesses occasionally use terms such as "afterlife" to refer to any hope for the dead, but they understand Ecclesiastes 9:5 to preclude belief in an immortal soul.
Gregory of Nyssa discusses the long-before believed possibility of purification of souls after death.
Although MacDougall's results varied considerably from "21 grams", for some people this figure has become synonymous with the measure of a soul's mass.
The Bhagavad Gita, an important Hindu script, talks extensively about the afterlife.
The classic work of Jewish mysticism, the Zohar, is quoted liberally in all Jewish learning; in the Zohar the idea of reincarnation is mentioned repeatedly.
Limbo is a theory that unbaptized but innocent souls, such as those of infants, virtuous individuals who lived before Jesus Christ was born on earth, or those that die before baptism exist in neither Heaven or Hell proper.
Survivors of Armageddon and those who are resurrected are then to gradually restore earth to a paradise.
Similarly their sum of bad deeds will be mirrored in their next life.
Other well-known rabbis who are reincarnationists include Yonassan Gershom, Abraham Isaac Kook, Talmud scholar Adin Steinsaltz, DovBer Pinson, David M. Wexelman, Zalman Schachter, and many others.
Hunter-gatherer societies such as the Hazda have no particular belief in an afterlife, and the death of an individual is a straightforward end to their existence.
Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh-day Adventists, though they have among the strictest rules on how to conduct their lives, teach that sinners are destroyed rather than tortured forever.
To inherit this gift, we must receive the ordinances of salvation, keep the commandments, and repent of our sins."
In the intermediate state the awareness is very flexible, so it is important to be virtuous, adopt a positive attitude, and avoid negative ideas.
Although apokatastasis is not a dogma of the church but instead a theologoumena, it is no less a teaching of the Orthodox Church than its rejection.
Angels are either spirits that have not yet come to earth to experience their mortality, or spirits or resurrected beings that have already passed through mortality and do the will of God.
One cross-cultural theme is that the ancestors are part of the world of the living, interacting with it regularly.
Psychological proposals for the origin of a belief in an afterlife include cognitive disposition, cultural learning, and as an intuitive religious idea.
So they are generally seen as existing in a state of natural, but not supernatural, happiness, until the end of time.
A soul goes here if his/her good deeds and bad deeds are equal, and Rashnu's scale is equal.
Most Unitarian Universalists believe that heaven and hell are symbolic places of consciousness and the faith is largely focused on the worldly life rather than any possible afterlife.
The '''afterlife''' (also referred to as '''life after death''' or the '''hereafter''') is the concept of a realm, or the realm itself (whether physical or transcendental), in which an essential part of an individual's identity or consciousness continues to exist after the death of the body.
Saadia Gaon, in Emunoth ve-Deoth (Hebrew: "beliefs and opinions") concludes Section VI with a refutation of the doctrine of metempsychosis (reincarnation).
But if one analyse the Sikh Scriptures carefully, one may find that on many occasions Afterlife, existence of heaven and hell are mentioned succinctly in Guru Granth Sahib and in Dasam granth so from that it can been concluded that Sikhism does believe in the existence of heaven and hell, however, heaven and hell are created to reward and punish, one will then take birth again until one merges in God.
So, if a person has lived a good life, they will be rewarded in the afterlife.
The book of 2 Maccabees gives a clear account of the dead awaiting a future resurrection and judgment, plus prayers and offerings for the dead to remove the burden of sin.
The Bahá'í scriptures also state there are distinctions between souls in the afterlife, and that souls will recognize the worth of their own deeds and understand the consequences of their actions.
One may also acquire ''Tasbih'' and recite the names of Allah in such manner as "SubahannAllah" or Glory be to Allah over and over again to acquire good deeds.
By no means do all Jews today believe in reincarnation, but belief in reincarnation is not uncommon among many Jews, including Orthodox.
Some view this period as being a "re-schooling", with the soul gaining wisdom as one's errors are reviewed.
Eschatological passages are found in many places, especially Isaiah, Daniel, Matthew 24, Matthew 25, and the Book of Revelation.
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father.
Many Wiccans see The Summerland as a place to reflect on their life actions.
Unlike other Christian groups, the Catholic Church teaches that those who die in a state of grace, but still carry venial sin go to a place called Purgatory where they undergo purification to enter Heaven.
