Christie never wrote a novel or short story featuring both Poirot and Miss Marple.
She served in a hospital during the First World War before marrying and starting a family in London.
That same evening, around 9:45 pm, Christie disappeared from her home, leaving behind a letter for her secretary saying that she was going to Yorkshire.
Many of the authors read Christie's novels first, before other mystery writers, in English or in their native language, influencing their own writing, and nearly all still view her as the Queen of Crime, and creator of the plot twists used by mystery authors.
She also helped put on a play called ''The Blue Beard of Unhappiness'' with female friends.
Christie continued searching for a husband, and entered into short-lived relationships with four separate men and an engagement with another.
They also taught her about music, and she learned to play both the piano and the mandolin.
In 1998, Booker sold a number of its non-food assets to focus on its core business.
Many archaeological sites are visited along the way and one of the main characters, Signor Richetti, is an archaeologist.
Prior to meeting Mallowan, Christie had not had any extensive brushes with archaeology, but once the two married, they made sure to only go to sites where they could work together.
The ''Styles'' manuscript was not accepted by such publishing companies as Hodder and Stoughton and Methuen.
Agatha retained custody of daughter Rosalind and the Christie name for her writing.
Several of the authors would be very pleased to have their own novels in print in 100 years.
In 1993, Hicks founded the '''Agatha Christie Society''' and became its first president.
It is an accident of typography that "nomina" came to be represented by "m".
Christie frequently used settings that were familiar to her for her stories.
She was survived by her only child, Rosalind Hicks.
* ''Appointment with Death (1938)'' – set in Jerusalem and its surrounding area.
They learned to surf prone in South Africa; then, in Waikiki, they were among the first Britons to surf standing up.
Christie would always pay for her own board and lodging and her travel expenses so as to not influence the funding of the archaeological excavations, and she also supported excavations as an anonymous sponsor.
She also read the work of Edith Nesbit, including ''The Story of the Treasure Seekers'' (1899), ''The Phoenix and the Carpet'' (1903), and ''The Railway Children'' (1906).
Some of Christie's best known novels with heavy archaeological influences are:
Christie's father Frederick was a member of the American upper class, and had been sent to Switzerland for his education.
Over a thousand police officers, 15,000 volunteers, and several aeroplanes scoured the rural landscape.
During the Second World War, Christie worked in the pharmacy at University College Hospital, London, where she acquired a knowledge of poisons that she put to good use in her post-war crime novels.
After Christie's death in 1976, her remaining 36% share of the company was inherited by her daughter, Rosalind Hicks, who passionately preserved her mother's works, image, and legacy until her own death 28 years later.
They married on the afternoon of Christmas Eve 1914 at Emmanuel Church, Clifton, Bristol, which was close to the home of his parents, while Archie was on home leave.
With the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, Archie was sent to France to fight the German forces.
Jewish characters are often seen as un-English (such as Oliver Manders in ''Three Act Tragedy''), but they are rarely the culprits.
In 1955 Christie was the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's highest honour, the Grand Master Award.
She was initially unsuccessful at getting her work published, but in 1920 the publication of ''The Mysterious Affair at Styles'', featuring Hercule Poirot, launched her literary career.
In 2004 her obituary in ''The Telegraph'' commented that Hicks had been "determined to remain true to her mother's vision and to protect the integrity of her creations" and disapproved of "merchandising" activities.
Agatha returned to England in 1910 and found that her mother Clara was ill.
Christie then set her first novel, ''Snow Upon the Desert'', in Cairo, and drew from her recent experiences in that city, written under the pseudonym Monosyllaba.
Anecdotes, memories, funny episodes are strung in a rough timeline, with more emphasis on eccentric characters and lovely scenery than on factual accuracy.
A fictionalized account of Christie's disappearance is the central theme of a Korean musical, ''Agatha''.
Similarly, the novel Mrs McGinty's Dead is named after a children's game that is explained in the course of the novel.
Both books were sealed in a bank vault for over thirty years and were released for publication by Christie only at the end of her life, when she realised that she could not write any more novels.
After the Second World War, she chronicled her time in Syria with fondness in "Come Tell Me How You Live".
The Greenway Estate in Devon, acquired by the couple as a summer residence in 1938, is now in the care of the National Trust.
The Irish were gay but made trouble in the house; the English were of all kinds".
The film starred Vanessa Redgrave and Timothy Dalton as Agatha and Archie, and depicts Christie planning suicide in such a way as to frame her husband's mistress for her "murder".
She met her second husband, Sir Max Mallowan, a distinguished archaeologist, on a trip to the excavation site at Ur in 1930.
Her mother, Clara Boehmer, was an Englishwoman who was born in Belfast in 1854 to Captain Frederick Boehmer and Mary Ann West, the couple's only daughter.
Christie described her childhood as "very happy".
However, John Lane at The Bodley Head offered to accept it after keeping the submission for several months, provided that Christie change the ending.
He provided substantial evidence to suggest that she planned the event to embarrass her husband, never anticipating the resulting escalated melodrama.
Their first child, Margaret Frary Miller (1879–1950), was born in Torquay, where the couple were renting lodgings, while their second, Louis "Monty" Montant (1880–1929), was born in the U.S. state of New York, where Frederick was on a business trip.
Her novels have sold roughly 2 billion copies, and her estate claims that her works come third in the rankings of the world's most-widely published books, behind only Shakespeare's works and the Bible.
During Agatha Christie's life, she had set up a private company, Agatha Christie Limited, to hold the rights to her works, and around 1959 she had also transferred her 278-acre home, Greenway Estate, to her daughter Rosalind.
She had trouble with an incompetent Swiss French nursery helper (Marcelle) for toddler Rosalind, and as a result she decided, "Scottish preferred&nbsp;... good with the young.
She was known to be in a depressed state from literary overwork, her mother's death earlier that year, and her husband's infidelity.
She was responsible for aiding the doctors and maintaining morale; she performed 3,400 hours of unpaid work between October 1914 and December 1916.
During their time in the Middle East, there was also a large amount of time spent travelling to and from Mallowan's sites.
(When Christie adapted ''Witness for the Prosecution'' into a stage play, she lengthened the ending so that the murderer was also killed; this format was followed in film and television productions, most famously the Charles Laughton/Marlene Dietrich film.)
Christie occasionally inserted stereotyped descriptions of characters into her work, particularly before the end of the Second World War (when such attitudes were more commonly expressed publicly), and particularly in regard to Italians, Jews, non-Europeans, and sometimes Americans, the last usually as impossibly naïve or uninformed.
Christie built these tropes into what is now considered classic mystery structure: a murder is committed, there are multiple suspects who are all concealing secrets, and the detective gradually uncovers these secrets over the course of the story, discovering the most shocking twists towards the end.
The couple quickly fell in love.
Dame Agatha Christie died on 12 January 1976 at age 85 from natural causes at her home in Winterbrook, Cholsey.
The film outraged Christie's heirs who fought two unsuccessful lawsuits in the United States to try to prevent it from being distributed.
Biographer Janet Morgan commented that, despite "infelicities of style", the story was nevertheless "compelling".
Under financial strain, she sent Clara (Christie's mother) to live with her aunt Margaret Miller (née West), who had married a wealthy American, Nathaniel Frary Miller, in 1863.
According to Index Translationum, she remains the most-translated individual author&nbsp;– having been translated into at least 103 languages.
Christie often stayed at Abney Hall, Cheshire, owned by her brother-in-law, James Watts, basing at least two stories there: a short story "The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding", in the story collection of the same name, and the novel ''After the Funeral''.
Christie features as a character in Gaylord Larsen's ''Dorothy and Agatha'' and ''The London Blitz Murders'' by Max Allan Collins.
Most of her books and short stories have been adapted for television, radio, video games and comics, and more than thirty feature films have been based on her work.
Other shorts followed, most of them illustrating her interest in spiritualism and the paranormal.
The Christies divorced in 1928, and Archie married Nancy Neele.
Some early works saw publication, but she decided against focusing on either of these as future professions.
Christie's stage play ''The Mousetrap'' holds the record for the longest initial run: it opened at the Ambassadors Theatre in the West End on 25&nbsp;November 1952 and  is still running after more than 25,000 performances.
She also wrote the world's longest-running play, a murder mystery, ''The Mousetrap'', and six romances under the name '''Mary Westmacott'''.
According to P. D. James, Christie often, but not always, made the unlikeliest character the guilty party.
Answer N. or M." The "N. or M." stands for the Latin, "nomen vel nomina", meaning "name or names".
The novel is noted most for its careful description of the dig site and house, which showed that the author had spent much of her time in very similar situations.
In some stories, the question remains unresolved of whether formal justice will ever be delivered, such as ''Five Little Pigs'' and ''Endless Night''.
Christie's 1934 novel ''Murder on the Orient Express'' was written in the Pera Palace Hotel in Istanbul, Turkey, the southern terminus of the railway.
As part of that, its shares in Agatha Christie Limited (at the time earning £2.1m annual revenue) were sold for £10m to Chorion, a major international media company whose portfolio of well known authors' works also included the literary estates of Enid Blyton and Dennis Wheatley.
The BBC broadcast ''Partners In Crime'' and ''And Then There Were None'' in 2015 as part of the deal.
They travelled to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Hawaii.
She did marry off Poirot's companion Colonel Hastings in an attempt to trim her cast commitments.
Poirot is the only fictional character to date to be given an obituary in ''The New York Times'', following the publication of ''Curtain''.
He was an army officer who was seconded to the Royal Flying Corps in April 1913.
Christie had a lifelong interest in archaeology.
* ''Death on the Nile (1937)'' – takes place on a tour boat on the Nile.
Clara suggested that her daughter ask for advice from a family friend and neighbour, writer Eden Philpotts, who obliged her enquiry, encouraged her writing, and sent her an introduction to his own literary agent, Hughes Massie, who rejected ''Snow Upon the Desert'', and suggested a second novel.
During their marriage, she published six novels, a collection of short stories, and a number of short stories in magazines.
'''Dame Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie, Lady Mallowan''', DBE (''née'' '''Miller'''; 15 September 1890&nbsp;– 12 January 1976) was an English crime novelist, short story writer and playwright.
Agatha&nbsp;– always chaperoned by her mother&nbsp;– attended many social functions in search of a husband.
Novelist Raymond Chandler criticised her in his essay "The Simple Art of Murder", and American literary critic Edmund Wilson was dismissive of Christie and the detective fiction genre generally in his ''New Yorker'' essay, "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?"
The hotel maintains Christie's room as a memorial to the author.
This occurs in ''The Murder of Roger Ackroyd'', ''Death on the Nile'', ''Dumb Witness'', ''Crooked House'', ''The Hollow'', ''The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side'', ''Cat Among the Pigeons'', ''Peril at End House'', ''Nemesis'', ''Appointment with Death'', ''The Secret Adversary'', and ''Curtain''.
In ''The Hollow'', published as late as 1946, one of the more unsympathetic characters is "a Whitechapel Jewess with dyed hair and a voice like a corncrake&nbsp;... a small woman with a thick nose, henna red and a disagreeable voice".
She eventually made friends with a group of other girls in Torquay, and she noted that "one of the highlights of my existence" was her appearance with them in a youth production of Gilbert and Sullivan's ''The Yeomen of the Guard'', in which she played the hero, Colonel Fairfax.
She wrote her own detective novel ''The Mysterious Affair at Styles'' featuring  Hercule Poirot, a former Belgian police officer noted for his twirly large "magnificent moustaches" and egg-shaped head.
Agatha later claimed that her father's death, occurring when she was eleven years old, marked the end of her childhood.
This may explain some of the inconsistencies compared to the rest of the Marple series&nbsp;— for example, Colonel Arthur Bantry, husband of Miss Marple's friend Dolly, is still alive and well in ''Sleeping Murder'' despite the fact that he is noted as having died in books published earlier.
''And Then There Were None'' is Christie's best-selling novel, with 100 million sales to date, making it the world's best-selling mystery ever, and one of the best-selling books of all time.
The heroine of Liar-Soft's visual novel ''Shikkoku no Sharnoth: What a Beautiful Tomorrow'' (2008), Mary Clarissa Christie, is based on the real-life Christie.
In ''Death Comes as the End'', set in ancient Egypt, the culprit is killed in the act before he can claim another victim by one of the few surviving characters.
Christie's reputation as "The Queen of Crime" was built upon the large number of classic motifs that she introduced, or for which she provided the most famous example.
MI5 was afraid that Christie had a spy in Britain's top-secret codebreaking centre, Bletchley Park.
From 8 November 2001 to 24 March 2002, The British Museum had an exhibit named ''Agatha Christie and Archaeology: Mystery in Mesopotamia'', which presented the life of Agatha Christie and the influences of archaeology in her life and works.
Dorothy L. Sayers visited the house in Surrey, later using the scenario in her book ''Unnatural Death''.
She qualified as an "apothecaries' assistant" (or dispenser) in 1917 and, as a dispenser, she earned £16 a year until the end of her service in September 1918.
She did so and then signed a contract which she later felt was exploitative.
These publications came on the heels of the success of the film version of ''Murder on the Orient Express'' in 1974.
Hercule Poirot, however, prevents this easy way out, ensuring a trial and hanging.
When a little older, she moved on to reading the surreal verse of Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll.
She wrote novels and short stories, but also contributed work to the archaeological sites, more specifically to the archaeological restoration and labelling of ancient exhibits, including tasks such as cleaning and conserving delicate ivory pieces, reconstructing pottery, developing photos from early excavations which later led to taking photographs of the site and its findings, and taking field notes.
Similarly, the title of Christie's autobiographical travel book ''Come, Tell Me How You Live'' is a quote from verse three of the White Knight's poem, "Haddocks' Eyes" from chapter eight of ''Through the Looking-Glass'' by Lewis Carroll, and is a play on the word "Tell", an archaeological mound.
Returning to Britain, she continued her social activities, writing and performing in amateur theatrics.
One such site featured in her work is the temple site of Abu Simbel, depicted in ''Death on the Nile''.
In 1934, she and Max Mallowan purchased Winterbrook House in Winterbrook, a hamlet adjoining the small market town of Wallingford which was then within the bounds of Cholsey and in Berkshire.
from the Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer which asks, "What is your Christian name?
In the second season of ''Grand Hotel'' (TV series), a Spanish television series set in 1906, one episode features a character named Agatha Mary Clarissa Miller, a 16-year-old English girl who is introduced as an aspiring mystery writer and  friend of one of the hotel's regular guests.
Nearly all had one or more favourites among Christie's mysteries, and find her books good to read now, nearly 100 years after her first novel was published.
Christie's autobiography makes no reference to her disappearance.
Upon learning that he would be stationed in Farnborough, Archie proposed marriage, and Agatha accepted.
The descriptions of the fictional Chimneys, Stoneygates, and other houses in her stories are mostly Abney in various forms."
Christie's family and family trusts, including Prichard, continue to own the remaining 36% stake in Agatha Christie Limited, and remain associated with the company.
Other novels (such as ''And Then There Were None'') were set in and around Torquay, where she was raised.
She is best known for her 66 detective novels and 14 short story collections, notably those revolving around the investigative work of her fictional detectives Hercule Poirot and Jane Marple.
Savvy readers could sometimes identify the culprit by simply identifying the least likely suspect.
, media reports state that the BBC had acquired the exclusive television rights to Christie's works in the UK (previously associated with ITV) and plans with Acorn's co-operation to air new productions for the 125th anniversary of Christie's birth in 2015.
Thirty wreaths adorned Dame Agatha's grave, including one from the cast of her long-running play The Mousetrap and one sent 'on behalf of the multitude of grateful readers' by the Ulverscroft Large Print Book Publishers.
A third novel again featured Poirot, ''Murder on the Links'' (1923), as did short stories commissioned by Bruce Ingram, editor of ''The Sketch'' magazine.
Following the great success of ''Curtain'', Christie gave permission for the release of ''Sleeping Murder'' sometime in 1976 but died in January 1976 before the book could be released.
She is buried in the nearby churchyard of St Mary's, Cholsey, having chosen the plot for their final resting place with her husband Sir Max some ten years before she died.
In the last of these (''Curtain''), no fewer than three culprits die during the course of the story.
Christie's inspiration for this stemmed from real Belgian refugees who were living in Torquay.
Author Jared Cade interviewed numerous witnesses and relatives for his sympathetic biography ''Agatha Christie and the Eleven Missing Days'', revised 2011.
In honour of the 125th anniversary of her birth, 25 contemporary mystery writers and one publisher revealed their views on Christie's works.
Around 1941–42, the British intelligence agency MI5 investigated Christie after a character called Major Bletchley appeared in her 1941 thriller ''N or M?
In a recording discovered and released in 2008, Christie revealed the reason for this: "Hercule Poirot, a complete egoist, would not like being taught his business or having suggestions made to him by an elderly spinster lady".
Toward the end of the episode, as she is leaving, she says that her stay at the Grand Hotel has inspired her to write a book set in a large house called Styles, with plot points that include elements that ''Grand Hotel'' shares with ''The Mysterious Affair at Styles:'' an investigator with a somewhat less bright assistant, someone being poisoned, an affair between people of different classes, etc.
Most notable are the characters of Dr. Eric Leidner in ''Murder in Mesopotamia'' and Signor Richetti in ''Death on the Nile'', while many minor characters were archaeologists in ''They Came to Baghdad''.
Also there is the great detail in which she describes life at the dig site in ''Murder in Mesopotamia''.
Agatha involved herself in the war effort, joining the Voluntary Aid Detachment (VAD) in 1914, and attending to wounded soldiers at a hospital in Torquay as an unpaid VAD nurse.
In order to tour the world promoting the British Empire Exhibition, the couple left their daughter Rosalind with Agatha's mother and sister.
Culprits in Christie's mysteries have included children, policemen, narrators, already deceased individuals, and sometimes comprise no known suspects (''And Then There Were None'') or all of the suspects (''Murder on the Orient Express'').
In ''And Then There Were None'', the killer's own death is intrinsic to the plot; the red herring is when and how the killer actually died.
These included "The Call of Wings" and "The Little Lonely God".
Both properties are now marked by blue plaques.
Christie's disappearance was featured on the front page of ''The New York Times''.
Others, such as Hungarian film, ''Kojak Budapesten'' (1980; not to be confused with the 1986 comedy by the same name) create their own scenarios involving Christie's criminal skill.
His death left the family devastated and in an uncertain economic situation.
Christie had long been a fan of detective novels, having enjoyed  Wilkie Collins' ''The Woman in White'' and ''The Moonstone'' as well as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's early Sherlock Holmes stories.
The simple funeral service was attended by about 20 newspaper and TV reporters, some having travelled from as far away as South America.
After his parents' deaths, Prichard donated Greenway - both the house and its contents - to the National Trust.
Clara stayed with Margaret, and there she met her future husband, an American stockbroker named Frederick Alvah Miller, who was the son of Nathaniel.
They decided to spend time together in the warmer climate of Cairo, then a popular tourist destination for wealthy Britons; they stayed for three months at the Gezirah Palace Hotel.
This house, too, bears a blue plaque.
In such cases, the original context of the title is usually printed as an epigraph.
To honour her many literary works, she was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1956 New Year Honours.
Seven stories are built around words from well known children's nursery rhymes: ''And Then There Were None'' (from "Ten Little Indians"), ''One, Two, Buckle My Shoe'' (from "One, Two, Buckle My Shoe"), ''Five Little Pigs'' (from "This Little Piggy"), ''Crooked House'' (from "There Was a Crooked Man"), ''A Pocket Full of Rye'' (from "Sing a Song of Sixpence"), ''Hickory Dickory Dock'' (from "Hickory Dickory Dock"), and ''Three Blind Mice'' (from "Three Blind Mice").
She then met Archibald Christie (1889–1962) at a dance given by Lord and Lady Clifford at Ugbrooke, about  from Torquay.
Their extensive travelling had a strong influence on her writing, as some type of transportation often plays a part in her murderer's schemes.
Christie was a voracious reader from an early age.
After the war, the couple settled into a flat at 5 Northwick Terrace in St. John's Wood, northwest London.
Christie allows some culprits to escape earthly justice for a variety of reasons, such as the passage of time (retrospective cases), in which the most important characters have already died, or by active prescription.
The large amount of travel was reused in novels such as ''The Murder on the Orient Express'', as well as suggesting the idea of archaeology as an adventure itself.
'', which was about a hunt for a pair of deadly fifth columnists in wartime England.
Archie was born in India, the son of a judge in the Indian Civil Service.
On 3 December 1926, the Christies quarrelled, and Archie left their house, Styles, in Sunningdale, Berkshire, to spend the weekend with his mistress at Godalming, Surrey.
"Abney became Agatha's greatest inspiration for country-house life, with all its servants and grandeur being woven into her plots.
At the end, in a Christie hallmark, the detective usually gathers the surviving suspects into one room, explains the course of his deductive reasoning, and reveals the guilty party, although there are exceptions in which it is left to the guilty party to explain all (such as ''And Then There Were None'' and ''Endless Night'', both rather nihilistic in nature).
In 1902, Agatha was sent to receive a formal education at Miss Guyer's Girls School in Torquay, but found it difficult to adjust to the disciplined atmosphere.
However, in February 2012, Chorion found itself in financial difficulties some years after a management buyout, and began to sell off their literary assets on the market, selling their stake in Christie's estate (specifically, their 64% stake in Agatha Christie Limited) to the current owner Acorn Media UK (part of RLJ Entertainment, Inc. and the RLJ Companies, owned by American entrepreneur Robert L. Johnson) during that same month.
So accurate was her description of thallium poisoning that on at least one occasion it helped solve a case that was baffling doctors.
However, John Curran's ''Agatha Christie: The Secret Notebooks'' describes different working methods for every book in Christie's bibliography, contradicting the claim by Aldiss.
She was perturbed when various publishers all declined.
In 2013, the Christie family gave their "full backing" to the release of a new Poirot story, ''The Monogram Murders'', which was written by British author Sophie Hannah.
She was surrounded by a series of strong and independent women from an early age.
Among her earliest memories were those of reading the children's books written by Mrs Molesworth, including ''The Adventures of Herr Baby'' (1881), ''Christmas Tree Land'' (1897), and ''The Magic Nuts'' (1898).
The Home Secretary, William Joynson-Hicks, pressured police, and a newspaper offered a £100 reward.
On an edition of ''Desert Island Discs'' in 2007, Brian Aldiss claimed that Christie had told him that she wrote her books up to the last chapter, then decided who the most unlikely suspect was, after which she would go back and make the necessary changes to "frame" that person.
Christie led a very low-profile life despite being known in the town of Wallingford, where she was for many years President of the local amateur dramatic society.
Christie meanwhile settled into married life, giving birth to her only child, daughter Rosalind Margaret in August 1919 at Ashfield, where the couple spent much of their time, having few friends in London.
Her travels with Mallowan contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle even gave a spirit medium one of Christie's gloves to find the missing woman.
* ''Murder in Mesopotamia (1936)'' – the most archaeologically influenced of all her novels, as it is set in the Middle East at an archaeological dig site and associated expedition house.
She visited such ancient Egyptian monuments as the Great Pyramid of Giza, but did not exhibit the great interest in archaeology and Egyptology that became prominent in her later years.
From 1971 to 1974, Christie's health began to fail, although she continued to write.
Agatha Christie is the world's best-selling mystery writer, often referred to as the "Queen of Crime", and considered a master of suspense, plotting, and characterisation.
An American reporter, played by Dustin Hoffman, follows her closely and stops the plan.
However, unlike Conan Doyle, Christie resisted the temptation to kill her detective off while he was still popular.
He was considered personable and friendly by those who knew him.
However, stage, film, and television productions of some of these mysteries were traditionally sanitized with the culprits not evading some form of justice, for a variety of reasons&nbsp;– e.g., censors, plot clarity, and Christie's own changing tastes.
Christie wrote her first short story, ''The House of Beauty'' (an early version of her later-published story ''The House of Dreams''), while recovering in bed from an undisclosed illness.
Upon Hicks' death, also at age 85 like her mother, on 28 October 2004, both this and the Greenway Estate passed to Christie's grandson, Mathew Prichard.
In the 1971 New Year Honours, she was promoted Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE), three years after her husband had been knighted for his archaeological work in 1968.
Murders'', the murderer has killed four innocent people and attempted to frame an unstable man for the crimes.
Agatha Christie Limited remains the owner of the worldwide rights for over 80 of Christie's novels and short stories, 19 plays, and nearly 40 TV films.
The couple lived in Prinsted, West Sussex.
This is largely because Christie wrote numerous Poirot novels early in her career, while ''The Murder at the Vicarage'' remained the sole Marple novel until the 1940s.
On 14 December 1926, she was found at the Swan Hydropathic Hotel (now the Old Swan Hotel) in Harrogate, Yorkshire, registered as Mrs Teresa Neele (the surname of her husband's lover) from Cape Town.
This was her last operatic role for, as she later wrote, "an experience that you really enjoyed should never be repeated."
Marple appeared in 12 of Christie's novels.
The extent of her time spent at the many locations featured in her books is apparent from the extreme detail in which she describes them.
But her fame as an author far surpassed his fame in archaeology.
