* DNA oxidation and caloric restriction: Caloric restriction reduces 8-OH-dG DNA damage in organs of ageing rats and mice.
A primary model organism for studying ageing is the nematode ''C.
Notwithstanding the similarly low calorie intake, the diet composition differed between the two studies (notably a high sucrose content in the Wisconsin study), and the monkeys have different origins (India, China), initially suggesting that genetics and dietary composition, not merely a decrease in calories, are factors in longevity.
These include mental health problems as well as physical health problems, especially dementia.
Fungi, too, can age.
* A decreased Growth hormone/Insulin-like Growth Factor 1 signalling pathway has been associated with increased life span in various organisms including fruit flies, nematodes and mice.
Ageing has a significant impact on society.
This theory, which introduced a new definition of ageing, has facilitated the conceptualisation of why and how ageing occurs at the evolutionary, physiological and molecular levels.
The sexual organism could henceforth pass on some of its genetic material to produce new individuals and itself could become disposable with regards to the survival of its species.
Such single-celled organisms (prokaryotes, protozoans, algae) multiply by fissioning into daughter cells, thus do not age and are innately immortal.
Admission to a movie for instance, may depend on age according to a motion picture rating system.
These challenges vary for developing and developed countries.
In most developed countries an older workforce is somewhat inevitable.
However, lifelong studies of mice suggest that most mutations happen during embryonic and childhood development, when cells divide often, as each cell division is a chance for errors in DNA replication.
Two major ongoing studies on rhesus monkeys initially revealed disparate results; while one study, by the University of Wisconsin, showed that caloric restriction does extend lifespan, the second study, by the National Institute on Ageing (NIA), found no effects of caloric restriction on longevity.
As a result, the mice were rejuvenated: Shrivelled testes grew back to normal and the animals regained their fertility.
The genetic aspect has also been demonstrated in studies of human centenarians.
However, while inflammation is very much evident in old mammals, even completely immunodeficient mice raised in pathogen-free laboratory conditions still experience senescence.
In the United States for instance, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that one in four American workers will be 55 or older by 2020.
Damage-related factors include internal and environmental assaults to living organisms that induce cumulative damage at various levels.
Various reasons have been proposed for this association; people who are objectively healthy may naturally rate their health better than that of their ill counterparts, though this link has been observed even in studies which have controlled for socioeconomic status, psychological functioning and health status.
Programmed factors follow a biological timetable, perhaps a continuation of the one that regulates childhood growth and development.
Michael Ristow's group has provided evidence that the effect of calorie restriction may be due to increased formation of free radicals within the mitochondria, causing a secondary induction of increased antioxidant defence capacity.
Such variants occur in genes p53 and BRCA1.
However, the benefits may not be proportional; longevity gains are typically greater in ''C.
A chronically high cortisol level compromises the immune system, causes cardiac damage/arterosclerosis and is associated with facial ageing, and the latter in turn is a marker for increased morbidity and mortality.
It is a research incentive prize to encourage teams from all over the world to compete in an all-out effort to "hack the code" that regulates our health and lifespan.
* A variation in the gene FOXO3A has a positive effect on the life expectancy of humans, and is found much more often in people living to 100 and beyond – moreover, this appears to be true worldwide.
* Accumulation of errors: The idea that ageing results from chance events that escape proof reading mechanisms, which gradually damages the genetic code.
A distinction can be made between "proximal ageing" (age-based effects that come about because of factors in the recent past) and "distal ageing" (age-based differences that can be traced back to a cause early in person's life, such as childhood poliomyelitis).
Positive correlates with ageing often include economics, employment, marriage, children, education, and sense of control, as well as many others.
In the field of sociology and mental health, ageing is seen in five different views: ageing as maturity, ageing as decline, ageing as a life-cycle event, ageing as generation, and ageing as survival.
This has been linked to less mTOR activation as well.
The causes of ageing are unknown; current theories are assigned to the damage concept, whereby the accumulation of damage (such as DNA breaks or oxidised DNA) may cause biological systems to fail, or to the programmed ageing concept, whereby internal processes (such as DNA telomere shortening) may cause ageing.
coli'' may split into distinguishable daughter cells, which opens the theoretical possibility of "age classes" among bacteria.
The precise mechanism by which decreased GH/IGF-1 signalling increases longevity is unknown, but various mouse strains with decreased GH and/or IGF-1 induced signalling share a similar phenotype which includes increased insulin sensitivity, enhanced stress resistance and protection from carcinogenesis.
In contrast, many species can be considered immortal: for example, bacteria fission to produce daughter cells, strawberry plants grow runners to produce clones of themselves, and animals in the genus ''Hydra'' have a regenerative ability with which they avoid dying of old age.
Retirement, a common transition faced by the elderly, may have both positive and negative consequences.
who showed a dose-responsive effect of rapamycin on lifespan extension in yeast cells.
About 3% of people between the ages of 65–74 have dementia, 19% between 75 and 84 and nearly half of those over 85 years of age.
Also, it has been suggested that some of the genetic variants that increase fertility in the young increase cancer risk in the old.
Recently, the $1 Million Palo Alto Longevity Prize was launched.
* Telomeres: In humans and other animals, cellular senescence has been attributed to the shortening of telomeres at each cell division; when telomeres become too short, the cells senesce and die or cease multiplying.
It may be that mTOR inhibition and autophagy reduce the effects of reactive oxygen species on the body, which damage DNA and other organic material, so longevity would be increased.
Young people tend to have fewer legal privileges (if they are below the age of majority), they are more likely to push for political and social change, to develop and adopt new technologies, and to need education.
This classic biological idea has however been perturbed recently by the discovery that the bacterium ''E.
* The cellular balance between energy generation and consumption (energy homeostasis) requires tight regulation during ageing.
In artificial cloning, adult cells can be rejuvenated back to embryonic status and then used to grow a new tissue or animal without ageing.
Population ageing is the increase in the number and proportion of older people in society.
* Autoimmunity: The idea that ageing results from an increase in autoantibodies that attack the body's tissues.
:*The hallmark of ageing yeast cells appears to be overproduction of certain proteins.
This has been considered as a negative phenomenon and effective strategies like labour productivity enhancement should be considered to deal with negative consequences of ageing.
Life expectancy at birth is over 80 now in 33 countries.
As life expectancy rises and birth rates decline in developed countries, the median age rises accordingly.
* Free-radical theory: Damage by free radicals, or more generally reactive oxygen species or oxidative stress, create damage that may gives rise to the symptoms we recognise as ageing.
They conclude that moderate calorie restriction rather than extreme calorie restriction is sufficient to produce the observed health and longevity benefits in the studied rhesus monkeys.
In the broader sense, ageing can refer to single cells within an organism which have ceased dividing (cellular senescence) or to the population of a species (population ageing).
"The finding offers the possibility that normal human ageing could be slowed by reawakening the enzyme in cells where it has stopped working" says Ronald DePinho.
This regulation would depend on changes in gene expression that affect the systems responsible for maintenance, repair and defence responses.
Thus, reduction of oxidative DNA damage is associated with a slower rate of ageing and increased lifespan.
Other organs, such as the spleen, liver, intestines and brain, recuperated from their degenerated state.
Ageing is among the greatest known risk factors for most human diseases.
Lack of sleep (9 hours) is associated with a doubling of the risk of death, though not primarily from cardiovascular disease.
One explanation for this is that mammals, being much longer-lived, already have many traits which promote lifespan.
For example, numerous perennial plants ranging from strawberries and potatoes to willow trees typically produce clones of themselves by vegetative reproduction and are thus potentially immortal, while annual plants such as wheat and watermelons die each year and reproduce by sexual reproduction.
Human beings and members of other species, especially animals, necessarily experience ageing and mortality.
A number of diseases associated with ageing, such as atrophic gastritis and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, are probably autoimmune in this way.
Moreover, the hormones that regulate reproduction also regulate cellular metabolism, explaining the increases in fat deposition during pregnancy through to the deposition of centralised adiposity with the dysregulation of the HPG axis following menopause and during andropause (Atwood and Bowen, 2006).
In addition, certain reforms to the Medicare system in the United States decreased elderly spending on home health care by 12.5% per year between 1996 and 2000.
A number of health problems become more prevalent as people get older.
Traditional definitions of successful ageing have emphasised absence of physical and cognitive disabilities.
In humans, ageing represents the accumulation of changes in a human being over time, encompassing physical, psychological, and social change.
The fact that DNA methylation age of blood predicts all-cause mortality in later life suggests that it relates to a process that causes ageing.
Ageing is among the greatest known risk factors for most human diseases: of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds die from age-related causes.
'''Ageing''', also spelled '''aging''', is the process of becoming older.
Each nation, government and non-governmental organisation has different ways of classifying age.
The intervention testing programme aims to address this by conducting parallel experiments at three internationally recognised mouse ageing-centres, the Barshop Institute at UTHSCSA, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor and the Jackson Laboratory.
A bus fare might be discounted for the young or old.
Once these factors are accounted for, the optimal body weight above age 65 corresponds to a leaner body mass index of 23 to 27.
The Book of Job (c. 6th century BC) describes human lifespan as inherently limited and makes a comparison with the innate immortality that a felled tree may have when undergoing vegetative regeneration.
* Accumulation of waste:
Age can result in visual impairment, whereby non-verbal communication is reduced, which can lead to isolation and possible depression.
Prizes for extending lifespan and slowing ageing in mammals exist.
In rural China, grandparents care for 38% of children aged under five whose parents have gone to work in cities."
Laboratory mice's telomeres are many times longer than human ones.
Currently, over 11% of the world's current population are people aged 60 and older and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimates that by 2050 that number will rise to approximately 22%.
Previous age-related testing in mammals has proved largely irreproducible, because of small numbers of animals and lax mouse husbandry conditions.
Elderly people often associate their functional and physical decline with the normal ageing process.
However, activating telomerase in humans could potentially encourage the growth of tumours.
Most known mutations and RNA interference targets that extend lifespan were first discovered in ''C.
Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds—100,000 per day—die from age-related causes.
DNA damage causes the cells to stop dividing or induces apoptosis, often affecting stem cell pools and hence hindering regeneration.
The major contributors to mortality risk reduction appear to be a higher consumption of vegetables, fish, fruits, nuts and monounsaturated fatty acids, i.e., olive oil.
Dementia becomes more common with age.
It was founded by Joon Yun.
The situation, however, has been complicated by the identification that autophagy up-regulation can also occur during ageing.
A rising median age can have significant social and economic implications, as the workforce gets progressively older and the number of old workers and retirees grows relative to the number of young workers.
* the activity levels of the electron transport chain in mitochondria and (in plants) in chloroplasts.
Rapamycin was first shown to extend lifespan in eukaryotes in 2006 by Powers ''et al.''
Stress can be countered by social connection, spirituality, and (for men more clearly than for women) married life, all of which are associated with longevity.
Even within humans and other mortal species, there are cells with the potential for immortality: cancer cells which have lost the ability to die when maintained in cell culture such as the HeLa cell line, and specific stem cells such as germ cells (producing ova and spermatozoa).
Reaction time, for example, may slow with age, while knowledge of world events and wisdom may expand.
Different cultures express age in different ways.
The studied mouse strains with decreased GH signalling showed between 20% and 68% increased longevity, and mouse strains with decreased IGF-1 induced signalling revealed a 19 to 33% increase in life span when compared to control mice.
The age of an adult human is commonly measured in whole years since the day of birth.
:*Autophagy induction can enhance clearance of toxic intracellular waste associated with neurodegenerative diseases and has been comprehensively demonstrated to improve lifespan in yeast, worms, flies, rodents and primates.
People who live the longest report sleeping for six to seven hours each night.
For example, "A study of Bolivian migrants who had moved to Spain found that 69% left their children at home, usually with grandparents.
No lifespan data exist for humans on a calorie-restricted diet, but several reports support protection from age-related diseases.
Cancer geneticist Ronald A. DePinho and his colleagues published research in mice where telomerase activity was first genetically removed.
This finding is generally stronger for men than women, though this relationship is not universal across all studies and may only be true in some circumstances.
* Evolutionary theories of ageing: Many have argued that life span, like other phenotypes, is selected.
Some evidence is provided by oxygen-deprived bacterial cultures.
In 2011, it was demonstrated that acetylation levels of AMP-activated protein kinase change with age in yeast and that preventing this change slows yeast ageing.
For example, a waste product called lipofuscin is formed by a complex reaction in cells that binds fat to proteins.
Dietary protein restriction not only inhibits mTOR activity but also IGF-1, two mechanisms implicated in ageing.
The comparative percentage is also similar between the dog and human for yearly DNA loss in the brain and lymphocytes.
Then, after the mice had prematurely aged, they restored telomerase activity by reactivating the telomerase gene.
In a UNFPA report about ageing in the 21st century, it highlighted the need to "Develop a new rights-based culture of ageing and a change of mindset and societal attitudes towards ageing and older persons, from welfare recipients to active, contributing members of society."
Specifically, reducing leucine intake is sufficient to inhibit mTOR activity, achievable through reducing animal food consumption.
As people age, subjective health remains relatively stable, even though objective health worsens.
However, the annual growth in national health spending is not mainly due to increasing demand from ageing populations, but rather has been driven by rising incomes, costly new medical technology, a shortage of health care workers and informational asymmetries between providers and patients.
Such organisms are sometimes said to exhibit negligible senescence.
Another caveat is that a study following nearly 1000 humans for ten years showed that while some humans do shorten their telomeres over time, a third of the participants did not.
People who participate in moderate to high levels of physical exercise have a lower mortality rate compared to individuals who are not physically active.
Avoidance of chronic stress (as opposed to acute stress) is associated with a slower loss of telomeres in most but not all studies, and with decreased cortisol levels.
Programmed ageing should not be confused with programmed cell death (apoptosis).
In other words, chronological ageing may be distinguished from "social ageing" (cultural age-expectations of how people should act as they grow older) and "biological ageing" (an organism's physical state as it ages).
This would explain why the autosomal dominant disease, Huntington's disease, can persist even though it is inexorably lethal.
Physical exercise may increase life expectancy.
* the Growth hormone/Insulin-like growth factor 1 signalling pathway
Therefore, longevity has been connected to caloric restriction and insulin sensitivity inhibiting mTOR, which in turns allows autophagy to occur more frequently.
Some of the targeted genes have homologues across species and in some cases have been associated with human longevity.
as well as "vicenarian", "tricenarian", "quadragenarian", etc.
elegans'' than fruit flies, and greater in fruit flies than in mammals.
Consequently, fertility rates have continued to decline and life expectancy have risen.
While the effects on society are complex, there is a concern about the impact on health care demand.
FOXO3A acts on the sirtuin family of genes which also have a significant effect on lifespan in yeast and in nematodes.
UNFPA said that this "requires, among others, working towards the development of international human rights instruments and their translation into national laws and regulations and affirmative measures that challenge age discrimination and recognise older people as autonomous subjects."
In order to elevate this pressure "social protection floors must be implemented in order to guarantee income security and access to essential health and social services for all older persons and provide a safety net that contributes to the postponement of disability and prevention of impoverishment in old age."
mTOR functions through nutrient and growth cues leading scientists to believe that dietary restriction and mTOR are related in terms of longevity.
:*A buildup of waste products in cells presumably interferes with metabolism.
There are three main metabolic pathways which can influence the rate of ageing:
Most known genetic interventions in ''C.
* Genetic instability: In heart muscle cells, dogs annually lose approximately 3.3% of the DNA in their heart muscle cells while humans lose approximately 0.6% of their heart muscle DNA each year.
Evidence suggests that pensions, while making a difference to the well-being of older persons, also benefit entire families especially in times of crisis when there may be a shortage or loss of employment within households.
The majority of the benefits from exercise are achieved with around 3500 metabolic equivalent (MET) minutes per week.
* Caloric restriction leads to longer lifespans in various species, an effect that is unclear, but probably mediated by the nutrient-sensing function of the mTOR pathway.
In rodents, this has been shown to increase lifespan by up to 50%; similar effects occur for yeast and ''Drosophila''.
This waste accumulates in the cells as small granules, which increase in size as a person ages.
The discovery, in 1934, that calorie restriction can extend lifespan by 50% in rats has motivated research into delaying and preventing ageing.
It has been argued that population ageing has undermined economic development.
* the FOXO3/Sirtuin pathway, probably responsive to caloric restriction
Traits that benefit early survival and reproduction will be selected for even if they contribute to an earlier death.
, the record for lifespan extension in C. ''elegans'' is a single-gene mutation which increases adult survival by tenfold.
In his book ''How and Why We Age'', Hayflick says that caloric restriction may not be effective in humans, citing data from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging which shows that being thin does not favour longevity.
More casual terms may include "teenagers," "tweens," "twentysomething", "thirtysomething", etc.
Of particular note, the treatment began in mice aged 20 months, the equivalent of 60 human years.
Ageing and mortality of the individual organism became possible with the evolution of sexual reproduction, which occurred with the emergence of the fungal/animal kingdoms approximately a billion years ago, and with the evolution of flowering plants 160 million years ago.
Sirtuin in turn inhibits mTOR.
This is thought to prevent spikes of glucose concentration in the blood, leading to reduced insulin signalling.
Older people have different requirements from society and government, and frequently have differing values as well, such as for property and pension rights.
Factors that are proposed to influence biological ageing fall into two main categories, ''programmed'' and ''damage-related''.
* Cross-linkage: The idea that ageing results from accumulation of cross-linked compounds that interfere with normal cell function.
Moderate levels of exercise have been correlated with preventing aging and improving quality of life by reducing inflammatory potential.
elegans'', thanks to its short lifespan of 2–3 weeks, the ability to easily perform genetic manipulations or suppress gene activity with RNA interference, and other factors.
The concept of ''successful ageing'' can be traced back to the 1950s and was popularised in the 1980s.
Similarly, it is sometimes claimed that moderate ''obesity'' in later life may improve survival, but newer research has identified confounding factors such as weight loss due to terminal disease.
In their 1987 article, Rowe and Kahn characterised successful ageing as involving three components: a) freedom from disease and disability, b) high cognitive and physical functioning, and c) social and productive engagement.
In a 2009 study, the lifespans of mice fed rapamycin were increased between 28 and 38% from the beginning of treatment, or 9 to 14% in total increased maximum lifespan.
* DNA damage theory of ageing: DNA damage is thought to be the common basis of both cancer and ageing, and it has been argued that intrinsic causes of DNA damage are the most important drivers of ageing.
Such a genetic effect is called the antagonistic pleiotropy effect when referring to a gene (pleiotropy signifying the gene has a double function – enabling reproduction at a young age but costing the organism life expectancy in old age) and is called the disposable soma effect when referring to an entire genetic programme (the organism diverting limited resources from maintenance to reproduction).
However, in a comparative analysis in 2014, the Wisconsin researchers found that the allegedly non-starved NIA control monkeys in fact are moderately underweight when compared with other monkey populations, and argued this was due to the NIA's apportioned feeding protocol in contrast to Wisconsin's truly unrestricted ''ad libitum'' feeding protocol.
The term refers especially to human beings, many animals, and fungi, whereas for example bacteria, perennial plants and some simple animals are potentially immortal.
UNFPA stated that, "Sustainability of these systems is of particular concern, particularly in developed countries, while social protection and old-age pension coverage remain a challenge for developing countries, where a large proportion of the labour force is found in the informal sector."
Clonal immortality apart, there are certain species whose individual lifespans stand out among Earth's life-forms, including the bristlecone pine at 5062 years (however Hayflick states that the bristlecone pine has no cells older than 30 years), invertebrates like the hard clam (known as ''quahog'' in New England) at 508 years, the Greenland shark at 400 years, fish like the sturgeon and the rockfish, and the sea anemone and lobster.
These numbers are close to the ratio of the maximum longevities of the two species (120 years vs. 20 years, a 6/1 ratio).
* Over-expression of the Ras2 gene increases lifespan in yeast by 30%.
Many societies in Western Europe and Japan have ageing populations.
Older persons make contributions to society including caregiving and volunteering.
Ageing has occurred due to development which has enabled better nutrition, sanitation, health care, education and economic well-being.
The length of telomeres is therefore the "molecular clock", predicted by Hayflick.
However, telomere length in wild mouse strains is unrelated to lifespan, and mice lacking the telomerase enzyme do not have a dramatically reduced lifespan.
This poses challenges for governments with ageing populations to ensure investments in pension systems continues in order to provide economic independence and reduce poverty in old age.
Population ageing has three possible causes: migration, longer life expectancy (decreased death rate) and decreased birth rate.
Autophagy is enhanced in obese mice by caloric restriction, exercise, and a low fat diet (but in these mice is evidently not related with the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase, see above).
It is likely that most of these pathways affect ageing separately, because targeting them simultaneously leads to additive increases in lifespan.
The Methuselah Foundation offers the Mprize.
Intelligence may decline with age, though the rate may vary depending on the type and may in fact remain steady throughout most of the lifespan, dropping suddenly only as people near the end of their lives.
These age specifications include voting age, drinking age, age of consent, age of majority, age of criminal responsibility, marriageable age, age of candidacy, and mandatory retirement age.
The global economic crisis has increased financial pressure to ensure economic security and access to health care in old age.
* Wear-and-tear theory: The very general idea that changes associated with ageing are the result of chance damage that accumulates over time.
* Reproductive-cell cycle theory: The idea that ageing is regulated by reproductive hormones that act in an antagonistic pleiotropic manner via cell cycle signalling, promoting growth and development early in life to achieve reproduction, but becoming dysregulated later in life, driving senescence (dyosis) in a futile attempt to maintain reproductive ability.
For example, climbing stairs 10 minutes, vacuuming 15 minutes, gardening 20 minutes, running 20 minutes, and walking or bicycling for 25 minutes on a daily basis would ''together'' achieve about 3000 MET minutes a week.
Several companies and organisations, such as Google Calico, Human Longevity, Craig Venter, Gero, SENS Research Foundation, and Science for Life Extension in Russia, declared stopping or delaying ageing as their goal.
Positive self-perception of health has been correlated with higher well-being and reduced mortality in the elderly.
Older people generally incur more health-related costs than do younger people in the workplace and can also cost more in worker's compensation and pension liabilities.
Macular degeneration causes vision loss and increases with age, affecting nearly 12% of those above the age of 80.
Caloric restriction substantially affects lifespan in many animals, including the ability to delay or prevent many age-related diseases.
The endocrine dyscrasia that follows the loss of follicles with menopause, and the loss of Leydig and Sertoli cells during andropause, drive aberrant cell cycle signalling that leads to cell death and dysfunction, tissue dysfunction (disease) and ultimately death.
