Whether a coercive or violent method of social control is perceived as aggression&nbsp;– or as legitimate versus illegitimate aggression&nbsp;– depends on the position of the relevant parties in relation to the social order of their culture.
For example, a bully wants peer approval and victim submission, and gang members want status and control.
According to the Male Warrior hypothesis,intergroup aggression represents an opportunity for men to gain access to mates, territory, resources and increased status.
Usually the more aggressive animals become the more dominant.
This occurs in many species by aggressive encounters between contending males when they are first together in a common environment.
According to Gray, "Social play—that is, play involving more than one player—is necessarily egalitarian.
One of the most important is the belief that spanking is more effective than nonviolent discipline and is, therefore, sometimes necessary, despite the risk of harmful side effects".
;Aggression triggers
Abnormalities in these systems also are known to be induced by stress, either severe, acute stress or chronic low-grade stress
This form of aggression may include the display of body size, antlers, claws or teeth; stereotyped signals including facial expressions; vocalizations such as bird song; the release of chemicals; and changes in coloration.
Analyzing aggression culturally or politically is complicated by the fact that the label 'aggressive' can itself be used as a way of asserting a judgement from a particular point of view.
This can be the case when men have become less ashamed of reporting female violence against them, therefore an increasing number of women are arrested, although the actual number of violent women remains the same.
According to Al-Rodhan, the risk of this aggression and its ensuing brutality should be minimized through confidence-building measures and policies that promote inclusiveness and prevent anarchy.
This could be due to the fact that girls' frontal lobes develop earlier than boys, allowing them to self-restrain.
Overall, an interplay of biological, social and environmental factors can be considered.
Many studies have also been done on the relationship between more general aggressive behavior/feelings and testosterone.
Joan Durrant at the University of Manitoba writes that a number of studies have found physical punishment to be associated with "higher levels of aggression against parents, siblings, peers and spouses", even when controlling for other factors.
Gender is a factor that plays a role in both human and animal aggression.
Regarding sexual dimorphism, humans fall into an intermediate group with moderate sex differences in body size but relatively large testes.
This analysis also conforms with the ''Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology'' which reviewed past analysis which found men to use more verbal and physical aggression with the difference being greater in the physical type.
In addition, physical aggression that continues is likely occurring in the context of family adversity, including socioeconomic factors.
According to a meta-analysis published in 2002, approximately 40% of variation between individuals is explained by differences in genes, and 60% by differences in environment (mainly non-shared environmental influences rather than those that would be shared by being raised together).
Pain and discomfort also increase aggression.
In mice, candidate genes for differentiating aggression between the sexes are the Sry (sex determining region Y) gene, located on the Y chromosome and the Sts (steroid sulfatase) gene.
However, the effect of estradiol appears to vary depending on the strain of mouse, and in some strains it reduces aggression during long days (16 h of light), while during short days (8 h of light) estradiol rapidly increases aggression.
The economic system known as capitalism has been viewed by some as reliant on the leveraging of human competitiveness and aggression in pursuit of resources and trade, which has been considered in both positive and negative terms.
This is most obviously the case in terms of attacking prey to obtain food, or in anti-predatory defense.
It has been found that girls are more likely than boys to use reactive aggression and then retract, but boys are more likely to increase rather than to retract their aggression after their first reaction.
Such findings may suggest that a specific brain region, the OFC, is a key factor in understanding reactive aggression.
Mups activate olfactory sensory neurons in the vomeronasal organ (VNO), a subsystem of the nose known to detect pheromones via specific sensory receptors, of mice and rats.
Another evolutionary theory explaining gender differences in aggression is the Male Warrior hypothesis, which explains that males have psychologically evolved for intergroup aggression in order to gain access to mates, resources, territory and status.
See also the sections on testosterone and evolutionary explanations for gender differences above.
Everyone who cares for your child should be a good role model and agree on the rules he's expected to observe as well as the response to use if he disobeys."
Those who had been in the presence of the gun administered more shocks.
There are profound differences in the extent of acceptance of a biological or evolutionary basis for human aggression, however.
The role of the amygdala is less clear in primates and appears to depend more on situational context, with lesions leading to increases in either social affiliatory or aggressive responses.
Studies of testosterone levels of male athletes before and after a competition revealed that testosterone levels rise shortly before their matches, as if in anticipation of the competition, and are dependent on the outcome of the event: testosterone levels of winners are high relative to those of losers.
* Aggressive behavior can impede learning as a skill deficit, while assertive behavior can facilitate learning.
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group, which is most linked to the prenatal and postnatal development of the male gender and physique, which in turn has been linked on average to more physical aggression in many species.
Moreover, 'opposition' and 'status violations' in childhood appear to be more strongly linked to social problems in adulthood than simply aggressive antisocial behavior.
One group was told that the people they would call would be generous and the collection would be very successful.
* Psychological trauma
According to the 2015  ''International encyclopedia of the social and behavioral sciences'''','' sex differences in aggression is one of the most robust and oldest findings in psychology.
Furthermore, linkage and association studies that seek to identify specific genes, for example that influence neurotransmitter or hormone levels, have generally resulted in contradictory findings characterized by failed attempts at replication.
It is often the root of the unthinkable brutality and injustice perpetuated by human beings.
Moreover, brain scanning with fMRI shows reduced activity in the medial OFC during such reactions.
On Bellona Island, a culture based on male dominance and physical violence, women tend to get into conflicts with other women more frequently than with men.
Other questions that have been considered in the study of primate aggression, including in humans, is how aggression affects the organization of a group, what costs are incurred by aggression, and why some primates avoid aggressive behavior.
Cross-cultural research has found differences in attitudes towards aggression in different cultures.
Also, an individual is more likely to become aggressive if other aggressive group members are nearby.
However, others refer to this behavior as predatory aggression, and point out cases that resemble hostile behavior, such as mouse-killing by rats.
For example, chimpanzees, which are continuous breeders, show significantly raised testosterone levels and aggressive male-male interactions when receptive and fertile females are present.
Such scholars do not consider this a trivial difference, noting that many traditional researchers' aggression measurements may measure outcomes lower down in the continuum, at levels which are adaptive, yet they generalize their findings to non-adaptive levels of aggression, thus losing precision.
Even the simple act of placing one's hands in hot water can cause an aggressive response.
Aggression can involve violence that may be adaptive under certain circumstances in terms of natural selection.
This varies depending on the pathway, the context and other factors such as gender.
anger) and mental states (e.g.
Conflicts between animals occur in many contexts, such as between potential mating partners, between parents and offspring, between siblings and between competitors for resources.
Long-term treatment with estradiol partially restored aggressive behavior, suggesting that the neural conversion of circulating testosterone to estradiol and its effect on estrogen receptors influences inter-male aggression.
E. O. Wilson elaborated in ''On Human Nature'' that aggression is, typically, a means of gaining control over resources.
Aggression between conspecifics in a group typically involves access to resources and breeding opportunities.
Although females are less likely than males to initiate physical violence, they can express aggression by using a variety of non-physical means.
In humans, frustration due to blocked goals can cause aggression.
These may be at risk for later violent behavior or, conversely, lack of aggression that may be considered necessary within society.
It appears to have different effects depending on the type of triggering stimulus, for example social isolation/rank versus shock/chemical agitation which appears not to have a linear relationship with aggression.
One study completed in the midst of the civil rights movement found that riots were more likely on hotter days than cooler ones (Carlsmith & Anderson 1979).
Conciliatory acts vary by species and may involve specific gestures or simply more proximity and interaction between the individuals involved.
Aggression can have adaptive benefits or negative effects.
This may stem from the other gender being constrained by providing greater parental investment, in terms of factors such as gamete production, gestation, lactation, or upbringing of young.
Aggression between groups is determined partly by willingness to fight, which depends on a number of factors including numerical advantage, distance from home territories, how often the groups encounter each other, competitive abilities, differences in body size, and whose territory is being invaded.
These observations suggest that physical aggression is not only a learned behavior but that development provides opportunities for the learning and biological development of self-regulation.
Many scholars assert that culture is one factor that plays a role in aggression.
Losing confrontations may be called social defeat, and winning or losing is associated with a range of practical and psychological consequences.
Although there is much variation in species, generally the more physically aggressive sex is the male, particularly in mammals.
* By school age, children should learn more socially appropriate forms of communicating such as expressing themselves through verbal or written language; if they have not, this behavior may signify a disability or developmental delay
This in turn can relate to factors such as: norms for coordinating actions and dividing resources; what is considered self-defense or provocation; attitudes towards 'outsiders', attitudes towards specific groups such as women, the disabled or the lower status; the availability of alternative conflict resolution strategies; trade interdependence and collective security pacts; fears and impulses; and ultimate goals regarding material and social outcomes.
Konrad Lorenz stated in his 1963 classic, ''On Aggression,'' that human behavior is shaped by four main, survival-seeking animal drives.
parents) suffering from dissociative symptoms related to post-traumatic stress disorder may be more likely to expose their children to violent programs and video games; links between these issues were also related to poverty.
There are more recent findings that show that differences in male and female aggression appear at about two years of age, though the differences in aggression are more consistent in middle-aged children and adolescence.
In many states, women now account for a quarter to a third of all domestic violence arrests, up from less than 10 percent a decade ago.
However, another equally possible explanation is a case of improved diagnostics: it has become more acceptable for men to report female domestic violence to the authorities while at the same time actual female domestic violence has not increased at all.
Males castrated as neonates exhibit low levels of aggression even when given testosterone throughout their development.
However, nearly all studies of juvenile delinquency and testosterone are not significant.
Norepinephrine, also known as noradrenaline, may influence aggression responses both directly and indirectly through the hormonal system, the sympathetic nervous system or the central nervous system (including the brain).
Aggressive behavior may be regulated by testosterone via reduced medial OFC engagement following social provocation.
Reduced activity of the prefrontal cortex, in particular its medial and orbitofrontal portions, has been associated with violent/antisocial aggression.
Although these two methods involve physical violence, both are forms of indirect aggression, since the aggressor herself avoids getting directly involved or putting herself in immediate physical danger.
One includes affective (emotional) and hostile, reactive, or retaliatory aggression that is a response to provocation, and the other includes instrumental, goal-oriented or predatory, in which aggression is used as a mean to achieve a goal.
"Fear(survival)-induced pre-emptive aggression" is one of the key factors that may push naturally amoral humans to behave in immoral ways.
This makes normal testosterone levels more effective.
The new statistics reflect a reality documented in research: women are perpetrators as well as victims of family violence.
In this work, Bandura found that children exposed to an aggressive adult model acted more aggressively than those who were exposed to a nonaggressive adult model.
The ǃKung people were described as 'The Harmless People' in a popular work by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas in 1958, while Lawrence Keeley's 1996 War Before Civilization suggested that regular warfare without modern technology was conducted by most groups throughout human history, including most Native American tribes.
One of its most common functions is to establish a dominance hierarchy.
Release of nerol by T. fulviventris individuals in the nest has been shown to decrease the number of individuals leaving the nest by fifty percent, as well as increasing aggressive behaviors like biting.
The possible correlation between testosterone and aggression could explain the "roid rage" that can result from anabolic steroid use, although an effect of abnormally high levels of steroids does not prove an effect at physiological levels.
Patients with localized lesions to the OFC engage in heightened reactive aggression.
Early androgenization as an organizational effect on the developing brains of both males and females, making more neural circuits that control sexual behavior as well as intermale and interfemale aggression become more sensitive to testosterone.
Initial studies in humans suggest some similar effects.
Alfred Adler had theorized about an "aggressive drive: in 1908.
However, there are critiques for using animal behavior to explain human behavior.
The first known use dates back to 1611, in the sense of an unprovoked attack.
If the results were the same in humans as they are in rhesus monkeys and baboons, then the increase in aggressive behaviors during ovulation is explained by the decline in estrogen levels.
In definitions commonly used in the social sciences and behavioral sciences, aggression is a response by an individual that delivers something unpleasant to another person.
However, according to many researchers, predation is not aggression.
DHEA levels also have been studied in humans and may play a role in human aggression.
Studies therefore have often instead used more unreliable measurements from blood or saliva.
In aggressive mimicry a predator has the appearance of a harmless organism or object attractive to the prey; when the prey approaches, the predator attacks.
Similarly, GABA, although associated with inhibitory functions at many CNS synapses, sometimes shows a positive correlation with aggression, including when potentiated by alcohol.
*American Academy of Pediatrics (2011): "The best way to prevent aggressive behavior is to give your child a stable, secure home life with firm, loving discipline and full-time supervision during the toddler and preschool years.
Gender plays an important role in human aggression.
Gray likens hunter-gatherer bands to social play groups, while stressing that such play is not frivolous or even easy at all times.
Group-living animals may dispute over the direction of travel or the allocation of time to joint activities.
* Family difficulties
In a study including 62 countries school principals reported  aggressive student behavior more often the more individualist, and hence less collectivist, their country's culture.
A possible explanation for this could be that girls develop language skills more quickly than boys, therefore they have better ways of verbalizing their wants and needs.
At the same time no consistent sex differences emerged within relational aggression.
Such scholars contend that traditional definitions of aggression have no validity.
Ethologists study aggression as it relates to the interaction and evolution of animals in natural settings.
Within American culture, southern men were shown in a study on university students to be more affected and to respond more aggressively than northerners when randomly insulted after being bumped into, which was theoretically related to a traditional culture of honor in the Southern United States.
Tremblay, Japel and Pérusse (1999) asserted that physically aggressive behaviors such as kicking, biting and hitting are age-typical expressions of innate and spontaneous reactions to biological drives such as anger, hunger, and affiliation.
Aggressive behavior is an individual or collective social interaction that may be defined in general terms as a hostile behavior with the intention of inflicting damage or harm.
The generally unclear picture has been compared to equally difficult findings obtained in regard to other complex behavioral phenotypes.
Game theory is used to understand how such behaviors might spread by natural selection within a population, and potentially become 'Evolutionary Stable Strategies'.
Aggression may be displayed in order to intimidate.
They are more likely to use communication when trying to retrieve a toy with the words "Ask nicely" or "Say please."
Research on violence from a range of disciplines lend some support to a distinction between affective and predatory aggression.
Adult mice with low baseline levels of corticosterone are more likely to become dominant than are mice with high baseline corticosterone levels.
The HPA axis is related to the general fight-or-flight response or acute stress reaction, and the role of catecholamines such as epinephrine, popularly known as adrenaline.
There is some evidence to suggest that the presence of violent objects such as a gun can trigger aggression.
In adult rats, acute injections of corticosterone promote aggressive behavior and acute reduction of corticosterone decreases aggression; however, a chronic reduction of corticosterone levels can produce abnormally aggressive behavior.
Aggression may occur in response to non-social as well as social factors, and can have a close relationship with stress coping style.
The hypothesis has been subsequently expanded and modified to predict relationships between testosterone and aggression in other species.
Females will seem more desirable to their mate if they fit in with society and females that are aggressive do not usually fit well in society, they can often be viewed as antisocial.
When in conflict with males, instead of using physical means, they make up songs mocking the man, which spread across the island and humiliate him.
It always requires a suspension of aggression and dominance along with a heightened sensitivity to the needs and desires of the other players".
As such, conflicts may have created selection evolutionary pressures for psychological mechanisms in men to initiate intergroup aggression.
Most ethologists believe that aggression confers biological advantages.
Aggression between groups of animals may also confer advantage; for example, hostile behavior may force a population of animals into a new territory, where the need to adapt to a new environment may lead to an increase in genetic flexibility.
Some definitions include that the individual must intend to harm another person.
In addition, glucocorticoids affect development of aggression and establishment of social hierarchies.
This cost-benefit analysis can be looked at in terms of evolution.
Other than biological factors that contribute to aggression there are physical factors are well.
Scientists have for a long time been interested in the relationship between testosterone and aggressive behavior.
From this alternate view, although the recipient may or may not be harmed, the perceived intent is to increase the status of the aggressor, not necessarily to harm the recipient.
They were then led to believe they were delivering electric shocks to another student, as in the Milgram experiment.
When the female can leave the male to care for the offspring, then females may be the larger and more physically aggressive.
In several avian studies, circulating DHEA has been found to be elevated in birds during the non-breeding season.
For example, bonobo chimpanzee groups are known for low levels of aggression within a partially matriarchal society.
In terms of variation between individual people, more than 100 twin and adoption studies have been conducted in recent decades examining the genetic basis of aggressive behavior and related constructs such as conduct disorders.
There has been some links between those prone to violence and their alcohol use.
In studies using genetic knock-out techniques in inbred mice, male mice that lacked a functional aromatase enzyme displayed a marked reduction in aggression.
The challenge hypothesis outlines the dynamic relationship between plasma testosterone levels and aggression in mating contexts in many species.
For example, in some primate species, such as rhesus monkeys and baboons, females are more likely to engage in fights around the time of ovulation as well as right before menstruation.
;Summary points from recommendations by national associations:
Vasopressin has been implicated in male-typical social behaviors which includes aggression.
However, results in relation to primates, particularly humans, are less clear cut and are at best only suggestive of a positive association in some contexts.
Studies show girls' aggressive tactics
In such settings aggression can involve bodily contact such as biting, hitting or pushing, but most conflicts are settled by threat displays and intimidating thrusts that cause no physical harm.
This is a typical pattern of primates where several males and females live together in a group and the male faces an intermediate amount of challenges from other males compared to exclusive polygyny and monogamy but frequent sperm competition.
There are noticeable sex differences in aggression.
injury, exclusion from the group, death).
The group that expected success was more upset when no one was pledging than the group who did not expect success (everyone actually had horrible success).
Still, there is evidence that males are quicker to aggression (Frey et al.
This is because anarchy provokes fear, which in turn results in aggression, brutality, and injustice.
Alternative defenses include a range of antipredator adaptations, including alarm signals.
There was no significant difference in aggression between males and females before two years of age.
Frustration is another major cause of aggression.
Males are historically believed to be generally more physically aggressive than females from an early age, and men commit the vast majority of murders (Buss 2005).
Other cultural themes sometimes applied to the study of aggression include individualistic versus collectivist styles, which may relate, for example, to whether disputes are responded to with open competition or by accommodating and avoiding conflicts.
Aggression between males often occurs to secure mating opportunities, and results in selection of the healthier/more vigorous animal.
In many animals, aggression can be linked to pheromones released between conspecifics.
Students were found to be more aggressive and irritable after taking a test in a hot classroom (Anderson et al.
Child raising experts began to refer to aggression, rather than anger, from the 1930s.
* Young children preparing to enter kindergarten need to develop the socially important skill of being assertive.
The hormonal neuropeptides vasopressin and oxytocin play a key role in complex social behaviours in many mammals such as regulating attachment, social recognition, and aggression.
Evolutionary psychology and sociobiology have also discussed and produced theories for some specific forms of male aggression such as sociobiological theories of rape and theories regarding the Cinderella effect.
In rhesus monkeys, neonatal lesions in the amygdala or hippocampus results in reduced expression of social dominance, related to the regulation of aggression and fear.
In examining several longitudinal studies that investigated the path from disciplinary spanking to aggression in children from preschool age through adolescence, Gershoff concluded: "Spanking consistently predicted increases in children's aggression over time, regardless of how aggressive children were when the spanking occurred".
In general, sexual dimorphism can be attributed to greater intraspecific competition in one sex, either between rivals for access to mates and/or to be chosen by mates.
One study suggested that adults (i.e.
The challenge hypothesis predicts that seasonal patterns in testosterone levels in a species are a function of mating system (monogamy versus polygyny), paternal care, and male-male aggression in seasonal breeders.
Some recent scholarship has questioned traditional psychological conceptualizations of aggression as universally negative.
These brain areas control the expression of both behavioral and autonomic components of aggression in these species, including vocalization.
In test situations, most of the conspecific aggression ceases about 24 hours after the group of animals is brought together.
Pheremones have also been identified in fruit flies, detected by neurons in the antenna, that send a message to the brain eliciting aggression; it has been noted that aggression pheremones have not been identified in humans.
Gonadal steroids generally regulate aggression during the breeding season, but non-gonadal steroids may regulate aggression during the non-breeding season.
Hormones are chemicals that circulate in the body to affect cells and the nervous system, including the brain.
If a woman wanted to kill a man, she would either convince her male relatives to kill him or hire an assassin.
These depend on such things as whether the aggression is verbal or physical; whether or not it involves relational aggression such as covert bullying and social manipulation; whether harm to others is intended or not; whether it is carried out actively or expressed passively; and whether the aggression is aimed directly or indirectly.
This is one of the most robust and reliable behavioral sex differences, and it has been found across many different age groups and cultures.
An example of an alarm signal is nerol, a chemical which is found in the mandibular glands of ''Trigona fulviventris'' individuals.
In one questionnaire study of university students, in addition to men overall justifying some types of aggression more than women, United States respondents justified defensive physical aggression more readily than Japanese or Spanish respondents, whereas Japanese students preferred direct verbal aggression (but not indirect) more than their American and Spanish counterparts.
For example, a high population density, when associated with a decrease of available resources, might be a significant intervening variable for the occurrence of violent acts.
These can mitigate or repair possible adverse consequences, especially for the recipient of aggression who may become vulnerable to attacks by other members of a group.
Animal studies have also indicated a link between incidents of aggression and the individual level of circulating testosterone.
Glucocorticoids are released by the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis in response to stress, of which cortisol is the most prominent in humans.
An animal defending against a predator may engage in either "fight or flight" in response to predator attack or threat of attack, depending on its estimate of the predator's strength relative to its own.
Glucocorticoid hormones have an important role in regulating aggressive behavior.
However, it may be that proactive aggression is associated with low cortisol levels while reactive aggression may be accompanied by elevated levels.
