This city was built in the form of a Mughal military camp in stone.
The pavilions in this garden are designed so that the wind from the Yamuna, combined with the greenery, keeps them cool even during the peak of summer.
On the India City Competitiveness Index, the city ranked 26th in 2010, 32nd in 2011 and 37th in 2012
A new semi-high speed train Gatimaan Express that reduces travel time between Delhi and Agra to 100 minutes has been started from 5 April 2016.
Small in comparison to many other Mughal-era tombs, it is sometimes described as a jewel box.
In view of the objectives laid down by the court, it was renamed as '''Institute of Mental Health and Hospital''' on 8 February 2001.
Akbar built the Buland Darwāza to commemorate his victory over Gujarat.
It is located by national (Delhi-Agra) highway-2.
This festival also figures in the calendar of events of the Department of Tourism, Government of India.
Also known as Sur Sarovar, Keetham Lake is situated about  from the Akbar tomb in Agra, within the Surdas Reserved Forest.
*  The Institute of Mental Health and Hospital, formerly known as '''Agra Lunatic Asylum''', was established in September 1859 governed by the State of Uttar Pradesh.
It is amongst the oldest and '''one of the most beautiful Christian colleges''' in India.
The interiors are decorated with fine inlay work, incorporating semi-precious stones.
Babar, the founder of the Mughal dynasty, laid out the first formal Persian garden on the banks of river Yamuna.
According to the 2011 India census, Agra city has a population of 1,585,704, while the population of Agra cantonment is 53,053.
Its garden layout and use of white marble, pietra dura, inlay designs and latticework presage many elements of the Tāj Mahal.
A large number of Indian and foreign tourists coming to Agra join this festivity in the month of February.
It is a major junction of highways with 3 national highways and 1 expressway originating from Agra.
Thousands of devotees and seekers visit this holy place.
The institute was renamed as '''Mental Hospital''', Agra in 1925.
According to the National Sample Survey Organization, in 1999–2000, 431 of every 1,000 employed males were self-employed in the city, which grew to 603 per 1,000 in 2004–05.
In the South, the majority of forts were built on the seabed like the one at Bekal in Kerala.
It lies about  north of the Tāj Mahal.
Verses of the Quran are inscribed on it and at the top of the gate are twenty-two small domes, signifying the number of years the monument took to build.
The area is given a major face lift befitting the venue for the divine marriage.
His grandson Akbar raised the towering ramparts of the Great Red Fort, besides making Agra a centre for learning, arts, commerce and religion.
He ruled his Sultanate from Agra until he fell fighting to Bābar in the First battle of Panipat fought in 1526.
Ambedkar University, Agra.
The English dailies published are ''The Times of India'', ''Hindustan Times'', ''Economic Times'', ''The Pioneer'', etc.
Agra city is also known for its leather goods, the oldest and famous leather firm Taj Leather World is in Sadar bazar .
The primary access to the highway is along Mathura Road in Delhi but, if coming from South Delhi or Delhi Airport, it is easier to take Aurobindo Marg (Mehrauli Road) and then work up to NH2 via Tughlakabad.
The tomb is within the compound of the Christian Missionary Society.
He governed the country from here and Agra assumed the importance of the second capital.
There is a community Radio Station 90.4 FM.
The project site would be selected in a way so as to enable prompt clearances and approvals for the implementation without any hindrances.
The name of the place came about after the Mughal Emperor Bābar defeated Rāṇā Sāngā in a battle at a place called Sikrī (about  from Agra).
(which lies south of Agra) rebelled.
Till 1883 the institute was a government college and after that a Board of Trustees and a Committee of Management managed the college.
The fort is a typical example of Mughal architecture, effectively showing how the North Indian style of fort construction differed from that of the South.
Idgah Bus Stand, Taj Depot, Ford Depot and Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) are the major bus stands in Agra, connecting Agra to most of the bigger cities in North India.
Today 40% of the population depends largely on agriculture, and others on the leather and footwear business and iron foundries.
Notable buildings in the fort include the Pearl Mosque or ''Motī Masjid'', the Dīwān-e-'Ām and Dīwān-e-Khās (halls of public and private audience), Jahāngīr's Palace, Khās Mahal, Shīsh Mahal (mirrored palace), and the Musamman Burj.
Many people come here for morning walk, as a result this place is full especially during the summer holidays when youngsters play all sort of different games.
Following a public writ, the Supreme Court of India in the year 1994, renamed the Institution as '''Agra Mansik Arogyashala''', made it an autonomous institution and outlined the objectives to improve treatment and care of mentally ill persons including rehabilitation as well as to develop activities for professional teaching, training and research.
Many of Nūr Jahān's relatives are interred in the mausoleum.
To be developed through Public Private Partnership (PPP), in order to ensure time-bound execution of the project, the government has assured full co-operation at all levels of administration.
He died in 1517 and his son, Ibrāhīm Lodī, remained in power there for nine more years and several palaces, wells and a mosque were built by him in the fort during his period.
The urban agglomeration of Agra has a population of 1,760,285.
Bus services are run by the Agra Municipal Corporation.
The institute is the only government run institution in India established solely for research and teaching of Hindi as a foreign and second language.
Then the Mughal Emperor Akbar wanted to make Fatehpūr Sikrī his headquarters, so he built a majestic fort; due to shortage of water, however, he had to ultimately move his headquarters to Agra Fort.
This highway has junction to Aligarh and Mathura via state highways.
In 1975, it formulated a programme of undergraduate studies which received approbation from the Government of Uttar Pradesh and the University Grants Commission, as a result of which in 1981 the Ministry of Education, Government of India, conferred the status of an institution '''deemed''' to be a University on the Dayalbagh Educational Institute, to implement the new scheme.
The only asymmetrical element of the entire complex are the tombs of her father and mother, which have been set side-by-side, a formation replicated in the Taj Mahal.
After this British rule was again secured over the city until the independence of India in 1947.
After the Sultan's death the city passed on to his son Sultan Ibrāhīm Lodī.
Agra features a semiarid climate that borders on a humid subtropical climate.
It achieved fame as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1556 to 1658.
Approximately four or five years back, the birth room of Mirza Ghalib was hidden behind the wall by the Management of the college to keep the identity of the place secret.
Agra College produced the first graduate in Uttar Pradesh and the '''first Law graduate''' to Northern India.
The sex ratio in the city was 875 females per thousand males while child sex ratio stood at 857.
Later abandoned, the site displays a number of buildings of significant historical importance.
On each corner are hexagonal towers, about  tall.
It was during the advent of the Mughal era that Agra grew as a centre of Islamic education.
* Raja Balwant Singh College, Established in 1885 owes its existence to '''Raja Balwant Singh Ji''' of '''Awagarh''' who enabled the institution to grow as one of the oldest and biggest colleges of Uttar Pradesh.
It is located near the Mankameshwar Temple and is about  from the Tāj Mahal and less than  from Agra Fort.
Legend ascribes the founding of the city to Raja Badal Singh, a Sikarwar Rajput king (c. 1475), whose fort, Badalgarh, stood on or near the site of the present fort.
The college runs a study centre of Indira Gandhi National Open University (ignou), a '''central university'''.
Built in loving memory of his wife Mumtāz Mahal, the mausoleum was completed in 1653.
In the year 1823,  Agra College, one of the oldest colleges in India was formed out of a Sanskrit school established by the Scindia rulers.
is located at Agra Cantt railways station.
It was known then as Akbarabād and remained the capital of the Mughal Empire under the Emperors Akbar, Jahāngīr and Shāh Jahān.
Uttar Pradesh's first plant biotech company Harihar Biotech is located near the Taj.
The city features mild winters, hot and dry summers and a monsoon season.
It is named after the first lady Governess of Uttar Pradesh, poet and freedom fighter, '''Bharat Kokila Smt.
The Mughal Emperor Akbar built Fatehpūr Sikrī about  from  Agra, and moved his capital there.
The feasibility report submitted by Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES) has proposed 30 stations, 11 underground and 19 elevated, for two corridors of the Metro Rail in the city in the first phase.
It was being managed under the provisions of Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 till 1993.
Hinduism, Islam, and Jainism are three major religions in Agra district with 80.68%, 15.37%, and 1.04% of the population following them.
Akbar's son Jahāngīr completed construction of this pyramidal tomb in 1613.
Polluting vehicles are not allowed near the Tāj Mahal, so one needs to take electric autos or Tanga (Tonga) from a few kilometres outside the Tāj Mahal.
Notable for its Persian influenced dome of blue glazed tiles, the Chīnī kā Rauza is dedicated to the Prime Minister of Shāh Jahān, 'Allāma Afzal Khāl Mullā Shukrullāh of Shiraz.
On Ram Bagh to Tundla road near Etmadpur, there is a famed Yoga Ashram of Mahaprabhu Ramlal ji Maharaja(First Guru Gaddi), Yogeshwar Mulakhraj Ji Maharaja(Second Guru Gaddi) & Yogeshwar DeviDayal Ji Mahadev(Third GuruGaddi) blessed Swami Chandra Mohan Ji Maharaj named Shri Siddha Gufa Sawai.
it is made of red and buff sandstone, decorated by carving and black and white marble inlays.
Finished in marble, it is perhaps India's most beautiful monument.
Taj Mahal, Agra Fort and Akbar's Tomb, besides many other landmarks of the city will now have metro rail connectivity.
The Buland Darwāza is approached by 52 steps.
It is an acknowledged masterpiece of symmetry.
There are many new buildings, shopping complexes, malls, roads, flyovers and apartments coming up.
Akbar himself planned his own tomb and selected a suitable site for it.
Other newspapers that are widely read include ''Amar Ujala'', ''Aaj'', ''Hindustan'',''The Sea Express''.
John's Public Library, also known as the Agra Municipal Library, is also located here and one can find rare books on diverse topics here.
Agra is included on the Golden Triangle tourist circuit, along with Delhi and Jaipur; and the Uttar Pradesh Heritage Arc, tourist circuit of UP state, along Lucknow the capital of the state and Varanasi.
In July 2014, a trial run of a "semi-high speed train" with 10 coaches and 2 generators reached a speed of  between New Delhi and Agra.
It can be observed from Agra Fort from where Emperor Shāh Jahān gazed at it for the last eight years of his life, a prisoner of his son Aurangzeb.
Agra ranked fifth on both the financial penetration index, which measures things like the presence of ATMs and bank branches, and on the consumption index, indicating the city’s transformation into an urban town.
Shāh Jahān later shifted the capital to Delhi during his reign, but his son Aurangzeb moved the capital back to Akbarabād, usurping his father and imprisoning him in the Fort there.
It is spread over on extensive and beautiful ground of  land and is well known centre for the treatment, training and research on mental disorders in Northern India.
This perfectly symmetrical monument took 22 years (1630–1652) of labour and 20,000 workers, masons and jewellers to build and is set amidst landscaped gardens.
A World Heritage Site, it is often visited by tourists.
A stone tablet at the gate of the Fort states that it had been built before 1000 but was later renovated by Akbar.
The Kailash Fair is held in the town of Kailash, about  from Agra, in the month of August/September.
An insulted Shīvajī stormed out of the imperial audience and was confined to Jai Sing's quarters on 12 May 1666.
Since Akbarabād was one of the most important cities in India under the Mughals, it witnessed a lot of building activity.
The Tāj Mahal was built on a marble platform that stands above a sandstone one.
Shah Jahān's tomb was erected next to hers by his son Aurangzeb.
It is widespreadly considered to be the birthplace of great poet Mirza Ghalib.
Enjoying both historical and religious importance, this shrine attracts a large number of devotees and tourists.
connect Agra with all major Indian cities like New Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Visakhapatnam, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, Pune, Bhopal, Indore, Kochi, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Ujjain, Jaipur, Aligarh, Mathura, Alwar, Lucknow, Thiruvananthapuram etc.
Another national highway passes through the city bringing the total highway outlet to 6.
In compliance of the order of the Supreme Court, the UP government declared the hospital as an autonomous institution on 31 January 1995.
Akbar also built a new city on the outskirts of Akbarabād called Fatehpūr Sikrī.
An inscription on the central face of the Buland Darwāza demonstrates Akbar's religious broadmindedness, it is a message from Jesus advising his followers not to consider this world as their permanent home.
Two days later a small British force at Sucheta were defeated and forced to withdraw, this led to a mob sacking the city.
52.5% of Agra's population is in the 15–59 years age category.
However, the rebels moved onto Delhi which allowed the British to restore order by 8 July.
The garden is called the Arām Bāgh or the Garden of Relaxation.
There is also the Hindi and English mixed newspaper tabloid ''I-NEXT''.
Buland Darwāza or 'the lofty gateway' was built by the great Mughal emperor, Akbar in 1601 CE.
'''Pandit Gangadhar Shastri''', a noted Sanskrit scholar founded the college in 1823.
Around 11% of the population is under 6 years of age.
There are two private FM radio stations, 92.7 BIG FM (Reliance Broadcast Network Limited)and Radio Mantra 91.9 FM (Shri Puran Multimedia).
Agra is dominated by Yadavs and Jats.
The Mughal Heritage Walk is a  loop which connects the agricultural fields with the Rajasthani culture, river bank connected with the ancient village of Kuchhpura, the Heritage Structure of Mehtab Bagh, the Mughal aqueduct system, the Humanyun Mosque and the Gyarah Sidi.
The oldest Mughal garden in India, the Rām Bāgh was built by the Emperor Bābar in 1528 on the bank of the Yamuna.
Akbar's tomb reflects the completeness of his personality.
Being located in the old city, the temple is surrounded by markets, many of which date back to the Mughal Era.
The city that nurtured the likes of Ghalib, Tansen, Surdas, Nazeer and many more.
The original name of the gardens was Ārām Bāgh, or 'Garden of Relaxation', and this was where the Mughal emperor Bābar used to spend his leisure time and where he eventually died.
Agra Fort (sometimes called the ''Red Fort''), was commissioned by the great Mughal Emperor Akbar in 1565, and is another of Agra's World Heritage Sites.
The institute is situated at a  campus on the outskirts of Agra city.
Boasting elaborate stone carvings and eight of the twelve original towers.
Being located in the old city, the College is surrounded by markets.
The red sandstone fort was converted into a palace during Shāh Jahān's time, and reworked extensively with marble and pietra dura inlay.
The silver and gold jewellery hub is at Choube Ji Ka Fatak.
And others are 1.5%
However, the 11th century Persian poet Mas'ūd Sa'd Salmān writes of a desperate assault on the fortress of Agra, then held by the Shāhī King Jayapala, by Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni.
The Empress Nūr Jahān built I'timād-Ud-Daulah's Tomb, sometimes called the "Baby Tāj", for her father, Mirzā Ghiyās Beg, the Chief Minister of the Emperor Jahāngīr.
Agra can also refer to the administrative district that has its headquarters in Agra city.
Morphers Animation Studios LLP is an animation studio in Agra, which caters 3d visualisation services to clients.
Sikandra, the last resting place of the Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great, is on the Delhi-Agra Highway, only  from the Agra Fort.
In the 1970s a gurudwara was erected here.
It is generally accepted that Sultan Sikandar Lodī, the Ruler of the Delhi Sultanate founded Agra in the year 1504.
It also has a small lake and has vast variety of trees.
With a population of 1,686,993 (2013 est.
While passengers need to negotiate rates for the rickshaws and they are usually expensive, there is a system of (what is called) 'Tempo' which are autorickshaws that run on specific routes called out by the drivers.
Tourism contributes to the economy of Agra.
The most elegant dome of the Tāj Mahal has a diameter of , and rises to a height of ; directly under this dome is the tomb of Mumtāz Mahal.
which is the most read Hindi newspaper in India.
Agra is the birthplace of the religion known as Dīn-i Ilāhī, which flourished during the reign of Akbar and also of the Radhaswami Faith, which has around two million followers worldwide.
The historic Agra University was later rechristened as '''Dr.
*  UEI Global, consecutively ranked among the top management institutes of India by Competition Success Review for year 2013 and 2012.
Some east-bound trains from Delhi also travel via Agra, so direct connections to points in Eastern India (including Calcutta are also available.
* Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Radhasoami Satsang Sabha, started the '''Radhasoami Educational Institute''', as a co-educational Middle School, open to all, on 1 January 1917.
The galaxy included the stalwarts, Muzaffar Ali, Shobha De, Prahlad Kakker and Raghu Rai.
* St. John's College, Agra, is a college established in 1850, now part of the Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar University, earlier known as '''Agra University'''.
However the monsoons, though substantial in Agra, are not quite as heavy as the monsoon in other parts of India.
Agra district literacy rate is 62.56%.
Tempos take around 6 people simultaneously and work out to be the most economical and practical.
Delhi fell to the British in September, the following month rebels who had fled Delhi along with rebels from Central India marched on Agra but were defeated.
This is a primary factor in Agra featuring a semiarid climate as opposed to a humid subtropical climate.
The college has 12 campuses across India and provide programs in Hotel Management and Business Management.
The Shah Market area is an electronics market while Sanjay Place is the trade centre of Agra.
), it is one of the most populous cities in Uttar Pradesh and the 19th most populous in India.
The vast, beautifully carved, red-ochre sandstone tomb with deers, rabbits and langurs is set amidst a lush garden.
The Mehtāb Bāgh, or 'Moonlight Garden', is on the opposite bank of the River Yamuna from the Tāj Mahal.
In the audience he was deliberately placed behind men of lower rank.
Motilal Nehru,Actress Nimmi, Raj Babbar, Prof (Dr) Deoki Nandan
Agra has historic linkages with Shauripur of Jainism and Runukta of Hinduism, of 1000 BC.
*  Central Institute of Hindi, (also known as '''Kendriya Hindi Sansthan''') is an autonomous institute under Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India engaged in teaching Hindi as a foreign and second language.
Located on the left bank of the Yamuna river, the mausoleum is set in a large cruciform garden, criss-crossed by water courses and walkways.
Guru ka Tal was originally a reservoir meant to collect and conserve rainwater built in Agra, near Sikandra, during Jahangir's reign next to the Tomb of I'tibār Khān Khwājasara in 1610.
Other para-transit modes include rickshaws and autorickshaws.
Presently all admissions and discharges are being done under the provisions of Mental Health Act, 1987.
There are about 7,000 small scale industrial units.
It is one of the biggest annual events in North India.
* Sachdeva Institute of Technology, Also known as SIT, Mathura since 2001.
Agra is home to Asia’s largest spa called Kaya Kalp – The Royal Spa, at the Hotel Mughal in Agra.
Chhatrapati Shīvajī visited the Agra Fort, as a result of the conditions of the Treaty of Purandar entered into with Mirzā Rājā Jaisingh to meet Aurangzeb in the Dīwān-i-Khās (Special Audience Chamber).
Between 1540 and 1556, Afghans, beginning with Sher Shah Suri ruled the area.
Agra city has an average literacy rate of 73.11%, lower than the national average of 74%.
The forbidding exteriors of this fort conceal an inner paradise.
Carpet making was introduced to the city by Moghul Emperor Babur and since then this art has flourished.
The Taj Mahal is one of the most famous buildings in the world, the mausoleum of Shah Jahan's favourite wife, Mumtaz Mahal.
Paliwal Park is located in the heart of Agra, India.
It also makes available works of art and craft at reasonable prices that are not inflated by high maintenance cost.
Headquartered in Agra the institute has eight regional centres in Delhi, Hyderabad, Mysore, Shillong, Dimapur, Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Bhubneshwar.
The railways plan to introduce such trains commercially from November 2014.
British people introduced the western concept of education in Agra.
Literacy rate of males is considerably higher than that of women.
His body was kept here for some time before sending it to Kabul.
Queen Victori's bronze statue's are also exposed in this Museum.
Tāj Mahal, Agra Fort and Fatehpur Sikri are all UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
It is spread over an area of around .
The area of the mausoleum itself is about , and is built on a base that is about  and about  high.
Completed in 1653, the Tāj Mahal was built by the Mughal king Shah Jahan as the final resting place for his beloved wife, Mumtāz Mahal.
Agra is commonly identified as the "City of Taj".
Taj Literature Festival saw stars of the literary world manifest themselves on the earth of Agra.
Four of the ten Sikh Gurus are said to have paid it a visit.
Apart from running residential Hindi language courses for foreign students, the institute also conducts regular training programmes for teachers of Hindi belonging to non-Hindi states of India.
