In temperate environments, where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system.
Some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to iron deficiencies in some crops, which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern, with potential economic and health implications.
Livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless.
Rice was domesticated in China between 13,500 and 8,200 years ago, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans.
In some cases, wild species are the primary source of resistance traits; some tomato cultivars that have gained resistance to at least 19 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes.
Disease and land degradation are two of the major concerns in agriculture today.
Climate change has the potential to affect agriculture through changes in temperature, rainfall (timing and quantity), CO2, solar radiation and the interaction of these elements.
There are several factors within the field of agriculture that contribute to the large amount of CO2 emissions.
These shipments are made using fossil fuel burning modes of transportation.
Increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas, meaning that water scarcity is increasing and agriculture is facing the challenge of producing more food for the world's growing population with reduced water resources.
Modern agriculture's heavy reliance on petrochemicals and mechanization has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output, causing food shortages.
It estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs.
Agriculture, as implemented through the method of farming, imposes external costs upon society through pesticides, nutrient runoff, excessive water usage, loss of natural environment and assorted other problems.
Between the 1960–65 measuring cycle and the cycle from 1986 to 1990, the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the globe, with world grain production increasing significantly (between 70% and 390% for wheat and 60% to 150% for rice, depending on geographic area) as world population doubled.
In 2009, the agricultural output of China was the largest in the world, followed by the European Union, India and the United States, according to the International Monetary Fund (''see below'').
New technologies have given rise to innovations like conservation tillage, a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion, water pollution and enhances carbon sequestration.
To practice agriculture means to use natural resources to "produce commodities which maintain life, including food, fiber, forest products, horticultural crops, and their related services."
Livestock expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation; in the Amazon basin 70% of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feedcrops.
Although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent, major trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history, ranging from tenant farmers and sharecropping in the post-American Civil War Southern United States to the European feudal system of manorialism.
Some believe that similar or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through traditional breeding practices, and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild species.
The majority of crops are shipped hundreds of miles to various processing plants before ending up in the grocery store.
Some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall.
As an industry in which families commonly share in work and live on the farm itself, entire families can be at risk for injuries, illness, and death.
In subtropical and arid environments, the timing and extent of agriculture may be limited by rainfall, either not allowing multiple annual crops in a year, or requiring irrigation.
A distinction is sometimes made between forestry and agriculture, based on the former's longer management rotations, extensive versus intensive management practices and development mainly by nature, rather than by man.
It produces 65% of human-related nitrous oxide (which has 296 times the global warming potential of CO2,) and 37% of all human-induced methane (which is 23 times as warming as CO2.)
Local farming suffered a decline over the past century due to large amounts of farm subsidies.
In the event of a petroleum shortage (see peak oil for global concerns), organic agriculture can be more attractive than conventional practices that use petroleum-based pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.
South American average wheat yields are around 2 t/ha, African under 1 t/ha, and Egypt and Arabia up to 3.5 to 4 t/ha with irrigation.
Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa.
Agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products.
On a larger scale the agrarian structure is more dependent on the regional, social, cultural and historical factors than on the state’s undertaken activities.
This definition includes arable farming or agronomy, and horticulture, all terms for the growing of plants, animal husbandry and forestry.
A 2000 assessment of agriculture in the UK determined total external costs for 1996 of £2,343 million, or £208 per hectare.
Integrated pest management attempts to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss, and recommends pesticides as a last resort.
Changes in management can reduce the release of these greenhouse gases, and soil can further be used to sequester some of the CO2 in the atmosphere.
For example, policies, practices and tools promoting climate-smart agriculture will be important, as will better use of scientific information on climate for assessing risks and vulnerability.
, 30% of Earth's ice- and water-free area was used for producing livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.3 billion people.
, the International Labour Organization states that approximately one billion people, or over 1/3 of the available work force, are employed in the global agricultural sector.
The tractor is going to burn fuel and release CO2 just to run.
The possibility of success of these programs is questioned by ecologists and economists concerned with unsustainable GMO practices such as terminator seeds.
By the 19th century in Europe, this had dropped to between 35 and 65 percent.
According to a 2010 report published by The Royal Society, agriculture is increasingly dependent on the direct and indirect input of fossil fuels.
The history of agriculture dates back thousands of years, and its development has been driven and defined by greatly different climates, cultures, and technologies.
Productivity on the farm itself and the use of machinery is another source of the carbon emission.
The energy used to manufacture farm machinery is also a form of indirect agricultural energy consumption.
Domestication of plants has, over the centuries increased yield, improved disease resistance and drought tolerance, eased harvest and improved the taste and nutritional value of crop plants.
Other GMO crops used by growers include insect-resistant crops, which have a gene from the soil bacterium ''Bacillus thuringiensis'' (Bt), which produces a toxin specific to insects.
Agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making, in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions.
In the United States, and elsewhere, food costs attributed to food processing, distribution, and agricultural marketing, sometimes referred to as the value chain, have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined.
In addition, incidences of death, injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported.
Genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to utilize in creating desired germlines for new crops.
It is intensively practiced in Monsoon Asia and South-East Asia.
Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 9,000 years ago.
Nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, green manure, compost and mined minerals.
Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago.
Planners and policy-makers will need to help create suitable policies that encourage funding for such agricultural transformation.
According to a report by the International Water Management Institute and UNEP, there is not enough water to continue farming using current practices; therefore how critical water, land, and ecosystem resources are used to boost crop yields must be reconsidered.
Fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax.
Synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure utilization becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution.
As of December 2007, 37 countries faced food crises, and 20 had imposed some sort of food-price controls.
These crops protect plants from damage by insects.
Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and Pakistan some 10,500 years ago.
Overall, the fuels used in agriculture vary based on several factors, including crop, production system and location.
Political action groups, including those interested in environmental issues and labor unions, also provide influence, as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities.
It also generates 64% of the ammonia emission.
In intensive farming, the crops are cultivated for commercial purpose i.e., for selling.
Agricultural food production and water management are increasingly becoming global issues that are fostering debate on a number of fronts.
Based on the experience of countries in the Nile river basin (Ethiopia, Kenya and Sudan) and other developing countries, depletion of water resources during seasons crucial for agriculture can lead to a decline in yield by up to 50%.
The amount of emissions from the machinery increase with the attachment of different units and need for more power.
These types of machinery all require additional energy which leads to increased carbon dioxide emissions from the basic tractors.
On industrialized farms, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers.
Agriculture, specifically farming, remains a hazardous industry, and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries, lung disease, noise-induced hearing loss, skin diseases, as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure.
In contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as France is over 8 t/ha.
Pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.5million short tons annually worldwide, yet crop loss from pests has remained relatively constant.
Furthermore, the UNEP states that "methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 per cent by 2030 under current practices and consumption patterns."
Further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage.
Crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period.
Governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets.
Together, direct and indirect consumption by US farms accounts for about 2% of the nation's energy use.
Pesticides select for pesticide resistance in the pest population, leading to a condition termed the "pesticide treadmill" in which pest resistance warrants the development of a new pesticide.
During the 16th century in Europe, for example, between 55 and 75 percent of the population was engaged in agriculture, depending on the country.
During growth watering pumps and sprayers are used to keep the crops hydrated.
Mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric (one stomach; mainly chickens and pigs) livestock.
For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the USA have increased from around 2.5 tons per hectare (t/ha) (40 bushels per acre) in 1900 to about 9.4 t/ha (150 bushels per acre) in 2001.
In some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed, causing farmers to switch to other herbicides.
When the soil becomes less fertile, the area is then abandoned.
Because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers.
Unprocessed commodities (i.e.
In the Middle Ages, both in the Islamic world and in Europe, agriculture was transformed with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants, including the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and fruit trees such as the orange to Europe by way of Al-Andalus.
Combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1800s, and grew significantly through the 20th century.
Almost all the industrial machines used in modern farming are powered by fossil fuels.
His work on dominant and recessive alleles, although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques.
Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated in Eurasia at an unknown time.
Between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, several international agreements were put into place that limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions.
Tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till.
It is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in CO2 equivalents.
Approximately 8% of the national carbon footprint is due to agricultural sources.
Crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits, self-pollination and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism.
The main motive of the farmer is to make profit, with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs.
"Payment for ecosystem services (PES) can further incentivise efforts to green the agriculture sector.
Herbicide-resistant seed has a gene implanted into its genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosates.
Further, wet or anaerobic soils also lose nitrogen through denitrification, releasing the greenhouse gases nitric oxide and nitrous oxide.
Shifting cultivation (or slash and burn) is a system in which forests are burnt, releasing nutrients to support cultivation of annual and then perennial crops for a period of several years.
Agriculture defined the limits on how large and for how long an army could be mobilized.
Global cattle, sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2050.
Extreme events, such as droughts and floods, are forecast to increase as climate change takes hold.
In recent years there has been a backlash against the external environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic and sustainable agriculture movements.
A senior UN official and co-author of a UN report detailing this problem, Henning Steinfeld, said "Livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today's most serious environmental problems".
Increased durability, nutritional content, insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering.
The growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management and selective breeding.
'''Agriculture''' is the cultivation of animals, plants and fungi for food, fiber, biofuel, medicinal plants and other products used to sustain and enhance human life.
Factories producing insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, and fertilizers are a major culprit of the greenhouse gas.
In the past century,  agriculture has been characterized by increased productivity, the substitution of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, water pollution, and farm subsidies.
Crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years, since the beginning of civilization.
In traditional farming, the two are often combined even on small landholdings, leading to the term agroforestry.
For example, proposals in 2010 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health, and environmental regulations, such as the number of animals an area of land can support without long-term damage, were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure.
Cattle and rice farms release methane, fertilized fields release nitrous oxide, and the cutting down of rainforests to grow crops or raise livestock releases carbon dioxide.
primitive genetic engineering) during the 1950s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as wheat, corn (maize) and barley.
Other useful materials are also produced by plants, such as resins, dyes, drugs, perfumes, biofuels and ornamental products such as cut flowers and nursery plants.
The final major contribution to CO2 emissions in agriculture is in the final transport of produce.
Agrarian structure is a long-term structure in the Braudelian understanding of the concept.
Some studies using modern organic-farming methods have reported yields equal to or higher than those available from conventional farming.
Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Chinese, and Inca Emperors themselves plowed ceremonial fields in order to show personal example to everyone.
While there has been some research on sustainability using GMO crops, at least one prominent multi-year attempt by Monsanto Company has been unsuccessful, though during the same period traditional breeding techniques yielded a more sustainable variety of the same crop.
These instruments are burning fossil fuels from the beginning of the process to the end.
Aquaculture or fish farming, the production of fish for human consumption in confined operations, is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production, growing at an average of 9% a year between 1975 and 2007.
With increased livestock operations, the farmers are able to produce meat, milk and other dairy products and they use the manure as organic fertiliser that returns nutrients to the fields."
Approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded.
In shifting cultivation, a small area of a forest is cleared by cutting down all the trees and the area is burned.
In nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture, fodder, and water.
Land transformation, the use of land to yield goods and services, is the most substantial way humans alter the Earth's ecosystems, and is considered the driving force in the loss of biodiversity.
By comparison, all transportation emits 13.5% of the CO2.
The International Labour Organization considers agriculture "one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors."
In Africa, if current trends of soil degradation continue, the continent might be able to feed just 25% of its population by 2025, according to United Nations University's Ghana-based Institute for Natural Resources in Africa.
Indirect consumption is mainly oil and natural gas used to manufacture fertilizers and pesticides, which accounted for 0.6 exajoules (0.6 quadrillion BTU) in 2002.
Both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs.
Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides.
Sorghum was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 7,000 years ago.
Informed by the UNEP, "agriculture also produces about 58 per cent of global nitrous oxide emissions and about 47 per cent of global methane emissions.
"Innovative PES measures could include reforestation payments made by cities to upstream communities in rural areas of shared watersheds for improved quantities and quality of fresh water for municipal users.
The UNEP introduces the Push–pull agricultural pest management technique which involves intercropping that uses plant aromas to repel or push away pests while pulling in or attracting the right insects.
Chemical (pesticides), biological (biocontrol), mechanical (tillage), and cultural practices are used.
For some, GMO crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns.
Landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm, representing the de-linking of crop and livestock production found more prevalently in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development(OECD) member countries.
There is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from GMOs, and while the EU currently requires all GMO foods to be labeled, the US does not.
This includes GHGs emitted by the use of inorganic fertilisers agro-chemical pesticides and herbicides; (GHG emissions resulting from production of these inputs are included in industrial emissions); and fossil fuel-energy inputs.
A 2005 analysis of these costs in the USA concluded that cropland imposes approximately $5 to 16 billion ($30 to $96 per hectare), while livestock production imposes $714 million.
"On average we find that the total amount of fresh residues from agricultural and forestry production for second- generation biofuel production amounts to 3.8 billion tonnes per year between 2011 and 2050 (with an average annual growth rate of 11 per cent throughout the period analysed, accounting for higher growth during early years, 48 per cent for 2011–2020 and an average 2 per cent annual expansion after 2020)."
Agriculture(direct & indirect)
The quality affects the price the producer receives.
Modern or industrialized agriculture is dependent on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways: 1. direct consumption on the farm and 2. indirect consumption to manufacture inputs used on the farm.
This trend has led to a significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds, leading to a corresponding decrease in disease resistance and local adaptations previously found among traditional breeds.
more productive farmland, or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights.
Agriculture in its many forms can both mitigate or worsen global warming.
Significant degradation of land and water resources, including the depletion of aquifers, has been observed in recent decades, and the effects of global warming on agriculture and of agriculture on global warming are still not fully understood.
Altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans, for example, larger fruits or seeds, drought-tolerance, or resistance to pests.
Agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems, including the destruction of natural wetlands, the spread of water-borne diseases, and land degradation through salinization and waterlogging, when irrigation is performed incorrectly.
The International Fund for Agricultural Development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and overall food security.
The study of agriculture is known as agricultural science.
Careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants.
Inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed, such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich, the clearing of land to make way for
Ancient Egyptians, whose agriculture depended exclusively on the Nile, deified the river, worshipped, and exalted it in a great hymn.
This is an approach that verifies values and rewards the benefits of ecosystem services provided by green agricultural practices."
In all of these environments perennial crops are grown (coffee, chocolate) and systems are practiced such as agroforestry.
Ecoservice payments by farmers to upstream forest stewards for properly managing the flow of soil nutrients, and methods to monetise the carbon sequestration and emission reduction credit benefits of green agriculture practices in order to compensate farmers for their efforts to restore and build SOM and employ other practices."
In the aftermath of the fall of the Soviet Union, with shortages of conventional petroleum-based inputs, Cuba made use of mostly organic practices, including biopesticides, plant-based pesticides and sustainable cropping practices, to feed its populace.
The organization has developed the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001, which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation, the prevention of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture should play.
China utilizes mostly coal in the production of nitrogen fertilizer, while most of Europe uses large amounts of natural gas and small amounts of coal.
The report suggested assigning value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests.
The number of people employed in agriculture varies widely on a per-country basis, ranging from less than 2% in countries like the US and Canada to over 80% in many African nations.
Cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and resistance.
The natural gas and coal consumed by the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of the agricultural energy usage.
This is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition (e.g.
The World Health Organization estimated in 1992 that 3million pesticide poisonings occur annually, causing 220,000 deaths.
Civilization was the product of the Agricultural Neolithic Revolution.
There are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy, including consumers, agribusiness, trade lobbies and other groups.
According to a report by the International Food Policy Research Institute, agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other; using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, food security and trade by 2050, the International Food Policy Research Institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40% and food prices could be reduced by almost half.
This requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs.
Agriculture was the key development in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated species created food surpluses that nurtured the development of civilization.
Genetically modified organisms are an increasing component of agriculture, although they are banned in several countries.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global agricultural regulations and agreements.
Economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture and by this measure agriculture in the United States is roughly 1.7 times more productive than it was in 1948.
Common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning, machinery and motor vehicle-related accidents.
Eutrophication, excessive nutrients in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal blooms and anoxia, leads to fish kills, loss of biodiversity, and renders water unfit for drinking and other industrial uses.
Wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago.
Dr. Samuel Jutzi, director of FAO's animal production and health division, states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that would improve human health and the environment.
Market concentration has increased in the sector as well, and although the total effect of the increased market concentration is likely increased efficiency, the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers (farmers) and consumers, and may have negative implications for rural communities.
As the synfuel would be used on-site, the process would be more efficient and might just provide enough fuel for a new organic-agriculture fusion.
It may improve productivity by warming the soil, incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds, but also renders soil more prone to erosion, triggers the decomposition of organic matter releasing CO2, and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms.
The Chinese imperial court issued numerous edicts, stating: "Agriculture is the foundation of this Empire."
Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food.
In the course of history, civilization coincided in space with fertile areas such as The Fertile Crescent, and states formed mainly in circumscribed agricultural lands.
The Haber-Bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields.
As the Neolithic Agricultural Revolution produced civilization, the modern Agricultural Revolution, begun in Britain (British Agricultural Revolution), made possible the Industrial civilization.
In the same countries today, the figure is less than 10%.
Even then, it is acknowledged that there is a large amount of knowledge transfer and overlap between silviculture (the management of forests) and agriculture.
Extensive X-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts (i.e.
Pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, mites, and diseases.
At least 11 separate regions of the Old and New World were involved as independent centers of origin.
