However, enthusiasm soon waned after gardeners became familiar with its suckering habits and its foul smelling odour.
The sepals are cup-shaped, lobed and united while the petals are valvate (i.e.
The tree was the only one he left in the yard, and the staff would eat lunch with Noguchi under it.
There are extant records from the 1750s of disputes over the proper name between Philip Miller and John Ellis, curator of Webb's garden in Busbridge.
''tanakai'', which is endemic to northern Taiwan highlands.
Furthermore, high concentrations of mercury have been found built up in tissues of the plant.
Ailanthus is among the most pollution-tolerant of tree species, including sulfur dioxide, which it absorbs in its leaves.
The tree prefers moist and loamy soils, but is adaptable to a very wide range of soil conditions and pH values.
On the west coast it is found from New Mexico west to California and north to Washington.
On the other hand, a study in an old-growth hemlock-hardwood forest in New York found that Ailanthus was capable of competing successfully with native trees in canopy gaps where only 2 to 15% of full sun was available.
The individual flowers are yellowish green to reddish in colour, each with five petals and sepals.
The seeds borne on the female trees are 5&nbsp;mm in diameter and each is encapsulated in a samara that is  long and  broad, appearing July though August, but can persist on the tree until the next spring.
Unlike other members of the genus ''Ailanthus'', it is found in temperate climates rather than the tropics.
It is considered a noxious weed in Australia, the United States, New Zealand and many countries of central, eastern and southern Europe.
A few cultivars exist, but they are not often sold outside of China and probably not at all in North America:
Shade considerably hampers growth rates.
He published an article with an illustrated description and gave it the name ''Ailanthus glandulosa'', placing it in the same genus as the tropical species then known as ''A.
Their styles are united and slender with star-shaped stigmas.
The specific ''glandulosa'', referring to the glands on the leaves, persisted until as late as 1957, but it was ultimately made invalid as a later homonym at the species level.
glandulosa'' is sometimes used as an herbal remedy for various ailments including cancer.
It spreads aggressively both by seeds and vegetatively by root sprouts, re-sprouting rapidly after being cut.
In certain parts of the United States, the species has been nicknamed the "ghetto palm" because of its propensity for growing in the inhospitable conditions of urban areas, or on abandoned and poorly maintained properties.
The plant is sometimes incorrectly cited with the specific epithet in the masculine (''glandulosus'' or ''altissimus''), which is incorrect since botanical, like Classical Latin, treats most tree names as feminine.
In many urban areas, it has acquired the derisive nicknames of "ghetto palm", "stink tree", and "tree of Hell".
Older trees, while growing much slower, still do so faster than other trees.
The tree's rings were counted, revealing its age to be 75, and museum officials hoped it would regenerate from a sucker.
Each work favoured a different character, however, and there is still some debate in the Chinese botanical community as to which character should be used.
In addition to the tree of heaven's various uses, it has also been a part of Chinese culture for many centuries and has more recently attained a similar status in the west.
Yet another recipe recorded by Li uses the leaves to treat baldness.
Along highways it often forms dense thickets in which few other tree species are present, largely due to the toxins it produces to prevent competition.
Its production is particularly well known in the Yantai region of that province.
The roots, leaves and bark are still used today in traditional Chinese medicine, primarily as an astringent.
Zhejiang Province in eastern China is most famous for producing these steamers.
''Altissima'' is Latin for "tallest", and refers to the sizes the tree can reach.
integrifolia'' (white siris, now ''A.
*'''‘Hongye’''' – The name is Chinese and means "red leaves".
The branches are light to dark gray in colour, smooth, lustrous, and containing raised lenticels that become fissures with age.
'''''Ailanthus altissima''''' , commonly known as '''tree of heaven''', '''ailanthus''', or in Standard Chinese as '''''chouchun''''' (), is a deciduous tree in the Simaroubaceae family.
A combination of several of these can be most effective, though they must of course be compatible.
In western North America it is most common in mountainous areas around old dwellings and abandoned mining operations.
It has escaped cultivation in all areas where it was introduced, but most extensively in the United States.
The tree had been spared by the sculptor Isamu Noguchi when in 1975 he bought the building which would become the museum and cleaned up its back lot.
The samara is large and twisted at the tips, making it spin as it falls, assisting wind dispersal, and aiding buoyancy for long-distance dispersal through hydrochory.
In the U.S. it is found in arid regions bordering the Great Plains, very wet regions in the southern Appalachians, cold areas of the lower Rocky Mountains and throughout much of the California Central Valley.
Confusion in naming began when the tree was described by all three men with three different names.
Modern works treat it in detail, discussing chemical constituents, how to identify the product and its pharmaceutical uses.
The petioles are  long.
At that time as well as now, ailanthus was common in neglected urban areas.
The buds are finely pubescent, dome shaped, and partially hidden behind the petiole, though they are completely visible in the dormant season at the sinuses of the leaf scars.
The moth has also been introduced in the United States.
A tincture of the root-bark has been used successfully in treating cardiac palpitation, asthma and epilepsy.
The bark is said to have cooling and astringent properties and is primarily used to treat dysentery, intestinal hemorrhage, menorrhagia and spermatorrhea.
Prolonged cold and snow cover cause dieback, though the trees re-sprout from the roots.
In 1751, Jussieu planted a few seeds in France and sent others on to Philip Miller, the superintendent at the Chelsea Physic Garden, and to Philip C. Webb, the owner of an exotic plant garden in Busbridge, England.
Due to the tree of heaven's weedy habit, landowners and other organisations often resort to various methods of control in order to keep its populations in check.
Den dey ghy stroy de bes ba'yton singer in nawth Mississippi!
It is prepared by felling the tree in fall or spring, stripping the bark and then scraping off the hardest, outermost portion, which is then sun-dried, soaked in water, partially re-dried in a basket and finally cut into strips.
In China, the tree of heaven has a long and rich history.
The tree was separately brought to California in the 1890s by Chinese immigrants who came during the California Gold Rush.
small marks where the veins of the leaf once connected to the tree) around the edges.
The wood is also used to make charcoal for culinary purposes.
It has naturalised across much of Europe, including Germany, Austria, Switzerland, the Czech Republic, the Pannonian region (i.e.
The tree grows rapidly and is capable of reaching heights of  in 25&nbsp;years.
For example, one study in Germany found the tree of heaven growing in 92% of densely populated areas of Berlin, 25% of its suburbs and only 3% of areas outside the city altogether.
Michael Dirr, a noted American horticulturalist and professor at the University of Georgia, reported meeting, in 1982, a grower who could not find any buyers.
The 1943 book ''A Tree Grows in Brooklyn'' by Betty Smith uses the tree of heaven as its central metaphor, using it as an analogy for the ability to thrive in a difficult environment.
Tree of heaven is a popular ornamental tree in China and valued for its tolerance of difficult growing conditions.
The rachis is light to reddish-green with a swollen base.
In northern Europe the tree of heaven was not considered naturalised in cities until after the Second World War.
It has colonised natural areas in Hungary, for example, and is considered a threat to biodiversity at that country's Aggtelek National Park.
The museum hired the Detroit Tree of Heaven Woodshop, an artists' collective, to use the wood to create benches, sculptures and other amenities in and around the building.
altissima'' is one of the last trees to come out of dormancy, and as such its leaves coming out would indicate that winter was truly over.
One study showed that a crude extract of the root bark inhibited 50% of a sample of garden cress (''Lepidium sativum'') seeds from germinating.
The flowers are small and appear in large panicles up to  in length at the end of new shoots.
It was mentioned in the oldest extant Chinese dictionary and listed in countless Chinese medical texts for its purported ability to cure ailments ranging from mental illness to baldness.
The tree of heaven is a very rapidly growing tree, possibly the fastest growing tree in North America.
Furthermore, the male plants emit a foul-smelling odour while flowering to attract pollinating insects.
It is possible that the tree is native to these areas, but it is generally agreed that the tree was a very early introduction.
It is frequently found in areas where few trees can survive.
It is drought-hardy, but not tolerant of flooding.
Within the oldest extant Chinese dictionary, the Erya, written in the 3rd century BC, the tree of heaven is mentioned second among a list of trees.
Techniques have been developed for drying the wood so as to prevent this cracking, allowing it to be commercially harvested.
There are problems with using the wood as lumber, however.
The fruits grow in clusters; a fruit cluster may contain hundreds of seeds.
The leaflets' upper sides are dark green in colour with light green veins, while the undersides are a more whitish green.
The lobed bases and glands distinguish it from similar sumac species.
He decided to transfer Miller's older specific name into the genus of Desfontaines, resulting in the accepted name ''Ailanthus altissima''.
Li's Compendium has 18 recipes that call for the bark.
The same study tested the extract as an herbicide on garden cress, redroot pigweed (''Amaranthus retroflexus''), velvetleaf (''Abutilon theophrasti''), yellow bristlegrass (''Setaria pumila''), barnyard grass (''Echinochloa crusgalli''), pea (''Pisum sativum'' cv.
Within China itself it has also been naturalised beyond its native range in areas such as Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang.
In London the specimens were named by Miller as ''Toxicodendron altissima'' and in Busbridge it was dubbed in the old classification system as ''Rhus Sinese foliis alatis''.
It was one of the first trees brought west during a time when ''chinoiserie'' was dominating European arts, and was initially hailed as a beautiful garden specimen.
In Taiwan it is present as var.
It was clinically shown to be able to treat trichomoniasis, a vaginal infection caused by the protozoan ''Trichomonas vaginalis''.
The tree of heaven is found within a wide range of climatic conditions.
The male flowers are similar in appearance, but they of course lack a pistil and the stamens do function, each being topped with a globular anther and a glandular green disc.
This manifests itself occasionally when expressing best wishes to a friend's father and mother in a letter, where one can write "wishing your ailanthus and daylily are strong and happy", with ailanthus metaphorically referring to the father and daylily to the mother.
altissima'' has some application in Chinese traditional medicine.
It can be very difficult to eradicate, however.
It is available in most shops dealing in Chinese traditional medicine.
Rather than the issue being resolved, more names soon appeared for the plant: Jakob Friedrich Ehrhart observed a specimen in Utrecht in 1782 and named it ''Rhus cacodendron''.
The drought-tolerance of the tree is strong due to its ability to effectively store water in its root system.
Although the live tree tends to have very flexible wood, the wood is quite hard once properly dried.
Despite this, it was used extensively as a street tree during much of the 19th century.
It is only prescribed in amounts between 4 and 10&nbsp;grams, so as not to poison the patients.
People living near the lower Yellow River know it by the name ''chunshu'' (), meaning "spring tree".
In one trial a tincture from the blossom and foliage caused nausea, vomiting and muscular relaxation.
It differs from the type in having yellowish bark, odd-pinnate leaves that are also shorter on average at  long with only 13–25 scythe-like leaflets.
As the name implies it has attractive vivid red foliage
The roots are also aggressive enough to cause damage to subterranean sewers and pipes.
It is native to both northeast and central China, as well as Taiwan.
It can withstand cement dust and fumes from coal tar operations, as well as resist ozone exposure relatively well.
This has been attributed to the tree's ability to colonise areas of rubble of destroyed buildings where most other plants would not grow.
The pistil is made up of five free carpels (i.e.
It is a short lived tree in any location and rarely lives more than 50 years.
When they emerge in the spring, the leaves are bronze then quickly turn from medium to dark green as they grow.
In Montenegro and Albania ''A.
*'''‘Erythrocarpa’''' – The fruits are a striking red
However, the species is also short lived and rarely lives more than 50&nbsp;years, though its remarkable suckering ability makes it possible for this tree to clone itself indefinitely and live considerably longer  (since they are linked to the mother tree and thus partly fed by it, the suckers are less vulnerable than the seedlings and can grow faster).
altissima'' is associated with at least 32 species of arthropods and 13 species of fungi.
The problem of odor was previously avoided by only selling pistillate plants since only males produce the smell, but a higher seed production also results.
a scar left on the twig after a leaf falls) with many bundle scars (i.e.
Because the trees exhibit rapid growth for the first few years, the trunk has uneven texture between the inner and outer wood, which can cause the wood to twist or crack during drying.
In China it is native to every province except Gansu, Heilongjiang, Hainan, Jilin, Ningxia, Qinghai, Xinjiang, and Tibet.
The name stems from the fact that ''A.
The earliest introductions of ''A.
It involves the application of foliar or basal herbicides in order to kill existing trees, while either hand pulling or mowing seedlings in order to prevent new growth.
southeastern Central Europe around the Danube river basin from Austria, Slovakia and Hungary south to the Balkan ranges) and most countries of the Mediterranean Basin.
The bark is smooth and light grey, often becoming somewhat rougher with light tan fissures as the tree ages.
In Chinese literature, ailanthus is often used for two rather extreme metaphors, with a mature tree representing a father and a stump being a spoiled child.
The current species name comes from Walter T. Swingle who was employed by the United States Department of Plant Industry.
Nearly every part of ''A.
In its native range it is found at high altitudes in Taiwan as well as lower ones in mainland China.
''sutchuenensis'', which differs in having red branchlets.
It was mentioned again in a materia medica compiled during the Tang dynasty in 656 AD.
''Ailanthus altissima'' has potent anti-anaphylactic and anti-inflammatory properties.
The samaras are also used in modern Chinese medicine under the name ''feng yan cao'' (), meaning "herbal phoenix eye".
For example, the city of Basel in Switzerland has an eradication program for the tree.
In Germany the tree is commonly planted in gardens.
The tree is associated with the black prisoner's despair in the face of his impending execution and the spirituals that he sings in chorus with other black people who keep a sort of vigil in the street below:...they sang spirituals while white people slowed and stopped in the leafed darkness that was almost summer, to listen to those who were sure to die and him who was already dead singing about heaven and being tired; or perhaps in the interval between songs a rich, sourceless voice coming out of the high darkness where the ragged shadow of the heaven-tree which snooded the street lamp at the corner fretted and mourned: "Fo days mo!
The tree has been grown extensively both in China and abroad as a host plant for the ailanthus silkmoth, a moth involved in silk production.
In addition to its use as an ornamental plant, the tree of heaven is also used for its wood, medicinal properties, and as a host plant to feed silkworms of the moth ''Samia cynthia'', which produces silk that is stronger and cheaper than mulberry silk, although with inferior gloss and texture.
altissima'' to countries outside of its native range were to the southern areas of Korea as well as to Japan.
Several species of Lepidoptera utilise the leaves of ailanthus as food, including the Indian moon moth (''Actias selene'') and the common grass yellow (''Eurema hecabe'').
They range in size from  in length and contain 10–41 leaflets organised in pairs, with the largest leaves found on vigorous young sprouts.
It is considered a shade-intolerant tree and cannot compete in low-light situations, though it is sometimes found competing with hardwoods, but such competition rather indicates it was present at the time the stand was established.
This derives from the literature of Zhuangzi, a Taoist philosopher, who referred to a tree that had developed from a sprout at the stump and was thus unsuitable for carpentry due to its irregular shape.
In China it is often found in limestone-rich areas.
The current name, ''chouchun'' (), means "stinking spring", and is a relatively new appellation.
Another source from 684 AD, during the Tang dynasty and recorded in Li Shizhen's ''Compendium of Materia Medica'', states that when the leaves are taken internally, they make one incoherent and sleepy, while when used externally they can be effectively used to treat boils, abscesses and itches.
The leaflets are ovate-lanceolate with entire margins, somewhat asymmetric and occasionally not directly opposite to each other.
In the east of its range it grows most extensively in disturbed areas of cities, where it was long ago present as a planted street tree.
It also grows along roads and railways.
It is flexible and well suited to the manufacture of kitchen steamers, which are important in Chinese cuisine for cooking mantou, pastries and rice.
All parts of the plant have a distinguishing strong odour that is often likened to peanuts, cashews, or rotting cashews.
The tree was first brought from China to Europe in the 1740s and to the United States in 1784.
In the West, an extract of the bark sold under the synonym ''A.
The inhibitors are strongest in the bark and roots, but are also present in the leaves, wood and seeds of the plant.
In its native range ''A.
They have lenticels as well as heart-shaped leaf scars (i.e.
altissima'' is dioecious, with male and female flowers being borne on different individuals.
Seeds produced from exposed plants have also been shown to be more resistant than their unexposed counterparts.
Ailanthus is an opportunistic plant that thrives in full sun and disturbed areas.
Sugar Snap) and maize (''Zea mays'' cv.
They have a long tapering end while the bases have two to four teeth, each containing one or more glands at the tip.
altissima'' is a medium-sized tree that reaches heights between  with a diameter at breast height of about .
It sometimes enters undisturbed areas as well and competes with native plants.
They are used as a hemostatic agent, spermatorrhea and for treating patients with blood in their feces or urine.
It is also unable to take dye.
In 1784, not long after Jussieu had sent seeds to England, some were forwarded to the United States by William Hamilton, a gardener in Philadelphia.
altissima'' is present from Massachusetts in the east, west to southern Ontario, southwest to Iowa, south to Texas, and east to the north of Florida.
In North America the tree is the host plant for the ailanthus webworm (''Atteva aurea''), though this ermine moth is native to Central and South America and originally used other members of the mostly tropical Simaroubaceae as its hosts.
In other areas of Europe this is not the case as climates are mild enough for the tree to flourish.
It becomes rare in the north, occurring only infrequently in southern Scotland.
After sitting for a day the liquid was strained out and given to the patient over the course of several days.
In North America, ''A.
The first scientific descriptions of the tree of heaven were made shortly after it was introduced to Europe by the French Jesuit Pierre Nicholas d'Incarville.
It contains a quinone irritant, 2,6-dimethoxybenzoquinone, as well as active quassinoids (ailanthone itself being one) which may account for these effects, but they have, however, proved difficult or impossible to reproduce in humans and goats.
This formula calls for young leaves of ailanthus, catalpa and peach tree to be crushed together and the resulting liquid applied to the scalp to stimulate hair growth.
Similarly, another study conducted in southwestern Virginia determined that the tree of heaven is thriving along approximately 30% of the state's interstate highway system length or mileage.
altissima'' has a defence mechanism to prevent autotoxicity.
One of the oldest recipes, recorded in a work from 732 AD, is used for treating mental illness.
In the United Kingdom it is especially common in London squares, streets, and parks, though it is also frequently found in gardens of southern England and East Anglia.
altissima'' is native to northern and central China, Taiwan and northern Korea.
Growth of one to two metres (3.3 to 6.6&nbsp;ft) per year for the first four years is considered normal.
Ailanthus has become a part of western culture as well, with the tree serving as the central metaphor and subject matter of the best-selling American novel ''A Tree Grows in Brooklyn'' by Betty Smith.
The chemical does not, however, affect the tree of heaven's own seedlings, indicating that ''A.
altissima'' is widespread in both rural and urban areas and while in the first it was introduced as an ornamental plant, it very soon invaded native ecosystems with disastrous results and became an invasive species.
This type of silk is known under various names: "pongee", "eri silk" and "Shantung silk", the last name being derived from Shandong Province in China where this silk is often produced.
In both Europe and America it quickly became a favoured ornamental, especially as a street tree, and by 1840 it was available in most nurseries.
D'Incarville attached a note indicating this, which caused much taxonomic confusion over the next few decades.
Each leaflet is  long and  wide.
It is also considered a good source of firewood across much of its range as it moderately hard and heavy, yet readily available.
Asian and European chemists have found some justification for its medical use as it contains a long list of active chemicals that include quassin and saponin, while ailanthone, the allelopathic chemical in the tree of heaven, is a known antimalarial agent.
Means of eradication can be physical, thermal, managerial, biological or chemical.
Ailanthus has also been introduced to Argentina, Australia (where it is a declared weed in New South Wales and Victoria), New Zealand (where it is listed under the National Pest Plant Accord and is classed an "unwanted organism"), the Middle East and in some countries in South Asia such as Pakistan.
*'''‘Metro’''' – A male cultivar with a tighter crown than usual and a less weedy habit
Female flowers contain ten (or rarely five through abortion) sterile stamens (stamenoides) with heart-shaped anthers.
In a number of these, it has become an invasive species due to its ability both to colonise disturbed areas quickly and to suppress competition with allelopathic chemicals.
The seeds sent by d'Incarville were thought to be from the economically important and similar looking Chinese varnish tree (''Toxicodendron vernicifluum''), which he had observed in the lower Yangtze region, rather than the tree of heaven.
