A Foursquare leader noted that to watch the long line pass reverently by her casket, and see tears shed by all types of people, regardless of class and color, helped give understanding to the far-reaching influence of her life and ministry.
With Kennedy, Semple, and Splivalo gone, the Temple lost much of its talented leadership.
McPherson also eschewed secrecy and freely used her radio station to broadcast her side of the story.
They also benefited by borrowing Pentecostal revival techniques such as more emotive expression, joyful praise worship, and testimonials, forerunning the Charismatic Movement.
The pair's notion of "Army" was very broad, encompassing much more than just the Salvation Army.
While in New York City, she met Harold Stewart McPherson, an accountant.
Cole went on to found the Christian Men's Network and influenced many to include Coach Bill McCartney (starter of Promise Keepers), Pat Robertson (president of the 700 Club), John Maxwell (president of Injoy Ministries), Kenneth Copeland, Oliver North, and as Chuck Norris, the martial artist and actor, writes, himself.
Drawing from her childhood experience with the Salvation Army, in 1927, McPherson opened a commissary at Angelus Temple which was devised to assist the needy on a much larger, formalized scale.
Pershing Square's Victory House in Los Angeles never saw a bigger crowd.
Two thoughts pervaded the mind of most devout Pentecostals of the time, "Jesus is coming, therefore how can I get ready," and "how can I help others to get ready?"
A well-known Methodist minister, Frank Thompson, who never had the Pentecostal experience,  was persuaded to run the college, and he taught the students the doctrine of John Wesley.
McPherson indicated she would turn hand springs with them as needed to see the power of God manifest.
The infusion of crosses and other symbols of Christianity alongside Romani astrology charts and crystal balls was the result of McPherson's influence.
According to Carey McWilliams, she had become "more than just a household word: she was a folk hero and a civic institution; an honorary member of the fire and police departments; a patron saint of the service clubs; an official spokesman for the community on problems grave and frivolous."
in the Echo Park area of Los Angeles.
She had her own charities".
No longer distracted by waves of reporters, reams of lawsuits, and innumerable individuals demanding her attention, she became very accomplished in her illustrative sermon style of Gospel preaching.
McPherson became a strong supporter of William Jennings Bryan during the 1925 Scopes trial, in which John Scopes was tried for illegally teaching evolution at a Dayton, Tennessee, school.
It is poisoning the minds of the children of the nation."
Following her death, the Foursquare Gospel church denomination was led for 44 years by her son Rolf McPherson.
In 1932, she promoted disarmament, "If the nations of the world would stop building warships and equipping armies, we would be all but overwhelmed with prosperity."
As evidence of her early influence by the Salvation Army, McPherson adopted a theme of "lighthouses" for the satellite churches, referring to the parent church as the "Salvation Navy".
She conducted public faith healing demonstrations before large crowds; testimonies conveyed tens of thousands of people healed.
In 1935, McPherson embarked on a worldwide six-month discovery tour to examine the social, religious, and economic climates of many countries.
He saw her legacy extend far beyond the glamor of Hollywood, exerting itself through the thousands of ministers she trained and churches planted throughout the world.
Laboring under a sign "Everybody and anybody is somebody to Jesus", volunteer workers filled commissary baskets with an assortment of food and other items, as well as Foursquare Gospel literature, and handed them out.
Though she shared many of their fundamentalist beliefs, such as  divine inspiration of the Bible, the classical Trinity, virgin birth of Jesus, historical reality of Christ's miracles, bodily resurrection of Christ, and the atoning purpose of his crucifixion; the presentation of lavish sermons, and an effective faith-healing ministry presented by a female divorcee whom thousands adored and about whom newspapers continuously wrote, was unexpected.
When she gained strength and returned, she introduced with renewed vigor her moving  "Attar of Roses" sermon, based on the Song of Solomon, with its Rose of Sharon as the mystical Body of Christ.
She did speaking-in-tongues and faith healing, but kept the former to a minimum in sermons to appease mainstream audiences.
If...anybody abused his trust, it must not happen again."
The choir could be replaced; however, Kennedy's financial and administrative skills had been of crucial importance in growing McPherson's ministry from tent revivals to satellite churches and maintaining its current activities in the Temple.
'Good luck with yours, Aimee.'
Along with taking seriously the religious role of women, the magazine contributed to transforming Pentecostalism from a movement into an ongoing American religious presence.
The grand jury inquiry concluded while enough evidence did not exist to try her, it did not indicate her story was true with its implication of kidnappers still at large.
In early 1927, McPherson immediately set out on a "vindication tour", visiting various cities and taking advantage of the publicity her kidnapping story created to preach the Gospel.
Canadian journalist Gordon Sinclair implied such a claim in his 1966 autobiography, ''Will the Real Gordon Sinclair Please Stand Up.''
It is the Cross against the Swastika.
Many people, who otherwise would have nothing to do with the Angelus Temple, would receive a call from McPherson, and then loot their mansion closets or company stores for something to give.
Sutton noted that Berle's story of a crucifix in McPherson's bedroom was not consistent with the coolness of Pentecostal-Catholic relations during that era.
In another meeting with students, she heard their assertion the teachings of Christ have outlived their usefulness; education, science and cold reasoning were the new saviors of the world.
She expected everyone in her temple to be involved, 'let us ever strive to lighten our brother's load and dry the tears of a sister; race, creed or status make no difference.
An observer, Marcus Bach, who was on a spiritual odyssey of personal discovery, wrote:
Frequently, she would start a revival meeting in a hall or church and then have to move to a larger building to accommodate the growing crowds.
Eventually, he returned to Rhode Island and around 1918 filed for separation.
McPherson's articulation of the United States as a nation founded and sustained by divine inspiration continues to be echoed by many pastors in churches today.
One such revival was held in a boxing ring, with the meeting before and after the match.
This period was one of unprecedented creativity for McPherson.
In the rain, at Verdun, France, she sat on a wrecked military vehicle in mournful contemplation of the hundreds of thousands who died on the still-uncleared battlefield.
She started with $5,000.
They yearned for Sister Aimee "in the old time dress," referring to her previous "trademarked" uniform of a navy cape over a white servant's dress, both purchased inexpensively in bargain basements.
She became the first woman evangelist to adopt the whole technique of the moving picture star.
Issues of trial by media and court of public opinion were apparent, as much of the proclaimed evidence against McPherson came from reporters who featured it in their news articles and passed it on to the police.
Discarded medical fittings from persons faith-healed during her services, which included crutches, wheelchairs, and other paraphernalia; were gathered for display in a museum area.
For a time, movie studios competed with each other offering McPherson long-term contracts.
The Azusa Street Revival commemoration events brought numbers of black leaders to her pulpit.
One production, ''The Iron Furnace'', based on the book of Exodus, told of God’s deliverance as the Israelites fled slavery in Egypt.
One author in attendance, insisted she actually drove the motorcycle, with its deafening roar, across the access ramp to the pulpit, slammed on the brakes, then raised a white-gloved hand to shout "Stop!
Author Raymond L. Cox states: "Mrs. McPherson's daughter, Roberta Salter of New York, told me, 'Mother never had an apartment in her life.'
She developed a strong following in what McPherson termed "the Foursquare Gospel" by blending contemporary culture with religious teachings.
Accordingly, the Angelus Temple plummeted deep into debt.
The story received nationwide coverage.
By 1917, she had started her own magazine, ''The Bridal Call'', for which she wrote many articles about women’s roles in religion; she portrayed the link between Christians and Jesus as a marriage bond.
In a letter to the ''Los Angeles Times'', a few months after the case was dropped, the Reverend Robert P. Shuler stated, "Perhaps the most serious thing about this whole situation is the seeming loyalty of thousands to this leader in the face of her evident and positively proven guilt."
A total of 160,000 people attended the meetings, breaking historic attendance records of any nine days of revival services in Boston.
The newspapers which served to propel McPherson to fame and advertise her message, also were used to highlight her faults, real and imagined.
Church members and leaders had to be willing to take up arms and fight for the United States.
Sinclair alluded to a sexual dalliance with McPherson one afternoon along with some gin and ginger.
During the 1926 kidnapping grand jury trial, his privacy in every way was invaded as reporters and investigators tried to link him amorously to McPherson.
Animals were frequently incorporated and McPherson, the once farm girl, knew how to handle them.
No one has ever been credited by secular witnesses with anywhere near the numbers of faith healings attributed to McPherson, especially during the years 1919 to 1922.
"Remove any of these," she warned, "and civilization topples, crumbles."
Early passed on a reply back from Roosevelt: a message of thanks for her work.
Females as preachers and her status as a divorcee with two failed marriages were of particular concern to many of the fundamentalist churches with which she wanted to work, but her success could not be easily ignored.
The Faith Healing Ministry of Aimee Semple McPherson were extensively written about in the news media and was a large part of her early career legacy.
Her husband later followed McPherson to take her back home.
Novels, though, made their way into the Methodist Church library and with guilty delight, McPherson would read them.
: Ben M. Bogard, 1934) drew further attention to the controversy, but none could really argue effectively against McPherson's results.
She decided to dedicate her life to both God and Robert, and after a short courtship, they were married on August 12, 1908, in a Salvation Army ceremony, pledging never to allow their marriage to lessen their devotion to God, affection for comrades, or faithfulness in the Army.
Semple then moved to New York.
For 10 months, she was absent from the pulpit, diagnosed, in part, with acute acidosis.
McPherson and Hutton separated in 1933 and divorced on March 1, 1934.
The house went wild when she walked out into the lights."
She wanted to work with existing churches on projects and to share with them her visions and beliefs.
As a consequence, the commissary was briefly shut down.
However, this price was low for a structure of its size.
Later, when the altar call would be given, many of these same servicemen would make another trip to the platform publicly to receive Jesus Christ as their personal savior."
We are all one in the eyes of the Lord."
Other highlights included traversing barefoot, in Myanmar, the lengthy stone path to the Great Pagoda, a gold-covered 325-ft tiered tower enshrining relics of four Buddhas, which caught and reflected the rays of the sun, a "vision of breath-taking glory."
Many Mexicans were terrified of appealing for county help because most of them were in the country illegally.
In 1928, after a dam failed and the ensuing flood left up to 600 dead in its wake, McPherson's church led the relief effort.
Her husband, in spite of initial enthusiasm, wanted a life that was more stable and predicable.
For McPherson, part of the answer was to mobilize her Temple congregation and everyone she could reach through radio, telephone, and word of mouth to get involved in substantial amounts of charity and social work.
It was open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and became active in creating soup kitchens, free clinics, and other charitable activities as the Great Depression wore on.
In his book, entitled '' Milton Berle: An Autobiography'', Berle asserts he met McPherson at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles where both were doing a charity show.
Various officials expressed their appreciation, including the governor of California.
She began broadcasting on radio in the early 1920s.
As a precaution, the ransom notes were sent to the police who investigated at least one of them.
Through her windows, the detectives frequently saw McPherson staying up until the early morning hours composing songs, drafting sacred operas, and scribbling diagrams of her illustrated sermons.
The cause of death is officially listed as unknown.
People waited for hours to get in, and McPherson could hardly reach the pulpit without stepping on someone.
Men were more discreet, wearing suits.
Biographer Matthew Avery Sutton commented, "Berle, a notorious womanizer whose many tales of scandalous affairs were not always true, claimed to have had sex with McPherson on this and one other occasion", both during a year when McPherson was often ill and bedridden.
By accepting and using such new media outlets, McPherson helped integrate them into people’s daily lives.
A reporter took note of McPherson's stage presence, different from any other evangelist who spoke there, gesturing with her white Bible for effect, as well as preaching.
McPherson worked hard to attain ecumenical vision of the faith, and while she participated in debates, avoided pitched rhetorical battles that divided so many in Christianity.
There, they would never be asked any of the embarrassing questions posed by the authorities.
Prizing gold and loyalty, the Romani repaid her in part, with heavy bags of gold coin and jewels, which helped fund the construction of the new Angelus Temple.
The temple was filled beyond capacity.
McPherson's mother was also involved and sided with Semple, her granddaughter, making unflattering statements about McPherson to the press.
Even people who considered McPherson's theology almost ridiculous helped out because they saw her church as the best way to assist their community.
The Old Testament book, the Song of Solomon, for example, she had hundreds of pages written about it, each "different from one another as snowflakes".
The Army made McPherson an honorary colonel.
In the early 1900s, it was expected traditional Protestantism would give way to rapidly developing new philosophical ideas and sciences that were being widely taught.
Eventually, McPherson's church evolved into its own denomination and became known as the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel.
African American Evangelist Emma Cotton and McPherson therefore organized a series of meetings which also marked her enthusiastic reidentification with the Pentecostal movement.
Around 1:00 am she  reached Agua Prieta, Sonora, a Mexican town, and collapsed near a house there.
But whenever I hear 'Yes, Sir, That's My Baby', I remember her."
She heard Benito Mussolini speak in Italy, and fretted war would again ensue.
Sung knew the culture, being born into it, but even he preached using a regional language interpreter who relayed his message to the audience.
At one point, it was earlier reported she wanted to study the women's movement in connection with the campaign for the independence of India, and was anxious to have "a chat with Mahatma Gandhi".
In San Diego, California, the city called in the National Guard and other branches of the armed forces to control a revival crowd over 30,000 people.
Assisting in her passion was the speedy establishment of LIFE Bible College adjacent to the Angeles Temple.
In Fresno, California, 1921, nine-year-old Uldine Utley (1912–1995) became a fervent believer.
She asked parishioners and other listeners to donate two hours a day for such tasks as rolling bandages "so that a soldier's bandage could be changed.... And let us give our blood to help every one."
McPherson sold $150,000 worth of bonds in one hour on June 20, 1942, breaking all previous records, then repeated the performance again on July 4, 1944.
The Temple, like other buildings in the city, had to have any opening or window that could emit visible light at night, covered.
Therefore, she looked to her spiritual origins and allowed for the possibility of reintroducing even the more alarming aspects of the Pentecostal experience into her public meetings.
Pacifism, which was a component of Pentecostalism, was evaluated by the Foursquare Gospel Church in the 1930s with official statements and documents which were further revised by McPherson.
Answering him as to why she presented a dramatic sermon, she stated, "Our God is a dramatic God,... rolling back the Red Sea,... Elijah on the mountaintop,... the crucifixion, the resurrection, His ascension,... tongues of fire on the day of Pentecost."
Because her programs aided nonresidents, as well, such as migrants from other states and Mexico, she ran afoul of California state regulations.
The next day, the "Bring Back the Bible to Boston" campaign's tone shifted as McPherson took greater control and attendance climbed sharply.
The rain immediately stopped, an event reported the following day by the ''Wichita Eagle'' on May 30: "Evangelist's Prayers Hold Big Rain Back," For the gathered Romani, it was a further acknowledgement "of the woman's power".
McPherson sometimes quipped when she first got to California, all she had was a car, ten dollars and a tambourine.
It was unknown how she obtained them.
Though described as "always kind and loving", McPherson demanded respect regarding the divine message the sacred operas and her other works were designed to convey.
Future meetings to celebrate the Azusa Street Revivals included guest Charles H. Mason, a founder of the Churches of God in Christ.
McPherson asked Splivalo to "leave town".
Regardless of the court's decision, months of unfavorable press reports fixed in much of the public's mind a certainty of McPherson's wrongdoing.
A jury trial could take months.
McPherson organized her meetings with the general public in mind and yet did not wish to quench any who suddenly came into "the Spirit".
The grand jury inquiries were first convened in July 8, 1926, adjourned and reconvened, holding sessions through the summer of 1926 accompanied by intense media interest.
A critic wrote McPherson "can out-dress the Hollywood stars".
Among the pills found in the hotel room was the barbiturate Seconal, a strong sedative which had not been prescribed for her.
In this sermon, McPherson described how the first plane had the devil for the pilot, sin for the engine, and temptation as the propeller.
The endeavor cost contributors around $250,000 in actual money spent.
It later took 11 trucks to transport the $50,000 worth of flowers to the cemetery which itself received more telegrammed floral orders than at any time since Will Rogers' death almost 10 years earlier.
McPherson accepted the voice's challenge, and she suddenly opened her eyes and was able to turn over in bed without pain.
She was incapacitated with illness a full five months of that year, and there is no place on her schedule as reported in her publications and church and travel records for the benefit Berle alleged.
In late 1918, McPherson came to Los Angeles, a move many at the time were making for better opportunities.
The new denomination focused on the nature of Christ's character: that he was Savior, baptizer with the Holy Spirit, healer, and coming King.
McPherson's experiments of Hollywood celebrity ambitions coexisting with her ministry were not as successful as she hoped.
Searchers combed the beach and nearby area, but could not locate her body.
The flaws he observed in McPherson, were by his opinion, many, yet she ultimately made a positive impact on Christianity, long lasting and enduring .
Mainline churches became exposed to the more unusual gifts of the Holy Spirit.
Liberal Christianity, which enjoyed strong growth starting in the late 19th century, regarded many of the miracles of Jesus to be superstitious interpretations of what actually occurred or metaphors for his teachings.
The distinctive white dome was painted over with black paint and its beautiful stained-glass windows were covered up.
Shortly after her recuperation in the United States, Semple joined her mother Minnie working with the Salvation Army.
McPherson is buried in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, California.
McPherson later publicly repented of the marriage, as wrong from the beginning, for both theological and personal reasons and therefore rejected nationally known gospel singer Homer Rodeheaver, a more appropriate suitor, when he eventually asked for her hand in 1935.
Throughout the boxing event, she walked about with a sign reading "knock out the Devil".
She frequently used the same metaphors as McPherson, referring to Christ as "the Rose of Sharon" and invoking "Bride of Christ" imagery.
The original mission building was demolished and its land unavailable.
Thirty years after her death, another claim by comedian Milton Berle, in a 1974 autobiography, alleges a brief affair with the evangelist.
McPherson began a campaign in earnest and was able to mobilize diverse groups of people to help fund and build the new church.
'Good luck with your show, Milton.'
It was easy to deny a God who did something 1,900 years ago, but large crowds of people were now witness to the blind seeing, the lame walking, and the deaf hearing.
Along with McPherson and her mother, several other defendants were charged in the inquiry.
She received an invitation from him and he gave her a sari made from threads woven from his simple spinning wheel.
McPherson intensely disliked Communism and its derivatives as they sought to rule without God; their ultimate goal, she believed, was to remove Christianity from the earth.
Prayer, to her, was even more powerful than the implements of war.
The Angelus Temple itself became a visible symbol of home front sacrifice for the war effort.
Some sauerkraut and salad oil were purportedly observed leaking from their respective storage areas.
When McPherson's son went to her hotel room at 10:00 the next morning, he found her unconscious with pills and a half-empty bottle of capsules nearby.
As McPherson tried to avoid administrative delays in categorizing the "deserving" from the "undeserving", her temple commissary became known as one of the region's most effective and inclusive aid institutions.
She endorsed Herbert Hoover over Franklin D. Roosevelt,  but enthusiastically threw her support behind the latter and his social programs when he was elected into office.
Not wanting to take on debt, McPherson located a construction firm which would work with her as funds were raised "by faith".
It is God against the antichrist of Japan,...
Mason, an Azusa leader, was also one of the most significant African American religious figures in United States history and was frequently hosted at the Angelus Temple.
The staff was let go and students from her Foursquare Gospel Church's LIFE Bible College filled in.
By early 1926, McPherson had become one of the most charismatic and influential women and ministers of her time.
"What a privilege it was to invite the servicemen present in every Sunday night meeting to come to the platform, where I greeted them, gave each one a New Testament, and knelt in prayer with them for their spiritual needs, and God’s guidance and protection on their lives.
A wide range of clergy and laypeople to include Methodists, Baptists, the Salvation Army, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Adventists, Quakers, Roman Catholics, Mormons, and secular civic leaders came to the Angelus Temple.
While still in high school, after her Pentecostal conversion, McPherson began a crusade against the concept of evolution, beginning a lifelong passion.
Various influential individuals offered their opinions on the inquiry.
For several years, she continued to travel and raise money for the construction of a large, domed church building at 1100 Glendale Blvd.
However,  pressured by various influential  community groups, the court instead intensely investigated McPherson,  her family, and acquaintances to determine if the kidnapping was fabricated.
She radiates friendliness.
Even if submarines were hiding in the depths of the sea, they could not escape the terror that would befall them.
She saw in them the possible activities of Communism, which sought to infiltrate labor unions and other organizations.
Besides, Roberta also told Cox, "Mother never did a benefit in her life.
And more so than in almost any war previously, she felt that if they did not prevail, churches, homes, and everything precious and dear to the Christian would absolutely be destroyed.
However, McPherson found a competent and firm administrator in Giles Knight, who was able to bring the Temple out of debt, dispose of the 40 or so lawsuits, and eliminate the more spurious projects.
Crowds clamored to reach her altar to experience a New Testament conversion that transformed many of their lives.
A month later, Roosevelt declared a National Day of Prayer to "beseech the Ruler of the Universe to bless our Republic."
Berle said he could see she was wearing nothing underneath.
Her developing difficulties with her mother, Mildred Kennedy, were starting to take the front page.
When in distress, they were comforted by the fact that they could call one of Aimee's branches at any time of the night.
Atheist Charles Lee Smith remarked publicly of McPherson, just before a debate, that she had an extraordinary mind, "particularly for a woman".
For about a year, Antonia Frederick Futterer, suggested by Los Angeles Times as the inspiration for Steven Spielberg's film character, Indiana Jones,  was also a facility member.
Her policy of giving first and investigating afterward allowed waste and a certain number of deadbeats to leech off the program, but it "alleviated suffering on an epic scale".
