Air National Guardsmen and aircraft deploy to Afghanistan routinely as part of the Air Expeditionary Units at bases there.
It is recognized as the ANG's oldest unit and its lineage is carried by the 102d Rescue Squadron, New York ANG.
Air National Guard aviation units would be expected to deploy overseas once every 15 months while support units would do so at 30-month intervals.
They had hardly resumed normal operations when President Kennedy announced on 22 October 1962 that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear warheads in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida.
:: 142d Fighter Group, Oregon
Unknown to the pilots, American Airlines Flight 11 had crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City just as Colonel Marr was delivering his order.
Four Air Guardsmen—Captains Robert Love (California), Clifford Jolley (Utah), and Robinson Risner (Oklahoma), plus Major James Hagerstrom (Texas) – became aces, with some, such as Risner, later transferring to the Regular Air Force.
It was proposed to employ ANG pilots full-time from "strategically placed" Air National Guard units to perform "air intercept missions" against unidentified aircraft entering United States air space.
Since 1988, the squadron had provided the air supply bridge to McMurdo, landing with wheels on an ice runway near the station.
When the war began, only Air National Guard units assigned to Air Force Special Operations Command (AFSOC) deployed directly to Afghanistan to support combat operations.
At about 40 miles away, they saw the billowing smoke of American Airlines Flight 77, which had crashed into the Pentagon at 9:43&nbsp;am.
However, as limited amounts of newer equipment became available from a smaller Air Force, and budgets tightened, the ANG would reduce the numbers of aircraft assigned to each unit.
Although it had no airlift or tanker units, the Air National Guard's flying units were equipped with a small number of liaison, trainer, and transport planes, and the Air National Guard actively sought out new missions and aircraft.
ANG units typically operate under Title 32 USC.
During Operation Enduring Freedom, Rangers and special operations formed the focal point of the U.S. ground campaign.
In the early 1990s, with the disestablishment of Strategic Air Command (SAC), Tactical Air Command (TAC) and Military Airlift Command (MAC) and their replacement with Air Combat Command (ACC) and Air Mobility Command (AMC), all Air National Guard units transisitoned to the objective wing organization, most flying unit designations were simplified to "Airlift" or "Fighter" or "Air Refuleing" or "Rescue,'' with flying squadrons being assigned to Operations Groups.
In July 1972, Air National Guard units began supporting Air Force tanker task forces overseas with second-line KC-97 Stratofreighter propeller-driven tankers and volunteer crews when needed.
The units were transformed from observation organizations into reconnaissance, liaison, fighter, and bombardment squadrons.
2d Lieutenant Erwin R. Bleckley of Kansas was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously for his heroism as an aerial observer.
:: 121st Fighter Group, Ohio
On 22 May 2002, a Joint Resolution was passed by the Congress of the United States recognizing the members of the 102d Fighter Wingfor their actions on 11 September 2001.
As operations began, Army Rangers embarked on a mission to protect the Haditha Dam from being destroyed by Iraqi forces.
To support rescue and relief operations in New Orleans, the Air National Guard used Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans, in Belle Chasse, Louisiana, on the Mississippi River's West Bank.
Although the Army Guard provided the vast majority of the enhanced airport security force, several hundred Air National Guard personnel also participated.
They put them in the helicopter and removed its insulation and wrapped it around the wounded Rangers.
Once mobilized, those Air National Guardsmen proved to be almost totally unprepared for combat.
In their "state" role, the Air National Guard may be called up for active duty by the governors to help respond to domestic emergencies and disasters, such as those caused by hurricanes, floods, fires, and earthquakes.
Less than 24 hours later, a C-130H landed at the air station with members of the Louisiana Air National Guard's 159th Fighter Wing.
Five of the ANG pilots also volunteered as ''Misty'' Forward Air Controllers (FACs) flying the F-100 Super Sabre.
A single bomb obliterated the attackers and shattered every window in the dam complex.
: Replaced by 140th Fighter Wing, 1 November 1950
Housed in C-130s, MAFFS could disperse up to 27,000 pounds...almost 3,000 gallons...of commercial fire retardants or an equivalent amount of water.
In 1910 the unit raised $500 to finance its first aircraft.
: Replaced by 106th Bombardment Wing, 1 November 1950
The most severe damage came from a 30-plus-foot storm surge along the Mississippi coast and the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain in Louisiana and breaks in the levies along a canal in New Orleans.
: Federalized Oregon ANG, 2 March 1951
A contingent from the 104th Fighter Wing participated in the action.
The New York Air National Guard's 109th Airlift Wing operates ski-equipped LC-130 Hercules transports that fly into arctic regions.
:: 132d Fighter Group, Iowa
It trained at Mineola Field, Mineola, Long Island.
One of the first ANG flying units deployed to the area, the 193d began transmitting by the end of October 2001.
the unit was called into federal service when the Mexican revolution spilled over the border into the United States.
The wing deployed nine of its 11 assigned E-8 Joint STARS aircraft to the Iraqi Freedom theater as well as over 600 unit personnel including one-tenth of the aircrews.
In practical terms, the Total Force policy sought to insure that all policymaking, planning, programming, and budgetary activities within the Defense Department considered active and reserve forces concurrently and determined the most efficient mix of those forces in terms of costs versus contributions to national security.
The Air National Guard (ANG), in tandem with the U.S. Air Force's other reserve component, the strictly "federal" Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC), comprise the "'''Air Reserve Component'''" of the U.S. Air Force under the "'''Total Force'''" construct.
Air support for Special Forces in the battle came from various coalition aircraft including U.S. Army Special Operations Aviation units.
They were either integral elements of National Guard infantry divisions or assigned to Army corps aviation.
: ''"Whereas on the morning of 11 September 2001, the 102nd Fighter Wing of the Massachusetts Air National Guard became the Nation's first airborne responder to the terrorist attacks of that day when it scrambled two F-15 fighter aircraft just six minutes after being informed of the terrorist hijackings of commercial airliners".''
The units were re-designated with unit designations within the 101–299 range and allotments were made to Adjutant General of the states and territories whose mission it was to organize the units being allocated and prepare them for federal recognition by the NGB.
They also recovered the bodies of Petty Officer Roberts and Sergeant Chapman.
After Lindbergh made his historic solo trans-Atlantic flight in May 1927, he recalled his service in the Guard fondly.
Approximately 10 minutes after the Rangers took control of the hill, they began to receive more frequent enemy mortar and automatic weapons fire.
Those forces consisted of 23 men and two helicopters.
Originally the Air National Guard was designed as a combat reserve force.
Air National Guard units are organized and federally recognized federal military reserve forces in each of the fifty U.S. states, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the territories of Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the District of Columbia of the United States.
As individual units were organized, federally recognized, and activated, the Army Air Forces provided them airfields, equipment and surplus aircraft.
From January 1968 until June 1969, the 355th TFS changed from a Regular Air Force unit composed almost entirely of recent SEA returnees to a composite squadron consisting of approximately 50% of whose personnel assets were composed of activated ANG members from the 119th TFS of the New Jersey ANG) and the 121st TFS of the District of Columbia ANG).
* 55th Fighter Wing, Ohio
18 September 1947, however, is considered the Air National Guard's official birth, concurrent with the establishment of the United States Air Force as a separate branch of the United States military under the National Security Act.
Even traditional part-time air guardsmen, especially pilots, navigators/combat systems officers, air battle managers and enlisted aircrew, often serve 100 or more man-days annually.
Operation Anaconda continued for another 19 days.
By the 1990s, 90 percent of the air defense mission was being handled by the Air National Guard.
: Replaced by 111th Air Defense Wing, 1 November 1950
Because both state Air National Guard and the Air National Guard of the United States relatively go hand-in-hand, they are both usually referred to as just Air National Guard.
When not in a "federal" status, the Air National Guard operates under their respective state, commonwealth or territorial governor.
After so many hours strapped in their seats, pilots generally received one to three days of crew rest.
:: 101st Fighter Group, Maine
During the first 24 hours of the crisis, 34 Air National Guard fighter units flew 179 missions.
AEFs would rotate in order to ease the strain of increased post-Cold War operations overseas.
Among their missions, Air National Guard C-130 crews airlifted elements of the 82d Airborne Division and the 3d Marine Expeditionary Force.
Guardsmen gained national visibility starting 27 September when President George W. Bush asked the governors for their temporary help at commercial airports, which had reopened a few days after 9/11 with new security restrictions.
In July 1970, two EC-121 "Super Constellations" from the Pennsylvania ANG's 193d Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadron departed their home station for Korat RTAFB, Thailand.
When President Harry S. Truman instituted dramatic postwar military budget cuts, he split defense dollars evenly among the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
As the North Dakota Air Guardsmen neared Washington, DC, Major Eckmann, the flight lead, set up a patrol over the nation's capital with the help of air traffic controllers at the Northeast Air Defense Sector.
Instead the Air National Guard would be flexible in its response in order to fit the situation.
In addition, the Pueblo Crisis in Korea also saw mobilized Air Force Reservists, Air National Guardsmen and Naval Reservists.
During Operation Iraqi Freedom's first six months, Air National Guard C-130 crews airlifted 22,000 tons of cargo, 47,000 passengers, and flew 8,600 sorties in 21,000 hours.
Although they received instruction and assembled a balloon, it was not clear whether members of the unit had ever actually ascended in it.
Subsequently, the individual state Air National Guard bureaus reactivated and reformed the units beginning in January 1953.
After that conflict, in April 1955, the Air National Guard acquired its first special operations unit when the 129th Air Resupply Squadron was federally recognized and two C-46 Commandos were delivered to it at Hayward, California.
The ANG of the territories of Guam and the Virgin Islands have no aircraft assigned and perform ground support functions.
At its peak in the mid-1950s, all 70 Air National Guard fighter squadrons participated in that program, although that number was reduced to 25 by 1961 due to budget constraints.
Initially, the National Guard Bureau (NGB) developed a table of organization for the Air National Guard to include at least one unit allocation per state.
In December 1989 and January 1990, ANG volunteers participated in Operation Just Cause, the invasion of Panama, to secure the arrest of Panamanian dictator and accused drug lord, General Manuel Noriega.
Despite intense ground fire, the six men successfully returned to Takur Ghar.
The Air National Guard also participates in noncombat support missions that sometimes take it beyond the U.S. boundaries.
Instead of heading into the flooded city, the 136th team remained at Belle Chasse and, within 36 hours of arriving, it established a fully functioning Air Terminal Operations Center and was keeping pace with the demanding mission schedule.
Some of the early-deploying squadrons maintained a degree of unit integrity and cohesion.
ANG units of the Combat Air Forces (CAF) based in the Continental United States (CONUS), plus a single air control squadron of the Puerto Rico ANG, are gained by the Air Combat Command (ACC).
The ANG runway alert program required some planes and pilots to be available around-the-clock to become airborne within minutes of being notified to scramble.
They were integrated into operations with their active duty and Air Force Reserve counterparts with a minimum of disruption and delay.
The Rangers expected the dam to be well defended.
In the years since its third activation, more of the responsibility for the defense of American air sovereignty was shifted to the Air National Guard.
Flying from March to June 2003, its missions apparently fulfilled their goals.
: Replaced by 126th Composite Wing, 1 November 1950
During the war in Iraq, the Air Force deployed 200 tanker aircraft based at 15 locations.
According to the National Guard Bureau, "The indigenous skills and capabilities National Guardsmen  to respond to natural disasters are the same skills and capabilities that enable us to successfully respond to potential terrorist threats."
About 100 National Guard pilots joined the newly formed United States Army Air Service.
New Jersey's newly organized 150th Air Transport Squadron (Light) became the first pure airlift unit in the Air National Guard on 1 February 1956.
Not only did the units and individuals lack specific wartime missions, their equipment, especially aircraft, was obsolete and their training was usually deplorable.
After the armistice and the return of the American Expeditionary Force in 1919, the wartime squadrons were demobilized and inactivated.
As the 1999 transfer of the Panama Canal to Panama approached, the Air National Guard began turning the operation over to civilian contractors.
In 1982, the South Carolina Air National Guard's 169th Tactical Fighter Group began receiving new General Dynamics F-16A Fighting Falcons.
:: 133d Fighter Group, Minnesota
It compelled the U.S. Army Air Forces (USAAF) to plan for a significant Air Force National Guard once the overseas fighting ended.
Although the Rangers repelled the initial assault, Iraqi counterattacks continued with heavy mortar and artillery shells that rained down on the Rangers.
In addition, some local leaders simply did not want jet fighters operating in their communities.
His reasons for not mobilizing reserve forces were many.
The vast majority of ANG units fall under either ACC or AMC.
: Replaced by 121st Fighter Wing, 1 November 1950
The Air National Guard participated widely in that long campaign, which featured U.S. and Coalition aircraft maintaining two no-fly zones over portions of Iraq: Operation Southern Watch (OSW) and Operation Northern Watch (ONW).
As a federal district, the units of the DC ANG are under the direct jurisdiction of the President of the United States though the office of the Commanding General, District of Columbia National Guard.
: Federalized New Jersey ANG, 1 March 1951
Missions could last up to 10 hours with multiple air refuelings.
The Americans made a major contribution to the overall allied effort, which involved airmen from 21 nations.
They were integrated into most of the Air Force's operational missions, flying strategic airlift and aerial refueling sorties, and manning aerial ports.
Surrounded by gunfire, the men on the ground called upon a Quick Reaction Force (QRF), designed for such emergencies.
Instead it took them more than 12 days.
Air National Guard aircrews already deployed TDY to Howard AFB, Panama also participated in Just Cause.
Those units monitored suspected airborne drug traffickers transiting Central America as well as the adjacent oceans.
The ANG however, unlike the active duty USAF, did not inactivate its combat groups during the 1950s as part of the tri-deputate organization.
Their organizations either strengthened American air defenses or were converted to tactical air control units that directed Air Force fighter aircraft in the continental United States, Alaska, Newfoundland, Europe, and French Morocco.
On 22 September, President George W. Bush mobilized about 5,100 more members of the air reserve components, including approximately 3,000 air refueling and about 130 security specialists.
In the same storm, western Kansas received between 15 and 36 inches of snow with drifts as high as 13 feet.
On 29 August 2005, the largest natural disaster the Air National Guard faced in its then 58-year history began when Hurricane Katrina hit the United States Gulf Coast.
At that point the Quick Reaction Force had 11 wounded and seven dead.
As part of the re-thinking of military concepts after the Vietnam War, beginning in the early 1970s with the establishment of the All-Volunteer Armed Forces, both the Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve force planning and policymaking were influenced by the "Total Force" Concept and have remained so to this day.
:: 118th Fighter Group, Tennessee
Air National Guard KC-135 tankers provided one-third of the Air Force refueling aircraft deployed for Operation Iraqi Freedom, and an additional 35 ANG tanker aircraft conducted air bridge operations.
The helicopter escaped the ambush and crash-landed about seven kilometers north of where Petty Officer Roberts fell.
That operation expanded significantly the following February to include airdrops of food and medicine to Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia blockaded by Bosnian Serbs.
From 1991 to 2001 the ANG experienced an enormous growth in large aircraft including C-130H Hercules tactical airlifters, upgraded KC-135E and KC-135R Stratotankers, and B-1B Lancer strategic bombers at the expense of smaller fighter planes.
After the Fall of France, during 1940–1941, approximately 4,800 experienced National Guard aviation personnel were mobilized from their observation squadrons.
Shortly after the terrorist attacks on 9/11 and weeks before the first U.S. bomb was dropped over Afghanistan, the Air Force established air bridges to help funnel material and personnel overseas to support multiple operations in conjunction with Enduring Freedom.
However, after the 1968 Tet Offensive in which the Communist North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops attacked positions throughout the Republic of Vietnam, the Pentagon dispatched four Air National Guard fighter squadrons to that nation.
As daylight broke over the dam, the Rangers began taking increasing enemy fire from the south as well as coordinated attacks at both ends of the dam.
As its goal, the ANG sought to acquire F-16C Block 25/30/32 aircraft, enabling ANG fighter units to have around-the-clock, all-weather, precision strike capabilities against surface targets.
Also, on 1 October 1994, in accordance with the USAF "one base-one wing" policy, all Air National Guard flying units previously designated as a "group" had their status changed to a "wing" on 1 October 1995.
* 54th Fighter Wing, Georgia
* 122d Fighter-Interceptor Wing (ADC)
After the first Gulf War ended in 1991, air power continued to play a significant role in containing Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq, as did a naval blockade and United Nations economic sanctions.
At the end of October 1950, the Air National Guard converted to the wing-base (Hobson Plan) organization.
Air National Guard units are trained and equipped by the United States Air Force.
Before President George H. W. Bush mobilized Reservists and National Guardsmen on 22 August 1990, nearly 1,300 Air National Guardsmen actually entered active duty as volunteers.
Determined to include an Air Force National Guard in the postwar U.S. military establishment during World War II, the National Guard Association of the United States flexed its considerable political muscle.
It took three to six months for some ANG units to become combat ready.
They were members of the 1st Company, Signal Corps, New York National Guard.
:: 111th Bombardment Group, Pennsylvania
In response to Hurricane Katrina, ANG units in all 54 states and territories responded to the recovery efforts in the Gulf States, with the Mississippi Air National Guard's Jackson Air National Guard Base serving as a hub and operating location for numerous active duty, Air National Guard, Air Force Reserve, Naval Reserve and Army National Guard aircraft.
From December 2002 to January 2003, the 111th Fighter Wing deployed personnel and sent its aircraft to Bagram Air Base, Afghanistan to carry out ground support missions for both United States as well as Afghan Northern Alliance ground forces.
The Rangers expected the operation to last approximately 24 hours.
Based on experiences during the Persian Gulf War and numerous deployments to the Balkans and other contingency operations, it organized more than 2,000 aircraft, including those of Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard units, into 10 Air Expeditionary Forces (AEFs), later designated as the Aerospace Expeditionary Forces, and, in 2007, the Air and Space Expeditionary Forces.
It received Curtiss C-46D Commandos.
* 142d Fighter-Interceptor Wing (ADC)
When Air National Guard units are used under the jurisdiction of the State Governor they are fulfilling their militia role.
Individual state squadrons were assigned to either Groups or Wings, depending on circumstances, allocations, and gaining commands of the Army Air Forces.
: Replaced by 144th Fighter Wing, 1 November 1950
Moreover, the timing of rotations became more predictable.
The transfer became permanent on 26 June 1968, at which time all TDY members were offered the opportunity to volunteer for a full year's tour.
The last Air National Guardsmen completed their deployments to these South American sites in 1999.
:: 103d Fighter Group, Connecticut
The Vietnam War provided the next significant test for the Air National Guard.
Combat Air Patrols (CAPs) began to be flown 24/7 over major cities in the United States.
But, 101 of them were either killed or declared missing in action during the conflict.
In the case of the DC Air National Guard in this role, the Adjutant General of the District of Columbia reports to the Mayor of the District of Columbia, who may only activate DC ANG assets for local purposes after consulting with the President of the United States.
During the Mexican Border Crisis of 1915 Captain Raynal Cawthorne Bolling organized and took command of a unit that became the '''1st Aero Company, New York National Guard'''.
In the end the coalition forces prevailed.
Air National Guard airlift units, however, began flying regularly to Japan and South Vietnam beginning in 1966 to support Military Airlift Command (MAC) operations.
Sixty-six of the Air Guard's ninety-two flying squadrons, along with numerous support units, were mobilized.
As its F-51 Mustangs and F-47 Thunderbolts became more and more obsolescent in the jet age of the 1950s, the force structure gradually changed to include a significant number of airlift, tanker, and specialized combat-support units.
But, most lost their character and identity as Guard organizations during World War II.
Newer aircraft like the C-130J carry the MAFFS II, which carry even more fire retardant, can disperse it more rapidly over a wider area, and is easier to recharge after a mission than its predecessor.
It took months and months for ANG units to become combat ready; some units never succeeded.
At nightfall the Iraqis resumed their attacks against the Rangers, but once again close air supported the U.S. forces.
* 61st Fighter Wing, California
With the war imminent, the Air Force quickly established an airlift operations plan that included active duty, Guard, and Reserve components.
The 193d Special Operations Wing of the Pennsylvania Air National Guard, using the EC-130E Commando Solo aircraft, performed an unusual mission in Afghanistan: psychological operations (PSYOPS).
With the active forces being reduced after the end of the Vietnam War, a significant number of older C-130A Hercules tactical airlifters became available for the Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve, which allowed the Korean War-era C-119 Flying Boxcars and C-124 Globemasters to be retired.
The Air National Guard contributed two C-141 Starlifter units, the 155th Airlift Squadron / 164th Airlift Wing, Tennessee Air National Guard; and the 183d Airlift Squadron / 172d Airlift Wing, Mississippi Air National Guard, to the strategic airlift mission.
The personnel and equipment of the inactivated wings were transferred to new Air National Guard wings which were established, recognized and activated on 1 November 1950.
Also on the team were Army Rangers.
Both air units remained at Mineola during the crisis.
Baker was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his heroic leadership.
Later deploying units to Turkey participated in Operation Northern Watch that was focused strictly on enforcing the no-fly zone above the 36th parallel in Iraq as mandated by the UN and did not include humanitarian relief for the Kurds.
I grabbed a radio … and set up satellite communication and then returned to the rear."
Because of communications failures, the Quick Reaction Force landed in the same spot as the previous helicopters and, like them, was greeted with gunfire.
Essentially, the Air Force agreed it would attempt to retain all ANG and Air Force Reserve flying units, while reducing its own as a cost-effective way to maintain a post-Cold War force structure.
The 193d remained in the region until ground psychological warfare operations stations were safely established.
In six minutes, the Langley F-16s were airborne.
In the spring and summer, the 109th heads toward the North Pole where it supports the National Science Foundation and several other nations in Greenland and above the Arctic Circle.
:: 126th Bombardment Group, Illinois
The Air National Guard was officially established in law as a separate reserve component on 18 September 1947, concurrent with the establishment of the U.S. Air Force.
The highly experienced Air National Guard pilots assigned to the AEW, especially the A-10 pilots, helped insure the successful employment of close air support for friendly forces fighting to retain the Haditha Dam.
Between 1946 and 1949, all of the initial allotment of units received federal recognition in the CONUS.
Trained to fly by the Army, he joined the 110th Observation Squadron in November 1925.
The Air National Guard not only assisted people, but also dropped bales of hay to feed stranded cattle.
Most of the runway alert exercises involved interceptions of SAC bombers; although a few actual scrambles turned out to be interceptions of late or off-course commercial airliners.
Those crews also flew one of the first day/night airlift missions into an Iraq air base and delivered the first humanitarian supplies into Baghdad International Airport.
: Replaced by 146th Composite Wing, 1 November 1950
Many ANG pilots work for commercial airlines, but in the ANG they may train to fly any of the aircraft in the USAF inventory, with the current exception of the B-1B Lancer and B-52 Stratofortress bombers, E-3 Sentry AWACS aircraft, KC-10 Extender and the AC-130 Gunship.
