Franklin concluded: "From this experiment one may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summer's day"
This minimizes the interior system footprint and allows each room to be adjusted independently.
This increase has the effect that, for each unit of energy input into the system (say to power a light bulb in the closed system), the air conditioner removes that energy.
A large house or building may have several such units, allowing each room to be cooled separately.
A failing thermistor may also cause this problem.
Women have, on average, a significantly lower resting metabolic rate than men.
They lowered the temperature of the thermometer bulb down to  while the ambient temperature was .
It is typical for air conditioners to operate at "efficiencies" of significantly greater than 100%.
In addition to buildings, air conditioning can be used for many types of transportation, including automobiles, buses and other land vehicles, trains, ships, aircraft, and spacecraft.
The comfort air conditioner is designed to create a 50% to 60% relative humidity in the occupied space.
The evaporation of water cooled the air blowing through the window.
R-744 is being adopted as a refrigerant in Europe and Japan.
The United States now requires that residential systems manufactured in 2006 have a minimum SEER rating of 13 (although window-box systems are exempt from this law, so their SEER is still around 10).
Free cooling and hybrid systems are mature technology.
this can also be rewritten as:
Another method that yields the same result, is to calculate the total annual cooling output:
A dual-hose unit draws air to cool its condenser from outside instead of from inside the room, and thus is more effective than most single-hose units.
Circulating refrigerant vapor enters the compressor, where its pressure and temperature are increased.
In a thermodynamically closed system, any power dissipated into the system that is being maintained at a set temperature (which is a standard mode of operation for modern air conditioners) requires that the rate of energy removal by the air conditioner increase.
Over time, air conditioning came to be used to improve comfort in homes and automobiles as well.
However, a window unit may only have an electric resistance heater.
In order for the process to have any efficiency, the cooling/ evaporative portion of the system must be separated by some kind of physical barrier from the heating/ condensing portion, and each portion must have its own fan to circulate its own "kind" of air (either the hot air or the cool air).
They are also very cheap to install and use less energy than refrigerative air conditioners.
Some homeowners elect to have a heat pump system installed as a feature of a central air conditioner.
On the exterior the heat drawn from the interior is dissipated into the environment as a second fan blows outside air over the condenser.
In 1902, the first modern electrical air conditioning unit was invented by Willis Carrier in Buffalo, New York.
The heat pump is significantly more energy efficient than electric resistance heating.
These chlorine radicals catalyze the breakdown of ozone into diatomic oxygen, depleting the ozone layer that shields the Earth's surface from strong UV radiation.
* Hospital operating theatres, in which air is filtered to high levels to reduce infection risk and the humidity controlled to limit patient dehydration.
This novel system used a compressor to force the refrigeration gas to pass through a condenser, where it cooled down and liquefied.
A portable  system has an indoor unit on wheels connected to an outdoor unit via flexible pipes, similar to a permanently fixed installed unit.
* High-rise residential buildings, such as tall dormitories and apartment blocks
The first air conditioners and refrigerators employed toxic or flammable gases, such as ammonia, methyl chloride, or propane, that could result in fatal accidents when they leaked.
In both types, the inside-environment (evaporative) heat exchanger is separated by some distance from the outside-environment (condensing unit) heat exchanger.
Cramer coined the term "air conditioning", using it in a patent claim he filed that year as an analogue to "water conditioning", then a well-known process for making textiles easier to process.
Formulas for the approximate conversion between SEER and EER or COP are available from the Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
The business of harvesting ice during winter and storing for use in summer became popular towards the late 17th century.
This means that equipment that uses R22 can still operate, as long as it does not leak.
The primary disadvantage of ductless air conditioners is their cost.
Corporations insisted that no alternatives to HFCs existed.
Some of the sensible heat of the entering air is converted to latent heat by the evaporation of water in the wet cooler pads.
In Europe, home air conditioning is generally less common.
This is about 30% more than central systems (not including ductwork) and may cost more than twice as much as window units of similar capacity."
In addition, ductless systems offer higher efficiency, reaching above 30 SEER.
During the subsequent Song Dynasty (960–1279), written sources mentioned the air conditioning rotary fan as even more widely used.
However, in construction, such a complete system of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning is referred to as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC – as opposed to ''AC'').
The water is usually sent to a drain or may simply drip onto the ground outdoors.
The blend most used in direct-expansion home and building comfort cooling is an HCFC known as chlorodifluoromethane (R-22).
An absorption pump dissolves ammonia gas in water, which gives off heat.
A single-hose unit uses air from within the room to cool its condenser, and then vents it outside.
It was first commercially used by Carrier Corp. under the brand name ''Puron''.
They conducted their experiment with the bulb of a mercury thermometer as their object and with a bellows used to speed-up the evaporation.
It was replaced with R-134a refrigerant, which has no ozone depletion potential.
Excessive air conditioning can have a negative effect on skin, causing it to dry out, and can also cause dehydration.
This process also made the air more humid, which can be beneficial in a dry desert climate.
While room air conditioning provides maximum flexibility, when used to cool many rooms at a time it is generally more expensive than central air conditioning.
Evaporative coolers tend to feel as if they are not working during times of high humidity, when there is not much dry air with which the coolers can work to make the air as cool as possible for dwelling occupants.
The air conditioner's power consumption will increase by 50&nbsp;W to compensate for this, thus making the 100&nbsp;W heating element cost a total of 150&nbsp;W of power.
He even envisioned centralized air conditioning that could cool entire cities.
'''Air conditioning''' (often referred to as AC, A.C., or A/C) is the process of altering the condition of air by removing heat and humidity to achieve a more comfortable interior environments, typically with the aim of distributing the conditioned air to an occupied space such as a building or a vehicle to improve thermal comfort and indoor air quality.
An evaporative cooler is a device that draws outside air through a wet pad, such as a large sponge soaked with water.
In light of these environmental concerns, beginning on November 14, 1994, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has restricted the sale, possession and use of refrigerant to only licensed technicians, per rules under sections 608 and 609 of the Clean Air Act.
The machine employed a flywheel and produced 3,000 kilograms of ice per day.
However, since all components of the dehumidifier are in the ''same'' room, no heat energy is removed.
To complete the refrigeration cycle, the refrigerant vapor is routed back into the compressor.
Window unit air conditioners are installed in an open window.
Air conditioning can also be provided by a process called free cooling which uses pumps to circulate a coolant (typically water or a glycol mix) from a cold source, which in turn acts as a heat sink for the energy that is removed from the cooled space.
For example, a 5000 BTU/h air-conditioning unit, with a SEER of 10, would consume 5000/10 = 500 Watts of power on average.
If the entering air is dry enough, the results can be quite substantial.
James Harrison's first mechanical ice-making machine began operation in 1851 on the banks of the Barwon River at Rocky Point in Geelong (Australia).
Once the refrigerant reaches the stratosphere, UV radiation from the Sun homolytically cleaves the chlorine-carbon bond, yielding a chlorine radical.
The basic concept behind air conditioning is said to have been applied in ancient Egypt, where reeds were hung in windows and were moistened with trickling water.
Since humans perspire to provide natural cooling by the evaporation of perspiration from the skin, drier air (up to a point) improves the comfort provided.
* Textile manufacturing
His first commercial ice-making machine followed in 1854, and his patent for an ether vapor compression refrigeration system was granted in 1855.
To compensate for this, the heat pump system must temporarily switch back into the regular air conditioning mode to switch the outdoor evaporator coil ''back'' to being the condenser coil, so that it can heat up and defrost.
: '''SEER = (BTU / h) ÷ W''', where "W" is the average electrical power in Watts, and (BTU/h) is the rated cooling power.
HFCs, however, contribute to climate change problems.
The SEER rating is the BTU of cooling output during its normal annual usage divided by the total electric energy input in watt hours (W·h) during the same period.
These include HCFCs (R-22, as used in most U.S. homes even before 2011) and HFCs (R-134a, used in most cars) have replaced most CFC use.
Air conditioning systems can also be made based on desiccants.
Then the air is released back into the room.
: (3) &nbsp; &nbsp; '''EER = COP × 3.413'''
Dichlorodifluoromethane (R-12) was the most common blend used in automobiles in the US until 1994, when most designs changed to R-134A due to the ozone-depleting potential of R-12.
Liquid water is evaporated on the cooling fins, releasing the vapor into the cooled area.
Common storage media are deep aquifers or a natural underground rock mass accessed via a cluster of small-diameter boreholes, equipped with heat exchanger.
The use of CFC as a refrigerant was once common, being used in the refrigerants R-11 and R-12 (sold under the brand name ''Freon-12'').
This is because ice forms on the outdoor unit's heat exchanger coil, which blocks air flow over the coil.
HCFCs, in turn, are supposed to have been in the process of being phased out under the Montreal Protocol and replaced by HFCs such as R-410A, which lack chlorine.
They are also commonly referred to as a "reverse cycle air conditioner".
The interior air is cooled as a fan blows it over the evaporator.
Industry resisted change in Europe until 1993, and in the U.S. until 2011, despite some supportive steps in 2004 and 2008 (see Refrigerant Development above).
SEER is unusual in that it is composed of an Imperial unit divided by an SI unit.
The cold refrigerant is then routed through the evaporator.
Therefore, an in-room dehumidifier always will warm the room and reduce the relative humidity indirectly, as well as reducing the humidity directly by condensing and removing water.
Improved process for the artificial production of ice.
: '''5,000,000 BTU ÷ 10 = 500,000 W·h = 500 kWh'''
Absorption heat pumps are a kind of air-source heat pump, but they do not depend on electricity to power them.
Since many animals normally reproduce only in spring, holding them in rooms in which conditions mirror those of spring all year can cause them to reproduce year-round.
Packaged terminal air conditioner (PTAC) systems are also known as wall-split air conditioning systems.
Thomas Midgley, Jr. created the first non-flammable, non-toxic chlorofluorocarbon gas, ''Freon'', in 1928.
A fan blows the interior warm air (which is to be cooled) across the evaporator, causing the liquid part of the cold refrigerant mixture to evaporate as well, further lowering the temperature.
The ''monoblock'' type collects the water in a bucket or tray and stops when full.
: '''500 W × 1000 h = 500,000 W·h = 500 kWh'''
Prior to 1994, most automotive air conditioning systems used R-12 as a refrigerant.
Evaporating water absorbs a significant amount of heat, the latent heat of vaporisation, cooling the air.
* Chemical and biological laboratories
On a semi-hermetic (or open) compressor, the heads can be fitted with unloaders which remove a portion of the load from the compressor so that it can run better when full cooling is not needed.
Franklin noted that, soon after they passed the freezing point of water , a thin film of ice formed on the surface of the thermometer's bulb and that the ice mass was about  thick when they stopped the experiment upon reaching .
He wrote: "Fresh meat frozen and packed as if for a voyage, so that the refrigerating process may be continued for any required period", and in 1873 prepared the sailing ship Norfolk for an experimental beef shipment to the United Kingdom.
A portable air conditioner can be easily transported inside a home or office.
The value is defined as 12,000 BTU per hour, or 3517 watts.
In addition, if water is condensed in the room, the amount of heat previously needed to evaporate that water also is re-released in the room (the latent heat of vaporization).
In the refrigeration cycle, heat is transported from a colder location to a hotter area.
Though his prototype leaked and performed irregularly, Gorrie was granted a patent in 1851 for his ice-making machine.
Portable air conditioners are either evaporative or refrigerative.
When the heat pump is in heating mode, the indoor evaporator coil switches roles and becomes the condenser coil, producing heat.
Modern units might have a coefficient of performance of approximately 3 (i.e., 1&nbsp;kW of electricity will produce 3&nbsp;kW of cooling).
Multi-zone systems typically offer a variety of indoor unit styles including wall-mounted, ceiling-mounted, ceiling recessed, and horizontal ducted.
In 1820, English scientist and inventor Michael Faraday discovered that compressing and liquefying ammonia could chill air when the liquefied ammonia was allowed to evaporate.
It collects water condensed from the cooled air and produces hot air which must be vented outside the cooled area; doing so transfers heat from the air in the cooled area to the outside air.
The EER is the efficiency rating for the equipment at a particular pair of external and internal temperatures, while SEER is calculated over a whole range of external temperatures (i.e., the temperature distribution for the geographical location of the SEER test).
* Food cooking and processing areas
However, these chlorine-bearing refrigerants reach the upper atmosphere when they escape.
* Environmental control of data centers
In 1758, Benjamin Franklin and John Hadley, a chemistry professor at Cambridge University, conducted an experiment to explore the principle of evaporation as a means to rapidly cool an object.
As an example, assume that inside the closed system a 100&nbsp;W heating element is activated, and the air conditioner has an coefficient of performance of 200%.
In an automobile, the A/C system will use around 4 horsepower (3&nbsp;kW) of the engine's power, thus increasing fuel consumption of the vehicle.
It is the needs of the process that determine conditions, not human preference.
He hoped to eventually use his ice-making machine to regulate the temperature of buildings.
A heat pump is an air conditioner in which the refrigeration cycle can be reversed, producing heating instead of cooling in the indoor environment.
Air conditioning is common in the US, with 88% of new single-family homes constructed in 2011 including air conditioning, ranging from 99% in the South to 62% in the West.
A specialized air conditioner that is used only for dehumidifying is called a dehumidifier.
Mutli-zone systems are a common application of ductless systems and allow up to 8 rooms (zones) to be conditioned from a single outdoor unit.
The name is a trademark name owned by DuPont for any chlorofluorocarbon (CFC), hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC), or hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerant.
In the 17th century, Cornelis Drebbel demonstrated "Turning Summer into Winter" for James I of England by adding salt to water.
* Industrial spaces where thermal comfort of workers is desired
In Canada, air conditioning use varies by province.
The first practical through-the-wall air conditioning unit was invented by engineers at Chrysler Motors and offered for sale starting in 1935.
Comfort applications are quite different for various building types and may be categorized as:
Although temperatures are often in the comfort range, some specialist procedures, such as open heart surgery, require low temperatures (about 18&nbsp;°C, 64&nbsp;°F) and others, such as neonatal, relatively high temperatures (about 28&nbsp;°C, 82&nbsp;°F).
Residential central air systems are usually from 1 to 5 tons (3 to 20 kilowatts (kW)) in capacity.
Modern refrigerants have been developed to be more environmentally safe than many of the early chlorofluorocarbon-based refrigerants used in the early- and mid-twentieth century.
In 1842, Florida physician John Gorrie used compressor technology to create ice, which he used to cool air for his patients in his hospital in Apalachicola, Florida.
This practice was replaced by mechanical ice-making machines.
DuPont and other companies blocked the refrigerant in the U.S. with the U.S.
The 2nd-century Chinese inventor Ding Huan (fl 180) of the Han Dynasty invented a rotary fan for air conditioning, with seven wheels  in diameter and manually powered by prisoners of the time.
The heat is rejected by the condenser which is located outside of room to be cooled.
Humans and animals use the same mechanism to cool themselves by sweating.
However, it may be noted that the input electrical energy is of higher thermodynamic quality (lower entropy) than the output thermal energy (heat energy).
In another southern European country, Malta, it is estimated that around 55% of households have an air conditioner installed.
Dr. Gorrie died impoverished in 1855, and the idea of air conditioning went away for 50 years.
Air conditioning makes deep plan buildings feasible, for otherwise they would have to be built narrower or with light wells so that inner spaces received sufficient outdoor air via natural ventilation.
The cooling is typically achieved through a refrigeration cycle, but sometimes evaporation or free cooling is used.
Next, the water and ammonia mixture is depressurized to induce boiling, and the ammonia is boiled off, which absorbs heat from the outdoor air.
Process applications aim to provide a suitable environment for a process being carried out, regardless of internal heat and humidity loads and external weather conditions.
In 1995, Germany made CFC refrigerators illegal.
For residential homes, some countries set minimum requirements for energy efficiency.
: (1) &nbsp; &nbsp; '''SEER = EER ÷ 0.9'''
This led to two alternatives, one a blend of propane (R290) and isobutane (R600a), and one of pure isobutane.
Moreover, policy and political influence by corporate executives resisted change.
Then, four years later, Ben & Jerry's of Unilever and General Electric began to take steps to support production and use in the U.S. Only in 2011 did the E.P.A.
The outdoor condenser unit also switches roles to serve as the evaporator, and discharges cold air (colder than the ambient outdoor air).
Several non-ozone-depleting refrigerants have been developed as alternatives, including R-410A.
A heat pump system will therefore have a form of electric resistance heating in the indoor air path that is activated only in this mode in order to compensate for the temporary indoor air cooling, which would otherwise be uncomfortable in the winter.
Residential sales expanded dramatically in the 1950s.
The inside wall space required is significantly reduced.
They are ductless systems.
The electrical energy consumed per year can be calculated as the average power multiplied by the annual operating time:
In the United States, the efficiency of air conditioners is often (but not always) rated by the ''seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER)''.
Dust can also cause the fins to begin blocking air flow with the same undesirable result: ice.
Unlike other types of air conditioners, evaporative coolers rely on the outside air to be channeled through cooler pads that cool the air before it reaches the inside of a house through its air duct system; this cooled outside air must be allowed to push the warmer air within the house out through an exhaust opening such as an open door or window.
Franklin and Hadley confirmed that evaporation of highly volatile liquids (such as alcohol and ether) could be used to drive down the temperature of an object past the freezing point of water.
Modern air conditioning systems are not designed to draw air into the room from the outside, they only recirculate the increasingly cool air on the inside.
It is an effective refrigerant with a global warming potential of 1, but it must use higher compression to produce an equivalent cooling effect.
Unloaders can be electrical or mechanical.
They cancel out, leaving a dimensionless quantity.
In common use, an '''air conditioner''' is a device that removes heat from the air inside a building or vehicle, thus lowering the air temperature.
The higher the SEER rating, the more energy efficient is the air conditioner.
Although these gasses can be recycled when air conditioning units are disposed of, uncontrolled dumping and leaking can release gas directly into the atmosphere.
Though Harrison had commercial success establishing a second ice company back in Sydney in 1860, he later entered the debate over how to compete against the American advantage of unrefrigerated beef sales to the United Kingdom.
finally decide in favor of the ozone- and climate-safe refrigerant for U.S. manufacture.
The liquefied gas then circulated through the refrigeration coils and vaporized again, cooling down the surrounding system.
In central air conditioning, the inside heat-exchanger is typically placed inside the central furnace/AC unit of the forced air heating system which is then used in the summer to distribute chilled air throughout a residence or commercial building.
The first air conditioner, designed and built in Buffalo by Carrier, began working on 17 July 1902.
Split-system air conditioners come in two forms: mini-split and central systems.
Designed to improve manufacturing process control in a printing plant, Carrier's invention controlled not only temperature but also humidity.
Inside the unit, the air passes over the evaporator coil first, and is cooled and dehumidified.
A clean and strong circulatory fan can help prevent this, as will raising the target cool temperature of the unit's thermostat to a point that the compressor is allowed to turn off occasionally.
The environmental organization Greenpeace solicited a European laboratory to research an alternative ozone- and climate-safe refrigerant in 1992, gained patent rights to a hydrocarbon mix of isopentane and isobutane, but then left the technology as open access.
After graduating from Cornell University, Carrier found a job at the Buffalo Forge Company.
Hose systems, which can be ''monoblock'' or ''air-to-air'', are vented to the outside via air ducts.
In India AC sales have dropped by 40%  due to higher costs and stricter energy efficiency regulations.
Realizing that air conditioning would one day be a standard feature of private homes, particularly in regions with warmer climate, David St. Pierre DuBose (1898-1994) designed a network of ductwork and vents for his home ''Meadowmont'', all disguised behind intricate and attractive Georgian-style open moldings.
Also, the compressor and heat exchanger can be located farther away from the inside space, rather than merely on the other side of the same unit as in a PTAC or window air conditioner.
In 747, Emperor Xuanzong (r. 712–762) of the Tang Dynasty (618–907) had the ''Cool Hall'' (''Liang Tian'') built in the imperial palace, which the ''Tang Yulin'' describes as having water-powered fan wheels for air conditioning as well as rising jet streams of water from fountains.
Their activist marketing first in Germany led to companies like Whirlpool, Bosch, and later LG and others to incorporate the technology throughout Europe, then Asia, although the corporate executives resisted in Latin America, so that it arrived in Argentina produced by a domestic firm in 2003, and then finally with giant Bosch's production in Brazil by 2004.
Willis Carrier adopted the term and incorporated it into the name of his company.
The controlled temperature and humidity helped maintain consistent paper dimensions and ink alignment.
According to his biographer, Vivian M. Sherlock, he blamed the "Ice King", Frederic Tudor, for his failure, suspecting that Tudor had launched a smear campaign against his invention.
