One STOBAR carrier:  was originally built as the 57,000 tonne Soviet  carrier ''Varyag'' and was later purchased as a stripped hulk by China in 1998 on the pretext of use as a floating casino, then partially rebuilt and towed to China for completion.
It also has the advantage of separating the recovery operation area from the launch area.
Carriers have evolved since their inception in the early twentieth century from wooden vessels used to deploy balloons to nuclear-powered warships that carry numerous fighter planes, strike aircraft, helicopters, and other types of aircraft.
Without catapults she can launch and recover lightly fueled naval fighters for air defense or anti-ship missions but not heavy conventional bombing strikes.
This either requires a thrust boost, a vertical component to its velocity, or a reduced take-off load (to lower mass).
As well as the supercarrier fleet, the US Navy has nine amphibious assault ships used primarily for helicopters (sometimes called helicopter carriers); these can also carry up to 25 fighter jets, and in some cases, are as large as some other nations' fixed-wing carriers.
Recently ,  previously known as the Royal Navy's , was retired from active service.
The "air boss" (usually a commander) occupies the top bridge (Primary Flight Control, also called ''primary'' or ''the tower'') and has the overall responsibility for controlling launch, recovery and "those aircraft in the air near the ship, and the movement of planes on the flight deck, which itself resembles a well-choreographed ballet."
Originally developed by the Royal Navy, it since has been adopted by many navies for smaller carriers.
The ship was launched in August 2013 and is scheduled for commissioning in 2018.
Later on in August 2013 Vice Admiral RK Dhowan, while talking about the detailed study underway on the IAC-II project, said that nuclear propulsion was also being considered.
A total of 20 fleet carriers are in active service with ten navies.
The spokesperson said one carrier would be assigned to the Russian Navy's Northern Fleet at Murmansk, and the second would be stationed with the Pacific Fleet at Vladivostok.
Alternatively, by reducing the fuel and weapon load, an aircraft is able to reach faster speeds and generate more upwards lift and launch without a ski-jump or catapult.
This was first developed to help launch STOVL aircraft take off at far higher weights than is possible with a vertical or rolling takeoff on flat decks.
South Korea believes it can procure 2 light aircraft carriers by 2036, which will help make the ROKN a blue water navy.
As a result of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922, which limited the construction of new heavy surface combat ships, most early aircraft carriers were conversions of ships that were laid down (or had served) as different ship types: cargo ships, cruisers, battlecruisers, or battleships.
CATO''BAR'' or STO''BAR'') to recover their aircraft.
Aircraft launch forward, into the wind, and are recovered from astern.
The ship successfully completed her sea trials in July 2013 and aviation trials in September 2013.
Speaking in St. Petersburg, Russia on 30 June 2011, the head of Russia's United Shipbuilding Corporation said his company expected to begin design work for a new carrier in 2016, with a goal of beginning construction in 2018 and having the carrier achieve initial operational capability by 2023.
This is the most expensive method as it requires complex machinery to be installed under the flight deck, but allows for even heavily-loaded aircraft to take off.
The carrier is expected to cost between $1.8 billion and $5.63 billion.
''São Paulo'' was first commissioned in 1963 by the French Navy as  and was transferred in 2000 to Brazil, where she became the new flagship of the Brazilian Navy.
Although technically VTOL aircraft, they are operationally STOVL aircraft due to the extra weight carried at take-off for fuel and armaments.
While the island is usually built on the starboard side of the fight deck, the Japanese aircraft carriers  and  had their islands built on the port side.
The ship will be powered by four gas-turbine engines and will have a range of , carrying 160 officers, 1,400 sailors, and 30 aircraft.
Furthermore, aircraft carriers facilitate quick and precise projections of overwhelming military power into such local and regional conflicts.
On the recovery side of the flight deck, the adaptation to the aircraft loadout is mirrored.
Most were built from mercantile hulls or, in the case of merchant aircraft carriers, were bulk cargo ships with a flight deck added on top.
India started the construction of a 40,000-tonne,   aircraft carrier in 2009.
On the other hand, the threatening role of aircraft carriers has a place in modern asymmetric warfare, like the gunboat diplomacy of the past.
On 24 or 25 November 2012, ''Liaoning'' successfully launched and recovered several Shenyang J-15 jet fighter aircraft.
Following the war, carrier operations continued to increase in size and importance.
On 9 May 1912 the first airplane take-off from a ship underway was made from the deck of the British Royal Navy's .
If the aircraft are VTOL-capable or helicopters, they do not need to decelerate and hence there is no such need.
The same is true of the F-35B Lightning II, which demonstrated VTOL capability in test flights but is operationally STOVL.
The ships are due to become operational starting in 2020.
During World War II, these ships would become known as fleet carriers.
Very few carriers have been designed or built without an island.
Usually this is below the water line so that the area can be flooded in case of emergency.
An angled deck also improves launch and recovery cycle flexibility with the option of simultaneous launching and recovery of aircraft.
An '''aircraft carrier''' is a warship that serves as a seagoing airbase, equipped with a full-length flight deck and facilities for carrying, arming, deploying, and recovering aircraft.
*  a class of eight 41,000 ton amphibious assault ships, members of this class have been used in wartime in their secondary mission as light carriers with 20 to 25 AV-8Bs after unloading their Marine expeditionary unit.
*  a class of 45,000 ton amphibious assault ships, although the lead ship in this class does not have a well deck.
In August 2013, a launching ceremony for Japan's largest military ship since World War II was held in Yokohama.
STOVL is used by other navies because it is cheaper to operate and still provides good deployment capability for fighter aircraft.
The Australian Defence Minister has publicly raised the possibility of procuring F-35B STOVL aircraft for the carrier, stating that it "has been on the table since day one and stating the LHD's are "STOVL capable".
At the end of 2010, sea trials began, and  ''São Paulo'' had been evaluated by the CIASA (Inspection Commission and Training Advisory).
3 amphibious assault ships: , 21,500 tonne full deck amphibious assault ships with hospital and well deck.
This allows heavily loaded and fueled aircraft a few more precious seconds to attain sufficient air velocity and lift to sustain normal flight.
As of , there are thirty-seven active aircraft carriers in the world within twelve navies.
Aircraft that are landing extend a tailhook that catches on arrestor wires stretched across the deck to bring themselves to a stop in a short distance.
*Short take-off but arrested recovery (STOBAR) depends on increasing the net lift on the aircraft.
She is classified as a training ship, intended to allow the navy to practice with carrier usage.
The large, modern  of US carriers has a displacement nearly four times that of the World War II–era , yet its complement of aircraft is roughly the same—a consequence of the steadily increasing size and weight of military aircraft over the years.
On 24 July 2007, the House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee recommended seven or eight new carriers (one every four years).
The first carrier-launched airstrike was the Tondern Raid in July 1918.
The P-700 systems will be removed in the coming refit to enlarge her below decks aviation facilities as well as upgrading her defensive systems.
The aircraft carrier dramatically changed naval combat in World War II, because air power was becoming a significant factor in warfare.
CATOBAR is most commonly used on USN supercarriers as it allows the deployment of heavy jets with full loadouts, especially on ground-attack missions.
For example, assisted launch mechanisms are used primarily for heavy aircraft, especially those loaded with air-to-ground weapons.
*Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL): Aircraft are specifically designed for the purpose of using very high degrees of thrust vectoring (e.g.
Soviet aircraft carriers now in use by Russia are actually called ''heavy aviation cruisers''; these ships, while sized in the range of large fleet carriers, were designed to deploy alone or with escorts, and provide both strong defensive weaponry and heavy offensive missiles equivalent to a guided missile cruiser, in addition to supporting fighters and helicopters.
The 1903 advent of heavier-than-air fixed-wing aircraft was closely followed on November 14, 1910 by Eugene Burton Ely's first experimental take-off of a Curtiss pusher airplane from the deck of a United States Navy ship, the  cruiser  anchored off the Norfolk Navy Base in Virginia.
However, the vulnerability of carriers compared to traditional battleships when forced into a gun-range encounter was quickly illustrated by the sinking of  by German battleships during the Norwegian campaign in 1940.
The handler works just inside the island from the flight deck and is responsible for the movement of aircraft before launching and after recovery.
The arrested-recovery system has used an angled deck since the 1950s because, in case the aircraft does not catch the arresting wire, the short deck allows easier take off by reducing the number of objects between the aircraft and the end of the runway.
''Izumo''s sister ship, ''Kaga'', is under construction and is projected to commission in 2017.
Today's aircraft carriers are so expensive that nations which operate them risk significant political, economic, and military impact if a carrier is lost, or even used in conflict.
They served the Royal Navy during the war and was the hull design chosen for nearly all aircraft carrier equipped navies after the war until the 1980s.
It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to maintain and operate the vessels.
Officially designated an aircraft carrying cruiser, she is unique in carrying a heavy cruiser's complement of defensive weapons and large P-700 Granit offensive missiles.
Conventional ("tailhook") aircraft rely upon a landing signal officer (LSO, radio call sign ''paddles'') to monitor the aircraft's approach, visually gauge glideslope, attitude, and airspeed, and transmit that data to the pilot.
One offshore helicopter support ship:  helicopter carrier: 11,400 tonne STOVL carrier based on Spanish  design.
In September 1914 the Imperial Japanese Navy  conducted the world's first successful ship-launched air raid: on 6 September 1914 a Farman aircraft launched by ''Wakamiya'' attacked the Austro-Hungarian cruiser  and the German gunboat ''Jaguar'' in Kiaochow Bay off Tsingtao; neither was hit.
The LHD is capable of launching multiple helicopters at one time while maintaining an amphibious capability of 1,000 troops and their supporting vehicles (tanks, armoured personnel carriers etc.).
CAM ships, were cargo-carrying merchant ships that could launch (but not retrieve) a single fighter aircraft from a catapult to defend the convoy from long range German aircraft.
Ship now used for royal transport, helicopter operations, and as a disaster relief platform.
The hangar is usually quite large and can take up several decks of vertical space.
This change took place during World War II in response to air power becoming a significant factor in warfare, driven by the superior range, flexibility and effectiveness of carrier-launched aircraft.
These conversions gave rise to the s (1927),  and .
To facilitate working on the flight deck of a U.S. aircraft carrier, the sailors wear colored shirts that designate their responsibilities.
The angled deck allows the installation of one or two "waist" catapults in addition to the two bow cats.
The current US fleet of ''Nimitz''-class carriers will be followed into service (and in some cases replaced) by the .
The UK 1942 Design Light Fleet Carrier was designed for building quickly by civilian shipyards and with an expected service life of about 3 years.
With the deactivation of  in December 2012, the U.S. fleet comprises 10 supercarriers.
As it is a training ship, ''Liaoning'' is not assigned to any of China's operation fleets.
Some are powered by nuclear reactors and form the core of a fleet designed to operate far from home.
They will be able to operate up to 40 aircraft in peace time with a tailored group of up to 50, and will have a displacement of 70,600&nbsp;tonnes.
A hangar storage several decks below the flight deck is where most aircraft are kept, and aircraft are taken from the lower storage decks to the flight deck through the use of an elevator.
HMS ''Queen Elizabeth'' is projected to commission in 2017 followed by ''Prince of Wales'' in about 2020.
In 1918,  became the world's first carrier capable of launching and recovering naval aircraft.
Typically, it is the capital ship of a fleet, as it allows a naval force to project air power worldwide without depending on local bases for staging aircraft operations.
Another disadvantage is on mixed flight deck operations where helicopters are also present such as a US Landing Helicopter Dock or Landing Helicopter Assault amphibious assault ship a ski jump is not included as this would eliminate one or more helicopter landing areas, this flat deck limits the loading of Harriers but is somewhat mitigated by the longer rolling start provided by a long flight deck compared to many STOVL carriers.
One CATOBAR carrier:  is a  currently in service with the Brazilian Navy.
For example, the Russian Su-33 is only able to launch from the carrier  with a minimal armament and fuel load.
Regardless of size, the ship itself must house their complement of aircraft, with space for launching, storing, and maintaining them.
However, the debate has deepened over budgeting for the $12–14.5&nbsp;billion (plus $12&nbsp;billion for development and research) for the 100,000 ton ''Gerald R. Ford''-class carrier (estimated service 2016) compared to the smaller $2&nbsp;billion 45,000 ton s able to deploy squadrons of F-35B of which one is already active, another is under construction and nine more are planned.
Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs, and their ship's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1,600 when the air group is embarked.
In addition, lack of an island meant difficulties managing the flight deck, performing air traffic control, a lack of radar housing placements and problems with navigating and controlling the ship itself.
There is no single definition of an "aircraft carrier", and modern navies use several variants of the type.
Two months later, on January 18, 1911, Ely landed his Curtiss pusher airplane on a platform on the armored cruiser USS ''Pennsylvania'' anchored in San Francisco Bay.
''Canberra'' underwent sea trials in late 2013 and was commissioned in 2014.
The versatility of the carrier was demonstrated in November 1940 when  launched a long-range strike on the Italian fleet at their base in Taranto, signalling the beginning of the effective and highly mobile aircraft strikes.
It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to staff, maintain and operate its supercarriers.
The two ships will be the largest warships ever built for the Royal Navy.
The top of the carrier is the flight deck, where aircraft are launched and recovered.
The main new features are implementation of Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS) (which replace the old steam catapults) and unmanned aerial vehicles.
This operation incapacitated three of the six battleships at a cost of two torpedo bombers.
The primary function of this angled deck is to allow aircraft that miss the arresting wires, referred to as a bolter, to become airborne again without the risk of hitting aircraft parked forward.
Since the early 1950s on conventional carriers it has been the practice to recover aircraft at an angle to port of the axial line of the ship.
On 2 June 2016, Egypt received the first of two helicopter carriers acquired in October 2015, the Landing Helicopter Dock Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Specialist carrier evolution was well underway, with several navies ordering and building warships that were purposefully designed to function as aircraft carriers by the mid-1920s, resulting in the commissioning of ships such as  (1922),  (1924), and  (1927).
The United States Navy has 10 large nuclear-powered carriers (known as supercarriers, carrying up to 90 aircraft each), the largest carriers in the world; the total deckspace is over twice that of all other nations' combined.
The carrier is being constructed by Cochin Shipyard.
The development of flattop vessels produced the first large fleet ships.
Use of STOVL tends to allow aircraft to carry a larger payload as compared to during VTOL use, while still only requiring a short runway.
Nine Amphibious assault ships:
1 Landing helicopter dock used as a STOVL carrier: : 27,000 tonne, Specially designed multipurpose strategic projection ship which can operate as an amphibious assault ship or STOVL carrier depending on mission requirement, has full facilities for both functions including a ski jump ramp, well deck, and vehicle storage area which can be used as additional hangar space, launched in 2008, commissioned 30 September 2010.
One  18,860 ton full deck amphibious assault ship with hospital and well deck and facilities to serve as fleet flagship.
On 26 December 2012, the People's Daily reported that it will take four to five years for ''Liaoning'' to reach full capacity, mainly due to training and coordination which will take significant amount of time for Chinese PLA Navy to complete as this is the first aircraft carrier in their possession.
Commissioned in 1997.
The Australian version retains the ski-ramp from the ''Juan Carlos I'' design, although the RAN has not acquired carrier based fixed-wing aircraft.
This carrier will be a hybrid of CATOBAR and STOBAR, given the fact that it utilizes both systems of launching aircraft.
Munitions are commonly stored on the lower decks because they are highly explosive should the compartment they are in be breached.
Therefore, an aircraft carrier is generally accompanied by a number of other ships to provide protection for the relatively unwieldy carrier, to carry supplies and perform other support services, and to provide additional offensive capabilities.
She was expected to rejoin the fleet in late 2013, but suffered another major fire in 2012.
With the deactivation of  in December 2012 (decommissioning scheduled for 2016), the U.S. fleet comprises 10 active supercarriers.
Ships of this class can have a secondary mission as a light carrier with 20 AV-8B Harrier II, and in the future the F-35B Lightning II aircraft after unloading their Marine expeditionary unit.
These are the largest carriers capable of fast speeds.
1  - , 19,500-ton (27,000 tons full load) helicopter carrier, launched August 2013 and commissioned March 2015.
One amphibious assault ship: .
As "runways at sea", aircraft carriers have a flat-top flight deck, which launches and recovers aircraft.
Launched in 1985 as ''Tbilisi'', renamed and operational from 1995.
The two ships will be the largest warships ever built for the Royal Navy.
Carrier operations of other nations use similar color schemes.
These variants are sometimes categorized as sub-types of aircraft carriers, and sometimes as distinct types of naval aviation-capable ships.
Without a ski-jump launching fully loaded and fueled aircraft such as the Harrier would not be possible on a smaller flat deck ship before either stalling out or crashing directly into the sea.
Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs, and their ship's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1600 when the air group is embarked.
The House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee on 24 July 2007, recommended seven or maybe eight new carriers (one every four years).
Amphibious assault ships, such as  and , serve the purpose of carrying and landing Marines, and operate a large contingent of helicopters for that purpose.
Aircraft carriers are expensive to build and are critical assets.
Aircraft do not require catapult assistance for take off; instead on nearly all ships of this type an upwards vector is provided by a ski-jump at the forward end of the flight deck, often combined with thrust vectoring by the aircraft.
The navy also evaluated the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS), which is being used by the US Navy in their latest s. General Atomics, the developer of the EMALS, was cleared by the US government to give a technical demonstration to Indian Navy officers, who were impressed by the new capabilities of the system.
The disadvantage of the ski-jump is the penalty it exacts on aircraft size, payload, and fuel load (and thus range); heavily laden aircraft can not launch using a ski-jump because their high loaded weight requires either a longer takeoff roll than is possible on a carrier deck, or assistance from a catapult or JATO rocket.
Although with similar complement to escort carriers, they had the advantage of speed from their converted cruiser hulls.
She was formally commissioned on 16 November 2013 at a ceremony held at Severodvinsk, Russia.
The Russian Government just recently gave the green light for the construction of the Shtorm-class aircraft carrier.
Several months later, on 3 November 2011 the Russian newspaper ''Izvestiya'' reported that the naval building plan now included (first) the construction of a new shipyard capable of building large hull ships, after which Moscow will build two (80,000 tons full load each) nuclear-powered aircraft carriers by 2027.
Landing Platform Helicopter, a type of Amphibious assault ship
Following this concept, light aircraft carriers built by the US, such as , represented a larger, more "militarized" version of the escort carrier.
Helicopters and aircraft capable of vertical or short take-off and landing (V/STOL) usually recover by coming abreast the carrier on the port side and then using their hover capability to move over the flight deck and land vertically without the need for arresting gear.
Due to the busy nature of the flight deck, only 20 or so aircraft may be on it at any one time.
They had higher range and precision than naval guns, making them highly effective.
The Republic of Korea Navy (South Korea) believes it can deploy two light aircraft carriers by 2036 and expand its blue-water force to cope with the rapid naval buildups of China and Japan, according to a Navy source.
The flight deck is where the most notable differences between a carrier and a land runway are found.
The ship is able to carry up to 14 helicopters; however, only seven ASW helicopters and two SAR helicopters were planned for the initial aircraft complement.
Space is also required for the large crew, supplies (food, munitions, fuel, engineering parts), and propulsion.
Their primary roles are to embark, transport and deploy an embarked force and to carry out or support humanitarian assistance missions.
Lacking the firepower of other warships, carriers by themselves are considered vulnerable to attack by other ships, aircraft, submarines, or missiles.
Escort aircraft carriers, such as , were sometimes purpose-built, but most were converted from merchant ships as a stop-gap measure to provide anti-submarine air support for convoys and amphibious invasions.
*Short take-off vertical-landing (STOVL): On aircraft carriers, non-catapult-assisted, fixed-wing short takeoffs are accomplished with the use of thrust vectoring, which may also be used in conjunction with a runway "ski-jump".
Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope, former head of the Royal Navy, has said that "To put it simply, countries that aspire to strategic international influence have aircraft carriers".
A ''Nimitz''-class carrier is powered by two nuclear reactors providing steam to four steam turbines and is  long.
During the period from 2005–2010, ''São Paulo'' underwent extensive modernization.
Although STOVL aircraft are capable of taking off vertically from a spot on the deck, using the ramp and a running start is far more fuel efficient and permits a heavier launch weight.
The first of this class, , is now in active service with another, , under construction and 9 more are planned.
Supercarriers, displacing 75,000&nbsp;tonnes or greater, have become the pinnacle of carrier development.
Russian, Chinese, and future Indian carriers include a ski-jump ramp for launching lightly loaded conventional fighter aircraft but recover using traditional carrier arresting cables and a tailhook on their aircraft.
It is a CATOBAR-type carrier that uses two 75&nbsp;m C13‑3 steam catapults of a shorter version of the catapult system installed on the U.S.  carriers, one catapult at the bow and one across the front of the landing area.
This affects take-off procedure, as a shorter runway length of the deck requires that aircraft accelerate more quickly to gain lift.
Key personnel involved in the flight deck include the shooters, the handler, and the air boss.
The flight deck has five helicopter landing spots that allow simultaneous landings or take-offs.
As catapults are unnecessary, carriers with this arrangement reduce weight, complexity, and space needed for complex steam or electromagnetic launching equipment, vertical landing aircraft also remove the need for arresting cables and related hardware.
The current US fleet of  carriers will be followed into service (and in some cases replaced) by the ten-ship .
However, the debate has deepened over budgeting for the $12–14.5&nbsp;billion (plus $12&nbsp;billion for development and research) for the 100,000 ton ''Gerald R. Ford''-class carrier (estimated service 2016) compared to the smaller $2&nbsp;billion 45,000 ton s, which are able to deploy squadrons of F-35Bs.
Shooters are naval aviators or Naval Flight Officers and are responsible for launching aircraft.
From the late 1950s onward, visual landing aids such as Optical Landing System have provided information on proper glide slope, but LSOs still transmit voice calls to approaching pilots by radio.
The ''flush deck'' configuration proved to have significant drawbacks, primary of which was management of the exhaust from the power plant.
Additionally, the navies of Australia, Brazil, China, France, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Spain, Thailand and the United States also operate ships capable of carrying and operating multiple helicopters and STOVL aircraft.
The decommissioned supercarrier  is being held in reserve until the first of the new  comes into service in 2016.
The ship is equipped with two Phalanx CIWS and two SeaRAM for its defense.
The ships are  and .
The , 19,500-ton flattop  was deployed in March 2015.
''Light aircraft carriers'' were carriers that were fast enough to operate with the fleet but of smaller size with reduced aircraft capacity.
1 STOBAR carrier: , 45,400 tonnes, modified ''Kiev'' class.
They were smaller and slower with lower numbers of aircraft carried.
World War II in the Pacific Ocean involved clashes between aircraft carrier fleets.
The most famous examples are the Hawker Siddeley Harrier and the Sea Harrier.
The Royal Australian Navy is in the process of procuring two Canberra-class LHD's, the first of which was commissioned in November 2015, while the second is expected to enter service in 2016.
Each method has advantages and disadvantages of its own:
This is the largest military ship Japan has had since World War II.
10 CATOBAR carriers: : ten 101,000 ton nuclear-powered supercarriers, the first of which was commissioned in 1975.
''Canberra''s sister ship, , was commissioned in December 2015.
The ships are due to become operational from 2020.
By the end of the catapult stroke, the aircraft is airborne and further propulsion is provided by its own engines.
Fumes coming across the deck were a major issue in .
US supercarriers are notable for having nuclear reactors powering their systems and propulsion.
A ski-jump ramp works by converting some of the forward rolling movement of the aircraft into vertical velocity and is sometimes combined with the aiming of jet thrust partly downwards.
