An airport can have areas where collisions between aircraft on the ground tend to occur.
Hazards to aircraft include debris, nesting birds, and reduced friction levels due to environmental conditions such as ice, snow, or rain.
The CTAF may be a Universal Integrated Community (UNICOM), MULTICOM, Flight Service Station (FSS), or tower frequency.
These systems became commonplace in the United States by the 1970s.
While in India GMR Group operates, through joint ventures, Indira Gandhi International Airport and Rajiv Gandhi International Airport.
VORs are often accompanied by a distance measuring equipment (DME) to determine the distance to the VOR.
Rome Ciampino Airport, opened 1916, is also a contender, as well as the Don Mueang International Airport near Bangkok, Thailand, which opened in 1914.
The first airport to operate scheduled international commercial services was Hounslow Heath Aerodrome in August 1919, but it was closed and supplanted by Croydon Airport in March 1920.
Some airbases, known as ''military airports'', provide facilities similar to their civilian counterparts.
Low-traffic airports may use pilot controlled lighting to save electricity and staffing costs.
In adverse weather conditions, ice and snow clearing equipment can be used to improve traction on the landing strip.
However, at particularly busy airports, or airports with other special requirements, there is an air traffic control (ATC) system whereby controllers (usually ground-based) direct aircraft movements via radio or other communications links.
There are a number of aids available to pilots, though not all airports are equipped with them.
After a plane has landed, it will depart the runway and be returned to Ground Control.
Bisbee-Douglas International Airport in Arizona was declared "the first international airport of the Americas" by US president Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1943.
Bardufoss Airport, Bardufoss Air Station in Norway and Pune Airport in India are examples of this.
Mobile stairs can give the ground crew more access to the aircraft's cabin.
The construction of new airports or addition of runways to existing airports, is often resisted by local residents because of the effect on countryside, historical sites, local flora and fauna.
Aircraft noise not only occurs from take-off and landings, but also ground operations including maintenance and testing of aircraft.
In 1922, the first permanent airport and commercial terminal solely for commercial aviation was opened at Flughafen Devau near what was then Königsberg, East Prussia.
The Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport has a tram that takes people through the concourses and baggage claim.
In the U.S. and Canada, the vast majority of airports, large and small, will either have some form of automated airport weather station, a human observer or a combination of the two.
The predetermined circuit helps traffic flow smoothly because all pilots know what to expect, and helps reduce the chance of a mid-air collision.
Airports may also contain premium and VIP services.
Airport crash tender crews are equipped for dealing with airfield accidents, crew and passenger extractions, and the hazards of highly flammable aviation fuel.
It keeps the electricity running in the plane when it stands at the terminal.
Standard traffic patterns are ''left-handed'', meaning all turns are made to the left.
The number of instrument approaches based on the use of the Global Positioning System (GPS) is rapidly increasing and may eventually be the primary means for instrument landings.
To film in an airside location, all visitors must go through security, the same as passengers, and be accompanied by a full airside pass holder and have photographic identification with them at all times.
Some airports have unofficial names, possibly so widely circulated that its official name is little used or even known.
In the 1940s, the slope-line approach system was introduced.
The busiest airports also have ''clearance delivery'', ''apron control'', and other specialized ATC stations.
Busy airports have air traffic control (ATC) system.
Pooley's also contains information on some continental European airports that are close to Great Britain.
For example, RAF Brize Norton in the UK has a terminal which caters to passengers for the Royal Air Force's scheduled TriStar flights to the Falkland Islands.
Now most airports in Canada are owned and operated by individual legal authorities or are municipally owned.
Airport guidance signs provide direction and information to taxiing aircraft and airport vehicles.
The system has recently become so advanced that controllers can predict whether an aircraft will be delayed on landing before it even takes off; that aircraft can then be delayed on the ground, rather than wasting expensive fuel waiting in the air.
Some airport structures include on-site hotels built within or attached to a terminal building.
Another airport known for considering environmental parameters is the Seymour Airport at Galapagos Islands.
In the United States, many larger civilian airports also host an Air National Guard base.
Later, concrete surfaces would allow landings, rain or shine, day or night.
Bremen Airport opened in 1913 and remains in use, although it served as an American military field between 1945 and 1949.
Together with the landing aircraft's arresting hook, it is used in situations where the aircraft's brakes would be insufficient by themselves.
Runway edge lighting consists of white lights spaced out on both sides of the runway, indicating the edge.
The airports of this era used a paved "apron", which permitted night flying as well as landing heavier aircraft.
Passage between landside and airside is tightly controlled at all airports.
Nontowered airport have no operating control tower and therefore two-way radio communications are not required, though it is good operating practice for pilots to transmit their intentions on the airport’s common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) for the benefit of other aircraft in the area.
"Floating airports" are being designed which could be located out at sea and which would use designs such as pneumatic stabilized platform technology.
Runways were extended out to .
A tow tractor pulls the aircraft to one of the airbridges, The ground power unit is plugged in.
In the U.S., all commercial airport runways are certified by the FAA under the Code of Federal Regulations Title 14 Part 139, "Certification of Commercial Service Airports" but maintained by the local airport under the regulatory authority of the FAA.
After their development in World War I, aircraft carriers replaced the battleship as the centrepiece of a modern fleet during World War II.
The tow tractor pushes the aircraft away from the terminal to a taxi area.
There is a cleaning service to clean the aircraft after the aircraft lands.
Many large airports are located near railway trunk routes for seamless connection of multimodal transport, for instance Frankfurt Airport, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, London Heathrow Airport, London Gatwick Airport and London Stansted Airport.
Germany's Frankfurt Airport is managed by the quasi-private firm Fraport.
The world's first airport to be fully powered by solar energy is located at Kochi, India.
Since the September 11, 2001 attacks, airport security has dramatically increased.
Larger airports for airline flights generally have paved runways  or longer.
The engines are not working, therefore they do not generate the electricity, as they do in flight.
They may help to assure smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft.
Airlines sometimes operate multiple lounges within the one airport terminal allowing ultra-premium customers, such as first class customers, additional services, which are not available to other premium customers.
When a plane is ready to takeoff it will stop short of the runway, at which point it will be turned over to Tower Control.
Landside, filming can take place in all public areas.
And due to the so-called SLOT-times, the overall traffic planning tend to assure landing queues are avoided.
Airlines pay great attention to minimizing turnaround times in an effort to keep aircraft utilization (flying time) high, with times scheduled as low as 25 minutes for jet aircraft operated by low-cost carriers on narrow-body aircraft.
Many airports are built near open fields or wetlands.
This can sometimes be part of a reciprocal deal, as when multiple airlines are part of the same alliance, or as a ploy to attract premium customers away from rival airlines.
If it has landed, they rise, the ground crew push the luggage container on the hi-loader, which carries it down.
Many ground crew at the airport work at the aircraft.
Ground Control is responsible for directing all ground traffic in designated "movement areas", except the traffic on runways.
But it also meant that passengers had to travel further to reach their plane.
The earliest aircraft takeoff and landing sites were grassy fields.
Such a connection lowers risk of missed flights due to traffic congestion.
For smaller piston engined airplanes at smaller airfields without ILS equipment, things are very different though.
After World War II, airport design became more sophisticated.
Many airport hotels also have agreements with airlines to provide overnight lodging for displaced passengers.
To access airside, one must go through Security, and if applicable, Passport Control too.
At all airports the use of a traffic pattern (often called a ''traffic circuit'' outside the U.S.) is possible.
However, as some countries have agreements that allow travel between them without customs and immigrations, such facilities are not a definitive need for an international airport.
Most major airports provide commercial outlets for products and services.
An even larger type is provided by the company YOTEL.
There are a number of aids available to pilots, though not all airports are equipped with them.
Smaller aerodromes may have few or no signs, relying instead on diagrams and charts.
One such example of this is ''The Terminal'', a film about a man who becomes permanently grounded in an airport terminal and must survive only on the food and shelter provided by the airport.
Part of runway maintenance is airfield rubber removal which helps maintain friction levels.
This consisted of two rows of lights that formed a funnel indicating an aircraft's position on the glideslope.
The world's widest paved runway is at Ulyanovsk Vostochny Airport in Russia and is  wide.
Aircraft had to approach these from certain directions and this led to the development of aids for directing the approach and landing slope.
A water truck fills the water tanks of the aircraft.
Lounges themselves typically have seating, showers, quiet areas, televisions, computer, Wi-Fi and Internet access, and power outlets that passengers may use for their electronic equipment.
Most airport names include the location.
An international airport has additional facilities for customs and passport control.
Following the war, some of these military airfields added civil facilities for handling passenger traffic.
Airline lounges frequently offer free or reduced cost food, as well as alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages.
Air safety is an important concern in the operation of an airport, and almost every airfield includes equipment and procedures for handling emergency situations.
The landside is where the exporters and importers through either their agents or by themselves deliver or collect shipments while the airside is where loads are moved to or from the aircraft.
It has a length of .
A fuel transfer vehicle transfers aviation fuel from fuel tanks underground, to the aircraft tanks.
National Air Traffic Services, the UK's Air Navigation Service Provider, a public–private partnership also publishes an online AIP for the UK.
A towered airport has an operating control tower that is responsible for overseeing the safe, orderly, and expeditious flow of air traffic at airports.
For waiting aircraft, equipment is used to spray special deicing fluids on the wings.
The construction of airports has been known to change local weather patterns.
DAFIF also includes extensive airport data.
Pearson Field Airport in Vancouver, Washington had a dirigible land in 1905 and planes in 1911 and is still in use.
It is common for airports to provide moving walkways and buses.
The distances passengers need to move within a large airport can be substantial.
Additional lights indicated incorrect altitude and direction.
In addition cargo terminals are divided into distinct areas – export, import and interline or transhipment
Most airports welcome filming on site, although it must be agreed in advance and may be subject to a fee.
On runways, green lights indicate the beginning of the runway for landing, while red lights indicate the end of the runway.
Each leg is named (see diagram), and ATC directs pilots on how to join and leave the circuit.
An airport with a helipad for rotorcraft but no runway is called a heliport.
Designated areas or sheds may be given to airlines or freight forward ring agencies.
Heavier aircraft require longer runways.
Microburst radar was developed as an aid to safety during landing, giving two to five minutes warning to aircraft in the vicinity of the field of a microburst event.
These include clothing boutiques and restaurants.
While this system keeps the airspace free and is simpler for pilots, it requires detailed knowledge of how aircraft are planning to use the airport ahead of time and is therefore only possible with large commercial airliners on pre-scheduled flights.
Other noise and environmental concerns are vehicle traffic causing noise and pollution on roads leading the airport.
Parking areas for aircraft away from terminals are called aprons.
During the 1980s, a phenomenon known as microburst became a growing concern due to aircraft accidents caused by microburst wind shear, such as Delta Air Lines Flight 191.
Premium services may sometimes be open to passengers who are members of a different airline's frequent flyer program.
These weather observations, predominantly in the METAR format, are available over the radio, through automatic terminal information service (ATIS), via the ATC or the flight service station.
This coordinated oversight facilitates safety and speed in complex operations where traffic moves in all three dimensions.
, the CIA stated that there were approximately 44,000 "... airports or airfields recognizable from the air" around the world, including 15,095 in the US, the US having the most in the world.
* The United States
An aircraft carrier is a warship that functions as a mobile airbase.
The majority of the world's airports are non-towered, with no air traffic control presence.
Some airports have more complicated lighting on the runways including lights that run down the centerline of the runway and lights that help indicate the approach (an approach lighting system, or ALS).
'', ''Airport'' (1970), ''Die Hard 2'', ''Soul Plane'', ''Jackie Brown'', ''Get Shorty'', ''Home Alone'', ''Liar Liar'', ''Passenger 57'', ''Final Destination'' (2000), ''Unaccompanied Minors'', ''Catch Me If You Can'', ''Rendition'' and ''The Langoliers''.
Some examples of this would include the AirTrain JFK at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, Link Light Rail that runs from the heart of downtown Seattle to Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, and the Silver Line T at Boston's Logan International Airport by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA).
A visual approach slope indicator (VASI) helps pilots fly the approach for landing.
They are also one of the major elements in movies such as ''The V.I.P.s'', ''Airplane!
Major airports in such countries as Russia and Japan offer miniature sleeping units within the airport that are available for rent by the hour.
Airports with international flights have customs and immigration facilities.
An improvement in the landing field was the introduction of grooves in the concrete surface.
Airports have played major roles in films and television programs due to their very nature as a transport and international hub, and sometimes because of distinctive architectural features of particular airports.
Planes take-off and land ''into'' the wind in order to achieve maximum performance.
The fields were constructed out of reinforced concrete using a slip-form machine that produces a continual slab with no disruptions along the length.
A toilet waste truck removes the human waste from the tank which holds the waste from the toilets in the aircraft.
The aircraft's horizontal and vertical movement is tracked via radar, and the controller tells the pilot his position relative to the approach slope.
Large airports have a frequency called ''Clearance Delivery'' which is used by departing aircraft specifically for this purpose.
Airport hotels have grown popular due to their convenience for transient passengers and easy accessibility to the airport terminal.
Access from landside areas to airside areas is tightly controlled at most airports.
The conveyor, which is a conveyor belt on a truck, brings in the awkwardly shaped, or late luggage.
Airport security normally requires baggage checks, metal screenings of individual persons, and rules against any object that could be used as a weapon.
Due to the risk of collision between birds and aircraft, large airports undertake population control programs where they frighten or shoot birds.
Passenger buildings were being grouped together in an island, with runways arranged in groups about the terminal.
The premium and VIP services may include express check-in and dedicated check-in counters.
Cargo Terminal Facilities are areas where international airports export cargo has to be stored after customs clearance and prior to loading on the aircraft.
Multiple lounges may also prevent overcrowding of the lounge facilities.
Some of the airport administrations prepare and publish annual environmental reports in order to show how they consider these environmental concerns in airport management issues and how they protect environment from airport operations.
Air safety is an important concern in the operation of an airport, and airports often have their own safety services.
170 degrees) from the north (coming from 360/0 degrees heading towards 180 degrees), the aircraft will land as fast as possible by just turning 10 degrees and follow the glidepath, without orbit the runway for visual reasons, whenever this is possible.
However, these only functioned well in dry conditions.
Flight catering provides the food and drinks on flights.
Some airports, typically military airbases, have long runways used as emergency landing sites.
They have also played important parts in television series like ''Lost'', ''The Amazing Race'', ''America's Next Top Model, Cycle 10'' which have significant parts of their story set within airports.
All airports use a traffic pattern to assure smooth traffic flow between departing and arriving aircraft.
Airports can be towered or non-towered, depending on air traffic density and available funds.
Many small airports have dirt, grass, or gravel runways, rather than asphalt or concrete.
They also carry luggage to the terminal if the aircraft has landed, and is being unloaded.
Many U.S. airports still lease part or all of their facilities to outside firms, who operate functions such as retail management and parking.
The title of "world's oldest airport" is disputed, but College Park Airport in Maryland, US, established in 1909 by Wilbur Wright, is generally agreed to be the world's oldest continually operating airfield, although it serves only general aviation traffic.
This term is misleading as prices often match the manufacturers' suggested retail price (MSRP) but are almost never discounted.
These include the Airport Tycoon series.
Landside areas include parking lots, public transportation train stations and access roads.
That is to say, all airports are aerodromes, but not all aerodromes are airports.
Traffic patterns are flown at one specific altitude, usually  above ground level (AGL).
In warfare, airports can become the focus of intense fighting, for example the Battle of Tripoli Airport or the Battle for Donetsk Airport, both taking place in 2014.
It serves about 35,000,000 passengers each year and continues to expand, recently opening a new 11,000 foot (3,355 meter) runway.
Sometimes these premium services will be offered to a non-premium passenger if the airline has made a mistake in handling of the passenger, such as unreasonable delays or mishandling of checked baggage.
Aircraft carriers allow a naval force to project air power without having to depend on local bases for land-based aircraft.
Of the airports constructed during this early period in aviation, it is one of the largest and busiest that is still currently operating.
Airports are divided into landside and airside.
Aircraft noise is a major cause of noise disturbance to residents living near airports.
The rest of India's airports are managed by the Airports Authority of India.
One of the earliest such fields was Paris – Le Bourget Airport at Le Bourget, near Paris.
Every cargo terminal has a landside and an airside.
The early 1960s also saw the introduction of jet bridge systems to modern airport terminals, an innovation which eliminated outdoor passenger boarding.
Most of the world's airports are owned by local, regional, or national government bodies.
Aircraft which are only passing through the airspace must also contact Tower Control in order to be sure that they remain clear of other traffic.
Many airport names honour a public figure, commonly a politician (e.g.
Other airports are located near densely populated urban or suburban areas.
Some airbases are co-located with civilian airports, sharing the same ATC facilities, runways, taxiways and emergency services, but with separate terminals, parking areas and hangars.
Amsterdam Airport Schiphol opened on September 16, 1916 as a military airfield, but only accepted civil aircraft from December 17, 1920, allowing Sydney Airport in Sydney, Australia—which started operations in January 1920—to claim to be one of the world's oldest continually operating commercial airports.
Areas have to be kept aside for examination of export and import cargo by the airport authorities.
There is no technical need within modern aviation for performing this pattern, ''provided there is no queue''.
The smallest type is the capsule hotel popular in Japan.
This includes some airports that do not have scheduled airline services (e.g.
However airside, filming is sometimes heavily restricted.
Sleep can be affected if the airports operate night and early morning flights.
Large airports usually have access also through controlled-access highways ('freeways' or 'motorways') from which motor vehicles enter either the departure loop or the arrival loop.
Because pilots need instantaneous information during landing, a windsock is also kept in view of the runway.
However, some airports now regulate costs to keep them comparable to "street prices".
''Good Will Hunting''.
A tractor and its dollies bring in luggage from the terminal to the aircraft.
Many airports have lighting that help guide planes using the runways and taxiways at night or in rain, snow, or fog.
Such a base typically includes a stretch of open water for takeoffs and landings, and seaplane docks for tying-up.
