In February 2014, the Egyptian Ministry for Antiquities announced what it called conclusive evidence that Akhenaten shared power with his father for at least 8 years.
It has been suggested that after the death of Akhenaten, Nefertiti reigned with the name of Neferneferuaten but other scholars believe this female ruler was rather Meritaten.
Akhenaten did refer to himself as "The Unique One of Re", and he may have used his control of artistic expression to distance himself from the common people, though such a radical departure from the idealized traditional representation of the image of the pharaoh would be truly extraordinary.
The only name he kept was his prenomen or throne name of Neferkheperure.
James Henry Breasted likened him to Jesus,  Arthur Weigall saw him as a failed precursor of Christ and Thomas Mann saw him "as right on the way and yet not the right one for the way".
Marfan's syndrome, unlike Froelich's, does not result in any lack of intelligence or sterility.
Akhenaten pointedly refused to save his vassal Rib-Hadda of Byblos — whose kingdom was being besieged by the expanding state of Amurru under Abdi-Ashirta and later Aziru, son of Abdi-Ashirta — despite Rib-Hadda's numerous pleas for help from the pharaoh.
There is much controversy around whether Amenhotep IV succeeded to the throne on the death of his father Amenhotep III or whether there was a coregency (lasting as long as 12 years according to some Egyptologists).
When the loyal but unfortunate Rib-Hadda was killed at the instigation of Aziru, Akhenaten sent an angry letter to Aziru containing a barely veiled accusation of outright treachery on the latter's part.
DNA tests in 2010 indicated Tutankhamun was indeed the son of Akhenaten.
And my messengers did see with their own eyes!
A secondary wife of Akhenaten named Kiya is known from inscriptions.
Rib-Hadda would pay the ultimate price; his exile from Byblos due to a coup led by his brother Ilirabih is mentioned in one letter.
"Great of Kingship in Akhet-Aten"
Another suggestion by Burridge is that Akhenaten may have suffered from Marfan's Syndrome.
Akhenaten tried to bring about a departure from traditional religion, yet in the end it would not be accepted.
Before much of the archaeological evidence from Thebes and from Tell el-Amarna became available, wishful thinking sometimes turned Akhenaten into a humane teacher of the true God, a mentor of Moses, a christlike figure, a philosopher before his time.
This letter shows that Akhenaten paid close attention to the affairs of his vassals in Canaan and Syria.
This is a list of Akhenaten's children (known and theoretical) with suggested years of birth:
Because only he knew his father's mind and will, Akhenaten alone could interpret that will for all mankind with true teaching coming only from him.
In 2007, Zahi Hawass and a team of researchers made CT Scan images of Mummy 61074.
Why are you at peace with a ruler whom the king is fighting?
Donald B. Redford has noted that some have viewed Akhenaten as a harbinger of Jesus.
Not only were the streets of Akhetaten filled with the pharaoh's soldiers; it seems the population now had to contend with the danger of malicious informers."
Some view this to indicate that Akhenaten fathered his own grandchildren.
And if you did act loyally, still all the things you wrote were not true.
He ordered the defacing of Amun's temples throughout Egypt and, in a number of instances, inscriptions of the plural 'gods' were also removed.
Initially, he permitted worship of Egypt's traditional deities to continue but near the Temple of Karnak (Amun-Ra's great cult center), he erected several massive buildings including temples to the Aten.
On several monuments, the two are shown seated side by side.
Questions remain whether the beauty of Nefertiti is portraiture or idealism.
There is little or no evidence to support the notion that Akhenaten was a progenitor of the full-blown monotheism that we find in the Bible.
Although some believe the religion he introduced was mostly monotheistic, many others see Akhenaten as a practitioner of an Aten monolatry, as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods; he simply refrained from worshiping any but the Aten while expecting the people to worship not Aten but him.
In these new temples, Aten was worshipped in the open sunlight rather than in dark temple enclosures as had been the previous custom.
Current literature by Eric Cline, Nicholas Reeves, Peter Dorman and other scholars comes out strongly against the establishment of a long coregency between the two rulers and in favour of either no coregency or a brief one lasting one to two years at the most.
Rather than a lover, however, Smenkhkare is likely to have been a half-brother or a son to Akhenaten.
In the 1970s, John Harris identified the figure pictured alongside Akhenaten as Nefertiti, arguing that she may have actually been elevated to coregent and perhaps even succeeded temporarily as an independent ruler, changing her name to Smenkhkare.
DNA analysis has determined that the man buried in KV55 is the father of King Tutankhamun, but its identification as Akhenaten has been questioned.
Velikovsky also posited that Akhenaten had swollen legs.
However, this is unlikely because this disorder results in sterility and Akhenaten is known to have fathered numerous children.
More recent research by James Allen and Marc Gabolde has led to "a fair degree of consensus" that Neferneferuaten was a female ruler apart from Smenkhkare.
You have sent plated ones of wood.
I will give you ones made also of lapis lazuli.
— year 35 or 36 of Amenhotep III's reign
If you really are the king's servant, why did you not denounce him before the king, your lord, saying, "This mayor has written to me saying, 'Take me to yourself and get me into my city'"?
But these imaginary creatures are now fading away as the historical reality gradually emerges.
Were you ignorant of the treacherousness of the men?
Freud argued that Moses had been an Atenist priest forced to leave Egypt with his followers after Akhenaten's death.
"Exalter of the Name of Aten"
A team of Spanish archeologists have been working at this tomb.
The inscription giving the filiation of the child is damaged, thereby preventing resolution of the issue.
These notions were discarded once the coregent was identified as a female, most likely his wife.
Others hold that, since these grandchildren are not attested to elsewhere, they are fictions invented to fill the space originally filled by Kiya's child.
Based on this, he identified Akhenaten as the history behind the Oedipus myth, Oedipus being Greek for "swollen feet", and moved the setting from the Greek Thebes to the Egyptian Thebes.
In my brother's country gold is as plentiful as dust.
I am indeed guarding the place of the king, my lord, the Sun of the sky, where I am, and all the things the king, my lord, has written me, I am indeed carrying out — everything!
"Strong Bull, Beloved of Aten"
Early excavations at Amarna by Flinders Petrie sparked interest in the enigmatic pharaoh, and a mummy found in the tomb KV55, which was unearthed in 1907 in a dig led by Edward R. Ayrton, is likely that of Akhenaten.
On the basis of his long jaw and his feminine appearance, Cyril Aldred, following up earlier arguments of Grafton Elliot Smith and James Strachey, suggested he may have suffered from Froelich's Syndrome.
Significantly, and for the only time in the history of Egyptian royal art, Akhenaten's family are shown taking part in decidedly naturalistic activities, showing affection for each other, and being caught in mid-action (in traditional art, a pharaoh's divine nature was expressed by repose, even immobility).
He identifies that their early deaths were probably a result of a Familial Temporal Epilepsy.
A group of Egypt's allies who attempted to rebel against the Hittites were captured, and wrote letters begging Akhenaten for troops, but he did not respond to most of their pleas.
Because no husband is known for her, the assumption has been that Akhenaten was the father.
Your father himself recast the statues in the presence of my messengers, and he made them entirely of pure gold...He showed much additional gold, which was beyond measure and which he was sending to me.
This is thought to be part of an attempt by Horemheb to delete all trace of Atenism and the pharaohs associated with it from the historical record.
i-t:n:N5-mr ''Meryaten''
As Nicolas Grimal succinctly states, Akhenaten's closure or limitations on the activities of non-Aten temples and his confiscation of priestly goods for the benefit of the state directly led:
I indeed prostrate myself at the feet of the king, my lord, my god, my Sun...7 times and 7 times, on the stomach and on the back.
Marfan's sufferers tend towards being taller than average, with a long, thin face, and elongated skull, overgrown ribs, a funnel or pigeon chest, and larger pelvis, with enlarged thighs and spindly calves.
He is especially noted for abandoning traditional Egyptian polytheism and introducing worship centered on the Aten, which is sometimes described monolatristic, henotheistic, or even quasi-monotheistic.
The king appears as Amenhotep IV in the tombs of some of the nobles in Thebes:
Indeed there is an abundance of everything, but not with me here."
The neglect of local government increased the problems of maintaining an effective administration and introduced a whole new state system characterized by corruption and arbitrariness....The construction of the new capital at Akhetaten and new temples was to the detriment of the economy in general and the temple-based economy in particular: the system of divine estates was, from a centralizing viewpoint, harmful, but its abandonment in the Amarna period led to the ruination of a whole economic system of production and distribution without providing any new structure to replace it."
Some have theorized that she gained her importance as the mother of Tutankhamen, Smenkhkare, or both.
In 2012, Hutan Ashrafian, a surgeon at Imperial College London, published research into the early death of Akhenaten and the premature deaths of other 18th Dynasty pharaohs (including Tutankhamun and Thutmose IV).
Yet you acted delinquently by taking the mayor whose brother had cast him away at the gate, from his city.
Among the latter-known documents referring to Amenhotep IV are two copies of a letter from the Steward Of Memphis Apy (or Ipy) to the pharaoh.
i-mn:n-Htp-R8-S38-R19   ''Amenhotep Netjer-Heqa-Waset''
* Meritaten — year 1.
Every one of my messengers that were staying in Egypt saw the gold for the statues with their own eyes.
Very soon afterwards, he centralized Egyptian religious practices in Akhetaten, though construction of the city seems to have continued for several more years.
The next successor was Neferneferuaten, a female pharaoh who reigned in Egypt for two years and one month.
May my brother cause me no distress.
In Year 5 of his reign, Amenhotep IV took decisive steps to establish the Aten as the sole god of Egypt: the pharaoh "disbanded the priesthoods of all the other gods...and diverted the income from these other cults to support the Aten".
Kheruef (TT192), Ramose (TT55) and the tomb of Parennefer (TT188).
However, Dominic Montserrat in ''Akhenaten: History, Fantasy and Ancient Egypt'' states that "there is now a broad consensus among Egyptologists that the exaggerated forms of Akhenaten's physical portrayal... are not to be read literally".
Initially, Akhenaten presented Aten as a variant of the familiar supreme deity Amun-Re (itself the result of an earlier rise to prominence of the cult of Amun, resulting in Amun's becoming merged with the sun god Ra), in an attempt to put his ideas in a familiar Egyptian religious context.
Recent DNA analysis has revealed that with one of his biological sisters, the "Younger Lady" mummy, Akhenaten fathered Tutankhaten (later Tutankhamen).
Furthermore, an autopsy and genetic evidence in 2014 proved that his son Tutankhamun was the product of a brother-sister marriage, not a parent-child pairing.
An early inscription likens the Aten to the sun as compared to stars, and later official language avoids calling the Aten a god, giving the solar deity a status above mere gods.
At the kimru feast......with many goods may my brother honor me.
In the end, Akhenaten was forced to release Aziru back to his homeland when the Hittites advanced southwards into Amki, thereby threatening Egypt's series of Asiatic vassal states, including Amurru.
Following his book, the concept entered popular consciousness and serious research.
Twelve years after the death of Amenhotep III, she is still mentioned in inscriptions as queen and beloved of the king, but kings' mothers often were.
There is much silver, and I will give it to you.
An overwhelmingly large number of faience amulets at Amarna also show that talismans of the household-and-childbirth gods Bes and Taweret, the eye of Horus, and amulets of other traditional deities, were openly worn by its citizens.
After his death, traditional religious practice was gradually restored, and when some dozen years later rulers without clear rights of succession from the 18th Dynasty founded a new dynasty, they discredited Akhenaten and his immediate successors, referring to Akhenaten himself as "the enemy" or "that criminal" in archival records.
Various illnesses have been put forward.
* Neferneferure — year 9.
Within a decade a comprehensive political, religious and artistic reformation began promoting a return of Egyptian life to the norms it had followed during his father's reign.
Though the mummy consists only of disarticulated bones, the skull is long and has a prominent chin, and the limbs are light and long.
Tushratta complains in numerous letters that Akhenaten had sent him gold-plated statues rather than statues made of solid gold; the statues formed part of the bride-price which Tushratta received for letting his daughter Tadukhepa marry Amenhotep III and then later marry Akhenaten.
* Meketaten, Akhenaten's second daughter.
:"Such displays of frightening self-censorship and toadying loyalty are ominous indicators of the paranoia which was beginning to grip the country.
So perform your service for the king, your lord, and you will live.
If Smenkhkare outlived Akhenaten, and became sole pharaoh, he likely ruled Egypt for less than a year.
He was all but lost from history until the discovery during the 19th century of the site of Akhetaten, the city he built for the Aten, at Amarna.
His successors Ay and Horemheb disassembled temples Akhenaten had built, including the temple at Thebes, using them as a source of easily available building materials and decorations for their own temples.
Aten was usually depicted as a sun disc.
Akhenaten commanded Aziru to come to Egypt and proceeded to detain him there for at least one year.
On day 13, Month 8, in the fifth year of his reign, the king arrived at the site of the new city Akhetaten (now known as Amarna).
Some scholars do identify Mummy 61074, found in KV55, an unfinished tomb in the Valley of the Kings, as Akhenaten's.
* Neferneferuaten Tasherit — year 8.
However, because there is currently no definitive genetic test for epilepsy, the theory remains impossible to prove.
While Akhenaten was certainly not a close friend of Tushratta, he was evidently concerned at the expanding power of the Hittite Empire under its powerful ruler Suppiluliuma I.
The documents were found in Gurob and are dated to regnal year 5, third month of the Growing Season, day 19.
However Akhenaten's case may be different through the emphasis placed on the heavenly father and son relationship.
Thus did the ruler Rib-Hadda speak to you.
Other literature by Donald Redford, William Murnane, Alan Gardiner and more recently by Lawrence Berman in 1998 contests the view of any coregency whatsoever between Akhenaten and his father.
(Kadesh) The two of you take food and strong drink together."
With Akhenaten's death, the Aten cult he had founded gradually fell out of favor.
Some have even suggested that Smenkhkare was actually an alias of Nefertiti or Kiya, and therefore one of Akhenaten's wives (see below).
Several letters from Egyptian vassals notify the pharaoh that they have followed his instructions:
Or, it has been suggested, Akhenaten's (and his family's) portraiture exaggerates his distinctive physical traits.
"Beautiful are the Forms of Re, the Unique one of Re"
Did you not write to the king, my lord saying, "I am your servant like all the previous mayors i.e., vassals in his city"?
However, as an autosomal recessive disease, it seems to fit better into Akhenaten's family tree — Akhenaten's parents, Amenhotep III and Tiye, were probably healthy, and Marfan Syndrome was ruled out following DNA tests on Tutankhamun in 2010.
He decorated the southern entrance to the precincts of the temple of Amun-Re with scenes of his worshiping Re-Harakhti.
May he send me much gold in order that my brother with the gold and many goods may honor me."
Because the god Aten was referred to as "the mother and father of all humankind" it has been suggested that Akhenaten was made to look androgynous in artwork as a symbol of the androgyny of the god.
The depictions of action may correspond to the emphasis on the active, creative nurturing of the Aten emphasized in the "Great Hymn to the Aten" and elsewhere.
When Rib-Hadda appealed in vain for aid from Akhenaten and then turned to Aziru, his sworn enemy, to place him back on the throne of his city, Aziru promptly had him dispatched to the king of Sidon, where Rib-Hadda was almost certainly executed.
However, depictions of members of the court, especially members of the royal family, are extremely stylized, with elongated heads, protruding stomachs, heavy hips, thin arms and legs, and exaggerated facial features.
Now the king has heard as follows, "You are at peace with the ruler of Qidsa.
The monotheism of the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament had its own separate development — one that began more than half a millennium after the pharaoh's death.
Until Akhenaten's mummy is positively identified, such theories remain speculative.
You have paid no attention to the things that you did earlier.
Consider the people that are training you for their own advantage.
The few supporters of this theory (notably Immanuel Velikovsky) consider Akhenaten to be the historical model of legendary King Oedipus of Thebes, Greece and Tiye the model for his mother/wife Jocasta.
He is his father's image on earth, and as Akhenaten is king on earth, his father is king in heaven.
Yet, even at Amarna itself, some courtiers kept such names as Ahmose ("child of the moon god", the owner of tomb 3), and the sculptor's workshop where the famous Nefertiti bust and other works of royal portraiture were found is associated with an artist known to have been called Thutmose ("child of Thoth").
His sarcophagus was destroyed but has  been reconstructed and now sits outside in the Cairo Museum.
However, DNA tests on Tutankhamun, in 2010, proved negative for Marfan Syndrome.
The Amarna Letters, a cache of diplomatic correspondence discovered in modern times at el-Amarna (the modern designation of the site of Akhetaten), have provided important evidence about Akhenaten's reign and foreign policy.
Indeed, a cache of royal jewelry found buried near the Amarna royal tombs (now in the National Museum of Scotland) includes a finger ring referring to Mut, the wife of Amun.
Other Aten temples constructed at Karnak during this time include the Rud-menu and the Teni-menu which may have been constructed near the Ninth Pylon.
Much of the art and building infrastructure created during Akhenaten's reign was defaced or destroyed in the period following his death, particularly during the reigns of Horemheb and the early 19th Dynasty kings.
This Temple of Amenhotep IV was called the Gempaaten ("The Aten is found in the estate of the Aten").
The idea of Akhenaten as the pioneer of a monotheistic religion that later became Judaism has been considered by various scholars.
meaning "Effective for Aten") known before the fifth year of his reign as '''Amenhotep IV''' (sometimes given its Greek form, ''Amenophis IV'', and meaning Amun Is Satisfied), was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the 18th Dynasty who ruled for 17 years and died perhaps in 1336 BC or 1334 BC.
* Kiya, a lesser Royal Wife.
In the Theban tomb of Parennefer, Amenhotep IV and Nefertiti are seated on a throne with the sun disk depicted over the king and queen.
wr:r-sw-t:n-i-i-m-i-t:p-Q1-t:Z2   ''Wer-nesut-em-Ipet-swt''
Say to Aziru, ruler of Amurru: Thus the king, your lord Akhenaten, saying: The ruler of Gubla Byblos, whose brother had cast him away at the gate, said to you, "Take me and get me into the city.
Yet there is nothing I know of in which I have failed my brother.
Akhenaten's fifth year also marked the beginning of construction on his new capital, Akhetaten or 'Horizon of Aten', at the site known today as Amarna.
Any day that I hear the greetings of my brother, that day I make a festive occasion... May my brother send me much gold.
Similarly, although it is accepted that Akhenaten himself died in Year 17 of his reign, the question of whether Smenkhkare became co-regent perhaps two or three years earlier or enjoyed a brief independent reign is unclear.
Various uninscribed and damaged stelae depict Akhenaten with what appears to be a coregent wearing a king's crown in familiar if not intimate settings (even naked).
She was, in turn, probably succeeded by Tutankhaten (later, Tutankhamun), with the country being administered by the chief vizier, and future pharaoh, Ay.
Letters written to Akhenaten from foreign rulers make reference to Meritaten as 'mistress of the house'.
Akhenaten's status as a religious revolutionary has led to much speculation, ranging from scholarly hypotheses to the non-academic fringe theories.
What Rib-Hadda did not comprehend was that the Egyptian king would not organize and dispatch an entire army north just to preserve the political status quo of several minor city states on the fringes of Egypt's Asiatic Empire.
Styles of art that flourished during this short period are markedly different from other Egyptian art.
Nefertiti also appears, both beside the king and alone (or with her daughters), in actions usually reserved for a pharaoh, suggesting that she enjoyed unusual status for a queen.
U39-r:n-V10:n-i-t:n:N5  ''Wetjes-ren-en-Aten''
"Effective for the Aten"
Rib-Hadda wrote a total of 60 letters to Akhenaten pleading for aid from the pharaoh.
Basing his arguments on a belief that the Exodus story was historical, in his book ''Moses and Monotheism''.
His body was removed after the court returned to Thebes, and recent genetic tests have confirmed that the body found buried in tomb KV55 was the father of Tutankhamun, and is therefore "most probably" Akhenaten, The tomb contained numerous Amarna era objects, including a royal funerary mask which had been deliberately destroyed.
Others have likened some aspects of Akhenaten's relationship with the Aten to the relationship, in Christian tradition, of Jesus Christ with God, particularly in interpretations that emphasize a more monotheistic interpretation of Atenism than henotheistic.
To emphasize his complete allegiance to the Aten, the king officially changed his name from Amenhotep IV to Akhenaten or 'Living Spirit of Aten.'
* Setepenre — year 9.
As high priest, prophet, king and divine he claimed the central position in the new religious system.
Sometime after his return to Amurru, Aziru defected to the Hittite side with his kingdom.
In honor of Aten, Akhenaten also oversaw the construction of some of the most massive temple complexes in ancient Egypt.
* Various monuments, originally for Kiya, were reinscribed for Akhenaten's daughters Meritaten and Ankhesenpaaten; the revised inscriptions list a Meritaten-tasherit ("junior") and an Ankhesenpaaten-tasherit.
ra-nfr-xpr-Z3-ra:wa:n   ''Neferkheperure-waenre''
And even if you did act loyally, you considered your own judgment, and his judgment did not count.
As Amenhotep IV, Akhenaten was married to Nefertiti at the very beginning of his reign, and six daughters were identified from inscriptions.
A month before that Amenhotep IV had officially changed his name to Akhenaten.
Akhenaten is also believed to have composed the Great Hymn to the Aten.
Finally, Akhenaten, Neferneferuaten, Smenkhkare, Tutankhamun, and Ay were excised from the official lists of pharaohs, which instead reported that Amenhotep III was immediately succeeded by Horemheb.
wr:r-sw-i-i-Aa15:N27-i-t:n:N5  ''Wer-nesut-em-Akhetaten''
His known consorts were:
Amarna letter EA 27 preserves a complaint by Tushratta to Akhenaten about the situation:
Tutankhaten changed his name to Tutankhamun in Year 2 of his reign (1332 BC) and abandoned the city of Akhetaten, which eventually fell into ruin.
Akhenaten planned to relocate Egyptian burials on the east side of the Nile (sunrise) rather than on the west side (sunset) to the Royal Wadi in Akhetaten.
''Kanakht-qai-Shuti''
i-t:n:ra-G25-x:n  ''Akhenaten''
This would account for the untimely death of Akhenaten, his abnormal endocrine body shape on sculptures and can also explain Akhenaten's religious conviction due to this type of epilepsy’s association with intense spiritual visions and religiosity.
If this is impossible, I will send my son in my place' — the king, your lord, let you off this year in accordance with what you said.
Amenhotep IV changed most of his 5 fold titulary in year 5 of his reign.
In some cases, representations are more naturalistic, especially in depictions of animals and plants, of commoners, and in a sense of action and movement for both nonroyal and royal people.
"Crowned in Heliopolis of the South" (Thebes)
He Rib-Hadda was residing in Sidon and, following your own judgment, you gave him to some mayors.
"Strong Bull of the Double Plumes"
Freud commented on the connection between Adonai, the Egyptian Aten and the Syrian divine name of Adonis as a primeval unity of language between the factions; in this he was following the argument of Egyptologist Arthur Weigall.
More recently, Homocystinuria was suggested as a possible diagnosis.
Archaeological discoveries at Akhetaten show that many ordinary residents of this city chose to gouge or chisel out all references to the god Amun on even minor personal items that they owned, such as commemorative scarabs or make-up pots, perhaps for fear of being accused of having Amunist sympathies.
Marfan's syndrome is a dominant characteristic, and sufferers have a 50% chance of passing it on to their children.
