Production proceeded smoothly, but getting the completed film past the censors was an entirely different matter.
As one commentator notes, "In contrast to this scene of primitive violence, the serenity of the Mozart is, literally, other-worldly" and "the power of this elemental encounter is heightened by the music."
After numerous revisions, a more or less finalized cut screenplay was agreed upon in May 1968.
Two film awards have also been named in Kurosawa's honor.
Shooting took place in early 1991, with the film opening on 25 May that year to a largely negative critical reaction, especially in the United States, where the director was accused of promulgating naïvely anti-American sentiments.
It had put out only one prior subtitled film in the American market, and the only previous Japanese talkie commercially released in New York had been Mikio Naruse's comedy, ''Wife!
"The visually flamboyant final battle of ''Yojimbo'' takes place in the main street, as huge clouds of dust swirl around the combatants&nbsp;...
Just one week was spent in hurried post-production, hampered by a studio fire, and the finished film premiered at Tokyo's Imperial Theatre on August 25, expanding nationwide the following day.
This sequence of shots is illustrated on film scholar David Bordwell's blog.
Bernardo Bertolucci considered the Japanese master's influence to be seminal: "Kurosawa's movies and ''La Dolce Vita'' of Fellini are the things that pushed me, sucked me into being a film director."
As one interviewer summarized, "he (co-)writes his scripts, oversees the design, rehearses the actors, sets up all the shots and then does the editing."
For example, in ''Sanshiro Sugata II'', the hero takes leave of the woman he loves, but then, after walking away a short distance, turns and bows to her, and then, after walking further, turns and bows once more.
Some controversy exists about the extent to which Kurosawa's films of the Second World War period could be considered propaganda.
By this time, Japan had surrendered and the occupation of Japan had begun.
'''Cinematographers''': Asakazu Nakai (''No Regrets for Our Youth'', ''One Wonderful Sunday'', ''Stray Dog'', ''Ikiru'', ''Seven Samurai'', ''Record of a Living Being'', ''Throne of Blood'', ''High and Low'', ''Red Beard'', ''Dersu Uzala'', ''Ran''); Kazuo Miyagawa (''Rashomon'', ''Yojimbo''); Takao Saitō (''Sanjuro'', ''High and Low'', ''Red Beard'', ''Dodeskaden'', ''Kagemusha'', ''Ran'', ''Dreams'', ''Rhapsody in August'', ''Madadayo'').
I like extremes because I find them most alive."
Donald Richie has described the rapport between them as a unique "symbiosis".
Shooting took more than eight months to complete, and ''Dreams'' premiered at Cannes in May 1990 to a polite but muted reception, similar to the reaction the picture would generate elsewhere in the world.
The film marked something of an end of an era for its creator.
Following the accident, he would use a wheelchair for the rest of his life, putting an end to any hopes of him directing another film.
However, it would be Kurosawa's ''second'' film of 1950, ''Rashomon'', that would ultimately win him a whole new audience.
"Kurosawa locates the unexpected benefits no less than the tragedy of this historical moment.
"I always edit in the evening if we have a fair amount of footage in the can.
The director claimed that he used these lenses and several cameras rolling at once to help the actors—allowing them to be photographed at some distance from the lens, and without any knowledge of which particular camera's image would be utilized in the final cut—making their performances much more natural.
He encouraged his children to watch films; young Akira viewed his first movies at the age of six.
This extended sequence&nbsp;... expresses, as only Kurosawa can, the simple joys of student-teacher relationships, of kinship, of being alive."
For example, for ''Seven Samurai'', he created six notebooks with (among many other things) detailed biographies of the samurai, including what they wore and ate, how they walked, talked and behaved when greeted, and even how each tied his shoes.
In order to coax realistic performances from his actresses, the director had them live in a real factory during the shoot, eat the factory food and call each other by their character names.
Production began the following April, with Kurosawa in high spirits.
Instead, justifying the inequitable class structure of their society and ours, the peasants must rely on the aristocracy, the upper class, and in particular samurai, to ensure their survival&nbsp;... Kurosawa defended himself against this charge in his interview with me.
A group of women visit the local government office to petition the bureaucrats to turn a waste area into a children's playground.
As a transitional device, it is used as a substitute for the straight cut or the dissolve (though Kurosawa, of course, often used both of those devices as well).
The censorship office considered the work too "British-American" (an accusation tantamount, at that time, to a charge of treason), and it was only through the intervention of director Yasujirō Ozu, who championed the film, that ''Sanshiro Sugata'' was finally accepted for release on March 25, 1943.
The shoot, the filmmaker's longest ever, lasted well over a year (after five months of pre-production), and wrapped in spring 1965, leaving the director, his crew and his actors exhausted.
But at least one film scholar has questioned the validity of this dichotomy between "Japanese" Mizoguchi and "Western" Kurosawa by pointing out that "Mizo" had been as influenced by Western cinema and Western culture in general as Kurosawa, and that this is reflected in his work.
''Dersu Uzala'' had its world premiere in Japan on August 2, 1975, and did well at the box office.
A grittily realistic story of a doctor who tries to save a gangster (yakuza) with tuberculosis, it was also the director's first film with Toshiro Mifune, who would proceed to play either the main or a major character in all but one (''Ikiru'') of the director's next 16 films.
The film was also a critical and box office success abroad, winning the coveted Palme d'Or at the 1980 Cannes Film Festival in May, though some critics, then and now, have faulted the film for its alleged coldness.
The narrative centers on yearly birthday celebrations with his former students, during which the protagonist declares his unwillingness to die just yet—a theme that was becoming increasingly relevant for the film's 81-year-old creator.
Guillermo Del Toro referred to Kurosawa "one of the essential masters", citing ''Throne of Blood'', ''High and Low'' and ''Ran'' as among his favorite films.
''Ikiru'' opened in October 1952 to rave reviews—it won Kurosawa his second Kinema Junpo "Best Film" award—and enormous box office success.
Although the script, like all of Kurosawa's occupation-era works, had to go through forced rewrites due to American censorship, Kurosawa felt that this was the first film in which he was able to express himself freely.
Federico Fellini in an interview declared the director "the greatest living example of all that an author of the cinema should be"—despite admitting to having seen only one of his films, ''Seven Samurai''.
After his accident, Kurosawa's health began to deteriorate.
Shooting lasted from June 1979 through March 1980 and was plagued with problems, not the least of which was the firing of the original lead actor, Shintaro Katsu—creator of the very popular Zatoichi character—due to an incident in which the actor insisted, against the director's wishes, on videotaping his own performance.
Kurosawa emphasized time and again that the screenplay was the absolute foundation of a successful film and that, though a mediocre director can sometimes make a passable film out of a ''good'' script, even an excellent director can never make a good film out of a ''bad'' script.
Also, for reasons never adequately explained, ''Red Beard'' would be his final film starring Toshiro Mifune.
An instance of the wipe used as a satirical device can be seen in ''Ikiru''.
For ''Throne of Blood'', in the scene where Washizu (Mifune) is attacked with arrows by his own men, the director had archers shoot real arrows, hollowed out and running along wires, toward Toshiro Mifune from a distance of about ten feet, with the actor carefully following chalk marks on the ground to avoid being hit.
''After the Rain'', directed by Takashi Koizumi, was released in 1998, and ''The Sea is Watching'', directed by Kei Kumai, premiered in 2002.
After retiring as a director, Ishirō Honda returned more than 30 years later to work again for his friend and former mentor as a directorial advisor, production coordinator and creative consultant on Kurosawa's last five films (''Kagemusha'', ''Ran'', ''Dreams'', ''Rhapsody in August'' and ''Madadayo'').
Yamamoto nurtured Kurosawa's talent, promoting him directly from third assistant director to chief assistant director after a year.
Freedom does not exist."
Later, before shooting the famous scene in which the castle is attacked and set on fire, in order to prevent the Styrofoam "stones" from melting in the heat, the art department coated the surface with four layers of cement, then painted the colors of the ancient stones onto the cement.
The director's frequent crew member Teruyo Nogami confirms this view.
Today, critics remain divided over the film: some see it as an example of Kurosawa's alleged artistic decline, while others count it among his finest works.
According to Prince, her "desertion of family and class background to assist a poor village, her perseverance in the face of enormous obstacles, her assumption of responsibility for her own life and for the well-being of others, and her existential loneliness&nbsp;... are essential to Kurosawan heroism and make of Yukie the first coherent&nbsp;...
In December 1973, the 63-year-old Kurosawa set off for the Soviet Union with four of his closest aides, beginning a year-and-a-half stay in the country.
This is an effect created through an optical printer, in which, when a scene ends, a line or bar appears to move across the screen, "wiping" away the image while simultaneously revealing the first image of the subsequent scene.
Goodwin claims that the wipes in ''Rashomon'', for instance, fulfill one of three purposes: emphasizing motion in traveling shots, marking narrative shifts in the courtyard scenes and marking temporal ellipses between actions (e.g., between the end of one character's testimony and the beginning of another's).
Kurosawa's essay earned him a call to take the follow-up exams, and director Kajirō Yamamoto, who was among the examiners, took a liking to Kurosawa and insisted that the studio hire him.
In his films of the 1940s and 1950s, Kurosawa frequently employs the "axial cut", in which the camera moves closer to, or further away from, the subject, not through the use of tracking shots or dissolves, but through a series of matched jump cuts.
The often blatantly propagandistic ''Sanshiro Sugata Part II'', which premiered in May 1945, is generally considered one of his weakest pictures.
A thief chosen to act as the double of a great lord continues his impersonation even after his master's death: "the relationship has become spectral and is generated from beyond the grave with the master maintaining a ghostly presence.
Toho, concerned about this development, suggested that he might help finance his own works, therefore making the studio's potential losses smaller, while in turn allowing himself more artistic freedom as co-producer.
German New Wave director Werner Herzog has cited Kurosawa as one of his greatest influences: "Of the filmmakers with whom I feel some kinship, Griffith...Bunuel, Kurosawa and Eisenstein's ''Ivan the Terrible'', all come to mind."
She and Kurosawa were constantly at loggerheads, and it was through these arguments that the two, paradoxically, became close.
The ''New York Times'' critic Vincent Canby wrote about this film: "A lot of people at Cannes were outraged that the film makes no mention of Pearl Harbor and Japan's atrocities in China&nbsp;...
The director intended to create a work condemning kidnapping, which he considered one of the very worst crimes.
Beginning with ''Seven Samurai'' (1954), however, Kurosawa's cinematic technique changed drastically with his extensive use of long lens and multiple cameras.
A famous, virtually wordless sequence, lasting over eight minutes, shows the detective, disguised as an impoverished veteran, wandering the streets in search of the gun thief; it employed actual documentary footage of war-ravaged Tokyo neighborhoods shot by Kurosawa's friend, Ishirō Honda, the future director of ''Gojira'' (a.k.a.
Though faithful to the play, this adaptation of Russian material to a completely Japanese setting—in this case, the late Edo period—unlike his earlier ''The Idiot'', was regarded as artistically successful.
In early 1973, the Soviet studio Mosfilm approached the filmmaker to ask if he would be interested in working with them.
Furthermore, the director's ideal of heroism is subverted by history itself: "When history is articulated as it is in ''Throne of Blood'', as a blind force&nbsp;... heroism ceases to be a problem or a reality."
After years of working on numerous films as an assistant director and scriptwriter, he made his debut as a director in 1943, during World War II, with the popular action film ''Sanshiro Sugata'' (a.k.a.
Kurosawa wasted no time moving onto his next project: ''Madadayo'', or ''Not Yet''.
An important formative influence was his elementary school teacher Mr Tachikawa, whose progressive educational practices ignited in his young pupil first a love of drawing and then an interest in education in general.
(Kurosawa had just turned 33.)
It is in this anxious atmosphere that Kurosawa's next film, ''Record of a Living Being'', was conceived.
Throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, Kurosawa directed approximately a film a year, including a number of highly regarded films such as ''Ikiru'' (1952), ''Seven Samurai'' (1954) and ''Yojimbo'' (1961).
But these changes had a powerful effect as well on the look of the action scenes in that film, particularly the final battle in the rain.
Most commentators concede its technical merits and some praise it as among Kurosawa's best, while others insist that it lacks complexity and genuine narrative power, with still others claiming that it represents a retreat from the artist's previous commitment to social and political change.
The first such postwar hero was, atypically for the artist, a heroine—Yukie, played by Setsuko Hara, in ''No Regrets for Our Youth''.
The inspiration for this innovation came from a family tragedy.
Towards the end of 1942, about a year after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, novelist Tsuneo Tomita published his Musashi Miyamoto-inspired judo novel, ''Sanshiro Sugata'', the advertisements for which intrigued Kurosawa.
In his very first film, ''Sanshiro Sugata'', after the judo master Yano becomes the title character's teacher and spiritual guide, "the narrative is cast in the form of a chronicle studying the stages of the hero's growing mastery and maturity."
The film was shot quickly (by Kurosawa's standards) in about nine weeks, with Kurosawa determined to show he was still capable of working quickly and efficiently within a limited budget.
Initial reception abroad was somewhat more favorable, but ''Dodesukaden'' has since been typically considered an interesting experiment not comparable to the director's best work.
He struggled to work with an unfamiliar crew and the requirements of a Hollywood production, while his working methods puzzled his American producers, who ultimately concluded that the director must be mentally ill. On Christmas Eve 1968, the Americans announced that Kurosawa had left the production due to "fatigue", effectively firing him.
The sound of a Mozart piece is suddenly heard, played on the piano by a woman in a nearby house.
Three months were spent in pre-production and a month in rehearsals.
''Drunken Angel'' is often considered the director's first major work.
Unable to secure funding for further work and allegedly suffering from health problems, Kurosawa apparently reached the breaking point: on December 22, 1971, he slit his wrists and throat multiple times.
These three techniques—long lenses, multiple cameras and widescreen—were in later works fully exploited, even in sequences with little or no overt action, such as the early scenes of ''High and Low'' that take place in the central character's home, in which they are employed to dramatize tensions and power relationships between the characters within a highly confined space.
The Akira Kurosawa Award for Lifetime Achievement in Film Directing is awarded during the San Francisco International Film Festival, while the Akira Kurosawa Award is given during the Tokyo International Film Festival.
He has never hesitated to exploit climate and weather as plot elements, to the point where they become "active participants in the drama&nbsp;...
This information is derived from the IMDB pages for Kurosawa's films and Stuart Galbraith IV's filmography:
''Red Beard'' also marked the midway point, chronologically, in the artist's career.
And as film company revenues dropped, so did their appetite for risk—particularly the risk represented by Kurosawa's costly production methods.
"Akira Kurosawa's editing was exceptional, the inimitable work of a genius&nbsp;... No one was a match for him."
(''Seven Samurai'', for example, was written in this fashion.)
He had spent years of his life on a logistically nightmarish project to which he ultimately did not contribute a foot of film shot by himself.
Joan Mellen's comments are typical of this view: "Seven Samurai is above all a homage to the samurai class at its most noble&nbsp;... Samurai for Kurosawa represent the best of Japanese tradition and integrity."
Kurosawa both directed and edited most of his films, which is nearly unique among prominent filmmakers.
Following Kurosawa's death, several posthumous works based on his unfilmed screenplays have been produced.
In the last of Kurosawa's films as an assistant director, ''Horse'' (''Uma'', 1941), Kurosawa took over most of the production, as Yamamoto was occupied with the shooting of another film.
He wrote the original screenplays ''The Sea is Watching'' in 1993 and ''After the Rain'' in 1995.
A criticism frequently directed at Kurosawa's films is that the director's preoccupation with ethical and moral themes led him at times to create what some commentators regard as sentimental or naïve work.
It was Coppola who said of Kurosawa, "One thing that distinguishes him is that he didn't make one masterpiece or two masterpieces.
When the younger brother wanted to look away from the human corpses and animal carcasses scattered everywhere, Heigo forbade him to do so, instead encouraging Akira to face his fears by confronting them directly.
The director himself recognized this at the time of its release, telling critic Donald Richie that a cycle of some kind had just come to an end and that his future films and production methods would be different.
"History has given way to a perception of life as a wheel of endless suffering, ever turning, ever repeating", which is compared in many instances in the screenplay with hell.
For his early films, although they were consistently well photographed, Kurosawa generally used standard lenses and deep-focus photography.
'''Production Crew''': Teruyo Nogami served as script supervisor, production manager, associate director or assistant to the producer on all Kurosawa's films from ''Rashomon'' to the end of the director's career.
For his first foreign project, Kurosawa chose a story based on a Life magazine article.
Often they all (except Oguni, who acted as "referee") would work on exactly the same pages of the script, and Kurosawa would choose the best-written version from the different drafts of each particular scene.
Lucas, enthralled by the screenplay and Kurosawa's illustrations, leveraged his influence over 20th Century Fox to coerce the studio that had fired Kurosawa just ten years earlier to produce ''Kagemusha'', then recruited fellow fan Francis Ford Coppola as co-producer.
The film premiered in Tokyo in April 1948 to rave reviews and was chosen by the prestigious Kinema Junpo critics poll as the best film of its year, the first of three Kurosawa movies to be so honored.
A large collection of archive material, including scanned screenplays, photos and news articles, has been made available through the Akira Kurosawa Digital Archive, a Japanese website maintained by Ryukoku University Digital Archives Research Center in collaboration with Kurosawa Production.
Appropriately, the acting of the players, particularly Yamada, draws heavily on the stylized techniques of the Noh theater.
As already noted above, several of these moviemakers were also instrumental in helping Kurosawa obtain financing for his late films: Lucas and Coppola served as co-producers on ''Kagemusha'', while the Spielberg name, lent to the 1990 production, ''Dreams'', helped bring that picture to fruition.
There are a number of theories concerning the purpose of this device, which, as James Goodwin notes, was common in silent cinema but became considerably rarer in the more "realistic" sound cinema.
Nature is a crucial element in Kurosawa's films.
It is also difficult not to notice the importance of rain to Kurosawa: "Rain in Kurosawa's films is never treated neutrally.
When Spike Lee posted a list of 87 films every aspiring director should see, he included three Kurosawa movies: ''Rashomon'', ''Yojimbo'' and ''Ran''.
Atypically for the director, the heroic central character is a woman, Yukie (Setsuko Hara), born into upper-middle-class privilege, who comes to question her values in a time of political crisis.
The nickname tennō is used in this sense to create an image of Kurosawa as a director who abuses his power solely for the purpose of self-indulgence."
It offers online programs in digital film making, with headquarters in Anaheim and a learning center in Tokyo.
During production, the actress playing the leader of the factory workers, Yōko Yaguchi, was chosen by her colleagues to present their demands to the director.
Angles and focal lengths change, details of leaves scattering in the wind are intercut, but nothing makes the scene go any faster."
'''Actors''': ''Leading actors'': Takashi Shimura (21 films); Toshiro Mifune (16 films), Susumu Fujita (8 films), Tatsuya Nakadai (6 films) and Masayuki Mori (5 films).
His half-mocking view was that if the deficiencies were fundamental, there was no way to correct them.
Kurosawa always strongly denied pandering to Western tastes: "He has never catered to a foreign audience" writes Audie Bock, "and has condemned those who do."
Shooting took up 148 days spread over almost a year, interrupted by production and financing troubles and Kurosawa's health problems.
''Record of a Living Being'' opened in November 1955 to mixed reviews and muted audience reaction, becoming the first Kurosawa film to lose money during its original theatrical run.
Production went much more smoothly than the director's previous film, but a few days before shooting ended, Kurosawa's composer, collaborator and close friend Fumio Hayasaka died (of tuberculosis) at the age of 41.
Kurosawa's habitual method was to edit a film daily, bit by bit, during production.
His very sanity had been called into question.
He also frequently wrote screenplays for other directors such as for Satsuo Yamamoto's film, A Triumph of Wings (''Tsubasa no gaika'', 1942).
''Yojimbo'' (''The Bodyguard''), Kurosawa Production's second film, centers on a masterless samurai, Sanjuro, who strolls into a 19th-century town ruled by two opposing violent factions and provokes them into destroying each other.
His next film, ''One Wonderful Sunday'' premiered in July 1947 to mixed reviews.
It remains one of Kurosawa's best-known and most-loved works in his native country.
Because of this practice of editing as he went along, the post-production period for a Kurosawa film could be startlingly brief: ''Yojimbo'' had its Japanese premiere on April 20, 1961, four days after shooting concluded on April 16.
Numerous instances of his fanatical devotion to detail have been recorded, of which the following are only a few examples.
In 1954, nuclear tests in the Pacific were causing radioactive rainstorms in Japan and one particular incident in March had exposed a Japanese fishing boat to nuclear fallout, with disastrous results.
This was his only movie to include a role for an American movie star: Richard Gere, who plays a small role as the nephew of the elderly heroine.
The mood of the director's work had been growing increasingly pessimistic and dark, with the possibility of redemption through personal responsibility now very much questioned, particularly in ''Throne of Blood'' and ''The Lower Depths''.
All biographical sources, as well as the filmmaker's own comments, indicate that Kurosawa was a completely "hands-on" director, passionately involved in every aspect of the filmmaking process.
The Japanese critic Tadao Sato concurs: "With defeat in World War II, many Japanese&nbsp;... were dumbfounded to find that the government had lied to them and was neither just nor dependable.
For all his films, but particularly for his ''jidaigeki'', Kurosawa insisted on absolute authenticity of sets, costumes and props.
The three shots are not connected in the film by camera movements or dissolves, but by a series of two jump cuts.
Be Like a Rose'', in 1937: a critical and box-office flop.
Another film released in 1947 with Kurosawa's involvement was the action-adventure thriller, ''Snow Trail'', directed by Senkichi Taniguchi from Kurosawa's screenplay.
Kurosawa turned to a script he had written before ''Yojimbo'', reworking it to include the hero of his previous film.
''Rashomon'', which premiered in Tokyo in August 1950, and which also starred Mifune, became, on September 10, 1951, the surprise winner of the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival and was subsequently released in Europe and North America.
(The film was also released, by other distributors, in France, West Germany, Denmark, Sweden and Finland.)
After watching the rushes, I usually go to the editing room and work."
The first project proposed and worked on was a period film to be called ''Dora-Heita'', but when this was deemed too expensive, attention shifted to ''Dodesukaden'', an adaptation of yet another Shūgorō Yamamoto work, again about the poor and destitute.
Released in March 1949, it was a box office success, but is generally considered one of the director's lesser achievements.
Hiroshi Nezu was production supervisor or unit production manager on all the films from ''Seven Samurai'' to ''Dodeskaden'', except ''Sanjuro''.
The historical setting of the film is used as "a commentary on what Kurosawa now perceives as the timelessness of human impulses toward violence and self-destruction."
The movie became both a critical and commercial success.
Despite the work's grim subject matter, the screenwriters took a satirical approach, which some have compared to the work of Brecht, to both the bureaucratic world of its hero and the U.S. cultural colonization of Japan.
I was almost a samurai myself!"
Prince claims that Kurosawa's last epics, ''Kagemusha'' and particularly ''Ran'', mark a major turning point in the director's vision of the world.
By the time of ''Kagemusha'', however, according to Prince, the meaning of this relationship has changed.
(He uses as evidence the fact that Washizu's lord, unlike the kindly King Duncan of Shakespeare's play, had murdered his own lord years before to seize power, and is then murdered in turn by Washizu (the Macbeth character) for the same reason.)
''Kagemusha'' and ''Ran'', particularly the latter, are often considered to be among Kurosawa's finest works.
The first such film, ''No Regrets for Our Youth'' (1946), inspired by both the 1933 Takigawa incident and the Hotsumi Ozaki wartime spy case, criticized Japan's prewar regime for its political oppression.
It was filmed in 1956 and released in January 1957 to a slightly less negative domestic response than had been the case with the director's previous film.
'', finally released to unenthusiastic reviews in September 1970, was, as Donald Richie put it, an "almost unmitigated tragedy" in Kurosawa's career.
'''Composers''': Fumio Hayasaka (''Drunken Angel'', ''Stray Dog'', ''Scandal'', ''Rashomon'', ''The Idiot'', ''Ikiru'', ''Seven Samurai'', ''Record of a Living Being''); Masaru Sato (''Throne of Blood'', ''The Lower Depths'', ''The Hidden Fortress'', ''The Bad Sleep Well'', ''Yojimbo'', ''Sanjuro'', ''High and Low'', ''Red Beard''); Tōru Takemitsu (''Dodeskaden'', ''Ran''); Shin'ichirō Ikebe (''Kagemusha'', ''Dreams'', ''Rhapsody in August'', ''Madadayo'').
Kurosawa spent much of the rest of the year in Europe and America promoting ''Kagemusha'', collecting awards and accolades, and exhibiting as art the drawings he had made to serve as storyboards for the film.
According to such French commentators, Mizoguchi seemed, of the two artists, the more authentically Japanese.
Akira was the eighth and youngest child of the moderately wealthy family, with two of his siblings already grown up at the time of his birth and one deceased, leaving Kurosawa to grow up with three sisters and a brother.
In the late 1940s, he began to employ music for what he called "counterpoint" to the emotional content of a scene, rather than merely to reinforce the emotion, as Hollywood traditionally did (and still does).
(He was replaced by Tatsuya Nakadai, in his first of two consecutive leading roles in a Kurosawa movie.)
Nor was Kurosawa's "ironic" use of the soundtrack limited to music.
Some commentators have suggested that this incident would influence Kurosawa's later artistic career, as the director was seldom hesitant to confront unpleasant truths in his work.
Through Heigo, Akira devoured not only films but also theater and circus performances, while exhibiting his paintings and working for the left-wing Proletarian Artists' League.
Kurosawa nevertheless continued to work.
The director himself once said, "I like hot summers, cold winters, heavy rains and snows, and I think most of my pictures show this.
Another major childhood influence was Heigo Kurosawa, Akira's older brother by four years.
As Prince notes, "Kurosawa's is an essentially tragic vision of life, and this sensibility&nbsp;... impedes his efforts to realize a socially committed mode of filmmaking."
Its release on April 17, 1993, was greeted by an even more disappointed reaction than had been the case with his two preceding works.
While Mifune was not cast as the protagonist in ''Drunken Angel'', his explosive performance as the gangster so dominates the drama that he shifted the focus from the title character, the alcoholic doctor played by Takashi Shimura, who had already appeared in several Kurosawa movies.
Kurosawa would later write or co-write all of his own films.
He became estranged from his longtime collaborator, writer Ryuzo Kikushima, and never worked with him again.
Kurosawa returned to finish his film and ''Ran'' premiered at the Tokyo Film Festival on 31 May, with a wide release the next day.
One scholar, as an example, describes a tense scene in ''Seven Samurai'' in which the samurai Shichirōji, who is standing, wishes to console the peasant Manzo, who is sitting on the ground, and he gets down on one knee to talk to him.
Speaking of the postwar "slice of life" drama ''One Wonderful Sunday'', for example, film scholar (and future politician) Audie Bock claimed that not even Kurosawa's celebrated prowess as an editor could save one particular scene from bathos: "The last sequence&nbsp;... is an excruciating twelve minutes of the boy conducting an imaginary orchestra in an empty amphitheater while his girlfriend appeals directly to the camera for the viewer to join in.
Kurosawa had meanwhile instructed Toho to purchase the film rights to ''King's Ransom'', a novel about a kidnapping written by American author and screenwriter Evan Hunter, under his pseudonym of Ed McBain, as one of his 87th Precinct series of crime books.
Alexander Payne spent the early part of his career watching Kurosawa's films, most notably ''Seven Samurai'' and ''Ikiru''.
Although proposals for television projects were submitted to him, he had no interest in working outside the film world.
Nevertheless, the censorship office would later decide to cut out some 18 minutes of footage, much of which is now considered lost.
Ironically, it is because of, not in spite of, the chaotic times of civil war depicted in the film that the seven rise to greatness.
I saw it three times on consecutive days, and wondered each time if there was another film anywhere which gave such sustained and dazzling proof of a director's command over every aspect of film making."
(American pop songs figure prominently in the film.)
Following the success of ''Yojimbo'', Kurosawa found himself under pressure from Toho to create a sequel.
The suspense film, titled ''High and Low'', was shot during the latter half of 1962 and released in March 1963.
