The circumstances are really completely different.
Gore called the ticket "a new generation of leadership".
For example, he has been labeled a "carbon billionaire" and accused of profiting from his advocacy; a charge which he has denied, by saying, among other things, that he has not been "working on this issue for 30 years... because of greed".
Finally, Wolf Blitzer (who conducted the original 1999 interview) stated in 2008 that: "I didn't ask him about the Internet.
And I hope that it will be compelling enough to draw people toward it.
His experiences in the war zone don't seem to have been deeply traumatic in themselves; although the engineers were sometimes fired upon, Gore has said he didn't see full-scale combat.
Gore also debated the other vice presidential candidates, Dan Quayle, and James Stockdale.
Gore's involvement in environmental issues has been criticized.
The bill was defeated in part due to intense lobbying of Congress by the Reagan-Bush White House and a veto threat from President Reagan.
His decision to become an attorney was a partial result of his time as a journalist, as he realized that, while he could expose corruption, he could not change it.
On August 13, 2000, Gore announced that he had selected Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut as his vice presidential running mate.
98), which declared opposition to any greenhouse gas treaty which would limit US emissions without similar limits on third-world countries such as China.
President Obama praised Gore for advancing the cause of peace.
In addition, computer professionals and congressional colleagues argued in his defense.
In Spring 2000, Conrad asked Reno to appoint an independent counsel to continue the investigation.
Soon after the convention, Gore hit the campaign trail with running mate Joe Lieberman.
On December 16, 2002, however, Gore announced that he would not run in 2004.
On election night, news networks first called Florida for Gore, later retracted the projection, and then called Florida for Bush, before finally retracting that projection as well.
Gore responded by stating that these events would not take place because a candidate would be nominated through the primary process.
Gore is also a partner in the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, heading its climate change solutions group.
However, background music drowned him out and he was escorted offstage, implying that it was a rehearsed gag, which he later acknowledged.
I've traveled to every part of this country during the last six years.
Gore first discussed his plans to emphasize information technology at UCLA on January 11, 1994, in a speech at The Superhighway Summit.
Gore defeated Republican senatorial nominee Victor Ashe, subsequently the mayor of Knoxville, and the Republican-turned-Independent, Ed McAteer, founder of the Christian right Religious Roundtable organization that had worked to elect Reagan as president in 1980.
When he joined Bill Clinton's ticket, it violated the old rules.
Gore next placed great hope on Super Tuesday where they split the Southern vote: Jackson winning Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Virginia; Gore winning Arkansas, North Carolina, Kentucky, Nevada, Tennessee, and Oklahoma.
Not with two Southerners from neighboring states.
Gore himself would later poke fun at the controversy.
Gore agreed that meat production contributes to increased carbon emissions, but did not want to "go quite as far as ... saying everybody should become a vegetarian".
He had earlier admitted that "it's absolutely correct that the growing meat intensity of diets across the world is one of the issues connected to this global crisis -- not only because of the carbon dioxide involved, but also because of the water consumed in the process" and some speculate that his adoption of the new diet is related to his environmentalist stance.
1979), and Albert Arnold Gore III (b.
The results of the decision led to Gore winning the popular vote by approximately 500,000 votes nationwide, but receiving 266 electoral votes to Bush's 271 (one District of Columbia elector abstained).
During the Clinton Administration, the U.S. economy expanded, according to David Greenberg (professor of history and media studies at Rutgers University) who said that "by the end of the Clinton presidency, the numbers were uniformly impressive.
In 1971, Gore also began to work the night shift for ''The Tennessean'' as an investigative reporter.
Many pundits saw Gore's choice of Lieberman as further distancing him from the scandals of the Clinton White House.
The bill was passed on December 9, 1991, and led to the National Information Infrastructure (NII) which Gore referred to as the "information superhighway."
But I am also a father, and I feel deeply about my responsibility to my children ...
In the 2000 presidential election, in what was one of the closest presidential races in history, Gore won the popular vote but lost in the Electoral College to Republican George W. Bush.
In a 2009 interview with CNN, Gore commented on former Vice President Dick Cheney's criticism of the Obama administration.
He was the first elected official to grasp the potential of computer communications to have a broader impact than just improving the conduct of science and scholarship ... the Internet, as we know it today, was not deployed until 1983.
After enlisting in August 1969, Gore returned to the anti-war Harvard campus in his military uniform to say goodbye to his adviser and was "jeered" at by students.
Number nine on the list was: "Remember, America, I gave you the Internet, and I can take it away!"
Clinton and Gore were inaugurated on January 20, 1993.
Gore attended St. Albans School, an independent college preparatory day and boarding school for boys in Washington, D.C., from 1956 to 1965, a prestigious feeder school for the Ivy League.
Gore attended college during the era of anti-Vietnam War protests.
Interest in having Gore run for the 2016 Presidential election arose in 2014 and again in 2015, although he did not declare any intention to do so.
Gore is not the Father of the Internet, but in all fairness, Gore is the person who, in the Congress, most systematically worked to make sure that we got to an Internet, and the truth is -- and I worked with him starting in 1978 when I got to Congress, we were both part of a "futures group"—the fact is, in the Clinton administration, the world we had talked about in the '80s began to actually happen."
Although nearly all of his Harvard classmates avoided the draft and service in Vietnam, Gore believed if he found a way around military service, he would be handing an issue to his father's Republican opponent.
Robert Conrad Jr. was the head of a Justice Department task force appointed by Attorney General Janet Reno to investigate Gore's fund-raising controversies.
His Harvard advisor, Richard Neustadt, also stated that Gore decided, "that he would have to go as an enlisted man because, he said, 'In Tennessee, that's what most people have to do.'"
He was introduced by his eldest daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff.
Albert was tended to by two nurses who happened to be present during the accident.
Also earmarked were a raft of basic technologies like digital imaging and data storage."
It was very powerful.
In 1991, Gore was one of ten Democrats who supported the Gulf War.
In a 2007 court case, a British judge said that while he had "no doubt ...the film was broadly accurate" and its "four main scientific hypotheses ...are supported by a vast quantity of research", he upheld nine of a "long schedule" of alleged errors presented to the court.
While in the Senate, he sat on the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, the Rules and Administration, and the Armed Services Committees.
He compared this decision to the Persian Gulf War (which Gore had voted for) stating, "Back in 1991, I was one of a handful of Democrats in the United States Senate to vote in favor of the resolution endorsing the Persian Gulf War ...
His investigations of corruption among members of Nashville's Metro Council resulted in the arrest and prosecution of two councilmen for separate offenses.
In a 2014 interview, Gore said "Over a year ago I changed my diet to a vegan diet, really just to experiment to see what it was like.
Gore has received a number of awards including the Nobel Peace Prize (joint award with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007), a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album (2009) for his book ''An Inconvenient Truth'', a Primetime Emmy Award for Current TV (2007), and a Webby Award (2005).
Gore has been involved with environmental issues since 1976, when as a freshman congressman, he held the "first congressional hearings on the climate change, and co-sponsored hearings on toxic waste and global warming."
He also sponsored hearings on how advanced technologies might be put to use in areas like coordinating the response of government agencies to natural disasters and other crises."
Florida's Republican Secretary of State, Katherine Harris, eventually certified Florida's vote count.
Besides the record-high surpluses and the record-low poverty rates, the economy could boast the longest economic expansion in history; the lowest unemployment since the early 1970s; and the lowest poverty rates for single mothers, black Americans, and the aged."
The news came as a 'bombshell' to his wife.
In 1998, Gore began promoting a NASA satellite (Deep Space Climate Observatory) that would provide a constant view of the Earth, marking the first time such an image would have been made since ''The Blue Marble'' photo from the 1972 Apollo 17 mission.
While both sides claimed victory after each, Gore was critiqued as either too stiff, too reticent, or too aggressive in contrast to Bush.
Beginning in late 2002, Gore began to publicly criticize the Bush administration.
Lieberman became "the first person of the Jewish faith to run for the nation's second-highest office."
But look at the differences between the resolution that was voted on in 1991 and the one this administration is proposing that the Congress vote on in 2002.
Gore also opened the 2004 Democratic National Convention.
He also later stated that his experience in Vietnam "didn't change my conclusions about the war being a terrible mistake, but it struck me that opponents to the war, including myself, really did not take into account the fact that there were an awful lot of South Vietnamese who desperately wanted to hang on to what they called freedom.
I didn't feel right about tearing myself away from my family to the extent that is necessary in a Presidential campaign."
And that was the sort of shorthand, the way his enemies projected it and it wound up being a devastating setback to him and it hurt him, as I'm sure he acknowledges to this very day."
In the ruling, ''Bush v. Gore'', the Justices held that the Florida recount was unconstitutional and that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline, effectively ending the recounts.
I felt better, so I've continued with it and I'm likely to continue it for the rest of my life."
I feel that it will be.
He served as Vice President during the Clinton administration from 1993 to 2001.
The Gores spent the next month in the hospital with Albert.
He launched the GLOBE program on Earth Day '94, an education and science activity that, according to ''Forbes magazine'', "made extensive use of the Internet to increase student awareness of their environment".
He said that although he was not a vegetarian, he had "cut back sharply" on his consumption of meat.
He was thrown , and then traveled along the pavement for another .
This 7–2 vote ruled that the standards the Florida Supreme Court provided for a recount were unconstitutional due to violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and further ruled 5–4 that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline.
Ideological balance?
In an interview on NBC's ''Today'' the following year, Gore said, "I did not know that it was a fund-raiser.
Dean's former campaign manager, Joe Trippi, also stated that after Gore's endorsement of Dean, "alarm bells went off in every newsroom in the country, in every other campaign in the country", indicating that if something did not change, Dean would be the nominee.
Tipper Gore held a job in ''The Tennessean'''s photo lab and was working on a master's degree in psychology, but she joined in her husband's campaign (with assurance that she could get her job at the ''Tennessean'' back if he lost).
In 2008, Gore argued against the ban of same-sex marriage on his Currentj TV website, stating, "I think that gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual hmen and women to make contracts, have hospital visiting rights, and join together in marriage."
Gore spent many weekends in Tennessee, working with his constituents.
He later said he was astonished by the "emotional field of negativity and disapproval and piercing glances that ... certainly felt like real hatred".
This case ordered an end to recounting underway in selected Florida counties, effectively giving George W. Bush a 537 vote victory in Florida and consequently Florida's 25 electoral votes and the presidency.
He is my friend ...
The draft movement, however, failed to convince Gore to run.
In his junior and senior years, he became more involved with his studies, earning As and Bs.
On Gore's personal financial commitment, two airlines each provided a plane with one flight latter underwritten by Larry Flax.
The phrase "no controlling legal authority" was criticized by columnist Charles Krauthammer, who stated: "Whatever other legacies Al Gore leaves behind between now and retirement, he forever bequeaths this newest weasel word to the lexicon of American political corruption."
At the time, he was 39 years old, making him the "youngest serious Presidential candidate since John F.
The flights were flown by volunteer airline crews and medically staffed by Gore's cousin, retired Col. Dar LaFon, and family physician Dr. Anderson Spickard and were accompanied by Gore and Albert III.
Although he maintained a position against homosexuality and gay marriage in the 1980s, Gore said in 2008 that he thinks "gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual men and women...to join together in marriage."
According to Leslie Budd, author of ''E-economy: Rhetoric or Business Reality'', this economic success was due, in part, to Gore's continued role as an ''Atari Democrat,'' promoting the development of information technology, which led to the dot-com boom (c. 1995-2001).
Clinton and Gore accepted the nomination at the Democratic National Convention on July 17, 1992.
He later said he went there in order to explore "spiritual issues", and that "he had hoped to make sense of the social injustices that seemed to challenge his religious beliefs."
Gore had basic training at Fort Dix from August to October, and then was assigned to be a journalist at Fort Rucker, Alabama.
In his senior year, he took a class with oceanographer and global warming theorist Roger Revelle, who sparked Gore's interest in global warming and other environmental issues.
Although Gore frequently stated that he had "no plans to run", he did not reject the possibility of future involvement in politics which led to speculation that he might run.
'''Albert Arnold''' "'''Al'''" '''Gore Jr.''' (born March 31, 1948) is an American environmentalist and politician who served as the 45th Vice President of the United States from 1993 to 2001 under President Bill Clinton.
Gore was also involved in environmental initiatives.
Organizations including People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) criticized Gore for not advocating vegetarianism as a way for individuals to reduce their carbon footprint.
To review a few of them briefly: in 1991, Iraq had crossed an international border, invaded a neighboring sovereign nation and annexed its territory.
Soon afterwards, Gore also had to contend with the Lewinsky scandal, involving an affair between President Clinton and an intern, Monica Lewinsky.
His older sister Nancy LaFon Gore, who was born in 1938, died of lung cancer in 1984.
Now by contrast in 2002, there has been no such invasion."
His orders to be sent to Vietnam were "held up" for some time, and the Gore family suspected that this was due to a fear by the Nixon administration that if something happened to him, his father would gain sympathy votes.
According to Gore's Senate biography, "He appeared in uniform in his father's campaign commercials, one of which ended with his father advising: 'Son, always love your country'."
Gore has said that his other reason for enlisting was that he did not want someone with fewer options than he to go in his place.
Regional diversity?
Bradley was the only candidate to oppose Gore and was considered a "fresh face" for the White House.
The Clinton-Gore ticket beat the Bush-Quayle ticket, 43%-38%.
He continued to speak on the topic throughout the 1980s, and is still prevalent in the environmental community.
The two women were employees of Gore's Current TV.
:Gore's abrupt decision to run for the open seat surprised even himself; he later said that 'I didn't realize myself I had been pulled back so much to it.'
When Senator Barack Obama became the presumptive Democratic nominee for president on June 3, 2008, speculation began that Gore might be tapped for the vice presidency.
Gore was also the subject of the Academy Award-winning (2007) documentary ''An Inconvenient Truth'' in 2006.
Gore formally announced his candidacy for president in a speech on June 16, 1999, in Carthage, Tennessee, with his major theme being the need to strengthen the American family.
Such support led to new speculation after Obama was elected President during the 2008 Presidential election that Gore would be named a member of the Obama administration.
Through their weekly lunches and daily conversations, Gore became the president's "indisputable chief adviser."
There was talk of a potential run in the 2000 presidential race by Gore as early as January 1998.
He received an honorable discharge from the Army in May 1971.
He was introduced by Vint Cerf who used the same format to joke: "We all invented the Internet."
Gore is the founder and current chair of the Alliance for Climate Protection, the co-founder and chair of Generation Investment Management and the now-defunct Current TV network, a member of the Board of Directors of Apple Inc., and a senior adviser to Google.
Gore thought he would be the only serious Southern contender; he had not counted on Jesse Jackson."
The prospect of a Gore candidacy arose again between 2006 and early 2008 in light of the upcoming 2008 presidential election.
After announcing he would not run in the 2004 U.S. presidential election, Gore endorsed Vermont governor Howard Dean in December 2003, weeks before the first primary of the election cycle.
During the 2008 primaries, Gore remained neutral toward all of the candidates which led to speculation that he would come out of a brokered 2008 Democratic National Convention as a "compromise candidate" if the party decided it could not nominate one.
Although his parents wanted him to go to law school, Gore first attended Vanderbilt University Divinity School (1971–72) on a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship for people planning secular careers.
Data in ''An Inconvenient Truth'' have been questioned.
He and his friends did not participate in Harvard demonstrations.
In a speech given in 2004, during the presidential election, Gore accused George W. Bush of betraying the country by using the 9/11 attacks as a justification for the invasion of Iraq.
In 2009, Gore described the British court ruling as being "in my favor."
Kline informed Gore and Simon of the desperate conditions at the hospital and asked Gore and Simon to arrange relief.
Gore's spokeswoman responded in 2007 that the court had upheld the film's fundamental thesis and its use as an educational tool.
In a news conference, Gore stated that, "all calls that I made were charged to the Democratic National Committee.
Gore faced an early challenge by former New Jersey senator Bill Bradley.
Gore was born in Washington, D.C., the second of two children of Albert Gore Sr., a U.S. Representative who later served as a U.S.
Gore was eventually able to mend fences with Jackson who supported the Clinton-Gore ticket in 1992 and 1996, and campaigned for the Gore-Lieberman ticket during the 2000 presidential election.
Critics claimed that the initiatives would "backfire, bloating Congressional pork and creating whole new categories of Federal waste."
Gore later recalled: "I ran to his side and held him and called his name, but he was motionless, limp and still, without breath or pulse ... His eyes were open with the nothingness stare of death, and we prayed, the two of us, there in the gutter, with only my voice."
His father, a vocal anti-Vietnam War critic, was facing a reelection in 1970.
During his time in the House, Gore sat on the Energy and Commerce and the Science and Technology committees, chairing the Science Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations for four years.
This was due in part to his increased popularity after the release of the 2006 documentary, ''An Inconvenient Truth''.
Andrew Jackson and Grover Cleveland) "each won a sort of immortality--having his image placed on a unit of US currency", and that Gore should answer this call of history.
Despite Gore taking himself out of the race, a handful of his supporters formed a national campaign to draft him into running.
98), which stated the sense of the Senate was that the United States should not be a signatory to any protocol that did not include binding targets and timetables for developing as well as industrialized nations or "would result in serious harm to the economy of the United States".
In making the speech, Gore also distanced himself from Bill Clinton, who he stated had lied to him.
These statements cast Gore in a negative light, leading voters away from Gore who received only 10% of the vote in the New York Primary.
Of his time in the Army, Gore later stated, "I didn't do the most, or run the gravest danger.
Al Gore served as Vice President during the Clinton Administration.
The director of the film, Davis Guggenheim, stated that after the release of the film, "Everywhere I go with him, they treat him like a rock star."
NashvillePost.com noted that, "his father's defeat made service in a conflict he deeply opposed even more abhorrent to Gore.
He attributes this phenomenon to the influence of television and argues that it endangers American democracy.
Gore was stationed with the 20th Engineer Brigade in Bien Hoa and was a journalist with ''The Castle Courier.''
During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initiative in creating the Internet.
He was criticized for this endorsement by eight Democratic contenders particularly since he did not endorse his former running mate Joe Lieberman (Gore preferred Dean over Lieberman because Lieberman supported the Iraq War and Gore did not).
Additional speeches were also interrupted by the protesters.
The Clinton–Gore administration also launched the first official White House website in 1994 and subsequent versions through 2000.
Gore strongly disagreed with the Court's decision, but in his concession speech stated that, "for the sake of our unity as a people and the strength of our democracy, I offer my concession."
Gore also commented: "Our lives were consumed with the struggle to restore his body and spirit."
In 2004, he co-launched Generation Investment Management, a company for which he serves as Chair.
He was a Congressman from Tennessee (1977–85) and from 1985 to 1993 served as one of the state's Senators.
Known as the ''Baby Boomer Ticket'' and the ''Fortysomething Team,'' ''The New York Times'' noted that if elected, Clinton and Gore, at ages 45 and 44 respectively, would be the "youngest team to make it to the White House in the country's history."
His position as a moderate (and on policies related to that label) shifted later in life after he became Vice President and ran for president in 2000.
In 2005 when Gore was awarded the ''Lifetime Achievement Award'' "for three decades of contributions to the Internet" at the ''Webby Awards'' he joked in his acceptance speech (limited to five words according to ''Webby Awards'' rules): "Please don't recount this vote."
1977), Sarah LaFon Gore (b.
Gore stated, however, that he was not interested in being Vice President again.
On June 16, 2008 (a week after Hillary Clinton had suspended her campaign), Gore endorsed Obama in a speech given in Detroit, Michigan which renewed speculation of an Obama-Gore ticket.
Gore was "dispirited" after his return from Vietnam.
He also helped to organize the ''Live Earth'' benefit concerts.
Coming face to face with those sentiments expressed by people who did the laundry and ran the restaurants and worked in the fields was something I was naively unprepared for."
Theirs was the first ticket since 1972 to try to capture the youth vote.
Chosen as Clinton's running mate in their successful 1992 campaign, he was reelected in 1996.
Additionally, he has been criticized for his above-average energy consumption in using private jets, and in owning multiple, very large homes, one of which was reported in 2007 as using high amounts of electricity.
One month later, in a speech given at the Jeddah Economic Forum, Gore criticized the treatment of Arabs in the U.S. after 9/11 stating, "Unfortunately there have been terrible abuses and it's wrong ...
I knew it was a political event, and I knew there were finance people that were going to be present, and so that alone should have told me, 'This is inappropriate and this is a mistake; don't do this.'
I was advised there was nothing wrong with that.
After looking into the matter, Reno judged that the appointment of an independent counsel was unwarranted.
In 1984, Gore successfully ran for a seat in the U.S. Senate, which had been vacated by Republican Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker.
As a Senator, Gore began to craft the ''High Performance Computing Act of 1991'' (commonly referred to as "The Gore Bill") after hearing the 1988 report ''Toward a National Research Network'' submitted to Congress by a group chaired by UCLA professor of computer science, Leonard Kleinrock, one of the central creators of the ARPANET (the ARPANET, first deployed by Kleinrock and others in 1969, is the predecessor of the Internet).
In the late 1980s and 1990s, Gore was criticized for his involvement in asking the EPA for less strict pollution controls for the Pigeon River.
Gore had a particular interest in reducing "waste, fraud, and abuse in the federal government and advocated trimming the size of the bureaucracy and the number of regulations."
Cerf would later state: "Al Gore had seen what happened with the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act of 1956, which his father introduced as a military bill.
Gore used his political influence to expedite landing rights in New Orleans.
His initiatives led directly to the commercialization of the Internet.
CNN noted that, "in 1988, for the first time, 12 Southern states would hold their primaries on the same day, dubbed "Super Tuesday".
Gore responded, "I love this country.
While Gore has criticized Bush for his Katrina response,he has not spoken publicly about his part in the evacuation of 270 patients on September 3 & 4, 2005, from Charity Hospital in New Orleans to Tennessee.
A conservative Washington D.C. think tank, and a Republican member of Congress, among others, have claimed that Gore has a conflict-of-interest for advocating for taxpayer subsidies of green-energy technologies in which he has a personal investment.
Former UCLA professor of information studies Philip E. Agre and journalist Eric Boehlert argued that three articles in ''Wired News'' led to the creation of the widely spread urban legend that Gore claimed to have "invented the Internet", which followed this interview.
During the election and his term as Vice President, Gore popularized the term ''Information Superhighway'', which became synonymous with the Internet, and he was involved in the creation of the National Information Infrastructure.
Gore discussed the possibility of running during a March 9, 1999, interview with CNN's ''Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer''.
