In 1909, Al's singing caught the attention of Lew Dockstader, the producer and star of Dockstader's Minstrels.
began to set up a formal program overseas, the excitable Jolson was deluging War and Navy Department brass with phone calls and wires.
The formula was repeated in a sequel, ''Jolson Sings Again'' (1949).
A few weeks later, he received his first tour schedule from the newly formed United Services Organization (USO), "the group his letter to Early had helped create".
* "at a time when black people were banned from starring on the Broadway stage," he promoted the play by black playwright Garland Anderson, which became the first production with an all-black cast ever produced on Broadway;
During their marriage, the Jolsons adopted two children, Asa Jr. (born 1948) and Alicia (born 1949), and remained married until his death in 1950.
But this man could really galvanize an audience into a frenzy.
Despite these new troubles, Jolson was able to make a comeback after performing a concert in New Orleans after "Wonderbar" closed in 1931.
It was good showmanship to cast this film with lesser people, particularly Larry Parks as the mammy kid... As for Jolson's voice, it has never been better.
Although the 60-year-old Jolson was too old to play a younger version of himself in the movie, he persuaded the studio to let him appear in one musical sequence, "Swanee", shot entirely in long shot, with Jolson in blackface singing and dancing onto the runway leading into the middle of the theater.
At the peak of his career, he was dubbed "The World's Greatest Entertainer".
For instance, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) during its peak in the early 1920s, included about 15% of the nation's eligible voting population, 4–5&nbsp;million men.
He went down on his knee again and sang 'Mammy', and the troops wept and cheered.
According to music historians Bruce Crowther and Mike Pinfold: "During his time he was the best known and most popular all-around entertainer America (and probably the world) has ever known, captivating audiences in the theatre and becoming an attraction on records, radio, and in films.
With Jolson providing almost all the vocals, and Columbia contract player Larry Parks playing Jolson, ''The Jolson Story'' (1946) became one of the biggest box-office hits of the year.
Those were the only records I had—a collection of the old breakable 78s.
"I still got all of his records.
:According to California historians Stephanie Barron and Sheri Bernstein, "few artists have done as much to publicize California as did Al Jolson" who performed and wrote the lyrics for "California, Here I Come".
He took 37 curtain calls that night and told the audience, "I'm a happy man tonight."
(Jolson's first Technicolor appearance was in a cameo in the musical ''Show Girl in Hollywood'' (1930) from First National Pictures, a Warner Bros.
'This is a cantor!'"
* 6622 Hollywood Blvd.
After each Jolson song, the audience applauded.
In 1972, Diamond gave the first solo concert performance on Broadway since Al Jolson, and starred in the 1980 remake of ''Jazz Singer'', with Laurence Olivier and Lucie Arnaz.
20th Century Fox hired him to recreate a scene from ''The Jazz Singer'' in the Alice Faye-Don Ameche film ''Hollywood Cavalcade''.
In 1918, Jolson's acting career would be pushed even further after he starred in the hit musical ''Sinbad''.
In that moment just before 'Toot, Toot, Tootsie,' she remembered, 'A miracle occurred.
He refused to go back on stage for the second act, but the audience "just stamped its feet and chanted 'Jolson, Jolson', until he came back out."
He began wearing blackface in all of his shows.
The inside of the dome features a huge mosaic of Moses holding the tablets containing the Ten Commandments, and identifies Jolson as "The Sweet Singer of Israel" and "The Man Raised Up High".
In 1934, he starred in a movie version of his earlier stage play ''Wonder Bar'', co-starring Kay Francis, Dolores del Río, Ricardo Cortez, and Dick Powell.
:Journalist David Wild writes that the 1927 movie ''The Jazz Singer'', would mirror Diamond's own life, "the story of a Jewish kid from New York who leaves everything behind to pursue his dream of making popular music in Los Angeles".
In this film, he notes, "Jolson had the confidence to rhyme 'Mammy' with 'Uncle Sammy'", adding "Mammy songs, along with the vocation 'Mammy singer', were inventions of the Jewish Jazz Age."
Out of fear, he lost his voice backstage and begged the stagehands not to raise the curtains.
It became one of the biggest funerals in show business history.
For a period of time, young Asa spent time at the St. Mary's Industrial School for Boys, a progressive reformatory/home for orphans run by the Xaverian Brothers in Baltimore (the same school which would later be attended by Babe Ruth).
I was the first American to be invited to sing in the Kremlin since Paul Robeson.
But he considered it his duty as an American to be there, and that was all that mattered to him.
"Once we accept a semantic change from singing to playing the clarinet, ''The Benny Goodman Story'' becomes an almost transparent reworking of ''The Jazz Singer'' … and ''The Jolson Story''."
I just sing a few little songs.
… Last night's audience was flatteringly unwilling to go home, and when the show proper was over, Jolson reappeared before the curtain and sang more songs, old and new."
From a review in ''Variety'':"''But the real star of the production is that Jolson voice and that Jolson medley.
Jolson joked about how his voice had deepened with age, saying "I got the clippetys all right, but I can't clop like I used to."
The bridge was the last remaining of three bridges across the Han River and was used to evacuate UN forces.
With his unique and dynamic style of singing black music, such as jazz and blues, he was later credited with single-handedly introducing African-American music to white audiences.
To support his view he describes a significant part of the movie:
Jazz historians have described Jolson's blackface and singing style as metaphors for Jewish and black suffering throughout history.
The moviegoers were electrified when the silent actions were interrupted periodically for a song sequence with real singing and sound.
:"''When one hears Jolson's jazz songs, one realizes that jazz is the new prayer of the American masses, and Al Jolson is their cantor.
He did as many as four shows a day in the jungle outposts of Central America and covered the string of U.S.
In October 2008, a new documentary film, ''Al Jolson and The Jazz Singer'' premiered at the 50th Lübeck Nordic Film Days, Lübeck, Germany, and won 1st Prize at an annual film competition in Kiel a few weeks later.
Al accepted Dockstader's offer and became a regular blackface performer.
His performing style was brash and extroverted, and he popularized a large number of songs that benefited from his "shamelessly sentimental, melodramatic approach".
Jolson also enjoyed performing in blackface makeup, a theatrical convention since the mid-19th century.
Or as the film itself states in its first title card, "perhaps this plaintive, wailing song of jazz is, after all, the misunderstood utterance of a prayer."
* he brought an all-black dance team from San Francisco that he tried to feature in his Broadway show;
The audience, transformed into what one critic called, 'a milling, battling mob' stood, stamped, and cheered 'Jolson, Jolson, Jolson!'"
Vitaphone was originally intended for musical renditions, and ''The Jazz Singer'' follows this principle, with only the musical sequences using live sound recording.
:According to singer and songwriter Jerry Lee Lewis, "there were only four true American originals: Al Jolson, Jimmie Rodgers, Hank Williams, and Jerry Lee Lewis."
The whole family roared with laughter."
He demanded permission to go anywhere in the world where there is an American serviceman who wouldn't mind listening to 'Sonny Boy' or 'Mammy'.... and early in 1942, Jolson became the first star to perform at a GI base in World War II".
Often performing in blackface, especially in the songs he made popular, such as "Swanee", "My Mammy", and "Rock-A-Bye Your Baby With A Dixie Melody".
On March 20, 1911, Jolson starred in his first musical revue at the Winter Garden Theater in New York City, ''La Belle Paree'', greatly helping to launch his career as a singer.
By 1906 the two agreed to separate, and Jolson was on his own.
Even during their time with Jack Palmer, Al was rising in popularity while Harry was fading.
He replied, "I was seven.
'Sorry for delay but regret no funds for entertainment – STOP; USO disbanded – STOP.'
And here you have the definition of a born comedian."
At the funeral, police estimated upwards of 20,000&nbsp;people showed up, despite threatened rain.
Romance, flash, dash, class, color, songs, star-studded talent and almost every known requisite to assure sturdy attention and attendance...
Even back when I was a kid I listened to him all the time."
In 1950, according to Jolson's biographer Michael Freedland, "the United States answered the call of the United Nations Security Council … and had gone to fight the North Koreans.
for his achievements in radio
I think it gave me a very, very early love of music."
Working behind a blackface mask gave the performer "a sense of freedom and spontaneity that he had never known".
In 1946, during a nationally broadcast testimonial dinner in New York City, given on his behalf, he received a special tribute from the American Veterans Committee in honor of his volunteer services during WWII.
He could really tear them apart."
In the wake of that opening night, Jolson was given a position in the show's cast.
Guest appearances in two more Fox films followed that same year, but Jolson never starred in a full-length feature film again.
The show closed after 104 performances, and during its run Jolson's popularity grew greatly.
Jolson's "Wait a minute, wait a minute, you ain't heard nothin' yet..." provoked shouts of pleasure and applause.
"I remember '' 'The Jazz Singer,' '' when Al Jolson just burst into song, and there was a little bit of dialogue.
Jolson first heard African-American music, such as jazz, blues, and ragtime, played in the back alleys of New Orleans, Louisiana.
In late 1905, Harry left the trio following an argument with Al.
In Crosby's ''Pop Chronicles'' interview, he fondly recalled seeing Jolson perform and praised his "electric delivery".
In March 1922, he moved the production to the larger Century Theater for a special benefit performance to aid injured Jewish veterans of World War I.
Jack Benny, who went to Korea the following year, noted that an amphitheater in Korea where troops were entertained, was named the "Al Jolson Bowl."
At the end of the film, Jolson rose from his seat and ran down to the stage.
After Jolson, whose health was still scarred from his previous battle with malaria, was hospitalized in the winter of 1945, Erle visited him and the two quickly began a relationship.
In Baltimore, Maryland, he took his wife Erle to St Mary's Industrial School in Baltimore, where he had been confined for a while as a boy and treated for tuberculosis.
Because he was over the age of 45, he received a "Specialist" rating that permitted him to wear a uniform and be given the standing of an officer.
Of Jolson's "Mammy" songs, he adds, "with real tears streaming down his blackened face, he immortalized the Negro motherhood of America as no individual could."
Al Jolson was born as '''Asa Yoelson''' () in the Jewish village of Srednik () now known as Seredžius, near Kaunas in Lithuania, then part of the Russian Empire.
According to film historian Scott Eyman, "by the film's end, the Warner brothers had shown an audience something they had never known, moved them in a way they hadn't expected.
He died just weeks after returning to the U.S., partly owing to the physical exertion of performing.
The only ones that ever invited us home for a visit was Al Jolson and Ruby Keeler."
And pandemonium... when he was done the applause that shook that soldier-packed room was like bombs falling again in Shaftsbury Avenue."
A new song was later added to the show that would become composer George Gershwin's first hit recording—"Swanee".
Forty-four years after Jolson's death, the United States Postal Service honored him by issuing a postage stamp.
Shortly after the war began, he wrote a letter to Steven Early, press secretary to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, volunteering "to head a committee for the entertainment of soldiers and said that he "would work without pay... and would gladly assist in the organization to be set up for this purpose".
Stewart replied: "Al Jolson, from when we used to have house parties around Christmas or birthdays.
I knew the same was true today, so I told the people in Washington that I would go anywhere and do an act for the Army."
After separating from Al and Jack, Harry's career in show business, however, sank greatly.
Wonder entertains and banters with his international clientele."
When Jolson appeared on Bing Crosby's radio show, he attributed his receiving the award to his being the only singer of any importance not to make a record of "Mule Train", which had been a widely covered hit of that year (four different versions, one of them by Crosby, had made the top ten on the charts).
Following ''La Belle Paree'', Jolson accepted an offer to perform in the musical ''Vera Violetta''.
But the Jewish mother recognizes the virtue of the old world in the new and the music flows again."
By 1920, Jolson had become the biggest star on Broadway.
His age was given as 64.
By the time they arrived, he had found work as a cantor at Talmud Torah Congregation in the Southwest Waterfront neighborhood of Washington, D.C., where the family was reunited.
Jolson died in a San Francisco hotel.
After Harry's departure, Al and Joe Palmer worked as a duo but were not particularly successful.
In 1930, he wrote the music for Jolson's fourth movie, ''Mammy'', which included hit songs such as "Let Me Sing and I'm Happy", "Pretty Baby", and "Mammy".
Hard times hit the family when his mother, Naomi, died at 37 in early 1895.
He immediately tracked them down and took them out to dinner, "insisting he'd punch anyone in the nose who tried to kick us out!"
And in that sense, it 'is' my story."
However, live performances were falling in popularity as nickelodeons captured audiences; by 1908, nickelodeon theaters were dominant throughout New York City as well.
Al Jolson once read in the newspaper that songwriters Eubie Blake and Noble Sissle, neither of whom he had ever heard of, were refused service at a Connecticut restaurant because of their race.
Reviewers wrote, "Mr Jolson's singing of ''Mammy'', California, Here I Come and others is something for the memory book" and "Of the three co-stars this is Jolson's picture … because it's a pretty good catalog in anybody's hit parade."
His next movie—his first with Twentieth Century-Fox—was ''Rose of Washington Square'' (1939).
From then until 1926, when he retired from the stage, he could boast an unbroken series of smash hits."
A direct response to the Great Depression, it contains messages to his vagabond friends equivalent to "there's more to life than money" and "the best things in life are free".
Diamond says it was "the story of someone who wants to break away from the traditional family situation and find his own path.
In this way, Jolson used comedy to poke fun at the prevalent idea of "white supremacy".
They were married on March 22, 1945.
Jolson co-starred with his actress-dancer wife, Ruby Keeler, only once, in ''Go Into Your Dance''.
In 2000, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.
Jolson's widow purchased a plot at Hillside and commissioned his mausoleum to be designed by well-known black architect Paul Williams.
British performer Brian Conley, former star of the 1995 British play ''Jolson'', stated during an interview, "I found out Jolson was actually a hero to the black people of America.
A few of the people and places that have been influenced by Jolson:
:"Today we know the exertion of his journey to Korea took a greater toll of his strength than perhaps even he realized.
Moving pictures really came alive.
The brothers worked for the William Morris Agency.
Shortly after Harry's wife Lillian died in 1948, Harry and Al became close once again.
He paid for part of the transportation out of his own pocket.
* 6750 Hollywood Blvd.
Jolson accepted Ziegfeld's offer and during their tour with Ziegfeld, the two started dating and were married on September 21, 1928.
… Finally, Louis A. Johnson, Secretary of Defense, sent Jolson a telegram.
However, these films gradually proved a cycle of diminishing returns due to their comparative sameness, the regal salary that Jolson demanded, and a general shift in public tastes away from the vaudeville-style musical as the 1930s began.
Asa was able to avoid financial troubles by forming a vaudeville partnership with his brother Hirsch, now a vaudeville performer known as '''Harry Yoelson'''.
The movie was released on DVD in October 2008.
According to the ''St.
The opening night drew a huge crowd to the theater, and that evening Jolson gained audience popularity by singing old Stephen Foster songs in blackface.
King recalls what happened next:
The next year, Jolson was named "Personality of the Year" by the Variety Clubs of America.
* he demanded equal treatment for Cab Calloway, with whom he performed a number of duets in his movie ''The Singing Kid'';
Decca Records signed Jolson and he recorded for Decca until his death.
After his wife received the news of his death by phone, she went into shock, and required family members to stay with her.
In 1951, Fisher dedicated his "smash hit" song, "Good-bye, G.I.
Even before the U.S.O.
This stamp was one of a series honoring popular American singers, which included Bing Crosby, Nat King Cole, Ethel Merman, and Ethel Waters.
In the summer of 1928, Jolson met young tap dancer, and later actress, Ruby Keeler in Los Angeles (Jolson would claim it was at Texas Guinan's night club) and was dazzled by her on sight.
Numerous well-known singers were influenced by his music, including Bing Crosby, David Bowie, Bob Dylan, Rod Stewart and others.
Although a Republican, Jolson publicly campaigned for Democrat Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1932.
He asked Al, privately, to perform at least one song.
:Mario Lanza's biographer, Armando Cesari, writes that Lanza's "favorite singers included Al Jolson, Lena Horne, Tony Martin and Toni Arden."
Jazz historian Amiri Baraka wrote, "the entrance of the white man into jazz...did at least bring him much closer to the Negro."
:In his memoirs, ''A Moveable Feast'', Ernest Hemingway wrote that "Zelda Fitzgerald... leaned forward and said to me, telling me her great secret, 'Ernest, don't you think Al Jolson is greater than Jesus?'"
While playing cards in his suite at the St. Francis Hotel at 335 Powell Street in San Francisco, Jolson collapsed and died of a massive heart attack on October 23, 1950.
It was a very big thing, like ''The Birth of a Nation''."
In 1944, while giving a show at a military hospital in Hot Springs, Arkansas, Jolson met a young X-ray technologist, Erle Galbraith.
And in 2006, Jolson had a street in New York named after him with the help of the '''Al Jolson Society'''.
To watch him is to marvel at his humorous vitality.
When he was asked what Korea was like he warmly answered, 'I am going to get back my income tax returns and see if I paid enough.'"
The movie is a "musical ''Grand Hotel'', set in the Parisian nightclub owned by Al Wonder (Jolson).
Hecht was also active in the promotion of civil rights: "Hecht film stories featuring black characters included ''Hallelujah, I'm a Bum'', co-starring Edgar Connor as Al Jolson's sidekick, in a politically savvy rhymed dialogue over Richard Rodgers music."
One reviewer of the film expressed how Jolson's blackface added significance to his role:''
As "one of the biggest stars of his time, he worked his magic singing ''Harding, You're the Man for Us'' to enthralled audiences&nbsp;... and was subsequently asked to perform ''Keep Cool with Coolidge'' four years later.
I learned every song and then the moves, which I saw in the movies."
A few months after his death, Defense Secretary George Marshall presented the Medal for Merit to Jolson, "to whom this country owes a debt which cannot be repaid".
Before returning to the U.S., General Douglas MacArthur, leader of UN forces, gave him a medallion inscribed "To Al Jolson from Special Services in appreciation of entertainment of armed forces personnel ‑ Far East Command", with his entire itinerary inscribed on the reverse side.
Asa and Hirsch spent most of their days working different jobs as a team.
After the George M. Cohan film biography, ''Yankee Doodle Dandy'' (1942), Hollywood columnist Sidney Skolsky believed that a similar film could be made about Al Jolson.
The short was included in Warner's 80th Anniversary release of ''The Jazz Singer'' on DVD.
Nearly every camp in this country has heard him sing and tell funny stories."
By 1894, Moses Yoelson could afford to pay the fare to bring Naomi and his four children to America.
Upon the film's release, the first full-length sound picture, film reviewers saw the symbolism and metaphors portrayed by Jolson in his role as the son of a cantor wanting to become a "jazz singer":
Yet he was as much a battle casualty as any American soldier who has fallen on the rocky slopes of Korea … A star for more than 40 years, he earned his most glorious star rating at the end—a gold star."
He contributed millions to Jewish and other charities in his will.
The image of the blackfaced cantor remained in Raphaelson's mind when he conceived of the story which led to ''The Jazz Singer''.
In 1908 Jolson, needing money for himself and his new wife, Henrietta, returned to New York.
As early as 1911, he became known for fighting against black discrimination on Broadway.
We unanimously elect you Public Morale Lifter No.
Being the first popular singer to make a spectacular event out of singing a song, he became a rock star before the dawn of rock music.
According to the ''St.
Newspaper columnist and radio reporter Walter Winchell said,
1 of the U.S Army."
Then in his upper sixties he was again the first to offer his singing gifts for bringing solace to the wounded and weary in Korea.
After ''Vera Violetta'' ran its course, Jolson starred in another musical, ''The Whirl of Society'', propelling his career on Broadway to new heights.
Jessel never got over it and often said that Warner gave the role to Jolson because he agreed to help finance the film.
Although Main had hired Jolson as an usher, Main was impressed by Jolson's singing voice and gave him a position as a singer during the circus' Indian Medicine Side Show segment.
He started to do Jolson imitations... he was crazy about Jolson."
But when the curtains went up, he "was still standing in the wings trembling and sweating."
'I'm gonna go to Korea,' he told a startled official on the phone.
In 1949, the movie ''Jolson Sings Again'' recreated some scenes showing Jolson during his war tours.
Japanese bombs on Pearl Harbor shook Jolson out of continuing moods of lethargy due to years of little activity and "... he dedicated himself to a new mission in life....
A few weeks later, the Jolsons were received by President Harry Truman at the White House.
After a year and a half of marriage, his new wife had never seen him perform in front of an audience, and the first occasion came unplanned.
:"He was the first to entertain troops in World War Two, contracted malaria and lost a lung.
Jolson did a tour of New York film theaters to plug the movie, traveling with a police convoy to make timetables for all showings, often ad libbing jokes and performing songs for the audience.
