This benefited the urban areas that had developed, as well as all in the population who had been underrepresented for more than 60 years.
In 1982, limited voting was first tested in Conecuh County.
The first legislative session in the new capital met in December 1847.
Alabama has made some changes since the late 20th century and has used new types of voting to increase representation.
Winters are generally mild in Alabama, as they are throughout most of the southeastern U.S., with average January low temperatures around  in Mobile and around  in Birmingham.
Alabama's land consists of  of forest or 67% of total land area.
This has resulted in more proportional representation for voters.
, sales and excise taxes in Alabama account for 51% of all state and local revenue, compared with an average of about 36% nationwide.
It was claimed by the Province of Georgia from 1767 onwards.
Analysis of artifacts from archaeological excavations at Moundville were the basis of scholars' formulating the characteristics of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (SECC).
Alabama uses partisan elections to choose judges, and since the 1980s judicial campaigns have become increasingly politicized.
The first community of adherents of the Baha'i Faith in Alabama was founded in 1896 by Paul K. Dealy who moved from Chicago to Fairhope to participate in the growth of Fairhope as a utopian community.
There are four toll roads in the state: Montgomery Expressway in Montgomery; Tuscaloosa Bypass in Tuscaloosa; Emerald Mountain Expressway in Wetumpka; and Beach Express in Orange Beach.
Temperatures tend to be warmer in the southern part of the state with its proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, while the northern parts of the state, especially in the Appalachian Mountains in the northeast, tend to be slightly cooler.
It was formally recognized by the state legislature on January 25, 1844.
(Rust International was acquired in 2000 by Washington Group International, which was in turn acquired by San-Francisco based URS Corporation in 2007.)
The overall federal, state, and local tax burden in Alabama ranks the state as the second least tax-burdened state in the country.
Experts in the Muskogean languages have been unable to find evidence to support such a translation.
This activity decreases somewhat further north in the state, but even the far north of the state reports thunder on about 60&nbsp;days per year.
Rust International has grown to include Brasfield & Gorrie, BE&K, Hoar Construction and B.L.
The largest educational gains were among people with some college education but without degrees.
The majority of Republican sheriffs have been elected in the more urban/suburban and heavily populated counties.
Native American groups within the state had increasingly been demanding recognition as ethnic groups and seeking an end to discrimination.
Some of the most popular areas include the Rocket City of Huntsville, the beaches along the Gulf, and the state's capitol in Montgomery.
The legislation voids a Birmingham city ordinance that was to raise the city's minimum wage to $10.10.
Until 1964, the state elected state senators by county, with one per county.
Major airports with sustained commercial operations in Alabama include Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport (BHM), Huntsville International Airport (HSV), Dothan Regional Airport (DHN), Mobile Regional Airport (MOB), Montgomery Regional Airport (MGM), and Muscle Shoals – Northwest Alabama Regional Airport (MSL).
The current split is 35 Democrats, 31 Republicans, and one Independent Fayette.
On January 11, 1861, Alabama declared its secession from the Union.
It had not changed legislative districts to reflect the decennial censuses, either.
Alabama has coastline at the Gulf of Mexico, in the extreme southern edge of the state.
The state's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 5.8% in April 2015.
A notable natural wonder in Alabama is "Natural Bridge" rock, the longest natural bridge east of the Rockies, located just south of Haleyville.
One result was that Jefferson County, containing Birmingham's industrial and economic powerhouse, contributed more than one-third of all tax revenue to the state, but did not receive a proportional amount in services.
In 1954, the US Supreme Court ruled in ''Brown v. Board of Education'' that public schools had to be desegregated, but Alabama was slow to comply.
* ''Piqua'' Shawnee Tribe, and
Despite numerous legal challenges that succeeded in overturning certain provisions, the state legislature would create new ones to maintain disenfranchisement.
At the same time, many rural people, both White and African American, migrated to the city of Birmingham to work in new industrial jobs.
The state government has promoted recognition of Native American contributions to the state, including the designation in 2000 for Columbus Day to be jointly celebrated as American Indian Heritage Day.
Alabama also contains the Natchez Trace Parkway, the Selma To Montgomery National Historic Trail, and the Trail Of Tears National Historic Trail.
Heavy industry and mining were the basis of its economy.
In 2010, Republicans won control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in 136 years, after a nearly complete realignment of political parties, who represent different visions in the 21st century.
Alabama is nicknamed the ''Yellowhammer State'', after the state bird.
The number of private farms has declined at a steady rate since the 1960s, as land has been sold to developers, timber companies, and large farming conglomerates.
While the planter class had persuaded poor whites to vote for this legislative effort to suppress black voting, the new restrictions resulted in their disenfranchisement as well, due mostly to the imposition of a cumulative poll tax.
It was designed by Barachias Holt of Exeter, Maine.
Sources disagree on the word's meaning.
Jews have been present in what is now Alabama since 1763, during the colonial era of Mobile, when Sephardic Jews immigrated from London.
In the 2013 season, Alabama averaged over 100,000 fans per game and Auburn averaged over 80,000 fans, both numbers among the top 20 in the nation in average attendance.
They held on to old representation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas.
* Cherokee Tribe of Northeast Alabama,
* MOWA Band of Choctaw Indians,
The Port of Mobile, Alabama's only saltwater port, is a large seaport on the Gulf of Mexico with inland waterway access to the Midwest by way of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway.
Its residents were under-represented for decades in the state legislature, which refused to redistrict after each decennial census according to population changes, as it was required by the state constitution.
Alabama had an estimated population of under 10,000 people in 1810, but it increased to more than 300,000 people by 1830.
Indigenous animal species in the state include 62 mammal species, 93 reptile species, 73 amphibian species, roughly 307 native freshwater fish species, and 420 bird species that spend at least part of their year within the state.
That represented an increase of $444,736,387 over the previous fiscal year.
The Legislature has the power to override a gubernatorial veto by a simple majority (most state Legislatures require a two-thirds majority to override a veto).
Highways also pass through the state, such as U.S. Route&nbsp;11 (US-11), US-29, US-31, US-43, US-45, US-72, US-78, US-80, US-82, US-84, US-90, US-98, US-231, US-278, US-280, US-331, US-411, and US-431.
The district's boundaries were roughly limited to the area within a few miles of the Tombigbee River and included portions of what is today southern Clarke County, northernmost Mobile County, and most of Washington County.
''Guntersville'', on ''Lake Guntersville''
In 2007, over 82&nbsp;percent of schools made adequate yearly progress (AYP) toward student proficiency under the National No Child Left Behind law, using measures determined by the state of Alabama.
The members of the Legislature take office immediately after the November elections.
Construction of an Airbus A320 family aircraft assembly plant in Mobile was formally announced by Airbus CEO Fabrice Brégier from the Mobile Convention Center on July 2, 2012.
Urban interests were consistently underrepresented in the legislature.
Jordan-Hare Stadium is the home field of the Auburn football team and seats up to 87,451.
The current governor of the state is Republican Robert Bentley.
In another form of proportional representation, 23 jurisdictions use limited voting, as in Conecuh County.
The 2011 Super Outbreak produced a record amount of tornadoes in the state.
Birmingham also serves as the headquarters for several large investment management companies, including Harbert Management Corporation.
, the three largest denominational groups in Alabama are the Southern Baptist Convention, The United Methodist Church, and non-denominational Evangelical Protestant.
From 1826 to 1846, Tuscaloosa served as Alabama's capital.
The tally reached 62.
In ''Reynolds v. Sims'' (1964), the US Supreme Court implemented the principle of "one man, one vote", ruling that congressional districts had to be reapportioned based on censuses (as the state already had in its constitution but had not implemented.)
Automakers accounted for approximately a third of the industrial expansion in the state in 2012.
Those citing "American" ancestry in Alabama are generally of English or British ancestry; many Anglo-Americans identify as having American ancestry because their roots have been in North America for so long, in some cases since the 1600s.
The corporate income tax rate is currently 6.5%.
This compared to more than 181,000 African Americans eligible to vote in 1900.
The current chief justice of the Alabama Supreme Court is Republican Roy Moore.
It was announced on February 1, 2013 that Airbus had hired Alabama-based Hoar Construction to oversee construction of the facility.
Areas of the state far away from the Gulf are not immune to the effects of the storms, which often dump tremendous amounts of rain as they move inland and weaken.
Public, post-secondary education in Alabama is overseen by the Alabama Commission on Higher Education and the Alabama Department of Postsecondary Education.
Alabama's threshold is the lowest among the 41 states and the District of Columbia with income taxes.
By 2006, crop and animal production in Alabama was valued at $1.5 billion.
This led to them being greeted with "Yellowhammer", and the name later was applied to all Alabama troops in the Confederate Army.
In 2006, 22.3 million tourists spent $8.3 billion providing an estimated 162,000 jobs in the state.
Legion Field is home for the UAB Blazers football program and the Birmingham Bowl.
Huntsville served as Alabama's temporary capital from 1819 to 1820, when the seat of state government was moved to Cahaba in Dallas County.
One example of this massive influx of workers occurred in Mobile.
It is bordered by Tennessee to the north, Georgia to the east, Florida and the Gulf of Mexico to the south, and Mississippi to the west.
Alabama has the headquarters of Regions Financial Corporation, BBVA Compass, Superior Bancorp and the former Colonial Bancgroup.
Alabama's government is divided into three coequal branches.
SouthTrust Corporation, another large bank headquartered in Birmingham, was acquired by Wachovia in 2004 for $14.3 billion.
The legislature also changed the boundaries of Tuskegee to a 28-sided figure designed to fence out blacks from the city limits.
Some changes at the county level have occurred following court challenges to establish single-member districts that enable a more diverse representation among county boards.
The U.S. Congress selected Huntsville as the site for the first Constitutional Convention of Alabama after it was approved to become the 22nd state.
South Alabama reports many thunderstorms.
The Supreme Court unanimously held that this racial "gerrymandering" violated the Constitution.
Alabama state politics gained nationwide and international attention in the 1950s and 1960s during the American Civil Rights Movement, when Whites bureaucratically, and at times, violently resisted protests for electoral and social reform.
The state ranges in elevation from sea level at Mobile Bay to over 1,800&nbsp;feet (550&nbsp;m) in the Appalachian Mountains in the northeast.
In addition, the state legislature gerrymandered the few Birmingham legislative seats to ensure election by persons living outside Birmingham.
This area has attracted an influx of refugees from Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam during the 1970s and thereafter.
Percentage of population()
The first usage appears in three accounts of the Hernando de Soto expedition of 1540 with Garcilaso de la Vega using ''Alibamo'', while the Knight of Elvas and Rodrigo Ranjel wrote ''Alibamu'' and ''Limamu'', respectively, in efforts to transliterate the term.
The state's general sales tax rate is 4%.
This is the second-largest complex of the classic Middle Mississippian era, after Cahokia in present-day Illinois, which was the center of the culture.
Alabama has hosted several professional golf tournaments, such as the 1984 and 1990 PGA Championship at Shoal Creek, the Barbasol Championship (PGA Tour), the Mobile LPGA Tournament of Champions, Airbus LPGA Classic and Yokohama Tire LPGA Classic (LPGA Tour), and The Tradition (Champions Tour).
Exclusion of minorities continued under at-large voting systems in most counties; some changes were made through a series of omnibus court cases in the late 1980s to establish different electoral systems.
Suburban Baldwin County, along the Gulf Coast, is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area.
Summers in Alabama are among the hottest in the U.S., with high temperatures averaging over  throughout the summer in some parts of the state.
* Poarch Band of Creek Indians (who also have federal recognition),
The 1901 constitution required racial segregation of public schools.
The Port of Mobile was ranked 12th by tons of traffic in the United States during 2009.
Into the 1950s, the state legislature passed additional racial segregation laws related to public facilities: jails were segregated in 1911; hospitals in 1915; toilets, hotels, and restaurants in 1928; and bus stop waiting rooms in 1945.
The agrarian Mississippian culture covered most of the state from 1000 to 1600 AD, with one of its major centers built at what is now the Moundville Archaeological Site in Moundville, Alabama.
In 1972, for the first time since 1901, the legislature completed the first congressional redistricting based on the decennial census.
The state's two U.S. senators are Jefferson B.
Black citizens in Mobile successfully challenged this amendment as a violation of the Fifteenth Amendment.
Alabama levies a 2, 4, or 5 percent personal income tax, depending upon the amount earned and filing status.
They often donated land and labor as well.
After remaining an independent republic for a few days, it joined the Confederate States of America.
This ultimately led to a collapse of support for Democrats at the ballot box in the next three or four election cycles.
The rural-dominated Alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disenfranchised African Americans, but it did not relieve them of paying taxes.
Since Alabama's tax structure largely depends on consumer spending, it is subject to high variable budget structure.
In a 2007 survey, nearly 70% of respondents could name all four of the Christian Gospels.
There are two intermediate appellate courts, the Court of Civil Appeals and the Court of Criminal Appeals, and four trial courts: the circuit court (trial court of general jurisdiction), and the district, probate, and municipal courts.
Today there is an exhibit honoring Dealy in Haifa, Israel at the world center of the Baha'i Faith.
The remaining portion of the ThyssenKrupp plant had final bids submitted by ArcelorMittal and Nippon Steel for $1.6 billion in March 2013.
* Star Clan of Muscogee Creeks,
Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander
In the early 21st century, Republicans hold all seven of the statewide elected executive branch offices.
Only after passage of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 did African Americans regain the ability to exercise suffrage, among other civil rights.
In the U.S. House of Representatives, the state is represented by seven members, six of whom are Republicans: (Bradley Byrne, Mike D. Rogers, Robert Aderholt, Morris J. Brooks, Martha Roby, and Gary Palmer) and one Democrat: Terri Sewell.
''Birmingham'', on ''Black Warrior River''
Alabama is the only state that levies income tax on a family of four with income as low as $4,600, which is barely one-quarter of the federal poverty line.
A great deal of Alabama's economic growth since the 1990s has been due to the state's expanding automotive manufacturing industry.
Contrary to popular belief, the SECC appears to have no direct links to Mesoamerican culture, but developed independently.
The highest point is Mount Cheaha, at a height of .
Alabama has six major interstate roads that cross the state: Interstate&nbsp;65 (I-65) travels north–south roughly through the middle of the state; I-20/I-59 travel from the central west Mississippi state line to Birmingham, where I-59 continues to the north-east corner of the state and I-20 continues east towards Atlanta; I-85 originates in Montgomery and travels east-northeast to the Georgia state line, providing a main thoroughfare to Atlanta; and I-10 traverses the southernmost portion of the state, traveling from west to east through Mobile.
In Alabama, majority-white districts are now expected to regularly elect Republican candidates to federal, state and local office.
African Americans continued to press in the 1950s and 1960s to end disenfranchisement and segregation in the state through the Civil Rights Movement, including legal challenges.
The center of population of Alabama is located in Chilton County, outside the town of Jemison.
Spain kept a claim on its former Spanish West Florida territory in what would become the coastal counties until the Adams–Onís Treaty officially ceded it to the United States in 1819.
UAB Hospital is the only Level I trauma center in Alabama.
The state has officially recognized nine American Indian tribes in the state, descended mostly from the Five Civilized Tribes of the American Southeast.
While Alabama's public education system has improved in recent decades, it lags behind in achievement compared to other states.
The state was affected by the 1974 Super Outbreak and was devastated tremendously by the 2011 Super Outbreak.
College football is popular in Alabama, particularly the University of Alabama Crimson Tide and Auburn University Tigers, rivals in the Southeastern Conference.
A company of cavalry soldiers from Huntsville, Alabama joined Nathan Bedford Forrest's battalion in Hopkinsville, Kentucky.
Despite the growth of major industries and urban centers, white rural interests dominated the state legislature from 1901 to the 1960s, as it did not regularly reapportion the legislature from 1901 to 1961; urban interests and African Americans were markedly under-represented.
The last remaining statewide Democrat, who served on the Alabama Public Service Commission was defeated in 2012.
A majority of people in the state identify as Evangelical Protestant.
In the southern Gulf coast, snowfall is less frequent, sometimes going several years without any snowfall.
There are six Dharma centers and organizations for Theravada Buddhists.
In the state are four medical schools (as of fall 2015) (University of Alabama School of Medicine, University of South Alabama and Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine and The Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine - Auburn Campus), two veterinary colleges (Auburn University and Tuskegee University), a dental school (University of Alabama School of Dentistry), an optometry college (University of Alabama at Birmingham), two pharmacy schools (Auburn University and Samford University), and five law schools (University of Alabama School of Law, Birmingham School of Law, Cumberland School of Law, Miles Law School, and the Thomas Goode Jones School of Law).
African Americans and poor whites were essentially disenfranchised altogether by the state constitution of 1901, a status that continued into the mid-1960s before being alleviated by federal legislation.
Many Baptist and Methodist congregations became established in the Great Awakening of the early 19th century, when preachers proselytized across the South.
Bryant-Denny Stadium is the home of the Alabama football team, and has a seating capacity of 101,821, and is the fifth largest stadium in America.
The Hunt Refining Company, a subsidiary of Hunt Consolidated, Inc., is based in Tuscaloosa and operates a refinery there.
+ '''Alabama Racial Breakdown of Population'''
The city still has major operations for Wachovia and its now post-operating bank Wells Fargo, which includes a regional headquarters, an operations center campus and a $400 million data center.
Several Hindu temples and cultural centers in the state have been founded by Indian immigrants and their descendants, the most well-known being the Shri Swaminarayan Mandir in Birmingham, the Hindu Temple and Cultural Center of Birmingham in Pelham, the Hindu Cultural Center of North Alabama in Capshaw, and the Hindu Mandir and Cultural Center in Tuscaloosa.
For nearly 100&nbsp;years, local and state elections in Alabama were decided in the Democratic Party primary, with generally only token Republican challengers running in the General Election.
United States Supreme Court cases of ''Baker v. Carr'' (1962) and ''Reynolds v. Sims'' (1964) ruled that the principle of "one man, one vote" needed to be the basis of both houses of state legislatures as well, and that their districts had to be based on population, rather than geographic counties, as Alabama had used for its senate.
Alabama's income tax on poor working families is among the highest in the United States.
Colleges and universities in Alabama offer degree programs from two-year associate degrees to a multitude of doctoral level programs.
The economy of the central Black Belt (named for its dark, productive soil) was built around large cotton plantations whose owners' wealth grew largely from slave labor.
Rural workers poured into the largest cities in the state for better jobs and a higher standard of living.
The meaning may have been "clearers of the thicket" or "herb gatherers", referring to clearing land for cultivation or collecting medicinal plants.
Part of the frontier in the 1820s and 1830s, its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men.
Despite massive population changes in the state from 1901 to 1961, the rural-dominated legislature refused to reapportion House and Senate seats based on population, as required by the state constitution to follow the results of decennial censuses.
In July 2013, the plant was sold to ArcelorMittal and Nippon Steel.
''Decatur'', on ''Wheeler Lake''
95.1% of all Alabama residents five years old or older spoke only English at home in 2010, a minor decrease from  96.1% in 2000.
At , Alabama has one of the nation's longest navigable inland waterways.
In 2010, Republicans took large majorities of both chambers of the state legislature, giving them control of that body for the first time in 136 years.
Historic snowfall events include New Year's Eve 1963 snowstorm and the 1993 Storm of the Century.
Given the long history of slavery and associated racial segregation, the Native American peoples, who have sometimes been of mixed race, have insisted on having their cultural identification respected.
By the 1920s, Birmingham was the 19th-largest city in the United States and had more than 30% of the state's population.
Alabama's 2012 GDP increased 1.2% from the previous year.
As part of settlement of this case, five Alabama cites and counties, including Chilton County, adopted a system of cumulative voting for election of representatives in multi-seat jurisdictions.
After the United States victory in the American Revolutionary War, the territory was divided between the United States and Spain.
It has a seating capacity of 143,000 and is the thirteenth largest stadium in the world and sixth largest stadium in America.
Until 1994, no Republicans held any of the court seats.
Ladd-Peebles Stadium in Mobile is the home of the University of South Alabama football team, and serves as the home of the NCAA Senior Bowl, Dollar General Bowl (formerly GoDaddy.com Bowl), and Alabama-Mississippi All Star Classic; the stadium seats 40,646.
An estimated 20 million tourists visit the state each year.
In 1961, ... the Alabama legislature also intentionally diluted the effect of the black vote by instituting numbered place requirements for local elections.
* Cher-O-Creek Intra Tribal Indians,
In 2007, the Alabama Legislature passed, and Republican Governor Bob Riley signed a resolution expressing "profound regret" over slavery and its lingering impact.
In 2010, per capita income for the state was $22,984.
The state's highest court is the Supreme Court of Alabama.
Alabama is in the subtropical coniferous forest biome and once boasted huge expanses of pine forest, which still form the largest proportion of forests in the state.
The company wore new uniforms with yellow trim on the sleeves, collar and coat tails.
From 1901 through the 1960s, the state did not redraw election districts as population grew and shifted within the state during urbanization and industrialization of certain areas.
Through the legislative delegations, the Alabama legislature kept control of county governments.
Alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in November and December, along with the spring severe weather season.
They wrote another constitution in 1875, and the legislature passed the Blaine Amendment, prohibiting public money from being used to finance religious-affiliated schools.
* ''Ani-Yun-Wiya'' Nation.
Non-agricultural employment in 2008 was 121,800 in management occupations; 71,750 in business and financial operations; 36,790 in computer-related and mathematical occupation; 44,200 in architecture and engineering; 12,410 in life, physical, and social sciences; 32,260 in community and social services; 12,770 in legal occupations; 116,250 in education, training, and library services; 27,840 in art, design and media occupations; 121,110 in healthcare; 44,750 in fire fighting, law enforcement, and security; 154,040 in food preparation and serving; 76,650 in building and grounds cleaning and maintenance; 53,230 in personal care and services; 244,510 in sales; 338,760 in office and administration support; 20,510 in farming, fishing, and forestry; 120,155 in construction and mining, gas, and oil extraction; 106,280 in installation, maintenance, and repair; 224,110 in production; and 167,160 in transportation and material moving.
The expedition of Hernando de Soto passed through Mabila and other parts of the state in 1540.
