From September 1938, Turing had been working part-time with the GC&CS, the British code breaking organisation.
Most of the possible settings would cause contradictions and be discarded, leaving only a few to be investigated in detail.
Some have speculated that Morcom's death was the cause of Turing's atheism and materialism, but this seems unlikely.
The sculptor buried his own old Amstrad computer under the plinth as a tribute to "the godfather of all modern computers".
At the time, there was acute public anxiety about homosexual entrapment of spies by Soviet agents, because of the recent exposure of the first two members of the Cambridge Five, Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, as KGB double agents.
It also included a notion of a 'Universal Machine' (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other computation machine (as indeed could Church's lambda calculus).
He was Walton Athletic Club's best runner, a fact discovered when he passed the group while running alone.
Both the designer of the logo and the company deny that there is any homage to Turing in the design.
Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done."
The Polish method relied on an insecure indicator procedure that the Germans were likely to change, which they did in May 1940.
At Hastings, Turing stayed at Baston Lodge, Upper Maze Hill, St Leonards-on-Sea, now marked with a blue plaque.
That same night, he also conceived of the idea of ''Banburismus'', a sequential statistical technique (what Abraham Wald later called sequential analysis) to assist in breaking the naval Enigma, "though I was not sure that it would work in practice, and was not, in fact, sure until some days had actually broken."
Instability in the system of  partial differential equations used to model the system allows for small random perturbations to homogeneous initial state to drive the development of patterns.
His central interest in the field was understanding Fibonacci phyllotaxis, the existence of Fibonacci numbers in plant structures.
The idea was that a computer could be said to "think" if a human interrogator could not tell it apart, through conversation, from a human being.
In 2006, British writer and mathematician Ioan James chose Turing as one of twenty people to feature in his book about famous historical figures who may have had some of the traits of Asperger syndrome.
A plaque at the statue's feet reads 'Father of computer science, mathematician, logician, wartime codebreaker, victim of prejudice'.
According to the memoirs of the German computer pioneer Heinz Billing from the Max Planck Institute for Physics, published by Genscher, Düsseldorf, there was a meeting between Alan Turing and Konrad Zuse.
Turing was one of four mathematicians examined in the BBC documentary entitled ''Dangerous Knowledge'' (2008).
Turing was never accused of espionage, but in common with all who had worked at Bletchley Park, he was prevented by the Official Secrets Act from discussing his war work.
Turingery was a method of ''wheel-breaking'', i.e., a procedure for working out the cam settings of Tunny's wheels.
Murray was given a conditional discharge.
Previous events have included a celebration of Turing's life and achievements, at the University of Manchester, arranged by the British Logic Colloquium and the British Society for the History of Mathematics on 5 June 2004.
They had tried to get more people and fund more bombes through the proper channels, but they were getting nowhere.
The game was recorded.
He accepted treatment with DES (chemical castration) as an alternative to prison.
Though published before even the structure or role of DNA was understood, Turing's work on morphogenesis remains relevant today, and is considered a seminal piece of work in mathematical biology.
The petition received more than 30,000 signatures.
If he is to be solely a ''Scientific Specialist'', he is wasting his time at a public school".
Leech made the case in the House of Commons that Turing's contribution to the war made him a national hero and that it was "ultimately just embarrassing" that the conviction still stood.
John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to Turing's paper.
At the University of Oxford, a new course in Computer Science and Philosophy was established to coincide with the centenary of Turing's birth.
The first day of term coincided with the 1926 General Strike in Britain, but he was so determined to attend that he rode his bicycle unaccompanied  from Southampton to Sherborne, stopping overnight at an inn.
Garner remembered Turing as "funny and witty" and said that he "talked endlessly".
Turing had such an apparatus set up in his tiny spare room.
However, both Julius and Ethel wanted their children to be brought up in Britain, so they moved to Maida Vale, London, where Turing was born on 23 June 1912, as recorded by a blue plaque on the outside of the house of his birth, later the Colonnade Hotel.
His parents purchased a house in Guildford in 1927, and Turing lived there during school holidays.
The work was unveiled at a ceremony on Turing's birthday, 23 June 2014, and is placed outside Pink Punter's alongside the busy Watling Street, the old main road to London where Turing himself would have passed by on many occasions.
In 1941, Turing proposed marriage to Hut 8 colleague Joan Clarke, a fellow mathematician and cryptanalyst, but their engagement was short-lived.
He suggests an alternative explanation for the cause of Turing's death, this being the accidental inhalation of cyanide fumes from an apparatus for gold electroplating spoons, which uses potassium cyanide to dissolve the gold.
They badly needed more resources to keep abreast of German adjustments.
There is also a Bertrand Russell quotation: "Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty&nbsp;— a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture."
From September 1936 to July 1938, Turing spent most of his time studying under Church at Princeton University.
Turing tried out for the 1948 British Olympic team, hampered by an injury.
For this, he invented a measure of weight of evidence that he called the ''ban''.
The commission was announced by the owners of Milton Keynes-based LGBT venue and nightclub Pink Punters to mark International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia.
Late in the year in a letter to ''The Daily Telegraph'', the physicist Stephen Hawking and 10 other signatories including  the Astronomer Royal Lord Rees, President of the Royal Society Sir Paul Nurse, Lady Trumpington (who worked for Turing during the war) and Lord Sharkey (the bill's sponsor) called on Prime Minister David Cameron to act on the pardon request.
Stephen Fry has recounted asking Steve Jobs whether the design was intentional, saying that Jobs' response was, "God, we wish it were."
The Science Museum in London launched a free exhibition devoted to Turing's life and achievements in June 2012, to run until July 2013.
Remarkably, the lectures have been reconstructed verbatim, including interjections from Turing and other students, from students' notes.
In August 2009, John Graham-Cumming started a petition urging the British Government to apologise for Turing's prosecution as a homosexual.
On 22 October 2014, Turing was inducted into the NSA Hall of Honor.
The first bombe was installed on 18 March 1940.
The London 2012 Olympic Torch flame was passed on in front of Turing's statue in Sackville Gardens, Manchester, on the evening of 23 June 2012, the 100th anniversary of his birth.
He was known to his colleagues as 'Prof' and his treatise on Enigma was known as 'The Prof's Book'.
Murray told Turing that the burglar was an acquaintance of his, and Turing reported the crime to the police.
Some have mistakenly said that Turing was a key figure in the design of the Colossus computer.
''Entscheidungsproblem'' (decision problem) was originally posed by German mathematician David Hilbert in 1928.
On 13 March 2000, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines issued a set of postage stamps to celebrate the greatest achievements of the 20th century, one of which carries a portrait of Turing against a background of repeated 0s and 1s, and is captioned: "1937: Alan Turing's theory of digital computing".
The Government indicated it would support the bill, and it passed its third reading in the Lords in October.
Leech continued to take the bill through Parliament and campaigned for several years until it was passed.
Copeland notes that the autopsy findings were more consistent with inhalation than with ingestion of the poison.
It executed its first program on 10 May 1950, and a number of later computers around the world owe much to it, including the English Electric DEUCE and the American Bendix G-15.
Turing's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC&CS in 1946 (though he kept his academic job).
Neither condition was met in regard to Turing's conviction.
Queen Elizabeth II granted him a posthumous pardon in 2013.
Experiments suggest that Turing's work can partially explain growth of "feathers, hair follicles, the branching pattern of lungs, and even the left-right asymmetry that puts the heart on the left side of the chest."
'''Alan Mathison Turing'''  (; 23 June 1912&nbsp;– 7 June 1954) was a pioneering English computer scientist, mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst and theoretical biologist.
For each possible setting of the rotors (which had on the order of 1019 states, or 1022 states for the four-rotor U-boat variant), the bombe performed a chain of logical deductions based on the crib, implemented electrically.
Alexander wrote as follows about his contribution:
In 2016, the government announced its intention to expand this retroactive exoneration to other men convicted of similar historical indecency offenses, in what has been described as an "Alan Turing law".
The case, ''Regina v. Turing and Murray,'' was brought to trial on 31 March 1952.
The location is also marked with a blue plaque.
Participants were Womersley, Turing, Porter from England and a few German researchers like Zuse, Walther, and Billing.
Apparently, at this point in his life he still believed in such concepts as a spirit, independent of the body and surviving death.
The bombe detected when a contradiction had occurred and ruled out that setting, moving on to the next.
Turing was prosecuted in 1952 for homosexual acts, when such behaviour was still a criminal act in the UK.
The ''Princeton Alumni Weekly'' named Turing the second most significant alumnus in the history of Princeton University, second only to President James Madison.
Though the system worked fully, with Turing demonstrating it to officials by encrypting and decrypting a recording of a Winston Churchill speech, Delilah was not adopted for use.
Von Neumann's incomplete ''First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC'' had predated Turing's paper, but it was much less detailed and, according to John R. Womersley, Superintendent of the NPL Mathematics Division, it "contains a number of ideas which are Dr. Turing's own".
The headmistress recognised his talent early on, as did many of his subsequent educators.
His reaction to the American bombe design was far from enthusiastic:
As Andrew Hodges, biographer of Turing, later wrote, "This letter had an electric effect."
In December 2011, William Jones created an e-petition requesting the British Government pardon Turing for his conviction of "gross indecency":
In 2012, Turing was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display that celebrates LGBT history and people.
He coped with his grief by working that much harder on the topics of science and mathematics that he had shared with Morcom.
The cast bronze bench carries in relief the text 'Alan Mathison Turing 1912–1954', and the motto 'Founder of Computer Science' as it could appear if encoded by an Enigma machine: 'IEKYF ROMSI ADXUO KVKZC GUBJ'.
Later, convinced by the advice of his brother and his own solicitor, Turing entered a plea of guilty.
Julius' work with the ICS brought the family to British India, where his grandfather had been a general in the Bengal Army.
Specifying the bombe was the first of five major cryptanalytical advances that Turing made during the war.
He also introduced the Tunny team to Tommy Flowers who, under the guidance of Max Newman, went on to build the Colossus computer, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer, which replaced a simpler prior machine (the Heath Robinson), and whose superior speed allowed the statistical decryption techniques to be applied usefully to the messages.
I know I must put as much energy if not as much interest into my work as if he were alive, because that is what he would like me to do.
When his body was discovered, an apple lay half-eaten beside his bed, and although the apple was not tested for cyanide, it was speculated that this was the means by which a fatal dose was consumed.
Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition, releasing a statement on 10 September 2009 apologising and describing the treatment of Turing as "appalling":
A 1.5-ton, life-size statue of Turing was unveiled on 19 June 2007 at Bletchley Park.
The full version of Turing's ACE was not built until after his death.
In 1948 Turing, working with his former undergraduate colleague, D. G. Champernowne, began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist.
According to the Church–Turing thesis, Turing machines and the lambda calculus are capable of computing anything that is computable.
In 2009, following an Internet campaign, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown made an official public apology on behalf of the British government for "the appalling way he was treated."
Turing also habitually ate an apple before bed, and it was not unusual for it to be discarded half-eaten.
Announcing the pardon, Justice Secretary Chris Grayling said Turing deserved to be "remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort" and not for his later criminal conviction.
He had died the previous day.
His headmaster wrote to his parents: "I hope he will not fall between two stools.
Turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park.
He went on to prove that there was no solution to the ''decision problem'' by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: It is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a Turing machine will ever halt.
Turing and Wittgenstein argued and disagreed, with Turing defending formalism and Wittgenstein propounding his view that mathematics does not discover any absolute truths, but rather invents them.
In the summer, they had had considerable success, and shipping losses had fallen to under 100,000 tons a month, but they were still on a knife-edge.
A reversed form of the Turing test is widely used on the Internet; the CAPTCHA test is intended to determine whether the user is a human or a computer.
Churchill wrote a memo to General Ismay, which read: "ACTION THIS DAY.
The event caused Turing great sorrow.
Turing also consulted with Bell Labs on the development of SIGSALY, a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war.
Turing died in 1954, 16 days before his 42nd birthday, from cyanide poisoning.
On 4 September 1939, the day after the UK declared war on Germany, Turing reported to Bletchley Park, the wartime station of GC&CS.
Turing is shown holding an apple.
Biographer Andrew Hodges suggests that Turing may have arranged the cyanide experiment deliberately, to give his mother some plausible deniability.
In February 2012, the Royal Mail issued a stamp featuring Turing as part of its "Britons of Distinction" series.
Turing's approach was more general, using crib-based decryption for which he produced the functional specification of the bombe (an improvement of the Polish Bomba).
In this paper, Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel's universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines.
He suggested that a system of chemicals reacting with each other and diffusing across space, termed a reaction-diffusion system, could account for "the main phenomena of morphogenesis".
In 1945, Turing was awarded the OBE by King George VI for his wartime services, but his work remained secret for many years.
On 18 November, the chief of the secret service reported that every possible measure was being taken.
In 2006, Alan Turing was named with online resources as an LGBT History Month Icon.
Turing's father's civil service commission was still active and during Turing's childhood years Turing's parents travelled between Hastings in England and India, leaving their two sons to stay with a retired Army couple.
In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year during which he produced a seminal work on ''Intelligent Machinery'' that was not published in his lifetime.
In 1948 Turing joined Max Newman's Computing Machine Laboratory at the Victoria University of Manchester, where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology.
By 1950, the program was completed and dubbed the Turochamp.
On 22 June 2012 Manchester City Council, in partnership with the Lesbian and Gay Foundation, launched the Alan Turing Memorial Award, which will recognise individuals or groups who have made a significant contribution to the fight against homophobia in Manchester.
The game also includes a replica of an original hand-drawn board created by William Newman, son of Turing's mentor, Max Newman, which Turing played on in the 1950s.
When Turing returned to Cambridge, he attended lectures given in 1939 by Ludwig Wittgenstein about the foundations of mathematics.
''Banburismus'' could rule out certain sequences of the Enigma rotors, substantially reducing the time needed to test settings on the bombes.
Madurai, India held celebrations with a programme attended by 6,000 students.
Turingery and the statistical approach of Banburismus undoubtedly fed into the thinking about cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher, but he was not directly involved in the Colossus development.
From 1945 to 1947, Turing lived in Hampton, London, while he worked on the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL).
A post-mortem examination established that the cause of death was cyanide poisoning.
Very early in life, Turing showed signs of the genius that he was later to display prominently.
On 28 October 2004, a bronze statue of Alan Turing sculpted by John W. Mills was unveiled at the University of Surrey in Guildford, marking the 50th anniversary of Turing's death; it portrays him carrying his books across the campus.
He devised a number of techniques for breaking German ciphers, including improvements to the pre-war Polish bombe method and an electromechanical machine that could find settings for the Enigma machine.
John Leech, the MP for Manchester Withington (2005-15), submitted several bills to Parliament and campaigned with William Jones to secure the pardon.
An inquest determined that he had committed suicide, and he was cremated at Woking Crematorium on 12 June 1954.
The Bletchley Park Trust collaborated with Winning Moves to publish an Alan Turing edition of the board game Monopoly.
The logo of Apple Inc. is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing, with the bite mark a reference to his death.
Turing's mother, Julius' wife, was Ethel Sara (née Stoney; 1881–1976), daughter of Edward Waller Stoney, chief engineer of the Madras Railways.
Initial committal proceedings for the trial were held on 27 February during which Turing's solicitor "reserved his defence".
It took place in Göttingen in 1947.
On 24 December 2013, Queen Elizabeth II signed a pardon for Turing's conviction for gross indecency, with immediate effect.
During this trip, he also assisted at Bell Labs with the development of secure speech devices.
In a letter to Prime Minister David Cameron after announcement of the pardon, human rights advocate Peter Tatchell criticised the decision to single out Turing due to his fame and achievements, when thousands of others convicted under the same law have not received pardons.
On 8 June 1954, Turing's housekeeper found him dead.
A bridge carrying this road was widened, and carries the name Alan Turing Bridge.
Following his work at Bell Labs in the US, Turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system, and in the latter part of the war, he moved to work for the Secret Service's Radio Security Service (later HMGCC) at Hanslope Park.
In a later letter, also written to Morcom's mother, Turing said: Personally, I believe that spirit is really eternally connected with matter but certainly not by the same kind of body&nbsp;... as regards the actual connection between spirit and body I consider that the body can hold on to a 'spirit', whilst the body is alive and awake the two are firmly connected.
Turing's ashes were scattered there, just as his father's had been.
After admitting his homosexuality to his fiancée, who was reportedly "unfazed" by the revelation, Turing decided that he could not go through with the marriage.
Turing's father was the son of a clergyman, the Rev.&nbsp;John Robert Turing, from a Scottish family of merchants that had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet.
He concentrated on cryptanalysis of the Enigma with Dilly Knox, a senior GC&CS codebreaker.
In 1948 Turing was appointed Reader in the Mathematics Department at the Victoria University of Manchester.
The game's squares and cards have been revised to tell the story of Alan Turing's life, from his birthplace in Maida Vale to Hut 8 at Bletchley Park.
In 2002, Turing was ranked twenty-first on the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK-wide vote.
Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence.
The petition gathered over 37,000 signatures, but the request was discouraged by Lord McNally, who gave the following opinion in his role as the Justice Minister:
The cryptographers at Bletchley Park did not know of the Prime Minister's response, but as Milner-Barry later recalled, "All that we did notice was that almost from that day the rough ways began miraculously to be made smooth."
Together they undertook the design and construction of a portable secure voice communications machine codenamed ''Delilah''.
He was interested in morphogenesis, the development of patterns and shapes in biological organisms.
Turing played a pivotal role in cracking intercepted coded messages that enabled the Allies to defeat the Nazis in many crucial engagements, including the Battle of the Atlantic; it has been estimated that this work shortened the war in Europe by as many as four years.
During the investigation he acknowledged a  sexual relationship with Murray.
They emphasised how small their need was compared with the vast expenditure of men and money by the forces and compared with the level of assistance they could offer to the forces.
A statue of Turing was unveiled in Manchester on 23 June 2001 in Sackville Park, between the University of Manchester building on Whitworth Street and Canal Street.
At the time, Turing's mother believed that the ingestion was accidental, resulting from her son's careless storage of laboratory chemicals.
While working at Bletchley, Turing, who was a talented long-distance runner, occasionally ran the  to London when he was needed for high-level meetings, and he was capable of world-class marathon standards.
(For more details see Herbert Bruderer, ''Konrad Zuse und die Schweiz'').
After the war, he worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he designed the ACE, among the first designs for a stored-program computer.
Building on the work of the Poles, they had set up a good working system for decrypting Enigma signals, but they only had a few people and a few bombes, so they did not have time to translate all the signals.
There he further developed his knowledge of electronics with the assistance of engineer Donald Bayley.
Despite this, Turing continued to show remarkable ability in the studies he loved, solving advanced problems in 1927 without having studied even elementary calculus.
He was denied entry into the United States after his conviction in 1952, but was free to visit other European countries.
The francophone singer-songwriter Salvatore Adamo made a tribute to Turing with his song "Alan et la Pomme".
On 1 April 2003, Turing's work at Bletchley Park was named an IEEE Milestone.
To this day, Turing machines are a central object of study in theory of computation.
This was a teleprinter rotor cipher attachment codenamed ''Tunny'' at Bletchley Park.
An inquest determined his death as suicide, but it has been noted that the known evidence is equally consistent with accidental poisoning.
The interrogation had the form of a colloquium.
Tatchell also called for a new investigation into Turing's death:
More than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war.
The treatment rendered Turing impotent and caused gynaecomastia, fulfilling in the literal sense Turing's prediction that "no doubt I shall emerge from it all a different man, but quite who I've not found out".
The others were: deducing the indicator procedure used by the German navy; developing a statistical procedure for making much more efficient use of the bombes dubbed ''Banburismus''; developing a procedure for working out the cam settings of the wheels of the Lorenz SZ 40/42 (''Tunny'') dubbed ''Turingery'' and, towards the end of the war, the development of a portable secure voice scrambler at Hanslope Park that was codenamed ''Delilah''.
Finally, breaking all the rules, on 28 October they wrote directly to Winston Churchill spelling out their difficulties, with Turing as the first named.
On 26 July 2012, a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to grant a statutory pardon to Turing for offences under section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, of which he was convicted on 31 March 1952.
Although ACE was a feasible design, the secrecy surrounding the wartime work at Bletchley Park led to delays in starting the project and he became disillusioned.
His tryout time for the marathon was only 11 minutes slower than British silver medallist Thomas Richards' Olympic race time of 2 hours 35 minutes.
Although Turing's proof was published shortly after Alonzo Church's equivalent proof using his lambda calculus, Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive than Church's.
In 1949, he became Deputy Director of the Computing Machine Laboratory there, working on software for one of the earliest stored-program computers—the Manchester Mark 1.
Turing's natural inclination towards mathematics and science did not earn him respect from some of the teachers at Sherborne, whose definition of education placed more emphasis on the classics.
Soon after the July 1939 Warsaw meeting at which the Polish Cipher Bureau had provided the British and French with the details of the wiring of Enigma rotors and their method of decrypting Enigma code messages, Turing and Knox started to work on a less fragile approach to the problem.
Turing's life and work featured in a BBC children's programme about famous scientists&nbsp;– ''Absolute Genius with Dick and Dom''&nbsp;– first broadcast on 12 March 2014.
He accepted the option of treatment via injections of what was then called stilboestrol (now known as diethylstilbestrol or DES), a synthetic oestrogen; this treatment was continued for the course of one year.
In the Philippines, the Department of Philosophy at De La Salle University-Manila hosted Turing 2012, an international conference on philosophy, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science from 27 to 28 March 2012 to commemorate the centenary birth of Turing.
In 1999, ''Time'' magazine named Turing as one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century and stated, "The fact remains that everyone who taps at a keyboard, opening a spreadsheet or a word-processing program, is working on an incarnation of a Turing machine."
When the body is asleep I cannot guess what happens but when the body dies, the 'mechanism' of the body, holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body sooner or later, perhaps immediately.
Andrew Hodges and another biographer, David Leavitt, have both suggested that Turing was re-enacting a scene from the Walt Disney film ''Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'' (1937), his favourite fairy tale, both noting that (in Leavitt's words) he took "an especially keen pleasure in the scene where the Wicked Queen immerses her apple in the poisonous brew".
He returned to Bletchley Park in March 1943.
