His final test was six perfect landings on the carrier .
Shepard joined it when it returned to the naval base at Ulithi on 30 October.
The 110 were then split into three groups, with the most promising candidates in the first group.
Shepard was assigned to Fighter Squadron 42 (VF-42), flying the F4U Corsair.
The school newspaper is named ''Freedom 7'' and the yearbook is entitled ''Odyssey''.
Shepard made his second space flight as Commander of Apollo 14 from January 31 to February 9, 1971, America's third successful lunar landing mission.
The job of the radar pickets was to warn the fleet of incoming kamikazes; but because they were often the first ships sighted by incoming Japanese aircraft, they were also the most likely ships to be attacked.
He was promoted to rear admiral on August 25, 1971, the first astronaut to reach that rank.
He completed years 9 to 12 at the Pinkerton Academy, a private school in Derry that his father had attended.
In November 1945, Shepard arrived at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in Texas, where he commenced basic flight training on January 7, 1946.
The ship also participated in the Allied naval bombardments of Japan, and was present in Tokyo Bay for the Surrender of Japan in September 1945.
On Shepard's second cruise with ''Cogswell'' he was appointed a gunnery officer, responsible for the 20&nbsp;mm and 40&nbsp;mm antiaircraft guns on the ship's bow.
In late 1963, Shepard began to experience episodes of extreme dizziness and nausea, accompanied by a loud, clanging noise in the left ear.
He was fascinated by flight, and created a model airplane club at the Academy, and his Christmas present in 1938 was a flight in a Douglas DC-3.
He squeezed out of the door and into a sling hoist, and was pulled into the helicopter, which flew both the astronaut and spacecraft to the aircraft carrier .
They prescribed diuretics in an attempt to drain the fluid from the ear.
He was the backup pilot for Cooper for the Mercury-Atlas 9 mission, nearly replacing Cooper after Cooper flew low over the NASA administration building at Cape Canaveral in an F-106.
He was a fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the Society of Experimental Test Pilots; member of the Rotary, the Kiwanis, the Mayflower Society, the Order of the Cincinnati, and the American Fighter Aces; honorary member, Board of Directors for the Houston School for Deaf Children, Director, National Space Institute, and Director, Los Angeles Ear Research Institute.
NASA officials then briefed them on Project Mercury.
Only one candidate, Lovell, was eliminated on medical grounds at this stage, and the diagnosis was later found to be in error.
This syndrome causes the semicircular canals and motion detectors to become extremely sensitive, resulting in disorientation, dizziness, and nausea.
He joined the National Guard in 1915 and served in France with the American Expeditionary Force during World War I.
During this period, his secretary had several head shot photographs taken of Shepard, posed with various expressions on his face.
Shepard had a younger sister, Pauline, who was known as Polly.
Visitors could then look at the photo to decide whether it was a good time to talk to him.
Shepard was informed of his selection on April 1, 1959.
In 1995, the organization was renamed the Astronaut Scholarship Foundation.
In 1968, Stafford stopped by Shepard's office and told him that an otologist in Los Angeles had developed a cure for Ménière's disease.
Ramage made Shepard his own wingman, a decision that would save his life in 1954, when Ramage's oxygen system failed, and Shepard talked him through a landing.
These included being less than 40 years old, with a bachelor's degree or equivalent, and no taller than .
All were concerned about their careers, but decided to volunteer.
He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B ''Freedom 7 II'' in honor of his first spacecraft, but on June 12, 1963, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced that Mercury had accomplished all its goals, and no more missions would be flown.
The whole recovery process took just eleven minutes.
In 1959, the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) received permission from President Dwight D. Eisenhower to recruit its first astronauts from the ranks of military test pilots.
Tests administered at Farragut indicated an IQ of 145.
At Annapolis, Shepard enjoyed aquatic sports.
McDivitt baulked at the prospect, arguing that Shepard did not have sufficient Apollo training to command a moon mission.
When reporters rang Shorty Powers for a comment at 4am, he memorably replied: "We're all asleep down here".
There was no known cure, but in about 20 percent of cases the condition went away by itself.
Naval Academy Museum in Annapolis, Maryland, where it is on permanent display.
He was appointed by President Richard Nixon in July 1971 as a delegate to the 26th United Nations General Assembly, serving from September to December 1971.
Then came a grueling series of physical and psychological tests at the Lovelace Clinic and the Wright Aerospace Medical Laboratory.
On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin had become the first person in space, and the first to orbit the Earth.
Shepard served as capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for Glenn's Mercury-Atlas 6  orbital flight, which he had also been considered for, and Carpenter's Mercury-Atlas 7.
The Navy named a supply ship,  for him in 2006.
He became the fifth and, at 47, the oldest man to walk on the moon.
Instead, the Navy sent him to the Admiral Farragut Academy, a prep school for the Naval Academy, from which he graduated with the class of 1941.
Shepard returned to the United States later that month.
Following an act of Congress, the post office in Derry is designated the Alan B. Shepard, Jr. Post Office Building.
Shepard and Slayton put Shepard down to command the next available moon mission, which was Apollo 13 in 1970.
Of the 69, six were found to be over the height limit, 15 were eliminated for other reasons, and 16 declined.
During training he flew 120 simulated flights.
The recipient demonstrates exemplary use of technology either to foster lifelong learners or to make the learning process easier.
A rookie, Edgar Mitchell was designated the Lunar Module Pilot instead.
When Slayton submitted the proposed crew assignments to NASA headquarters, George Mueller turned it down.
He was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.
Shepard was celebrated as a national hero, honored with ticker-tape parades in Washington, New York and Los Angeles, and received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President John F. Kennedy.
He departed on his first cruise, of the Caribbean, with it in 1948.
Splashdown occurred with an impact comparable to landing a jet aircraft on an aircraft carrier.
Alan B. Shepard High School, in Palos Heights, Illinois, which opened in 1976, was named in his honor.
He became the fifth and oldest person to walk on the Moon, and the only one of the Mercury Seven to do so.
Following the death of Louise's sister in 1956, they raised her niece, Judith, whom they renamed Alice to avoid confusion with Julie, as their own, although they never adopted her.
The following day he received his Naval Aviator wings, which his proud father pinned on his chest.
He was a member of many organizations.
He tried to keep it secret, fearing that he would lose his flight status, but was aware that if an episode occurred in the air or in space it could be fatal.
This left NASA with 32 candidates.
After graduation, he participated in flight test work, which included high-altitude tests to obtain data on light at different altitudes and on a variety of air masses over the American continent; test and development experiments of the Navy's in-flight refueling system; carrier suitability trials of the F2H Banshee; and Navy trials of the first angled carrier deck.
Fighter Squadron 193 (VF-193), based at Naval Air Station Moffett Field, California, was a night fighter unit flying F2H Banshee jets.
He named his spacecraft, Mercury Spacecraft 7, ''Freedom 7''.
After just two days at sea ''Cogswell'' helped rescue 172 sailors from the cruiser , which had been torpedoed by a Japanese submarine, then escorted the crippled ship back to Ulithi.
By this time he had logged more than 3,600 hours of flying time, including 1,700 hours in jets.
Following Apollo 14, Shepard returned to his position as Chief of the Astronaut Office in June 1971.
The condition caused Shepard to be removed from flight status.
After a month of classroom instruction in aviation, Shepard was posted to a destroyer, , it being the US Navy's policy that aviation candidates should first have some service at sea.
He was awarded an Honorary Master of Arts degree from Dartmouth College in 1962, an Honorary D.Sc.
Shepard turned to Glenn and said: "Well, I'm glad they got that out of the way."
Shepard was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1977, the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981, and the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame on May 11, 1990.
Naval aviators with experience in jet aircraft were still relatively rare, and Ramage specifically requested Shepard's assignment on the advice of Elder, who commanded VF-193's sister squadron, VF-191.
He also participated in swimming, and row with the eight.
The Navy and Marine Corps officers were welcomed by the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, while the United States Air Force officers were addressed by the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, General Thomas D. White.
After the war, they had two children, both daughters:  Laura, born in 1947, and Julie, born in 1951.
He then attended the Naval War College at Newport, Rhode Island, and, upon graduating in 1957, was assigned to the staff of the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Fleet, as Aircraft Readiness Officer.
He also served as president of his umbrella company for several business enterprises, Seven Fourteen Enterprises, Inc. (named for his two flights, ''Freedom 7'' and Apollo 14).
Two days later he headed up to Boston with Louise for the wedding of his cousin Alice, and was able to break the news to his parents and sister.
They engaged kamikazes in the Battle of Okinawa, where the ship served in the dangerous role of a radar picket.
Fellow Mercury astronaut Deke Slayton is also named as an author.
Shepard was diagnosed with leukemia in 1996, and died from it in Pebble Beach, California, on July 21, 1998, He was the second astronaut who had walked on the Moon to die, Jim Irwin being the first in 1991.
After briefly returning to Norfolk, the carrier set out on a nine-month tour of the Mediterranean Sea.
From these, 110 were found that matched the minimum standards.
The City of Virginia Beach renamed its convention center, with its integral geodesic dome, the ''Alan B. Shepard Convention Center''.
He was sent to Naval Air Station Pensacola in Florida for advanced training.
In 1984, he and the other surviving Mercury astronauts, along with Betty Grissom, the widow of astronaut Gus Grissom, founded the Mercury Seven Foundation to raise money for scholarships for science and engineering students in college.
Interstate 93 in New Hampshire, from the Massachusetts is designated the Alan B. Shepard Highway.
Additionally, an autographed plaque commemorates the dedication of the building.
His family members accepted the award on his behalf during a ceremony on April 28 at the U.S.
Neither Cooper nor McDivitt ever flew in space again.
Alan B. Shepard Sr., known as Bart, worked in the Derry National Bank, owned by Shepard's grandfather.
Shepard served as Chief of the Astronaut Office from November 1963 to July 1969 (the approximate period of his grounding), and from June 1971 to August 1, 1974 (from his last flight to his retirement).
The astronauts were stunned.
Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. was born on November 18, 1923, in Derry, New Hampshire, the oldest of two children of  Alan B. Shepard Sr. and Pauline Renza Shepard ().
After a dramatic Atlantic Ocean recovery, Commander Shepard observed, "...&nbsp;didn't really feel the flight was a success until the recovery had been successfully completed.
He made two tours to the western Pacific on board the aircraft carrier .
She would post these on the door to his private office, with a sign which said "Mood of the Day."
Most of the aviators were, like Shepard, on their first assignment.
These were his only two space flights, as his flight status was interrupted for five years during the Mercury and Gemini programs by Ménière's disease, an inner-ear disease that was surgically corrected before his Moon flight.
He agreed to do so, and Shepard's inexperienced crew was assigned to Apollo 14 instead.
The following month he became secretly engaged to Louise Brewer.
Faced with intense competition from the other astronauts, particularly John Glenn, Shepard quit smoking, and adopted Glenn's habit of taking a morning jog, although he did not go so far as to give up the cocktails or the philandering.
The doctors diagnosed Ménière's disease, a condition in which fluid pressure builds up in the inner ear.
Both pledged their support to the Space Program, and promised that the careers of volunteers would not be adversely affected.
Due to the war, the usual four-year course at Annapolis was cut short by a year, and he graduated and was commissioned as an Ensign on June 6, 1944, ranked 463rd in his class of 915.
He remained in the National Guard between the wars, and was recalled to active duty during World War II, rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel.
He and Louise decided to marry before he had to return.
Under normal circumstances, this assignment would have gone to Cooper, as the backup commander of Apollo 10. Cooper was swept aside.
They eventually had six grandchildren.
Shepard initially attended Adams School.
The ship was buffeted by Typhoon Cobra in December 1944, a storm in which three other destroyers went down, and battled kamikazes in the invasion of Lingayen Gulf in January 1945.
While there was flexibility with some requirements, the height requirement was firm, owing to the size of the Project Mercury spacecraft.
He earned a reputation for carousing and chasing women.
Shepard's craft entered space, but did not achieve orbit.
Shepard went as far as making a personal appeal to President Kennedy, but to no avail.
The building was later renamed the ''Alan B. Shepard Civic Center'', and was razed in 1994.
After the Mercury-Atlas 10 mission was cancelled, Shepard was designated as the Command Pilot of the first manned Project Gemini mission, with Thomas P. Stafford chosen as his Pilot.
On May 4, 2011, the U.S.
In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission.
He was a keen and competitive sailor, winning a number of races, including a regatta held by the Annapolis Yacht Club.
After Shepard left NASA, he served on the boards of many corporations.
The book generated some controversy for use of a staged photo purportedly showing Shepard hitting a golf ball on the Moon.
The award recognizes excellence in the development and application of technology in the classroom or to the professional development of teachers.
Shepard piloted the Lunar Module ''Antares'' to the most accurate landing of the entire Apollo program.
While on the Moon, Shepard used a Wilson six-iron head attached to a lunar sample scoop handle to drive golf balls.
He also instituted a ritual of, whenever he could, calling Louise at 17:00 (her time).
He also received the Golden Plate Award for Science and Exploration in 1981; the Langley Gold Medal (highest award of the Smithsonian Institution for Aeronautics and Astronautics) on May 5, 1964; the John J. Montgomery Award in 1963; the Lambert trophy; the SETP Iven C. Kincheloe Award; the Cabot Award; the Collier Trophy; and the City of New York Gold Medal for 1971.
and in Hampton, Virginia, a road is named Commander Shepard Boulevard in his honor.
Following an episode during a lecture in Houston, where he had recently moved from Virginia Beach, Virginia, Shepard was forced to confess his ailment to Slayton, who was now Director Flight Operations, and seek help from NASA's doctors.
An X-ray found a lump on his thyroid, and on January 17, 1964, surgeons at Hermann Hospital removed 20 percent of it.
To make up for this he took private lessons at a local civilian flying school—something the Navy frowned on—earning a civil pilot's license.
Alan Shepard Park in Cocoa Beach, Florida, a beach-side park south of Cape Canaveral, is named in his honor.
Shepard's launch was seen live on television by millions.
Despite thick gloves and a stiff spacesuit, which forced him to swing the club with one hand, Shepard struck two golf balls; driving the second, as he jokingly put it, "miles and miles and miles".
He was promoted to Rear Admiral by Nixon on August 26, 1971, the first astronaut to reach this rank, although McDivitt had previously been promoted to brigadier general in the Air Force.
The book was also turned into a TV miniseries in 1994.
In 1950, Shepard was selected to attend the United States Naval Test Pilot School at Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland.
The squadron was part of James D. "Jig Dog" Ramage's Air Group 19.
At one point he was forced to bail out of a Vought F7U Cutlass.
''Cogswell'' returned to the United States for an overhaul in February 1945, and Shepard was given three weeks' leave.
(The color camera on Apollo 12 provided a few brief moments of color telecasting before it was inadvertently pointed at the Sun, ending its usefulness.)
This was the first mission to successfully broadcast color television pictures from the surface of the Moon, using a vidicon-tube camera.
In a 2010 Space Foundation survey, Shepard was ranked as the ninth most popular space hero (tied with astronauts Buzz Aldrin and Gus Grissom).
A few minutes after lift off, it spectacularly exploded, lighting up the night sky.
His hometown of Derry has the nickname Space Town in honor of his career as an astronaut.
Blue Origin's subortial space tourism rocket, the New Shepard, is named after Shepard.
As operations officer of this squadron, Shepard's most important job was imparting his knowledge of flying jets to his fellow aviators to keep them alive.
In 1940, he easily passed the entrance exam to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, but at sixteen was too young to enter that year.
Postal Service issued a first-class stamp in Shepard's honor, the first U.S. stamp to depict a specific astronaut.
Many things are named in his honor.
The service records of 508 graduates of test pilot schools were obtained from the Department of Defense.
Those that were not were given the opportunity to qualify for night landings on a carrier, a dangerous maneuver, especially in a Corsair, which had to bank sharply on approach.
Shepard asked for Jim McDivitt as his Lunar Module Pilot.
Although his flight was originally scheduled for April 26, 1960, delays by unplanned preparatory work meant that this was postponed several times, initially to December 5, 1960, then mid-January 1961, March 6, 1961, April 25, 1961, May 2, 1961, and finally to May 5, 1961.
This included monitoring the development and implementation of effective training programs to assure the flight readiness of personnel for crew assignments on manned space flights; furnishing pilot evaluations applicable to the design, construction, and operations of spacecraft systems and related equipment; and providing qualitative scientific and engineering observations to facilitate overall mission planning, formulation of feasible operational procedures, and selection and conduct of specific experiments for each flight.
On May 5, 1961, Shepard piloted the Mercury-Redstone 3 mission and became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space.
They had only a brief time together before Shepard rejoined ''Cogswell'' at the Long Beach Navy Yard on April 5, 1945.
His last five months at Patuxent were spent as an instructor in the Test Pilot School.
Shepard later recalled Louise's response when he told her that she had her arms around the man who would be the first man in space: "Who let a Russian in here?"
House proposed to cut through Shepard's mastoid bone and make a tiny hole in the saccule.
The enormity of the challenge ahead of them was made clear a few weeks later, on the night of May 18, 1959, when the seven astronauts gathered at Cape Canaveral to watch their first rocket launch, of an SM-65D Atlas similar to the one that was to carry them into orbit.
Each year, the Space Foundation, in partnership with the Astronauts Memorial Foundation and NASA, present the Alan Shepard Technology in Education Award for outstanding contributions by K–12 educators or district-level administrators to educational technology.
Rear Admiral '''Alan Bartlett''' "'''Al'''" '''Shepard Jr.''' (November 18, 1923 – July 21, 1998) was an American naval officer and aviator, test pilot, one of the original NASA Mercury Seven astronauts, and businessman, who in May 1961 made the first manned Mercury flight.
There he met Louise Brewer, whose parents were pensioners on the du Pont family estate, and, like Renza Shepard, were devout Christian Scientists.
He was one of many famous descendants of ''Mayflower'' passenger Richard Warren.
Ten years later, at age 47 and the oldest astronaut in the program, Shepard commanded the Apollo 14 mission (1971), piloting the lander ''Antares'' to the most accurate landing of the Apollo missions.
He was an average student, and for a time faced being "bilged" (dropped) from flight training and reassigned to the surface navy.
The squadron was nominally based on the aircraft carrier , but it was being overhauled at the time Shepard arrived, and in the meantime the squadron was based at Naval Air Station Norfolk in Virginia.
They also diagnosed  glaucoma.
Normally sea duty alternated with periods of duty ashore.
Shepard flew to Los Angeles, where he met with Dr. William F. House.
A rookie, Stuart Roosa, was designated the Command Module Pilot.
Shepard did not like the plane, and his unfavorable report killed the project.
Shepard's high school alma mater in Derry, Pinkerton Academy, has a building named after him, and the school team name is called the Astros after his career as an astronaut.
Framed newspapers throughout the school depict various accomplishments and milestones in Shepard's life.
The surgery was successful, and Shepard was restored to full flight status on May 7, 1969.
His flying skills gradually improved, and by early 1947 his instructors rated him above average.
Shepard was awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor by President Jimmy Carter on October 1, 1978.
The first group of 35, which included Shepard, assembled at the Pentagon on February 2, 1959.
They conceded that it would be a hazardous undertaking, but emphasised that it was of great national importance.
The following year he began cycling out to Manchester Airport, where he would do odd jobs in exchange for the occasional ride in an airplane or informal flying lesson.
It was launched by a Redstone rocket, and unlike Gagarin's 108-minute orbital flight in a Vostok spacecraft three times the size of a Mercury capsule, Shepard stayed on a ballistic trajectory for a 15-minute sub-orbital flight, which carried him to an altitude of  and to a splashdown point  down the Atlantic Missile Range.
At the time of the ''Freedom 7'' launch, Shepard lived in Virginia Beach.
A small tube was inserted through which excess fluid would drain from the endolymphatic sac.
He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space, and the first person to manually control the orientation of his spacecraft.
His widow Louise resolved to cremate his remains and scatter the ashes, but she died from a heart attack five weeks later on August 25, 1998, at 17:00, the time at which Shepard had always called her.
The briefing process was repeated with a second group of 34 candidates a week later.
Shortly before the launch, Shepard said to himself: "Don't mess up, Shepard&nbsp;..." Unlike Gagarin, whose flight was strictly automatic, Shepard had some control of ''Freedom 7'', spacecraft attitude in particular.
A recovery helicopter arrived after a few minutes, and  the capsule was lifted partly out of the water to allow Shepard to leave by the main hatch.
In 1994, he published a book with two journalists, Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict, called ''Moon Shot: The Inside Story of America's Race to the Moon''.
The family decided to cremate them both, and their ashes scattered together by a Navy helicopter over Stillwater Cove, in front of their Pebble Beach home.
With World War II approaching, Shepard's father wanted him to join the Army, but Shepard chose the Navy instead.
Shepard managed to persuade his squadron commander to allow him to qualify as well.
Shepard was designated Chief of the Astronaut Office, with responsibility for monitoring the coordination, scheduling, and control of all activities involving NASA astronauts.
