In 2008, Democrat Mark Begich, mayor of Anchorage, defeated long-time Republican senator Ted Stevens.
''Denali'' is the highest mountain in North America.
The oil and gas industry dominates the Alaskan economy, with more than 80% of the state's revenues derived from petroleum extraction.
Manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere.
Because of its population relative to other U.S. states, Alaska has only one member in the U.S. House of Representatives.
As a result, an increasing number of Russian Orthodox churches gradually became established within Alaska.
GCI owns and operates what it calls the Alaska United Fiber Optic system and as of late 2011 Alaska Communications advertised that it has "two fiber optic paths to the lower 48 and two more across Alaska.
The climate of Western Alaska is determined in large part by the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska.
Another European contact with Alaska occurred in 1741, when Vitus Bering led an expedition for the Russian Navy aboard the ''St.
According to statistics collected by the Association of Religion Data Archives from 2010, about 34% of Alaska residents were members of religious congregations.
A stretch of about  of track along an area north of Talkeetna remains inaccessible by road; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins in the area.
This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.
Prudhoe Bay was the largest conventional oil field ever discovered in North America, but was much smaller than Canada's enormous Athabasca oil sands field, which by 2014 was producing about  of unconventional oil, and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate.
On the other extreme, some locations between Dillingham and Bethel average around  of precipitation.
For most of Alaska's first decade under the United States flag, Sitka was the only community inhabited by American settlers.
The fund was originally proposed by Governor Keith Miller on the eve of the 1969 Prudhoe Bay lease sale, out of fear that the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of the sale (which amounted to $900 million) at once.
Influences on music in Alaska include the traditional music of Alaska Natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from Russia and Europe.
It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising .
This bill gave the languages symbolic recognition as official languages, though they have not been adopted for official use within the government.
Precipitation is light in this part of Alaska, with many places averaging less than  per year, mostly as snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year.
Starting in the 1890s and stretching in some places to the early 1910s, gold rushes in Alaska and the nearby Yukon Territory brought thousands of miners and settlers to Alaska.
It is also larger than the combined area of the 22 smallest U.S. states.
This line is now mainly used by tourists, often arriving by cruise liner at Skagway.
Gabriel'' under the authority of the surveyor M. S. Gvozdev and assistant navigator I. Fyodorov on August 21, 1732 during an expedition of Siberian cossak A. F. Shestakov and Belorussian explorer Dmitry Pavlutsky (1729—1735).
There are many established music festivals in Alaska, including the Alaska Folk Festival, the Fairbanks Summer Arts Festival, the  Anchorage Folk Festival, the Athabascan Old-Time Fiddling Festival, the Sitka Jazz Festival, and the Sitka Summer Music Festival.
The construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some Alaskan cities.
The Alaska Railroad was one of the last railroads in North America to use cabooses in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains.
Sitka, renamed New Archangel from 1804 to 1867, on Baranof Island in the Alexander Archipelago in what is now Southeast Alaska, became the capital of Russian America.
Before the force was officially organized, law enforcement in Alaska was handled by various federal agencies.
With over 100,000 glaciers, Alaska has half of all in the world.
From its initial principal of $734,000, the fund has grown to $50&nbsp;billion as a result of oil royalties and capital investment programs.
The Alaska Native Arts Foundation promotes and markets Native art from all regions and cultures in the State, using the internet.
The University of Alaska has attempted to combat this by offering partial four-year scholarships to the top 10% of Alaska high school graduates, via the Alaska Scholars Program.
A ''recording district'' is a mechanism for administration of the public record in Alaska.
It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north.
Most of Alaska's native languages belong to either the Eskimo–Aleut or Na-Dene language families however some languages are thought to be isolates (e.g.
The Supreme Court hears civil appeals and may in its discretion hear criminal appeals.
The conviction was set aside in April 2009 after evidence of prosecutorial misconduct emerged.
As the name implies, it has no intermediate borough government but is administered directly by the state government.
As of January 31, 2012, over 35,000 sites have been reported.
Alaska's capital, which had been in Sitka until 1906, was moved north to Juneau.
The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals are appellate courts.
Alaska was loosely governed by the military initially, and was administered as a district starting in 1884, with a governor appointed by the President of the United States.
File:Byron Mallott inaugural speech.jpg|Byron Mallott, Lieutenant Governor
Prominent musicians from Alaska include singer Jewel, traditional Aleut flautist Mary Youngblood, folk singer-songwriter Libby Roderick, Christian music singer/songwriter Lincoln Brewster, metal/post hardcore band 36 Crazyfists and the groups Pamyua and Portugal.
Anchorage and, to a lesser extent Fairbanks, is served by many major airlines.
Denali National Park and Preserve is located here.
As of November 2014, the state's unemployment rate was 6.6%.
The system also operates a ferry service from Bellingham, Washington and Prince Rupert, British Columbia in Canada through the Inside Passage to Skagway.
100,960 people identified as Evangelical Protestants, 50,866 as Roman Catholic, and 32,550 as mainline Protestants.
Alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the United States and has the most easterly longitude in the United States because the Aleutian Islands extend into the Eastern Hemisphere.
The most populous region of Alaska, containing Anchorage, the Matanuska-Susitna Valley and the Kenai Peninsula.
In 2000, the U.S. Congress authorized $6&nbsp;million to study the feasibility of a rail link between Alaska, Canada, and the lower 48.
The program requires 70% of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities.
Anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (in 2012-2013, Alaska received almost 2 million visitors).
While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer.
An example of a traditional native food is Akutaq, the Eskimo ice cream, which can consist of reindeer fat, seal oil, dried fish meat and local berries.
Approximately half of Alaska's residents (the total estimated at 738,432 by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2015) live within the Anchorage metropolitan area.
Alaska was carried by Democratic nominee Lyndon B. Johnson during his landslide election in 1964, while the 1960 and 1968 elections were close.
Every year, the state legislature takes out 8% from the earnings, puts 3% back into the principal for inflation proofing, and the remaining 5% is distributed to all qualifying Alaskans.
The average age of sexually assaulted victims is 16 years old.
Various races are held around the state, but the best known is the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race, a  trail from Anchorage to Nome (although the distance varies from year to year, the official distance is set at ).
Prudhoe Bay on Alaska's North Slope is still the second highest-yielding oil field in the United States, typically producing about , although by early 2014 North Dakota's Bakken Formation was producing over .
The Gwich'in people of the northern Interior region are Athabaskan and primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The region is dominated by the Alexander Archipelago as well as the Tongass National Forest, the largest national forest in the United States.
The superior and district courts are trial courts.
Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities.
The Tanana Valley is another notable agricultural locus, especially the Delta Junction area, about  southeast of Fairbanks, with a sizable concentration of farms growing agronomic crops; these farms mostly lie north and east of Fort Greely.
In recent years, cruise lines have created a summertime tourism market, mainly connecting the Pacific Northwest to Southeast Alaska and, to a lesser degree, towns along Alaska's gulf coast.
The 20 languages that were included in the bill are:
Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined.
Its per capita personal income for 2007 was $40,042, ranking 15th in the nation.
The climate of Anchorage and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast.
Legislation allowing Alaskan communities to legally incorporate as cities did not come about until 1900, and home rule for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect in 1959.
A federal district court was headquartered in Sitka.
William H. Seward, the United States Secretary of State, negotiated the Alaska Purchase (also known as Seward's Folly) with the Russians in 1867 for $7.2&nbsp;million.
The survey's inventory of cultural resources includes objects, structures, buildings, sites, districts, and travel ways, with a general provision that they are over 50 years old.
Federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy, allowing the state to keep taxes low.
The Alaska Legislature consists of a 40-member House of Representatives and a 20-member Senate.
Alaska's voter initiative making marijuana legal takes effect 24 February 2015, placing Alaska alongside Colorado and Washington as the three U.S. states where recreational marijuana is legal.
"Alaska Grown" is used as an agricultural slogan.
The Governor of Alaska serves four-year terms.
Much of this service can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to Alaskan rural communities.
The U.S. Lend-Lease program involved the flying of American warplanes through Canada to Fairbanks and thence Nome; Soviet pilots took possession of these aircraft, ferrying them to fight the German invasion of the Soviet Union.
Mainline Protestant
The Inter-Island Ferry Authority also serves as an important marine link for many communities in the Prince of Wales Island region of Southeast and works in concert with the Alaska Marine Highway.
Alaska has the highest rate of sexual assault in the nation, especially in rural areas.
The state is divided into 34 recording districts which are centrally administered under a State Recorder.
Domestic abuse and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state; this is in part linked to alcohol abuse.
That same year, not coincidentally, Alaska repealed its state income tax.
The Alaska Permanent Fund is a constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues, established by voters in 1976 to manage a surplus in state petroleum revenues from oil, largely in anticipation of the then recently constructed Trans-Alaska Pipeline System.
One of the most prominent movies filmed in Alaska is MGM's ''Eskimo/Mala The Magnificent'', starring Alaska Native Ray Mala.
Agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock.
Literally, it means ''object to which the action of the sea is directed''.
European immigrants from Norway and Sweden also settled in southeast Alaska, where they entered the fishing and logging industries.
On an annual basis, Southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year.
The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Fairbanks is the only large city in the region.
The fairs are mostly located in communities with historic or current agricultural activity, and feature local farmers exhibiting produce in addition to more high-profile commercial activities such as carnival rides, concerts and food.
''Eskimo'' was critically acclaimed and released worldwide; as a result, Mala became an international movie star.
The climate of the interior of Alaska is subarctic.
Many of its young people, including most of the highest academic achievers, leave the state after high school graduation and do not return.
Unimak Island, for example, is home to Mount Shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to  above the North Pacific.
The state's road system covers a relatively small area of the state, linking the central population centers and the Alaska Highway, the principal route out of the state through Canada.
On March 27, 1964, the massive Good Friday earthquake killed 133 people and destroyed several villages and portions of large coastal communities, mainly by the resultant tsunamis and landslides.
Decades later, the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946.
Built around 1915, the Alaska Railroad (ARR) played a key role in the development of Alaska through the 20th century.
Alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers.
In 2010, Alaska ranked as the 47th state by population, ahead of North Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming (and Washington, D.C.) Alaska is the least densely populated state, and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world, at , with the next state, Wyoming, at .
She won full six-year terms in 2004 and 2010.
The Court of Appeals is required to hear appeals from certain lower-court decisions, including those regarding criminal prosecutions, juvenile delinquency, and habeas corpus.
Fuel cost per gallon is routinely 20–30¢ higher than the continental United States average, with only Hawaii having higher prices.
The Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the majority of Fairbanks (including North Pole and the military base), and South Anchorage typically have the strongest Republican showing.
The Permanent Fund is often considered to be one of the leading examples of a "Basic Income" policy in the world.
The short 100-day growing season limits the crops that can be grown, but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons.
The Pacific Ocean lies to the south and southwest.
The world's busiest seaplane base is Lake Hood, located next to Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry passengers, cargo, and many items from stores and warehouse clubs.
The state capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, only a car ferry, which has spurred several debates over the decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system, or building a road connection from Haines.
The first European vessel to reach Alaska is generally held to be the ''St.
In 1789 a Spanish settlement and fort were built in Nootka Sound.
In areas not served by road or rail, primary transportation in summer is by all-terrain vehicle and in winter by snowmobile or "snow machine," as it is commonly referred to in Alaska.
It was featured in the 1983 BBC television series ''Great Little Railways.''
Alaska's At-large congressional district is one of the largest parliamentary constituencies in the world.
In 2009 there were 6,000 Jews in Alaska (for whom observance of halakha may pose special problems).
The cost of a gallon of gas in urban Alaska today is usually 30–60¢ higher than the national average; prices in rural areas are generally significantly higher but vary widely depending on transportation costs, seasonal usage peaks, nearby petroleum development infrastructure and many other factors.
The time of day (5:36&nbsp;pm), time of year and location of the epicenter were all cited as factors in potentially sparing thousands of lives, particularly in Anchorage.
Most if not all the principal is invested conservatively outside Alaska.
On average, Anchorage receives  of precipitation a year, with around  of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow.
Non-Christian faiths
Statehood was approved by Congress on July 7, 1958.
The psychological thriller ''Insomnia'', starring Al Pacino and Robin Williams, was shot in Canada, but was set in Alaska.
In 1795, the First Russian Orthodox Church was established in Kodiak.
Precipitation is sparse in the Interior, often less than  a year, but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.
The Alaska Rail network is not connected to Outside.
It remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the United States.
Republicans have won the state's electoral college votes in all but one election that it has participated in (1964).
Glacier ice covers some  of land and  of tidal zone.
This hypothesis is based on the testimony of Chukchi geographer Nikolai Daurkin, who had visited Alaska in 1764–1765 and who had reported on a village on the Kheuveren River, populated by "bearded men" who "pray to the icons".
Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation.
Anchorage merged the city government with the Greater Anchorage Area Borough in 1975 to form the Municipality of Anchorage, containing the city proper and the communities of Eagle River, Chugiak, Peters Creek, Girdwood, Bird, and Indian.
Though most small towns and villages in Alaska lie along the coastline, the cost of importing food to remote villages can be high, because of the terrain and difficult road conditions, which change dramatically, due to varying climate and precipitation changes.
Nothing in particular
Unalaska/Dutch Harbor became a significant base for the U.S. Army Air Forces and Navy submariners.
In rural areas, subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive.
The Unorganized Borough has no government of its own, but the U.S. Census Bureau in cooperation with the state divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 census areas solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation.
The Alaska Department of Education and Early Development administers many school districts in Alaska.
She continued to be a prominent national figure even after resigning from the governor's job in July 2009.
Individual Native allotments can be and are sold on the open market, however.
In 2008, Governor Sarah Palin became the first Republican woman to run on a national ticket when she became John McCain's running mate.
Barrow, the northernmost city in the United States, is located here.
Statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes, mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within Alaska.
In October 2014, the governor of Alaska signed a bill declaring the state's 20 indigenous languages as official languages.
Alaska's well-developed state-owned ferry system (known as the Alaska Marine Highway) serves the cities of southeast, the Gulf Coast and the Alaska Peninsula.
With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly  of tidal shoreline.
It is well known for its summertime tour passenger service.
Many rural communities in Alaska are considered "dry," having outlawed the importation of alcoholic beverages.
Alaska is the largest U.S. state by area, and the tenth wealthiest (per capita income).
Since 1972, however, Republicans have carried the state by large margins.
In northern Southeast Alaska, the White Pass and Yukon Route also partly runs through the state from Skagway northwards into Canada (British Columbia and Yukon Territory), crossing the border at White Pass Summit.
This allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the United States.
Some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, but the International Date Line was drawn west of 180° to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for selected locations in Alaska
Though wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for statewide energy systems (e.g.
Major oil and gas reserves were found in the Alaska North Slope (ANS) and Cook Inlet basins, but according to the Energy Information Administration, by February 2014 Alaska had fallen to fourth place in the nation in crude oil production after Texas, North Dakota, and California.
Between 1774 and 1800, Spain sent several expeditions to Alaska in order to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest.
Alaska Natives, while organized in and around their communities, have been active within the Native corporations.
Regional Native corporation Doyon, Limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other communications.
Alaska is the only non-contiguous U.S. state on continental North America; about  of British Columbia (Canada) separates Alaska from Washington.
Many films and television shows set in Alaska are not filmed there; for example, ''Northern Exposure'', set in the fictional town of Cicely, Alaska, was filmed in Roslyn, Washington.
File:Bill Walker inauguration speech.jpg|Bill Walker, Governor
Alaska Rail Marine provides car float service between Whittier and Seattle.
Perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan plane is the bush seaplane.
Another  are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) of 1971.
Commercial sales await implementation of Alaska Measure 2 (2014).
The "Serum Run" is another sled dog race that more accurately follows the route of the famous 1925 relay, leaving from the community of Nenana (southwest of Fairbanks) to Nome.
They broke ground on a building in south Anchorage in 2010 and were nearing completion in late 2014.
Seafood is one of the few food items that is often cheaper within the state than outside it.
While Alaska has no state sales tax, 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, from 1.0–7.5%, typically 3–5%.
It is a subarctic climate (Köppen: ''Dfc'') due to its brief, cool summers.
The Alaska State Troopers are Alaska's statewide police force.
In 2014 the Tax Foundation ranked Alaska as having the fourth most "business friendly" tax policy, behind only Wyoming, South Dakota, and Nevada.
The most prominent orchestra in Alaska is the Anchorage Symphony Orchestra, though the Fairbanks Symphony Orchestra and Juneau Symphony are also notable.
Alaska has been identified, along with Pacific Northwest states Washington and Oregon, as being the least religious states of the USA, in terms of church membership.
Stevens had been convicted on seven felony counts of failing to report gifts on Senate financial discloser forms one week before the election.
It has served as an attractive political prospect ever since, diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund.
Republican Frank Murkowski held the state's other senatorial position.
No state has voted for a Democratic presidential candidate fewer times.
It is also known as ''Alyeska,'' the "great land", an Aleut word derived from the same root.
Counting territorial waters, Alaska is larger than the combined area of the next three largest states: Texas, California, and Montana.
The Alaska Bush, central Juneau, midtown and downtown Anchorage, and the areas surrounding the University of Alaska Fairbanks campus and Ester have been strongholds of the Democratic Party.
About 3.5% speak Spanish at home.
Other local taxes levied include raw fish taxes, hotel, motel, and bed-and-breakfast 'bed' taxes, severance taxes, liquor and tobacco taxes, gaming (pull tabs) taxes, tire taxes and fuel transfer taxes.
The population of Ketchikan may rise by over 10,000 people on many days during the summer, as up to four large cruise ships at a time can dock, debarking thousands of passengers.
The climate in the extreme north of Alaska is Arctic (Köppen: ''ET'') with long, very cold winters and short, cool summers.
One of the world's largest tides occurs in Turnagain Arm, just south of Anchorage&nbsp;– tidal differences can be more than .
The Alaska Marine Highway provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area, as only three communities (Haines, Hyder and Skagway) enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system.
Alaska's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, transportation, electric power and light.
There is also a growing service and tourism sector.
Kodiak Island is also located in Southwest.
The 1991 film ''White Fang'', based on Jack London's novel and starring Ethan Hawke, was filmed in and around Haines.
