It was signed by 47 Muslim deputies of the League on 18 June 1878.
Still, Albania has shown potential for economic growth, as more and more businesses relocate there and consumer goods are becoming available from emerging market traders as part of the current massive global cost-cutting exercise.
Teuta was eventually succeeded by&nbsp;Gentius&nbsp;in 181&nbsp;BC.
VUSh organizes marches in Tirana including one against blood feuds in 2010.
After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire in Europe following the Balkan Wars, Albania declared independence in 1912 and was recognized the following year.
With its coastline facing the Adriatic and Ionian seas, its highlands backed upon the elevated Balkan landmass, and the entire country lying at a latitude subject to a variety of weather patterns during the winter and summer seasons, Albania has a high number of climatic regions relative to its landmass.
The Ardiaen Kingdom reached its greatest extent under Agron of Illyria, son of Pleuratus II.
In November 1941, the small Albanian Communist groups established an&nbsp;Albanian Communist Party&nbsp;in Tirana of 130 members under the leadership of Enver Hoxha and an eleven-man Central Committee.
When the People's Republic was established in 1945, the Party gave high priority to wiping out illiteracy.
The coastal lowlands have typically Mediterranean climate; the highlands have a Mediterranean continental climate.
The music of various festivals and holidays is also an important part of Albanian folk song, especially those that celebrate St. Lazarus Day, which inaugurates the springtime.
The name may be derived from the Illyrian tribe of the Albani recorded by Ptolemy, the geographer and astronomer from Alexandria who drafted a map in 150&nbsp;AD that shows the city of Albanopolis located northeast of Durrës.
The University of Tirana is the oldest university in Albania, having been founded in October 1957.
Albania is within close proximity to all the major European capitals with short two- or three-hour flights that are available daily.
This new airport, which was later officially named "Airport of Tirana", was constructed in conformity with optimal technological parameters of that time, with a reinforced concrete runway of , and complemented with technical equipment and appropriate buildings.
The railway system was extensively promoted by the totalitarian regime of Enver Hoxha, during which time the use of private transport was effectively prohibited.
Rocky coastal regions in the south provide good habitats for the endangered Mediterranean monk seal.
It directs and controls the activities of the ministries and other state organs.
All trains are hauled by Czech-built ČKD diesel-electric locomotives.
By 1955, illiteracy was virtually eliminated among Albania's adult population.
Besides the capital city of Tirana, which has 420,000 inhabitants, the principal cities are Durrës, Korçë, Elbasan, Shkodër, Gjirokastër, Vlorë and Kukës.
But in 1444, the Albanian principalities were united under George Castrioti Skanderbeg,Albanian: Gjergj Kastrioti, Skenderbeu the national hero of Albania.
King Zogu remained a conservative, but initiated reforms.
When the continental air mass is weak, Mediterranean winds drop their moisture farther inland.
By the summer of 1943, when the Italian effort collapsed, almost all of the mountainous interior was controlled by resistance units.
About 150 Kelmendi people were killed or tortured.
Shkumbin river is the rough dividing line between the two dialects.
Because the season's lower temperatures damage olive trees and citrus fruits, groves and orchards are restricted to sheltered places with southern and western exposures, even in areas with high average winter temperatures.
It has a coast on the Adriatic Sea to the west and on the Ionian Sea to the southwest.
A large part of Albania's national income comes from tourism.
After March 1943, the National Liberation Movement formed its first and second regular battalions, which subsequently became brigades, to operate along with existing smaller and irregular units.
Albania was occupied by Fascist Italy and then by Nazi Germany during World War II.
The Kingdom of Albania was established by Charles of Anjou in the Albanian territory he conquered from the Despotate of Epirus in 1271.
The fall of the Communist regime in 1990 Albania was accompanied with massive migration.
He thwarted every attempt by the Turks to regain Albania, which they envisioned as a springboard for the invasion of Italy and western Europe.
As early as the 17th century the placename ''Shqipëria'' and the ethnic demonym ''Shqiptarë'' gradually replaced ''Arbëria'' and ''Arbëresh''.
The total number of plants is over 3250 species, approximately 30% of the entire flora species found in Europe.
Ohrid Lake is situated in the country's southeast and is shared between Albania and Republic of Macedonia.
The railways in Albania are administered by the national railway company ''Hekurudha Shqiptare'' (HSH) (which means ''Albanian Railways'').
In Albanian grammar, a word can have indefinite and definite forms, and this also applies to city names: both ''Tiranë'' and ''Tirana'', ''Shkodër'' and ''Shkodra'' are used.
The Assembly has the power to decide the direction of domestic and foreign policy; approve or amend the constitution; declare war on another state; ratify or annul international treaties; elect the President of the Republic, the Supreme Court, and the Attorney General and his or her deputies; and control the activity of state radio and television, state news agency and other official information media.
The international service has used the theme from the song "Keputa një gjethe dafine" as its signature tune.
In 2000 the number of people living with HIV/AIDS was estimated at less than 100.
Its text contained a proclamation that the people from  "northern Albania, Epirus and Bosnia" are willing to defend the "territorial integrity" of the Ottoman Empire "by all possible means" against the troops of the Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro.
Population decreased mainly in the North and South of the country while it increased in Tirana and Durrës center districts.
In 2013, the Socialist Party won the national elections.
The Hoxha dictatorship's anti-religion crusade attained its most fundamental legal and political expression a decade later: "The state recognizes no religion," declared Communist Albania's 1976 constitution, "and supports and carries out atheistic propaganda in order to implant a scientific materialistic world outlook in people."
The climate on the coast is typically Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and warm, sunny, and rather dry summers.
The variation of geomorphology, climate and terrain create favorable conditions for a number of endemic and sub-endemic species with 27 endemic and 160 subendemic vascular plants present in the country.
In November 1913 the Albanian pro-Ottoman forces had offered the throne of Albania to the Ottoman war minister of Albanian origin, Izzet Pasha.
New land reform laws were passed granting the land to the workers and peasants who tilled it.
During 1960–78, several airlines ceased to operate in Albania due to the self-imposed isolationism of the Communist government under Enver Hoxha, resulting in a decrease of influx of flights and passengers.
The seasonal variation is not quite as great in the coastal area.
The crisis led Prime Minister Aleksandër Meksi to resign on 11 March 1997, followed by President Sali Berisha in July in the wake of the June General Election.
"Tourism is gaining a fair share of Albania's GDP with visitors growing every year.
Albania was the only country in Europe where Jewish population experienced growth during the Holocaust.
After the Axis' invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, territories of Yugoslavia with substantial Albanian population were annexed to Albania: most of Kosovo, as well as Western Macedonia, the town of Tutin in Central Serbia and a strip of Eastern Montenegro.
Albania joined the Organisation of the Islamic Conference in 1992, following the fall of the communist government, but will not be attending the 2014 conference due a dispute regarding the fact that its parliament never ratified the country's membership.
In the following years, much of the accumulated wealth of the country was invested in Ponzi pyramid banking schemes, which were widely supported by government officials.
It is one of the founding members of the Energy Community, Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the Union for the Mediterranean.
RTSH runs three analogue television stations as TVSH ''Televizioni Shqiptar'', four digital thematic stations as RTSH, and three radio stations using the name ''Radio Tirana''.
However, in 1443 a great and longstanding revolt broke out under the lead of the Albanian national hero Skanderbeg, which lasted until 1479, many times defeating major Ottoman armies led by the sultans Murad II and Mehmed II.
On 28 February 1914, the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus was proclaimed in Gjirokastër by the local Greek population against incorporation to Albania.
When all three corridors are completed Albania will have an estimated 759&nbsp; kilometers of highway linking it with all its neighboring countries: Kosovo, the Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, and Greece.
Albanian seaside has a considerable length of 360&nbsp;km, including even the lagoon area which you find within.
The motives for conversion according to some scholars were diverse, depending on the context.
The Ottoman Empire ruled over Albania for nearly five centuries, which greatly affected the country's artwork and artistic forms.
Regarding the Greeks, "it is difficult to know how many Greeks there are in Albania.
Other spoken languages include Serbian, Romanian, German, Turkish and Aromanian.
The western Albanian Alps (valley of Boga) are among the wettest areas in Europe, receiving some  of rain annually.
This conversion caused a massive emigration of Albanians to the Christian European countries.
This was partly due to the Devşirme system.
'''Albania''' (, ; ; ), officially the '''Republic of Albania''' (, ), is a country in Southeast Europe, bordered by Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, the Republic of Macedonia to the east, and Greece to the south and southeast.
According to the 2011 Census results, the total population of Albania is 2,821,977 with a low Fertility rate of 1.49 children born per woman.
Macedonian is official in the Pustec Municipality in East Albania.
In April 1997, Operation Alba, a UN peacekeeping force led by Italy, entered the country with two goals: assistance in evacuation of expatriates and to secure the ground for international organizations.
Also a dialect of Greek that preserves features now lost in standard modern Greek is spoken in areas inhabited by the Greek minority.
The lowlands of the west face the Adriatic Sea.
was established on 15 October 1913 to take care of the administration of newly established Albania until its own political institutions were in order.
Tourists can see and experience Albania's ancient past and traditional culture.
This plan found also the support of Helen of Anjou, a cousin of Charles of Anjou, who was at that time ruling territories in North Albania.
These counties were further divided in 36 districts () which became defunct in 2000.
The communist partisans however defeated the last Balli Kombëtar forces in southern Albania by mid-summer 1944.
Religious freedoms were severely curtailed during the Communist period, with all forms of worship being outlawed.
Moreover, Albanian has undergone a vowel shift in which stressed, long ''o'' has fallen to ''a'', much like in the former and opposite the latter.
Albanian_Byrek.jpg|Byrek
After Agron's death in 230 BC, his wife Teuta inherited the&nbsp;Ardiaean kingdom.
The municipalities are the first level of local governance, responsible for local needs and law enforcement.
The first recorded Albanian Protestant was Said Toptani, who traveled around Europe, and in 1853 returned to Tirana and preached Protestantism.
The first full Albanian Bible to be printed was the Filipaj translation printed in 1990.
Enjoying this privileged position in the empire, Muslim Albanians held various high administrative positions, with over two dozen Grand Viziers of Albanian origin, such as Gen. Köprülü Mehmed Pasha, who commanded the Ottoman forces during the Ottoman-Persian Wars; Gen. Köprülü Fazıl Ahmed, who led the Ottoman armies during the Austro-Turkish War; and, later, Muhammad Ali Pasha of Egypt.
Both the Albanian Orthodox church and the Bektashi Sufi order refused to recognize the 2011 census results regarding faith, with the Orthodox claiming that 24% of the total population are Albanian Orthodox Christians rather than just 6.75%.
The highest mountain is Korab situated in the former district of Dibër, reaching up to .
However, they were subject to German attacks driving them out of certain areas.
At the end of 1942, guerrilla forces numbered no more than 8,000 to 10,000.
The cuisine of Albania&nbsp;– as with most Mediterranean and Balkan nations&nbsp;– is strongly influenced by its long history.
Phytogeographically, Albania belongs to the Boreal Kingdom, the Mediterranean Region and the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region.
The Protestant reforms invigorated hopes for the development of the local language and literary tradition when cleric Gjon Buzuku brought into the Albanian language the Catholic liturgy, trying to do for the Albanian language what Luther did for German.
By the last year in WWII Albania fell into a civil war-like state between the communists and nationalists.
This territory was known as Illyria, corresponding roughly to the area east of the Adriatic sea to the mouth of the Vjosë river in the south.
The_World_Factbook_-_Albania_-_Flickr_-_The_Central_Intelligence_Agency_(5).jpg|Kruja Mosque
Përmet_–_Gur_i_Qytetit,_mosque_i_Vjosa_zoom_01.jpg|Mosque in Përmet
Albania was the winner of the 1946 Balkan Cup and the Malta Rothmans International Tournament 2000, but had never participated in any major UEFA or FIFA tournament, until UEFA Euro 2016, Albania's first ever appearance at the continental tournament and at a major men's football tournament.
On the other hand, nationalists, various intellectuals organizations and political parties in Albania have expressed their concern that the census might artificially increase the number of Greek minority, which might be then exploited by Greece to threaten Albania's territorial integrity.
Today VUSh has about 160 member congregations from different Protestant denominations.
The most significant impact on the Albanians was the gradual Islamisation process of a large majority of the population, although it became widespread only in the 17th century.
It is also an official candidate for membership in the European Union.
The A1 Albania–Kosovo Highway links Kosovo to Albania's Adriatic coast: the Albanian side was completed in June 2009, and now it takes only two hours and a half to go from the Kosovo border to Durrës.
Albania's infant mortality rate, estimated at 20 per 1,000 live births in 2000, has also declined over the years since the high rate of 151 per 1,000 live births in 1960.
The assembly of eighty-three leaders meeting in Vlorë in November 1912 declared Albania an independent country and set up a provisional government.
Nonetheless, many Albanians continued to practice their beliefs secretly.
Because they usually meet at the point where the terrain rises, the heaviest rain falls in the central uplands.
The Euro-Atlantic integration of Albania has been the ultimate goal of the post-communist governments.
At the dawn of the establishment of the Ottoman Empire in Southeast Europe, the geopolitical landscape was marked by scattered kingdoms of small principalities.
Mainline evangelical Protestants date back to the work of Congregational and later Methodist missionaries and the work of the British and Foreign Bible Society in the 19th century.
There are signs of increasing investments, and power cuts are reduced to the extent that Albania is now exporting energy.
In the 2000s, there were 51 hospitals in the country, including a military hospital and specialist facilities.
The Kingdom of Albania was invaded by Italy in 1939, which formed Greater Albania, before becoming a Nazi German protectorate in 1943.
At different times, the territory which is now Albania has been claimed or occupied by Greece, Serbia, Italy and the Ottoman Turks and each group has left its mark on Albanian cuisine.
About 3,000 different species of plants grow in Albania, many of which are used for medicinal purposes.
After the dissolution of the Serbian Empire, several Albanian principalities were created, and among the most powerful were the Balsha, Thopia, Kastrioti, Muzaka and Arianiti.
Lowland rainfall averages from  to more than  annually, with the higher levels in the north.
Albanian is the official language of Albania.
Albanian civil unrest of 1997, Vlorë.
Nearly 95% of the rain falls in the winter.
There are overall 2980 villages/communities () in all Albania, formerly known as localities ().
The Council is responsible for carrying out both foreign and domestic policies.
The sport swiftly grew in popularity in a country then under Ottoman Empire rule.
Terrain differences cause wide local variations, but the seasonal distribution is the most consistent of any area.
Tirana, moschea ethem bey, esterno di notte 02.JPG|thumb|Et'hem Bey Mosque, Tirana
They faced open resistance in Nikaj-Mertur, Dukagjin and Kelmend (Kelmendi was led by Prek Cali).
According to 2008 statistics from the religious communities in Albania, there are 1119 churches and 638 mosques in the country.
Several gramophone compilations were recorded in those years by this genial trio of Albanian artists which eventually led to the recognition of the Himariot Isopolyphonic Music as an UNESCO World Heritage.
Other Albanian minorities are Bulgarians, Gorani, Serbs, Balkan Egyptians, Bosniaks and Jews.
The international television service via satellite was launched since 1993 and aims at Albanian communities in Kosovo, Serbia, Macedonia, Montenegro and northern Greece, plus the Albanian diaspora in the rest of Europe.
Teuta's forces extended their operations further southward into the&nbsp;Ionian Sea, defeating the combined&nbsp;Achaean&nbsp;and&nbsp;Aetolian&nbsp;fleet in the&nbsp;Battle of Paxos&nbsp;and capturing the island of Corcyra, which put them in position to breach the important&nbsp;trade routes&nbsp;between the mainland of&nbsp;Greece&nbsp;and the&nbsp;Greek cities in Italy.
The pro-Ottoman peasants believed that the new regime of the Principality of Albania was a tool of the six Christian Great Powers and local landowners that owned half of the arable land.
The modern territory of Albania has no counterpart in antiquity, comprising parts of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia (southern Illyricum) and Macedonia (particularly Epirus Nova).
This was primarily WEU MAPE, who worked with the government in restructuring the judicial system and police.
The Chairman of the Council (prime minister) is appointed by the president; ministers are nominated by the president on the basis of the prime minister's recommendation.
The History of Skanderbeg is still the foundation of Scanderbeg studies and is considered an Albanian cultural treasure, vital to the formation of Albanian national self-consciousness.
Albania, Cyprus, and Poland are the only countries in Europe that recorded economic growth in the first quarter of 2010. International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicted 2.6% growth for Albania in 2010 and 3.2% in 2011.Albania and Croatia have discussed the possibility of jointly building a nuclear power plant at Lake Shkoder, close to the border with Montenegro, a plan that has gathered criticism from Montenegro due to seismicity in the area.
The first account of the Illyrian groups comes from ''Periplus of the Euxine Sea'', an ancient Greek text written in the middle of the 4th century BC.
Migration greatly affected Albania's internal population distribution.
Albania is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the World Trade Organization.
The country's churches had not been spared either, and many were converted into cultural centers for young people.
This is claimed to be an attempt to intimidate minorities into declaring Albanian ethnicity, according to them the Albanian government has stated that it will jail anyone who does not participate in the census or refuse to declare his or her ethnicity.
Islam came for the first time in the 9th century to the region which is known as Albania today.
Today the overall literacy rate in Albania is 98.7%; the male literacy rate is 99.2% and female literacy rate is 98.3%.
The Assembly also established the Senate () with an advisory role to the government, consisting of 18 members of the Assembly.
The communists retained a stronghold in parliament after popular support in the elections of 1991.
The fish available off the coasts of Albania are carp, trout, sea bream, mussels, and crustaceans.
In May and June 1914 the International Gendarmerie joined by Isa Boletini and his men, mostly from Kosovo, and northern Mirdita Catholics were defeated by the rebels who captured most of Central Albania by the end of August 1914.
Albania recognizes three national minorities, Greeks, Macedonians and Montenegrins, and two cultural minorities, Aromanians and Romani people.
The President of the Assembly (or Speaker), who has two deputies, chairs the Assembly.
The three largest and deepest tectonic lakes of the Balkan Peninsula are partly located in Albania.
On 15 January 1945, a clash took place between partisans of the first Brigade and nationalist forces at the Tamara Bridge, resulting in the defeat of the nationalist forces .
Albania is a parliamentary republic.
The project proved unprofitable, however, and Adria Aero Lloyd sold its concession to the Italian company Ala Littoria, which started air service in 1935 to several domestic and international destinations.
According to the 2011 census, 58.79% of Albania adheres to Islam, making it the largest religion in the country; Christianity is practiced by 17.06% of the population, and 24.29% of the total population is either non-religious, belongs to other religious groups, or are 'undeclared'.
The northern and southern traditions are contrasted by the "rugged and heroic" tone of the north and the "relaxed" form of the south.
According to the 2011 census the population of Albania declared the following ethnic affiliation: Albanians 2,312,356 (82.6% of the total), Greeks 24,243 (0.9%), Macedonians 5,512 (0.2%), Montenegrins 366 (0.01%), Aromanians 8,266 (0.30%), Romani 8,301 (0.3%), Balkan Egyptians 3,368 (0.1%), other ethnicities 2,644 (0.1%), no declared ethnicity 390,938 (14.0%), and not relevant 44,144 (1.6%).
An important gateway to the Balkan Peninsula, Albania's ever-growing road network provides juncture to reach its neighbors in north south, east, and west.
Albanian earliest icons date from the late thirteenth century and generally estimated that their artistic peak reached in the eighteenth century.
The cost of the highway appears to have breached €800&nbsp; million, although the exact cost for the total highway has yet to be confirmed by the government.
Albania's Communist constitution did not allow taxes on individuals; instead, taxes were imposed on cooperatives and other organizations, with much the same effect.
During 1955–57, the Rinasi Airport was constructed for military purposes.
This initiative was short lived and in 1921 the southern provinces were finally incorporated to the Albanian Principality.
The Directory General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) was established on 3 February 1991, to cope with the development required by the time.
Tourism –  – funds 10% of its gross domestical product, and this is expected to increase.
Every male Albanian over the age of 16 years was legally bound to give ten days of free labor each year to the state.
At the beginning of November the first gendarmerie members arrived in Albania.
60,000 houses were destroyed and about 10% of the population was left homeless.The communist partisans had regrouped and gained control of much of southern Albania in January 1944.
Genc Pollo, the minister in charge has declared that: "Albanian citizens will be able to freely express their ethnic and religious affiliation and mother tongue.
Aviation in Albania marked its beginning in March 1926 when German airline Adria Aero Lloyd begin service between Tirana, Shkodër, Korçë and Vlorë.
In 2014 about 3000 Albanian families were estimated to be involved in blood feuds and this had since the fall of Communism led to the deaths of 10,000 people.
Albania is an upper-middle income economy with the service sector dominating the country's economy, followed by the industrial sector and agriculture.
In 1999, the country was affected by the Kosovo War, when a great number of Albanians from Kosovo found refuge in Albania.
The higher inland mountains receive less precipitation than the intermediate uplands.
Zogu led an authoritarian and conservative regime, the primary aim of which was the maintenance of stability and order.
The process of Islamization was an incremental one, commencing from the arrival of the Ottomans in the 14th century (to this day, a minority of Albanians are Catholic or Orthodox Christians, though the vast majority became Muslim).
The leading causes of death are cardiovascular disease, trauma, cancer, and respiratory disease.
Albania is divided into 12 administrative counties ().
Instead, the National Agency of Air Traffic (NATA) was established as an independent enterprise.
Contemporary Albanian artwork captures the struggle of everyday Albanians, however new artists are utilizing different artistic styles to convey this message.
After the death of Dhimiter, the last of the Progon family, the principality came under Grigor Kamona, and later Golem.
Since June 2015, these counties are divided into 61 municipalities ().
Albanians could also be found throughout the empire in Iraq, Egypt, Algeria and across the Maghreb, as vital military and administrative retainers.
Albania has one international airport, Tirana International Airport Nënë Tereza, which is linked to 29 destinations by 14 airlines.
According to the Albanian Media Authority, AMA, Albania has an estimated 257 media outlets, including 66 radio stations and 67 television stations, with three national, 62 local and more than 50 cable TV stations.
Many believers, along with the ulema and many priests, were arrested and executed.
However, in February 2009 Italian company Enel announced plans to build an 800 MW coal-fired power plant in Albania, to diversify electricity sources.
Paintings and sculpture arose in the first half of the twentieth century and reached a modest peak in the 1930s and 1940s, when the first organized art exhibitions at national level.
In 1949, a new Decree on Religious Communities required that all their activities be sanctioned by the state alone.
The party at first had little mass appeal, and even its youth organization netted few recruits.
After Albania's joining with the Ottoman Empire in 1478, Ottoman influenced art forms such as mosaics and muralpaintings became prevalent, and no real artistic change occurred until Albanian Liberation in 1912.
As part of the reform, major town centers in Albania are being physically redesigned and façades painted to reflect a more Mediterranean look.
After being militarily occupied by Italy, from 1939 until 1943 the Albanian Kingdom was a protectorate and a dependency of Italy governed by the Italian King Victor Emmanuel III and his government.
Elections are held every four years to the 140-seat unicameral Assembly of the Republic of Albania.
The Ottomans erected their garrisons throughout southern Albania by 1415 and occupied most of Albania by 1431.
