In addition to the letter, Einstein used his connections with the Belgian Royal Family and the Belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the White House's Oval Office.
In order to show this, they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a torsion pendulum.
The explanation of the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves.
In search of business, the Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia.
A resident of Princeton recalls that Einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student, and black physicist Sylvester James Gates states that Einstein had been one of his early science heroes, later finding out about Einstein's support for civil rights.
Einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be different, but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics.
Einstein married Elsa Löwenthal  in 1919, after having had a personal relationship with her since 1912.
Einstein was greeted as if he were a head of state, rather than a physicist, which included a cannon salute upon arriving at the home of the British high commissioner, Sir Herbert Samuel.
Barbara Wolff, of The Hebrew University's Albert Einstein Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.
In late July 1933, he went to England for about six weeks at the personal invitation of British naval officer Commander Oliver Locker-Lampson, who had become friends with Einstein in the preceding years.
Schrödinger urged Einstein to add his name as co-author, although Einstein declined the invitation.
Resolved an unsolved puzzle by suggesting that energy is exchanged only in discrete amounts (quanta).
To its students, Einstein gave a speech about racism in America, adding, "I do not intend to be quiet about it."
Reconciled Maxwell's equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics by introducing major changes to mechanics close to the speed of light, resulting from analysis based on empirical evidence that the speed of light is independent of the motion of the observer.
He finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries.
He also submitted various suggestions as to its initial programs.
As observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time, Einstein introduced a new term, the cosmological constant, to the field equations, in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe.
Einstein probably never saw his daughter.
After more than two years of intensive work, Einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and abandoned the theory in November 1915.
According to general relativity, the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of space and time by those masses.
As a physical principle, it was shown to be incorrect when the Aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed Bell's theorem, which had been promulgated in 1964.
Einstein's 1905 work on relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by leading physicists, starting with Max Planck.
Arnold Sommerfeld identified this adiabatic invariant as the action variable of classical mechanics.
In 1900, Einstein was awarded the Zürich Polytechnic teaching diploma, but Marić failed the examination with a poor grade in the mathematics component, theory of functions.
Not long after settling into his career at the Institute for Advanced Study (in Princeton, New Jersey), he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in American culture when compared to Europe.
Einstein's intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "Einstein" synonymous with "genius".
'''Albert Einstein''' (; ; 14 March 1879&nbsp;– 18 April 1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist.
In each of these models, Einstein discarded the cosmological constant, claiming that it was "in any case theoretically unsatisfactory".
Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University.
Music possessed an unusual meaning for this student."
Locker-Lampson took Einstein to meet Winston Churchill at his home, and later, Austen Chamberlain and former Prime Minister Lloyd George.
In 1954, a year before his death, Einstein said to his old friend, Linus Pauling, "I made one great mistake in my life—when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justification—the danger that the Germans would make them&nbsp;..."
Discredited the concept of a "luminiferous ether."
He rented a house in De Haan, Belgium, where he lived for a few months.
The contents of his letter to Marić in September 1903 suggest that the girl was either adopted or died of scarlet fever in infancy.
In the period before World War II, ''The New Yorker'' published a vignette in their "The Talk of the Town" feature saying that Einstein was so well known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain "that theory".
In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where Einstein's father and his uncle Jakob founded ''Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie'', a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.
Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie's work, and supported his ideas, which were received skeptically at first.
Wien had shown that the hypothesis of adiabatic invariance of a thermal equilibrium state allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived from one another by a simple shifting process.
He told his inquirers "Pardon me, sorry!
In the same article, Einstein also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation, gravitational red shift and deflection of light.
In 1922, Einstein was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
He is sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the Köchel catalogue of Mozart's work; that edition was actually prepared by Alfred Einstein, who may have been a distant relation.
Noether's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry.
When the family moved to Pavia, Einstein stayed in Munich to finish his studies at the Luitpold Gymnasium.
Chaplin said Einstein's outward persona, calm and gentle, seemed to conceal a "highly emotional temperament," from which came his "extraordinary intellectual energy."
Assuming the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy, they then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with the experimental data.
In his place, the banquet speech was held by a German diplomat, who praised Einstein not only as a scientist but also as an international peacemaker and activist.
He also received the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in 1925.
The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether's presecriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason.
If one end of a wormhole was positively charged, the other end would be negatively charged.
Lincoln was the first university in the United States to grant college degrees to blacks, including Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall.
Einstein's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity motivates modern quests for a theory of everything and in particular string theory, where geometrical fields emerge in a unified quantum-mechanical setting.
Other principles postulated by Einstein and later vindicated are the principle of equivalence and the principle of adiabatic invariance of the quantum number.
He taught himself to play without "ever practicing systematically", he said, deciding that "love is a better teacher than a sense of duty."
While lodging with the family of professor Jost Winteler, he fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie.
Einstein's intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "Einstein" synonymous with "genius".
For the density to remain constant, new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space."
In 1939, a group of Hungarian scientists that included émigré physicist Leó Szilárd attempted to alert Washington to ongoing Nazi atomic bomb research.
At the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large fluctuations.
Their invention was not immediately put into commercial production, and the most promising of their patents were acquired by the Swedish company Electrolux.
Einstein next traveled to California where he met Caltech president and Nobel laureate, Robert A. Millikan.
As its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory, less elegant and more difficult than general relativity, with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions.
On 5 December 2014, universities and archives announced the release of Einstein's papers, comprising more than 30,000 unique documents.
The principle he proposed is that if it is possible to determine what the answer to a position or momentum measurement would be, without in any way disturbing the particle, then the particle actually has values of position or momentum.
After arriving in New York City, Einstein was taken to various places and events, including Chinatown, a lunch with the editors of the ''New York Times'', and a performance of ''Carmen'' at the Metropolitan Opera, where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival.
President Roosevelt could not take the risk of allowing Hitler to possess atomic bombs first.
However, after publishing the findings, they promptly withdrew their support, because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy.
He sat down at his piano and started playing.
When he turned 13, he discovered the violin sonatas of Mozart, whereupon "Einstein fell in love" with Mozart's music and studied music more willingly.
Einstein's views about religious belief have been collected from interviews and original writings.
(Albert's sister Maja later married Winteler's son Paul.)
According to conductor Leon Botstein, Einstein is said to have begun playing when he was 5, although he did not enjoy it at that age.
As he stated in the paper, "In what follows, I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation (1) that can account for Hubbel's sic facts, and in which the density is constant over time" ... "If one considers a physically bounded volume, particles of matter will be continually leaving it.
He acquired Swiss citizenship in February 1901, but was not conscripted for medical reasons.
He noted, along with his collaborators, that by performing different measurements on the distant particle, either of position or momentum, different properties of the entangled partner could be discovered without disturbing it in any way.
He was asked to lend his support by writing a letter, with Szilárd, to President Roosevelt, recommending the U.S. pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research.
Einstein became a full professor at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague in April 1911, accepting Austrian citizenship in the Austro-Hungarian Empire to do so.
On 5 December 2014, universities and archives announced the release of Einstein's papers, comprising more than 30,000 unique documents.
At the end of December 1894, he travelled to Italy to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school to let him go by using a doctor's note.
Thus, the theoretical prediction of general relativity can for the first time be tested experimentally.
Einstein was displeased with quantum theory and quantum mechanics (the very theory he helped create), despite its acceptance by other physicists, stating that God "is not playing at dice."
I have done my share, it is time to go.
Bruria Kaufman, his assistant, later became a physicist.
''Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?''
On 7 November 1919, the leading British newspaper ''The Times'' printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution in Science&nbsp;– New Theory of the Universe&nbsp;– Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".
In 1935, Elsa Einstein was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems; she died in December 1936.
When Einstein offered to be a character witness for Du Bois, the judge decided to drop the case.
Establishing an Oriental Studies Institute, to include language courses given in both Hebrew and Arabic, for scientific exploration of the country and its historical monuments, was also important.
In 1922, his travels took him to Asia and later to Palestine, as part of a six-month excursion and speaking tour, as he visited  Singapore, Ceylon and Japan,  where he gave a series of lectures to thousands of Japanese.
As part of his involvement, he corresponded with civil rights activist W. E. B.
As Albert Einstein later said, the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion (even accelerated ones) should appear more satisfactory.
Einstein collaborated with others to produce a model of a wormhole.
Bose–Einstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons.
Einstein is best known in popular culture for his mass–energy equivalence formula  (which has been dubbed "the world's most famous equation").
I often think in music.
Near the beginning of his career, Einstein thought that Newtonian mechanics was no longer enough to reconcile the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field.
Erwin Schrödinger applied this to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas.
In 1911, Einstein published another article "On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of Light" expanding on the 1907 article, in which he estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies.
Einstein refused surgery, saying: "I want to go when I want.
In a letter to his sons, Einstein described his impression of the Japanese as being modest, intelligent, considerate, and having a true feel for art.
In that article titled "On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It", he argued that free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply.
Two papers he published in 1902–1903 (thermodynamics) attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view.
His mother cared for him and he was also committed to asylums for several periods, finally being committed permanently after her death.
Marić returned to Switzerland without the child, whose real name and fate are unknown.
These papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion, which showed that Brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist.
Mainstream physics, in turn, largely ignored Einstein's approaches to unification.
Einstein visited New York City for the first time on 2 April 1921, where he received an official welcome by Mayor John Francis Hylan, followed by three weeks of lectures and receptions.
He said "I believe in Spinoza’s God, who reveals himself in the lawful harmony of all that exists" (New York Times , April 25, 1929).
These four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space, time, and matter.
Einstein's work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science.
In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces, Einstein ignored some mainstream developments in physics, most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces, which were not well understood until many years after his death.
In 1917, Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole.
A few years later, the Nazis sold his boat and turned his cottage into a Hitler Youth camp.
In 1917, at the height of his work on relativity, Einstein published an article in ''Physikalische Zeitschrift'' that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser.
Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications, among them the Bose–Einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures.
After moving to the U.S., he described the book burnings as a "spontaneous emotional outburst" by those who "shun popular enlightenment," and "more than anything else in the world, fear the influence of men of intellectual independence."
She asked him if something was bothering him.
Einstein noted that Bose's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles, and submitted his translation of Bose's paper to the ''Zeitschrift für Physik''.
This experiment needed to be sensitive, because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small, but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization.
Following the discovery of the recession of the nebulae by Edwin Hubble in 1929, Einstein abandoned his static model of the universe, and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos, the Friedman–Einstein model of 1931 and the Einstein–de Sitter model of 1932.
Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, plays, and works of music.
General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics.
Einstein suggested to Erwin Schrödinger that he might be able to reproduce the statistics of a Bose–Einstein gas by considering a box.
None of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel, so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to Einstein in 1922.
Harry Emerson Fosdick, pastor at New York's Riverside Church, gave Einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of Einstein, standing at the entrance.
For Einstein, "war was a disease&nbsp;... and he called for resistance to war."
Near the end of his life, when the young Juilliard Quartet visited him in Princeton, he played his violin with them, and the quartet was "impressed by Einstein's level of coordination and intonation."
Einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter.
Chaim Weizmann later became Israel's first president.
He strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation.
This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether—one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the time—was superfluous.
In letters revealed in 2015, Einstein wrote to his early love, Marie Winteler, about his marriage and his still-strong feelings for Marie.
Earlier, in 1921, he was asked by the biochemist and president of the World Zionist Organization, Chaim Weizmann, to help raise funds for the planned university.
It was published in 1901 with the title "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen", which translates as "Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena".
Einstein concluded that each wave of frequency ''f'' is associated with a collection of photons with energy ''hf'' each, where ''h'' is Planck's constant.
Because of Einstein's travels to the Far East, he was unable to personally accept the Nobel Prize for Physics at the Stockholm award ceremony in December 1922.
Photoelectric effect
Explained empirical evidence for the atomic theory, supporting the application of statistical physics.
On his return voyage, he visited Palestine for 12 days in what would become his only visit to that region.
In another major paper from this era, Einstein gave a wave equation for de Broglie waves, which Einstein suggested was the Hamilton–Jacobi equation of mechanics.
Einstein's light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists, including Max Planck and Niels Bohr.
In 1935, Einstein returned to the question of quantum mechanics.
In addition to the work he did by himself he also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including the Bose–Einstein statistics, the Einstein refrigerator and others.
He failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the examination, but obtained exceptional grades in physics and mathematics.
During his time in Italy he wrote a short essay with the title "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field".
This idea was pivotal to the early development of quantum theory.
Soon, this idea attracted the attention of Albert Einstein and his assistant Otto Stern.
This paper would inspire Schrödinger's work of 1926.
He was visiting the United States when Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933 and, being Jewish, did not go back to Germany, where he had been a professor at the Berlin Academy of Sciences.
These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches.
Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the university.
Though only 17, he enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Zürich Polytechnic.
He recognized the "right of individuals to say and think what they pleased", without social barriers, and as a result, individuals were encouraged, he said, to be more creative, a trait he valued from his own early education.
Throughout his life, Einstein published hundreds of books and articles.
In a subsequent letter to physicist and friend Max Born, who had already emigrated from Germany to England, Einstein wrote, "...&nbsp;I must confess that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise."
A month later, Einstein's works were among those targeted by the German Student Union in the Nazi book burnings, with Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proclaiming, "Jewish intellectualism is dead."
He also studied continuum mechanics, the molecular theory of heat, and the problem of gravitation, on which he worked with mathematician and friend Marcel Grossmann.
He was one of the four first selected (two of the others being John von Neumann and Kurt Gödel) at the new Institute, where he soon developed a close friendship with Gödel.
The Einsteins were non-observant Ashkenazi Jews, and Albert attended a Catholic elementary school in Munich from the age of 5 for three years.
The numbers matched nicely.
He considered how a measurement on one of two entangled particles would affect the other.
The four papers are:
He also investigated the thermal properties of light which laid the foundation of the photon theory of light.
In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles.
Locker-Lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend British citizenship to Einstein, during which period Einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in Europe.
However, Einstein's steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea.
The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white.
On his return to Europe he was the guest of the British statesman and philosopher Viscount Haldane in London, where he met several renowned scientific, intellectual and political figures, and delivered a lecture at King's College London.
The audience applauded as they entered the theater.
This eventually led to what would become the Manhattan Project.
It is tasteless to prolong life artificially.
It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST–JILA laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
In "''über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung''" ("The Development of our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of light, and in an earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as independent, point-like particles.
He went on to deliver several lectures at Columbia University and Princeton University, and in Washington he accompanied representatives of the National Academy of Science on a visit to the White House.
The bill failed to become law, however, and Einstein then accepted an earlier offer from the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study, in the U.S., to become a resident scholar.
''Time'' magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was "a cartoonist's dream come true".
Einstein was a figurehead leader in helping establish the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which opened in 1925, and was among its first Board of Governors.
He and his wife Elsa returned to Belgium by ship in March, and during the trip they learned that their cottage was raided by the Nazis and his personal sailboat confiscated.
In addition to longtime collaborators Leopold Infeld, Nathan Rosen, Peter Bergmann and others, Einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists.
While at American universities in early 1933, he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
He developed the general theory of relativity, one of the two pillars of modern physics (alongside quantum mechanics).
With a few friends he had met in Bern, Einstein started a small discussion group, self-mockingly named "The Olympia Academy", which met regularly to discuss science and philosophy.
Equivalence of matter and energy,  (and by implication, the ability of gravity to "bend" light), the existence of "rest energy", and the basis of nuclear energy.
Based on calculations Einstein made in 1911, about his new theory of general relativity, light from another star should be bent by the Sun's gravity.
The group's warnings were discounted.
This principle distilled the essence of Einstein's objection to quantum mechanics.
In the Einstein model, each atom oscillates independently—a series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator.
In 1910 he wrote to her that "I think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be" while his wife was pregnant with their second child.
This modification was made by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s.
On 11 November 1930,  was awarded to Albert Einstein and Leó Szilárd for the refrigerator.
General relativity (GR) is a theory of gravitation that was developed by Albert Einstein between 1907 and 1915.
That should be followed, he suggested, by a Chemical Institute and an Institute of Microbiology, to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria, which he called an "evil" that was undermining a third of the country's development.
His research in 1903 and 1904 was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena.
In 1900, Einstein's paper "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen" ("Conclusions from the Capillarity Phenomena") was published in the prestigious ''Annalen der Physik''.
In many Einstein biographies, it is claimed that Einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his "biggest blunder".
Einstein supported defending the Allied forces, but largely denounced the idea of using the newly discovered nuclear fission as a weapon.
This led to the development of his special theory of relativity.
That same year, which has been called Einstein's ''annus mirabilis'' (miracle year), he published four groundbreaking papers, on the photoelectric effect, Brownian motion, special relativity, and the equivalence of mass and energy, which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world, at the age of 26.
One German magazine included him in a list of enemies of the German regime with the phrase, "not yet hanged", offering a $5,000 bounty on his head.
