Alberta has over  of highways and roads, of which nearly  are paved.
However, these latter two have a lower diversity of documented dinosaurs, primarily due to their lower total fossil quantity and neglect from collectors who are hindered by the isolation and scarcity of exposed outcrops.
Both Calgary and Edmonton host a number of annual festivals and events, including folk music festivals.
To the south, the province borders on the 49th parallel north, separating it from the US state of Montana, while on the north the 60th parallel north divides it from the Northwest Territories.
Since the 1960s, Alberta has had three main political parties, the Progressive Conservatives ("Conservatives" or "Tories"), the Liberals, and the social democratic New Democrats.
Alberta is home to only one variety of venomous snake, the prairie rattlesnake.
This area was granted by Charles II of England to the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) in 1670, and rival fur trading companies were not allowed to trade in it.
As Canada's head of state, Queen Elizabeth II is the head of state for the Government of Alberta.
Alberta is the only province in Canada—as well as one of the few places in the world—that is free of Norwegian rats.
Located in east-central Alberta is Alberta Prairie Railway Excursions, a popular tourist attraction operated out of Stettler, that offers train excursions into the prairie and caters to tens of thousands of visitors every year.
Moose, mule deer, elk, and white-tail deer are found in the wooded regions, and pronghorn can be found in the prairies of southern Alberta.
AHS also funds all ground ambulance services in the province, as well as the province-wide STARS (Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society) air ambulance service.
On June 21, 2013, during the 2013 Alberta floods Alberta experienced heavy rainfall that triggered catastrophic flooding throughout much of the southern half of the province along the Bow, Elbow, Highwood and Oldman rivers and tributaries.
The southern quarter of the province is prairie, ranging from shortgrass prairie in the southeastern corner to mixed grass prairie in an arc to the west and north of it.
The 2011 census reported Alberta had a population of 3,645,257 living in 1,390,275 of its 1,505,007 total dwellings, a 10.8% change from its 2006 population of 3,290,350.
January dailymaximum
Others may have migrated down the coast of British Columbia and then moved inland.
AHS is the province's single health authority established on July 1, 2008, which replaced nine local health authorities.
The oil price increases since 2003 have made it profitable to extract this oil, which in the past would give little profit or even a loss.
In addition, one Protestant separate school district, Glen Avon, survives as a ward of the St. Paul Education Region.
In 2006 the deviation from the national average was the largest for any province in Canadian history.
Soccer, rugby union and lacrosse are also played professionally in Alberta.
The province is the namesake of the Alberta clipper, a type of intense, fast-moving winter storm that generally forms over or near the province and pushed with great speed by the continental polar jetstream descends over the rest of Southern Canada and the northern tier of the United States.
Peter Pond built Fort Athabasca on Lac la Biche in 1778.
The Wapiti Formation contains two ''Pachyrhinosaurus'' bone beds that break its general trend of low productivity, however.
Members of the sunflower family blossom on the prairie in the summer months between July and September.
The Queen and lieutenant governor are figureheads whose actions are highly restricted by custom and constitutional convention.
The University of Alberta, located in Edmonton and established in 1908, is Alberta's oldest and largest university.
The value of assessed property in Alberta was approximately $727 billion in 2011.
Princess Louise was the wife of John Campbell, Marquess of Lorne, Governor General of Canada (1878–83).
The University of Calgary, once affiliated with the University of Alberta, gained its autonomy in 1966 and is now the second largest university in Alberta.
Alberta has numerous ski resorts most notably Sunshine Village, Lake Louise, Marmot Basin, Norquay and Nakiska.
Alberta is the leading beekeeping province of Canada, with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially designed barns in southern Alberta, then migrating north during the summer into the Peace River valley where the season is short but the working days are long for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed.
Edmonton's Churchill Square is home to a large number of the festivals, including the large Taste of Edmonton & The Works Art & Design Festival throughout the summer months.
The central aspen parkland region extending in a broad arc between the prairies and the forests, from Calgary, north to Edmonton, and then east to Lloydminster, contains the most fertile soil in the province and most of the population.
These are largely deciduous, typically aspen, poplar, and willow.
Its highest point is  at the summit of Mount Columbia in the Rocky Mountains along the southwest border, while its lowest point is  on the Slave River in Wood Buffalo National Park in the northeast.
Thunderstorms, some of them severe, are frequent in the summer, especially in central and southern Alberta.
Calgary, in particular, has a tradition of calling its largest urban expressways ''trails'' and naming many of them after prominent First Nations individuals and tribes, such as Crowchild Trail, Deerfoot Trail, and Stoney Trail.
With the exception of the semi-arid steppe of the southeastern section, the province has adequate water resources.
Bighorn sheep and mountain goats live in the Rocky Mountains.
Depending on the property type, property owners may appeal a property assessment to their municipal 'Local Assessment Review Board', 'Composite Assessment Review Board,' or the Alberta Municipal Government Board.
Many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain.
Many of Alberta's cities and towns have experienced very high rates of growth in recent history.
With a land area of , it had a population density of  in 2011.
The region around Lethbridge has the most chinooks, averaging 30 to 35 chinook days per year.
Alberta is named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (1848–1939), the fourth daughter of Victoria, Queen of Canada, and Albert, Prince Consort.
The vast northern forest reserves of softwood allow Alberta to produce large quantities of lumber, oriented strand board (OSB) and plywood, and several plants in northern Alberta supply North America and the Pacific Rim nations with bleached wood pulp and newsprint.
Alberta's Rockies include well-known tourist destinations Banff National Park and Jasper National Park.
Nearly one half of all Canadian beef is produced in Alberta.
The remainder belonged to a wide variety of different religious affiliations, none of which constituted more than 2% of the population.
Government revenue comes mainly from royalties on non-renewable natural resources (30.4%), personal income taxes (22.3%), corporate and other taxes (19.6%), and grants from the federal government primarily for infrastructure projects (9.8%).
Statistics Canada estimated the province to have a population of 4,196,457 in 2015.
Athabasca University, which focuses on distance learning, and the University of Lethbridge are located in Athabasca and Lethbridge respectively.
The NWC occupied the northern part of Alberta territory.
The amalgamated Hudson's Bay Company dominated trade in Alberta until 1870, when the newly formed Canadian Government purchased Rupert's Land.
The Dinosaur Provincial Park area contains outcrops of the Dinosaur Park Formation and Oldman Formation.
Arctic air masses in the winter produce extreme minimum temperatures varying from  in northern Alberta to  in southern Alberta, although temperatures at these extremes are rare.
The largest river is the Peace River with an average flow of 2161 m3/s.
As reported in the 2001 census, the Chinese represented nearly four percent of Alberta's population, and East Indians represented more than two percent.
Alberta has a population of Hutterites, a communal Anabaptist sect similar to the Mennonites, and has a significant population of Seventh-day Adventists.
The four climatic regions (alpine, boreal forest, parkland, and prairie) of Alberta are home to many different species of animals.
Drumheller also had a rich mining history being one of Western Canada's largest coal producers during the war years.
Between 2003 and 2004, the province had high birthrates (on par with some larger provinces such as British Columbia), relatively high immigration, and a high rate of interprovincial migration compared to other provinces.
The District of Alberta was created as part of the North-West Territories in 1882.
Continuous cropping (in which there is no fallow season) is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion.
Edmonton Capital Region
Muslims, Sikhs, Buddhists, and Hindus live in Alberta.
Edmonton Capital Region
About 1.2 million people visit the Calgary Stampede, a celebration of Canada's own Wild West and the cattle ranching industry.
About  south of the capital is Calgary, the largest city in Alberta.
In the central and southern regions of Alberta are intermittent Scollard Formation outcrops.
The province is open to cold arctic weather systems from the north, which often produce extremely cold conditions in winter.
In 2009, several rats were
In 2016, a wildfire resulted in the largest evacuation of residents in Alberta's history, as over 80,000 people were evacuated.
Herbivorous animals are found throughout the province.
Alberta also privatized alcohol distribution.
For many years the provincial government has funded the greater part of the cost of providing K–12 education.
The provincial government pools the property tax funds from across the province and distributes them, according to a formula, to public and separate school jurisdictions and Francophone authorities.
By mid-2014 however rising costs and stabilizing oil prices were threatening the economic viability of some projects.
It was there he discovered the mighty outflow river which bears his name—the Mackenzie River—which he followed to its outlet in the Arctic Ocean.
The Calgary–Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and is one of the most densely populated areas of Canada.
The south and central prairie was the land of the bison, commonly known as buffalo, its grasses providing pasture and breeding ground for millions of buffalo.
He called an early election on May 5, 2015 in which the opposition New Democratic Party (NDP) won a majority of the seats.
Aspen poplar, balsam poplar (or in some parts cottonwood), and paper birch are the primary large deciduous species.
The main north-south corridor is Highway 2, which begins south of Cardston at the Carway border crossing and is part of the CANAMEX Corridor.
Albertan municipalities raise a significant portion of their income through levying property taxes.
Other prairie flora known to flower early are the golden bean and wild rose.
The Banff Centre hosts a range of festivals and other events including the international Mountain Film Festival.
Tax revenue also increased from $400 million to $700 million.
Average high temperatures in January range from  in the southwest to  in the far north.
Jews constituted 0.3% of Alberta's population.
This estimate predicts a real GDP growth of only 1.4% for 2015.
The number of Aboriginal Identity Peoples have been increasing at a rate greater than the population of Alberta.
The current premier is Rachel Notley, sworn in on May 24, 2015.
Aboriginal Identity Peoples make up 5.8% of the population, about half of whom consist of North American Indians and the other half are Metis.
In 2013 Alberta's per capita GDP exceeded that of the United States, Norway, or Switzerland, and was the highest of any province in Canada at C$84,390.
Among them are the grizzly and black bears, which are found in the mountains and wooded regions.
About 700,000 people enjoy Edmonton's K-Days (formerly Klondike Days and Capital EX).
Shipments of forest products totalled $5.4 Billion while exports were $2.7 Billion.
As with any Canadian province, the Alberta Legislature has (almost) exclusive authority to make laws respecting education.
Another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the oil sands is the price of oil.
Alberta is one of three Canadian provinces and territories to border only a single U.S. state and one of only two landlocked provinces.
The most common aboriginal language is Cree 17,215 (0.53%).
All public health care services funded by the Government of Alberta are delivered operationally by Alberta Health Services.
Fort La Jonquière was established near what is now Calgary in 1752.
The strongly conservative Social Credit Party was a power in Alberta for many decades, but fell from the political map after the Progressive Conservatives came to power in 1971.
The premier has been Rachel Notley since May 2015.
One of the most scenic drives is along the Icefields Parkway, which runs for  between Jasper and Lake Louise, with mountain ranges and glaciers on either side of its entire length.
Of the remainder, 7.5% of the population identified themselves as belonging to the United Church of Canada, while 3.9% were Anglican.
With a growing economy, Alberta has several financial institutions dealing with civil and private funds.
Members of LDS Church are mostly concentrated in the extreme south of the province.
In the summer, continental air masses have produced record maximum temperatures from  in the mountains to over  in southeastern Alberta.
Both yellow and white sweet clover can be found throughout the southern and central areas of the province.
The buffalo population was decimated during early settlement, but since then buffalo have made a comeback, living on farms and in parks all over Alberta.
Paleo-Indians arrived in Alberta at least 10,000 years ago, toward the end of the last ice age.
The Rocky Mountaineer operates two sections: one from Vancouver to Banff and Calgary over CP tracks, and a section that travels over CN tracks to Jasper.
The longest river in the province is the Athabasca River which travels  from the Columbia Icefield in the Rocky Mountains to Lake Athabasca.
According to Alberta Economic Development, Calgary and Edmonton both host over four million visitors annually.
The privatization increased outlets from 304 stores to 1,726; 1,300 jobs to 4,000 jobs; and 3,325 products to 16,495 products.
Calgary International Airport and Edmonton International Airport are the third and fifth busiest in Canada respectively.
Alberta has one of the greatest diversities and abundances of Late Cretaceous dinosaur fossils in the world.
Despite this, relatively few Albertans claim French as their mother tongue.
After the arrival of French Canadians in the west around 1731, they settled near fur trading posts, establishing communities such as Lac La Biche and Bonnyville.
The trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and belts on the hillsides.
Alberta had the second highest percentage of non-religious residents among the provinces (after British Columbia) at 31.6% of the population.
The premier is normally a member of the Legislative Assembly, and draws all the members of the Cabinet from among the members of the Legislative Assembly.
Dinosaur Provincial Park, near Brooks, Alberta, showcases the badlands terrain, desert flora, and remnants from Alberta's past when dinosaurs roamed the then lush landscape.
Alberta's elections have tended to yield much more conservative outcomes than those of other Canadian provinces.
s that make their homes in Alberta.
There are three large lakes, Lake Claire () in Wood Buffalo National Park, Lesser Slave Lake (), and Lake Athabasca () which lies in both Alberta and Saskatchewan.
Alberta is bounded by the provinces of British Columbia to the west and Saskatchewan to the east, the Northwest Territories to the north, and the U.S. state of Montana to the south.
Manufacturing sales totaled $79.4 Billion, and Alberta's ICT industries generated over $13 Billion in revenue.
Annualprecipitation
At least 38 dinosaur type specimens were collected in the province.
Hybrid canola also requires bee pollination, and some beekeepers service this need.
Edmonton LRT, which is underground in the downtown core and on the surface outside the CBD, was the first of the modern generation of light rail systems to be built in North America, while the Calgary C-Train has one of the highest number of daily riders of any LRT system in North America.
In the summer, the average daytime temperatures range from around  in the Rocky Mountain valleys and far north, up to around  in the dry prairie of the southeast.
Highway 3 joins Lethbridge to Fort Macleod and links Highway 4 to Highway 2.
Municipalities where the same body act as both local government and school board are formally referred to as "counties" in Alberta.
There has been some controversy in recent years over the rising cost of post-secondary education for students (as opposed to taxpayers).
''(Figures shown are for the number of single language responses and the percentage of total single-language responses.)''
Highway 4, which effectively extends Interstate 15 into Alberta and is the busiest US gateway to the province, begins at the Coutts border crossing and ends at Lethbridge.
The southeastern corner of Alberta, part of the Palliser Triangle, experiences greater summer heat and lower rainfall than the rest of the province, and as a result suffers frequent crop yield problems and occasional severe droughts.
In total, Alberta's 2014 GDP amassed $364.5 Billion in 2007 dollars, or $414.3 Billion in 2015 dollars.
Wheat and canola are primary farm crops, with Alberta leading the provinces in spring wheat production; other grains are also prominent.
Dinosaur-bearing strata are distributed widely throughout Alberta.
Fur trade expanded in the north, but bloody battles occurred between the rival HBC and NWC, and in 1821 the British government forced them to merge to stop the hostilities.
As of the 2011 National Household Survey, the largest religious group was Roman Catholic, representing 24.3% of the population.
In southwestern Alberta, the cold winters are frequently interrupted by warm, dry chinook winds blowing from the mountains, which can propel temperatures upward from frigid conditions to well above the freezing point in a very short period.
The relevant legislation requires that all the money raised by this property tax must go to the support of K–12 education provided by school boards.
In 1994 the government of the province eliminated this right for public school boards, but not for separate school boards.
In 2005, Premier Ralph Klein made a promise that he would freeze tuition and look into ways of reducing schooling costs.
Across the province, the once common grain elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreasing; farmers typically truck the grain to central points.
Prior to 1994 public and separate school boards in Alberta had the legislative authority to levy a local tax on property as a supplementary support for local education.
Alberta, with an area of , is the fourth largest province after Quebec, Ontario, and British Columbia.
A positive is the predicted 10.8% growth in Nominal GDP, and possibly above 11% in 2016.
Alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil, synthetic crude, natural gas and gas products in Canada.
In the Drumheller Valley and Edmonton regions there are exposed Horseshoe Canyon facies.
The Edmonton Fringe Festival is the world's second largest after the Edinburgh Festival.
Military bases in Alberta include Canadian Forces Base (CFB) Cold Lake, CFB Edmonton, CFB Suffield and CFB Wainwright.
The region surrounding the Calgary–Edmonton Corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in Canada, which is caused by orographic lifting from the nearby Rocky Mountains, enhancing the updraft/downdraft cycle necessary for the formation of hail.
Fur traders formed the North West Company (NWC) of Montreal to compete with the HBC in 1779.
The next most common mother tongues were Chinese with 97,275 native speakers (3.02%), followed by German with 84,505 native speakers (2.62%) and French with 61,225 (1.90%).
The Chinese presence began with workers employed in the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway in the 1880s.
A colony of rats were subsequently found in a landfill near Medicine Hat in 2012, and again in 2014.
The extreme southernmost portion of Alberta was part of the French (and Spanish) territory of Louisiana, sold to the United States in 1803; in 1818, the portion of Louisiana north of the Forty-Ninth Parallel was ceded to Great Britain.
Alberta is one of the top producers of plains buffalo (bison) for the consumer market.
The section of Highway 2 between Calgary and Edmonton has been named the Queen Elizabeth II Highway to commemorate the visit of the monarch in 2005.
Alberta has two main east-west corridors.
The exceptions to market value assessment are farmland, railways, machinery & equipment and linear property, all of which is assessed by regulated rates.
During one chinook recorded at Pincher Creek, temperatures soared from  in just one hour.
After a long campaign for autonomy, in 1905 the District of Alberta was enlarged and given provincial status, with the election of Alexander Cameron Rutherford as the first premier.
Since the early 1950s, the Government of Alberta has operated a rat-control program, which has been so successful that only isolated instances of wild rat sightings are reported, usually of rats arriving in the province aboard trucks or by rail.
His cousin, Sir Alexander Mackenzie, followed the North Saskatchewan River to its northernmost point near Edmonton, then setting northward on foot, trekked to the Athabasca River, which he followed to Lake Athabasca.
Homeschool tutors may choose to follow the Program of Studies or develop their own Program of Studies.
Alberta is the world’s second largest exporter of natural gas and the fourth largest producer.
Since 1994 there has continued to be a tax on property in support of K–12 education; the difference is that the mill rate is now set by the provincial government, the money is collected by the local municipal authority and remitted to the provincial government.
Two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in North America are located in central and north-central Alberta.
Locally municipal governments and school boards are elected and operate separately.
Western Alberta is protected by the mountains and enjoys the mild temperatures brought by winter chinook winds.
The city's "heritage days" festival sees the participation of over 70 ethnic groups.
Passenger trains include Via Rail's '''Canadian''' (Toronto-Vancouver) or '''Jasper-Prince Rupert''' trains, which use the CN mainline and pass through Jasper National Park and parallel the Yellowhead Highway during at least part of their routes.
Banff, Jasper and the Rocky Mountains are visited by about three million people per year.
Should the GDP remain at an average of 2.2% for the last two quarters of 2015, Alberta's GDP should exceed $430 Billion by the end of 2015.
Another tourist destination that draws more than 650,000 visitors each year is the Drumheller Valley, located northeast of Calgary.
According to Statistics Canada, Alberta is home to the second highest proportion (two percent) of Francophones in western Canada (after Manitoba).
The Alberta badlands are located in southeastern Alberta, where the Red Deer River crosses the flat prairie and farmland, and features deep canyons and striking landforms.
Highway 2 travels northward through Fort Macleod, Calgary, Red Deer, and Edmonton.
Alberta extends for over  from north to south; its climate, therefore, varies considerably.
Alberta's economy was one of the strongest in the world, supported by the burgeoning petroleum industry and to a lesser extent, agriculture and technology.
The government of Alberta has invested its earnings wisely; as of September 30, 2013, official statistics reported nearly 500 holdings.
This was 56% higher than the national average of C$53,870 and more than twice that of some of the Atlantic provinces.
The City of Calgary is also famous for its Stampede, dubbed "The Greatest Outdoor Show on Earth".
The Foremost Formation, Oldman Formation and Dinosaur Park Formations collectively comprise the Judith River Group and are the most thoroughly studied dinosaur-bearing strata in Alberta.
Alberta is home to many large carnivores.
Her duties in Alberta are carried out by Lieutenant Governor Lois Mitchell.
Over time they differentiated into various First Nations peoples, including the Plains Indian tribes of southern Alberta such as those of the Blackfoot Confederacy and the Plains Cree, who generally lived by hunting buffalo (American bison), and the more northerly tribes such as the Woodland Cree and Chipewyan who hunted, trapped, and fished for a living.
Calgary and Edmonton centre Alberta's two census metropolitan areas, both of which have populations exceeding one million, while the province has 16 census agglomerations.
Lake Louise and Mount Alberta were also named in her honour.
