Speer was indicted on all four possible counts: first, participating in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of crime against peace; second, planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace; third, war crimes; and lastly, crimes against humanity.
After passing his exams in 1927, Speer became Tessenow's assistant, a high honor for a man of 22.
The court's judgment stated that:
According to Milch, upon hearing the message, Speer burst out, "The ''Führer'' can kiss my ass!"
Consumer goods were still being produced at nearly as high a level as during peacetime.
On April&nbsp;29, the day before committing suicide, Hitler dictated a final political testament which dropped Speer from the successor government.
Rather than increasing female labor and taking other steps to better organize German labor, as Speer favored, Sauckel advocated importing labor from the occupied nations&nbsp;– and did so, obtaining workers for (among other things) Speer's armament factories, using the most brutal methods.
On learning (through a clandestine look at the Soviet plans) that the Soviet design included two colossal figures seemingly about to overrun the German site, Speer modified his design to include a cubic mass which would check their advance, with a huge eagle on top looking down on the Soviet figures.
Although the site could not be cleared until April, Speer was successful in building the large, impressive structure in nine months.
Speer's supposed assassination plan subsequently met with some skepticism, with Speer's architectural rival Hermann Giesler sneering, "the second most powerful man in the state did not have a ladder."
This was a huge undertaking, especially as the existing Chancellery was in full operation.
He was allowed to build an ambitious garden, transforming what he initially described as a "wilderness" into what the American commander at Spandau described as "Speer's Garden of Eden".
In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for the Reich Capital with the rank of undersecretary of state in the Reich government.
By February&nbsp;1945, Speer was working to supply areas about to be occupied with food and materials to get them through the hard times ahead.
According to Speer, SS chief Heinrich Himmler tried to have him physically isolated by having Himmler's personal physician Karl Gebhardt treat him, though his "care" did not improve his health.
After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, to the architect's great excitement.
Speer considered Wolters' actions to be a "betrayal" and a "stab in the back".
At the northern end of the boulevard, Speer planned to build the ''Volkshalle'', a huge assembly hall with a dome which would have been over  high, with floor space for 180,000 people.
Hans Baur, Hitler's personal pilot, suggested, "Speer must have taken leave of his senses."
Following the publication of his bestselling books, Speer donated a considerable amount of money to Jewish charities.
The original ''Chronicle'' reached the Archives in 1983, after both Speer and Wolters had died.
Speer later said he had been shocked by the conditions there (5.7 percent of the work force died that month).
Speer hired Wolters as part of his design team, with special responsibility for the ''Prachtstrasse''.
Over these departments was a central planning committee headed by Speer, which took increasing responsibility for war production, and as time went by, for the German economy itself.
Using this order, Speer worked to persuade generals and ''Gauleiters'' to circumvent the Nero Decree and avoid needless sacrifice of personnel and destruction of industry that would be needed after the war.
Speer began his architectural studies at the University of Karlsruhe instead of a more highly acclaimed institution because the hyperinflation crisis of 1923 limited his parents' income.
On May&nbsp;15, an allied delegation arrived and asked Speer if he would be willing to provide information on the effects of the air war.
The Home Secretary, Robert Carr, allowed Speer into the country for 48 hours.
His books, most notably ''Inside the Third Reich'' (in German, ''Erinnerungen'', or ''Reminiscences'') and ''Spandau: The Secret Diaries'', provide a unique and personal look into the personalities of the Nazi era, and have become much valued by historians.
Juni, a double row of lampposts designed by Speer still stands.
The following morning, Speer left the ''Führerbunker''; Hitler curtly bade him farewell.
One of his biographers, Dan van der Vat, suggests this necessarily implies he must have still been present at Posen then, and must have heard Himmler's speech.
According to Siedler, these donations were as high as 80% of his royalties.
He was the second of three sons of Luise Máthilde Wilhelmine (Hommel) and Albert Friedrich Speer.
In ''Inside the Third Reich'', he wrote that in mid-1944, he was told by Hanke (by then ''Gauleiter'' of Lower Silesia) that the minister should never accept an invitation to inspect a concentration camp in neighbouring Upper Silesia, as "he had seen something there which he was not permitted to describe and moreover could not describe".
Speer served his full sentence, and was released on the stroke of midnight as October&nbsp;1, 1966, began.
Speer took to the prison garden for enjoyment and work, at first to do something constructive while afflicted with writer's block.
Among Speer's innovations were quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris; before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites.
After Hitler's death, Speer offered his services to the so-called Flensburg Government, headed by Hitler's successor, Karl Dönitz, and took a significant role in that short-lived regime.
Speer maintained at Nuremberg and in his memoirs that he had no knowledge of the Holocaust.
Speer also oversaw the construction of buildings for the ''Wehrmacht'' and ''Luftwaffe''.
On July 18, 1947, Speer and his six fellow prisoners, all former high officials of the Nazi regime, were flown from Nuremberg to Berlin under heavy guard.
By 1943, the Allies had gained air superiority over Germany, and bombings of German cities and industry had become commonplace.
Stalin had been particularly impressed by Speer's work in Paris, and wished to meet the "Architect of the Reich".
When Speer ordered peacetime building work suspended, the ''Gauleiters'' (Nazi Party district leaders) obtained an exemption for their pet projects.
In April, Speer's rivals for power succeeded in having him deprived of responsibility for construction, and Speer promptly sent Hitler a bitter letter, concluding with an offer of his resignation.
As such, Speer taught some of Tessenow's classes while continuing his own postgraduate studies.
Speer placed his department at the disposal of the ''Wehrmacht''.
As the war progressed, initially to great German success, Speer continued preliminary work on the Berlin and Nürnberg plans.
Speer was active in sports, taking up skiing and mountaineering.
Willy Brandt was a strong advocate of Speer's, supporting his release, sending flowers to his daughter on the day of his release, and putting an end to the de-Nazification proceedings against Speer, which could have caused his property to be confiscated.
Most days he was invited to dinner.
Speer made himself widely available to historians and other enquirers.
Among those who pledged support for Speer's sentence to be commuted were Charles de Gaulle, U.S. diplomat George Ball, former U.S. High Commissioner John J. McCloy, and former Nuremberg prosecutor Hartley Shawcross.
In 1924 when the crisis had abated, he transferred to the "much more reputable" Technical University of Munich.
With the draft memoir complete and clandestinely transmitted, Speer sought a new project.
He wanted to become a mathematician, but his father said if Speer chose this occupation he would "lead a life without money, without a position and without a future".
As film director Heinrich Breloer remarked, "Speer created a market for people who said, 'Believe me, I didn't know anything about the Holocaust.
He was fêted at the time, and long afterwards, for performing an "armaments miracle" in which German war production dramatically increased; this "miracle", however, was brought to a halt by the summer of 1943 by, among other factors, the first sustained Allied bombing of 1943.
Already he overrides all departments&nbsp;... On the whole, Speer's attitude is to the point."
Hitler instead presented Göring with the ''fait accompli'' of Speer's appointment.
This came to pass, as following the publication of ''Inside the Third Reich'', close friends, such as Wolters and sculptor Arno Breker, distanced themselves from him.
Speer leaves the questions unanswered.
In the letter, Speer states that he had been present for Himmler's presentation in Posen.
According to Fest in his biography of Speer, "Goldhagen's accusation certainly would have been more convincing" had he not placed supposed incriminating statements linking Speer with the Holocaust in quotation marks, attributed to Himmler, which were in fact invented by Goldhagen.
In 1918, the family moved permanently to their summer home Villa Speer on Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg, Heidelberg.
In appreciation for the architect's work on the Chancellery, Hitler awarded Speer the Nazi Golden Party Badge.
Speer made no mention of it in the first draft of ''Inside the Third Reich'', and it was only on the urgent advice of his publisher that he added a mention of seeing the ruins of the Central Synagogue in Berlin from his car.
This work won Speer his first national post, as Nazi Party "Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations".
Hitler instructed him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the ''Zeppelinfeld'' stadium in Nuremberg where Party rallies were held.
On April&nbsp;23, 1944, Speer went to see Hitler who agreed that "everything will stay as it was, Speer will remain the head of all German construction".
Speer's release from prison was a worldwide media event, as reporters and photographers crowded both the street outside Spandau and the lobby of the Berlin hotel where Speer spent his first hours of freedom in over 20 years.
He is truly a genius with organization."
He said little, reserving most comments for a major interview published in ''Der Spiegel'' in November&nbsp;1966, in which he again took personal responsibility for crimes of the Nazi regime.
As early as 1953, when Wolters strongly objected to Speer referring to Hitler in the memoirs draft as a criminal, Speer had predicted that were the writings to be published, he would lose a "good many friends".
If Hitler had had any friends at all, I certainly would have been one of his close friends."
Hitler merely filed the memo in his safe.
In February 1942, Hitler appointed Speer Minister of Armaments and War Production.
The  high concrete cylinder was used to measure ground subsidence as part of feasibility studies for a massive triumphal arch and other large structures proposed as part of ''Welthauptstadt Germania'', Hitler's planned postwar renewal project for the city.
Just look at the ''Führer's'' friend, he didn't know about it either.
His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle.
He found one while taking his daily exercise, walking in circles around the prison yard.
Judging Speer indispensable to the war effort, Field Marshal Erhard Milch persuaded Hitler to try to get his minister to reconsider.
A reduced sentence required the consent of all four of the occupying powers, and the Soviets adamantly opposed any such proposal.
Speer visited the ''Führerbunker'' on April&nbsp;22.
Eventually, 75,000 Jews were displaced by these measures.
In Munich, and continuing in Berlin, Speer began a close friendship, ultimately spanning over 50 years, with Rudolf Wolters, who also studied under Tessenow.
From 1939 onward, the Department used the Nuremberg Laws to evict Jewish tenants of non-Jewish landlords in Berlin, to make way for non-Jewish tenants displaced by redevelopment or bombing.
According to the minutes of a conference at ''Wehrmacht'' High Command in March&nbsp;1942, "It is only Speer's word that counts nowadays.
Hitler evinced considerable interest in Speer during the luncheon, and later told Speer that he had been looking for a young architect capable of carrying out his architectural dreams for the new Germany.
In response to Goldhagen's article, Speer had alleged that in writing ''Inside the Third Reich'', he erred in reporting an incident that happened at another conference at Posen a year later, as happening in 1943.
Upon arrival, he was detained for almost eight hours at Heathrow Airport when British immigration authorities discovered his true identity.
Speer was taken to several internment centres for Nazi officials and interrogated.
Sereny notes that Speer's original draft of his memoirs lacks the confession and Hitler's tearful reaction, and contains an explicit denial that any confession or emotional exchange took place, as had been alleged in a French magazine article.
On 1 October 1946, he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment.
As Chancellor, Hitler had a residence in the building and came by every day to be briefed by Speer and the building supervisor on the progress of the renovations.
That was the whole point of my buildings.
He can interfere in all departments.
Speer insisted that as many events as possible be held at night, both to give greater prominence to his lighting effects and to hide the individual Nazis, many of whom were overweight.
Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris.
In July&nbsp;1932, the Speers visited Berlin to help out the Party prior to the ''Reichstag'' elections.
Speer devoted much of his time and energy to reading.
Speer later concluded that Hanke must have been speaking of Auschwitz, and blamed himself for not inquiring further of Hanke or seeking information from Himmler or Hitler:
U.S. Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson, the chief U.S. prosecutor at Nuremberg, alleged, "Speer joined in planning and executing the program to dragoon prisoners of war and foreign workers into German war industries, which waxed in output while the workers waned in starvation."
Speer was born in Mannheim, into an upper-middle-class family.
However, he demanded the exclusive power to implement the Nero Decree, and Hitler signed an order to that effect.
In January&nbsp;1944, Speer fell ill with complications from an inflamed knee, and was away from the office for three months.
One evening soon after his appointment, Speer went to visit a Berlin armament factory; he found no one on the premises.
On December&nbsp;10, 1943, Speer visited the underground Mittelwerk V-2 rocket factory that used concentration camp labor.
Goebbels would note in his diary in June 1943, "Speer is still tops with the ''Führer''.
In ''Inside the Third Reich'', Speer mentions his own address to the officials (which took place earlier in the day) but does not mention Himmler's speech.
After consultation with his assistants, Speer agreed.
Meticulously calculating every meter traveled, and mapping distances to the real-world geography, he began in northern Germany, passed through Asia by a southern route before entering Siberia, then crossed the Bering Strait and continued southwards, finally ending his sentence  south of Guadalajara, Mexico.
In September&nbsp;1945, he was told that he would be tried for war crimes, and several days later, he was taken to Nuremberg and incarcerated there.
Speer managed to reach a relatively safe area near Hamburg as the Nazi regime finally collapsed, but decided on a final, risky visit to Berlin to see Hitler one more time.
Speer stated his motive was despair at realising that Hitler intended to take the German people down with him.
When the commission was completed, Speer returned to Mannheim and remained there as Hitler took office in January&nbsp;1933.
In ''Inside the Third Reich'', published before the Goldhagen article, Speer recalled that on the evening after the conference, many Nazi officials were so drunk that they needed help boarding the special train which was to take them to a meeting with Hitler.
Production would continue to increase until the second half of 1944, by which time enough equipment to supply 270 army divisions was being produced—although the ''Wehrmacht'' had only 150 divisions in the field.
Since 1967, it has served as the offices of the Royal Society.
Speer was under significant psychological pressure during this period of his life.
After the war, he was tried at Nuremberg and sentenced to 20 years in prison for his role in the Nazi regime, principally for the use of forced labor.
The cylinder is now a protected landmark and is open to the public.
Speer had formed a relationship with an Englishwoman of German origin, and was with her at the time of his death.
Speer's supporters maintained a continual call for his release.
The prisoners were taken to Spandau Prison in the British Sector of what would become West Berlin, where they would be designated by number, with Speer given Number Five.
Speer supported the German invasion of Poland and subsequent war, though he recognized that it would lead to the postponement, at the least, of his architectural dreams.
He read classic novels, travelogues, books on ancient Egypt, and biographies of such figures as Lucas Cranach, Édouard Manet, and Genghis Khan.
Hitler ordered Speer to develop plans to rebuild Berlin.
He later wrote a third book, ''Infiltration'', about the SS.
While planning these structures, Speer conceived the concept of "ruin value": that major buildings should be constructed in such a way they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins for thousands of years into the future.
By 1954, Speer had completed his memoirs, which became the basis of ''Inside the Third Reich'', and which Wolters arranged to have transcribed onto 1,100 typewritten pages.
Speer quickly became part of Hitler's inner circle; he was expected to call on Hitler in the morning for a walk or chat, to provide consultation on architectural matters, and to discuss Hitler's ideas.
He said his efforts were frustrated by the impracticability of tabun and his lack of ready access to a replacement nerve agent, and also by the unexpected construction of a tall chimney that put the air intake out of reach.
Following his release from Spandau, Speer presented to the German Federal Archives an edited version of the ''Chronicle'', stripped by Wolters of any mention of the Jews.
Tooze further contends that an insufficiently challenged Speer "mythology" (partly fostered by Speer himself through politically motivated, tendentious use of statistics and other propaganda) had led many historians to assign Speer far more credit for the increases in armaments production than was warranted and give insufficient consideration to the "highly political" function of the so-called armaments miracle.
In his 2006 book, ''The Wages of Destruction'', Tooze, following Gitta Sereny, argues that Speer's ideological commitment to the Nazi cause was greater than he claimed.
According to Speer, while he was successful in this debate, Hitler had also won, "because he wanted and needed me back in his corner, and he got me".
Speer overcame these difficulties by centralizing power over the war economy in himself.
Despite this opposition, the two married in Berlin on 28 August 1928; seven years were to elapse before Margarete Speer was invited to stay at her in-laws' home.
During his absence, his political rivals (mainly Göring, and Martin Bormann), attempted to have some of his powers permanently transferred to them.
Speer biographer Gitta Sereny stated that, due to his workload, Speer would not have been personally aware of such activities.
The ''Arbeitsstab'''s recommendations served as the basis of the postwar redevelopment plans in many cities, and ''Arbeitsstab'' members became prominent in the rebuilding.
During the Chancellery project, the pogrom of Kristallnacht took place.
In October 1971, American historian Erich Goldhagen published an article arguing that Speer was present for Himmler's speech.
On March 19, 1945, Hitler issued his Nero Decree, ordering a scorched earth policy in both Germany and the occupied territories.
Measuring the path's distance carefully, Speer set out to walk the distance from Berlin to Heidelberg.
When Speer's father saw the model for the new Berlin, he said to his son, "You've all gone completely insane."
Speer's attorney, Dr. Hans Flächsner, presented Speer as an artist thrust into political life, who had always remained a non-ideologue and who had been promised by Hitler that he could return to architecture after the war.
Speer's wife and friends managed to have his case transferred to his friend Dr. Karl Brandt, and he slowly recovered.
Speer wrote: "There is no doubt – I was present as Himmler announced on October 6, 1943, that all Jews would be killed."
Speer described this as his most beautiful work, and as the only one that stood the test of time.
Speer's next major assignment was as liaison to the Berlin building trades for Paul Troost's renovation of the Chancellery.
In ''Inside the Third Reich'', Speer recounts his meeting with Hitler and his reluctance to take ministerial office, saying that he only did so because Hitler commanded it.
Wolters wondered that Speer did not now "walk through life in a hair shirt, distributing his fortune among the victims of National Socialism, forswear all the vanities and pleasures of life and live on locusts and wild honey".
In 1940, Joseph Stalin proposed that Speer pay a visit to Moscow.
Speer considered himself an outcast among his fellow prisoners for his acceptance of responsibility at Nuremberg.
In the same year he appeared in the television programme ''The World at War''.
The two men found much in common: Hitler spoke of Speer as a "kindred spirit" for whom he had always maintained "the warmest human feelings".
The young, ambitious architect was dazzled by his rapid rise and close proximity to Hitler, which guaranteed him a flood of commissions from the government and from the highest ranks of the Party.
However, as a result of an offer from a sympathetic orderly, Speer was able to have his writings, which eventually amounted to 20,000 sheets, sent to Wolters.
Speer received, from Hitler Youth leader and later fellow Spandau prisoner Baldur von Schirach, the Golden Hitler Youth Honor Badge with oak leaves.
Another legacy was the ''Arbeitsstab Wiederaufbau zerstörter Städte'' (Working group on Reconstruction of destroyed cities), authorized by Speer in 1943 to rebuild bombed German cities to make them more livable in the age of the automobile.
In mid-1922, Speer began courting Margarete (Margret) Weber (1905–1987), the daughter of a successful craftsman who employed 50 workers.
Speer also made plans to reconstruct Berlin on a grand scale, with huge buildings, wide boulevards, and a reorganized transportation system.
Speer was Adolf Hitler's chief architect before assuming ministerial office.
No buildings designed by Speer during the Nazi era are extant in Berlin, other than the ''Schwerbelastungskörper'' (heavy load bearing body), built around 1941.
Few women were employed in the factories, which were running only one shift.
Speer was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, though he was acquitted on the other two counts.
The prisoners were forbidden to write memoirs, and mail was severely limited and censored.
In response, after considerable research in the German Federal Archives in Koblenz, Speer said he had left Posen around noon (long before Himmler's speech) to journey to Hitler's headquarters at Rastenburg.
Tessenow was less impressed, suggesting to Speer that he should have taken nine years over the project.
At least one original memo from Speer so inquiring still exists, as does the ''Chronicle'' of the Department's activities, kept by Wolters.
He then expanded his idea into a worldwide journey, visualizing the places he was "traveling" through while walking the path around the prison yard.
In January&nbsp;1938, Hitler asked Speer to build a new Reich Chancellery on the same site as the existing structure, and said he needed it for urgent foreign policy reasons no later than his next New Year's reception for diplomats on January&nbsp;10, 1939.
Later that day, Hitler appointed Speer as Todt's successor to all of his posts.
Headed by Wolters, the working group took a possible military defeat into their calculations.
Speer found himself unable to re-establish his relationship with his children, even with his son Albert, who had also become an architect.
Speer, who had arrived in Rastenburg the previous evening, had accepted Todt's offer to fly with him to Berlin, but had canceled some hours before takeoff (Speer stated in his memoirs that the cancellation was because of exhaustion from travel and a late-night meeting with Hitler).
But the fact is that none of it happened; our witness to this is Speer himself."
In spite of these losses, German production of tanks more than doubled in 1943, production of planes increased by 80 percent, and production time for ''Kriegsmarine'' submarines was reduced from one year to two months.
The plans centered on a three-mile long grand boulevard running from north to south, which Speer called the ''Prachtstrasse'', or Street of Magnificence; he also referred to it as the "North-South Axis".
Part of the land for the boulevard was to be obtained by consolidating Berlin's railway system.
His father gave him a job as manager of the elder Speer's properties.
Even to the end of his life, Speer continued to question his actions under Hitler.
The view of Speer as an unpolitical "miracle man" is challenged by Columbia historian Adam Tooze.
Little remains of Speer's personal architectural works, other than the plans and photographs.
He told Hitler in no uncertain terms that without Silesia, "the war is lost."
Hitler seemed calm and somewhat distracted, and the two had a long, disjointed conversation in which the dictator defended his actions and informed Speer of his intent to commit suicide and have his body burned.
Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of Nazi Germany, just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of those civilizations.
Hitler sent Milch to Speer with a message not addressing the dispute but instead stating that he still regarded Speer as highly as ever.
This huge work was able to hold 340,000 people.
At the southern end of the avenue a great triumphal arch would rise; it would be almost  high, and able to fit the Arc de Triomphe inside its opening.
The structure included a "Marble Gallery" 146 metres long, almost twice the length of the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles.
It also made Speer a member of the ''Reichstag'', though the body by then had little effective power.
In 1931, Speer surrendered his position as Tessenow's assistant and moved to Mannheim.
Backed by Hitler's strong support (the dictator stated, "Speer, I'll sign anything that comes from you"), he divided the armament field according to weapon system, with experts rather than civil servants overseeing each department.
On February 8, 1942, Minister of Armaments Fritz Todt died in a plane crash shortly after taking off from Hitler's eastern headquarters at Rastenburg.
In 1925 he transferred again, this time to the Technical University of Berlin where he studied under Heinrich Tessenow, whom Speer greatly admired.
When Speer sought the appointment of Hanke as a labor czar to optimize the use of German labor, Hitler, under the influence of Martin Bormann, instead appointed Fritz Sauckel.
