In 1898 he went back to Paris to write a PhD dissertation on ''The Religious Philosophy of Kant'' at the Sorbonne, and to study in earnest with Widor.
Though we cannot perfect the endeavour we should strive for it: the will-to-live constantly renews itself, for it is both an evolutionary necessity and a spiritual phenomenon.
In nature one form of life must always prey upon another.
He also corresponded with composer Clara Faisst and the two became good friends.
Therefore, Schweitzer argues that Paul is the only theologian who does not claim that Christians can have an experience of "being-in-God."
(Revelation 1:3)  "And he said to me, 'These words are faithful and true'; and the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent His angel to show to His bond-servants the things which must soon take place."
In ''The Quest of the Historical Jesus'', Schweitzer notes the  passage "Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and heed the things which are written in it; for the time is near."
In June 1912, he married Helene Bresslau, municipal inspector for orphans and daughter of the Jewish pan-Germanist historian Harry Bresslau.
Sir Donald Tovey dedicated his conjectural completion of Bach's ''Die Kunst der Fuge'' (Art of the Fugue) to Schweitzer.
He showed that the image of Jesus had changed with the times and outlooks of the various authors, and gave his own synopsis and interpretation of the previous century's findings.
He could easily have obtained a place in a German Evangelical mission, but wished to follow the original call despite the doctrinal difficulties.
Schweitzer continues writing in ''The Quest of the Historical Jesus'' that it is totally unreasonable to think that "coming quickly", "near", and "soon" could mean hundreds of years, much less, thousands of years in the future.
In the first nine months, he and his wife had about 2,000 patients to examine, some travelling many days and hundreds of kilometers to reach him.
His "The Problem of Peace" lecture is considered one of the best speeches ever given.
Such was the theory which Schweitzer sought to put into practice in his own life.
Chinua Achebe has quoted Schweitzer as saying: "The African is indeed my brother but my junior brother," which Achebe criticized him for, though Achebe seems to acknowledge that Schweitzer's use of the word "brother" at all was, for a European of the early 20th century, an unusual expression of human solidarity between whites and blacks.
In mid-December 1935 he began to record for Columbia Records on the organ of All Hallows, Barking-by-the-Tower (London).
During 1934 and 1935 he resided in Britain, delivering the Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh University, and those on ''Religion in Modern Civilization'' at Oxford and London.
Widor, deeply impressed, agreed to teach Schweitzer without fee, and a great and influential friendship thus began.
Then at his suggestion the sessions were transferred to the church of Ste Aurélie in Strasbourg, on a mid-18th-century organ by Johann Andreas Silbermann (brother of Gottfried), an organ-builder greatly revered by Bach, which had been restored by the Lorraine organ-builder Frédéric Härpfer shortly before the First World War.
The onset of famine and a dysentery epidemic created fresh problems.
In the Preface to ''Civilization and Ethics'' (1923) he argued that Western philosophy from Descartes to Kant had set out to explain the objective world expecting that humanity would be found to have a special meaning within it.
Rather, Paul uses the phrase "being-in-Christ" to illustrate how Jesus is a mediator between the Christian community and God.
The Nobel Peace Prize of 1952 was awarded to Dr Albert Schweitzer.
On 23 April 1957, Schweitzer made his "Declaration of Conscience" speech; it was broadcast to the world over Radio Oslo, pleading for the abolition of nuclear weapons.
One of Schweitzer's major arguments in ''The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle'' is that Paul's mysticism, marked by his phrase "being in Christ", gives the clue to the whole of Pauline theology.
His grave, on the banks of the Ogooué River, is marked by a cross he made himself.
On the other hand, a more developed form of mysticism can be found in the Greek mystery-cults that were popular in 1st CE society.
He also noted the lack of Africans trained to be skilled workers.
Additional medical staff, nurse (Miss) Kottmann and Dr. Victor Nessmann, joined him in 1924, and Dr. Mark Lauterberg in 1925; the growing hospital was manned by native orderlies.
This compromise arose after the Protestant Reformation and the Thirty Years War.
He spent his childhood in the Alsatian village of Gunsbach, where his father, the local Lutheran-Evangelical pastor of the EPCAAL, taught him how to play music.
There was a further period of work in 1935.
In 1905 Widor and Schweitzer were among the six musicians who founded the Paris Bach Society, a choir dedicated to performing J.S.
Schweitzer felt that St. Paul clearly believed in the immediacy of the "Second Coming of Jesus", in stark contrast to modern organized Christianity.
The prize was first awarded on 29 May 2011 to Eugen Drewermann and the physician couple Rolf and Raphaela Maibach in Königsfeld im Schwarzwald, where Schweitzer's former residence now houses the Albert-Schweitzer Museum.
Schweitzer also studied piano under Isidor Philipp, head of the piano department at the Paris Conservatory.
Schweitzer concludes that the 1st-century theology, originating in the lifetimes of those who first followed Jesus, is totally incompatible with modern Christian belief.
He had originally conducted trials for recordings for HMV on the organ of the old Queen's Hall in London.
Schweitzer's first language was the Alsatian dialect of German.
He also studied piano at that time with Marie Jaëll.
One of his notable pupils was conductor and composer Hans Münch.
The information that each capsule collects is unique, unlike the identical out-of-polarity information generated from the figure-8 in a regular mid-side.
According to some authors, Schweitzer's thought, and specifically his development of reverence for life, was influenced by Indian religious thought and in particular the Jain principle of ahimsa, or non-violence Albert Schweitzer has noted the contribution of Indian influence in his book ''Indian Thought and Its Development'':
Widor had not grown up with knowledge of the old Lutheran hymns.
They were works of devotional contemplation in which the musical design corresponded to literary ideas, conceived visually.
The Albert Schweitzer Fellowship was founded in 1940 by Schweitzer to unite U.S. supporters in filling the gap in support for his Hospital when his European supply lines was cut off by war, and continues to support the Lambaréné Hospital today.
Trensz conducted experiments showing that the non-amoebic strain of dysentery was caused by a paracholera vibrion (facultative anaerobic bacteria).
A developed form of mysticism is attained when the "conception of the universal is reached and a man reflects upon his relation to the totality of being and to Being in itself."
In contemplation of the will-to-life, respect for the life of others becomes the highest principle and the defining purpose of humanity.
Schweitzer saw many operas of Richard Wagner in Strasbourg (under Otto Lohse) and in 1896 he managed to afford a visit to the Bayreuth to see Wagner's ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' and ''Parsifal'' which deeply impressed him.
From 1939–48 he stayed in Lambaréné, unable to go back to Europe because of the war.
Schweitzer was more likely speaking in terms of modern civilization than of class relationship of man; this would be consistent with his later statement that "The time for speaking of older and younger brothers has passed.
And according to a visitor, Dr. Gaine Cannon, of Balsam Grove, N.C., the old, dilapidated piano-organ was still being played by Dr. Schweitzer in 1962 and stories told that "his fingers were still lively" on the old instrument at 88 years of age.
In The Quest of the Historical Jesus, Schweitzer observes the Bible contradicting the possibility of important events that never took place and never can take place as they are described; Jesus specifically states that we are to "not seal up the words of the prophecy" and promises that some of his listeners as well as the high priest at his trial would be alive to see him return to the Earth.
He noted that in the gospel of Mark, Jesus speaks of a "tribulation", with his coming in the clouds with great power and glory" (St Mark), and states when it will happen: "This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled" (St Matthew, 24:34) (or, "have taken place" (Luke 21:32))
O'Brian returned to the United States and founded the Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Foundation (HOBY).
Primitive mysticism "has not yet risen to a conception of the universal, and is still confined to naive views of earthly and super-earthly, temporal and eternal."
S. Bach''), which were published in 1908 and translated in English by Ernest Newman in 1911.
At first he regarded his new life as a renunciation of his art, and fell out of practice: but after some time he resolved to study and learn by heart the works of Bach, Mendelssohn, Widor, César Franck, and Max Reger systematically.
In 1900, with the completion of his licentiate in theology, he was ordained as curate, and that year he witnessed the Oberammergau Passion Play.
Schweitzer wrote, "True philosophy must start from the most immediate and comprehensive fact of consciousness, and this may be formulated as follows: 'I am life which wills to live, and I exist in the midst of life which wills to live.'"
Much of the building work was carried out with the help of local people and patients.
There he also received instruction in piano and counterpoint from professor Gustav Jacobsthal, and associated closely with Ernest Munch (the brother of his former teacher), organist of St William church, who was also a passionate admirer of J.S.
In 1893 he played for the French organist Charles-Marie Widor (at Saint-Sulpice, Paris), for whom Johann Sebastian Bach's organ-music contained a mystic sense of the eternal.
Having circulated a questionnaire among players and organ-builders in several European countries, he produced a very considered report.
In the following year he became provisional Principal of the Theological College of Saint Thomas (from which he had just graduated), and in 1903 his appointment was made permanent.
He and Widor collaborated on a new edition of Bach's organ works, with detailed analysis of each work in three languages (English, French, German).
"And behold, I am coming quickly.
In 1925-6, new hospital buildings were constructed, and also a ward for white patients, so that the site became like a village.
The technique has since been used to record many modern instruments.
Scientific materialism (advanced by Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin) portrayed an objective world process devoid of ethics, entirely an expression of the will-to-live.
Then, working as medical assistant and assistant-pastor in Strasbourg, he advanced his project on The Philosophy of Civilization, which had occupied his mind since 1900.
When World War I broke out in summer of 1914, Schweitzer and his wife, German citizens in a French colony, were put under supervision at Lambaréné by the French military, where Schweitzer continued his work.
Additionally, he argues that this view of a "union with the divinity, brought about by efficacious ceremonies, is found even in quite primitive religions."
The site was nearly 200 miles (14 days by raft) upstream from the mouth of the Ogooué at Port Gentil (Cape Lopez) (and so accessible to external communications), but downstream of most tributaries, so that internal communications within Gabon converged towards Lambaréné.
Even in his study of medicine, and through his clinical course, Schweitzer pursued the ideal of the philosopher-scientist.
Recordings of Schweitzer playing the music of Bach are available on CD.
The two remaining volumes, on ''The World-View of Reverence for Life '' and a fourth on the Civilized State, were never completed.
He completed his theology degree in 1899 and published his PhD thesis at the University of Tübingen in 1899.
Paul’s imminent eschatology (from his background in Jewish Eschatology) causes him to believe that the kingdom of God has not yet come and that Christians are now living in the time of Christ.
Three years after the end of World War II, in 1948, he returned for the first time to Europe and kept traveling back and forth (and once to the USA) as long as he was able.
Schweitzer claims that this form of mysticism is more intellectual and can be found "among the Brahmans and in the Buddha, in Platonism, in Stoicism, in Spinoza, Schopenhauer, and Hegel."
"All these things shall come upon this generation" (Matthew 23:36).
"Surely I come quickly" (Revelation 22:20).
Everything was heavily decayed, and building and doctoring progressed together for months.
His cousin Anne-Marie Schweitzer Sartre was the mother of Jean-Paul Sartre.
He was also a chevalier of the Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.
The hospital suffered from squalor and was without modern amenities, and Schweitzer had little contact with the local people.
However, the committee of this French Missionary Society was not ready to accept his offer, considering his Lutheran theology to be "incorrect".
He was there again from 1929 to 1932.
After briefly occupying a shed formerly used as a chicken hut, in autumn 1913 they built their first hospital of corrugated iron, with two 13-foot rooms (consulting room and operating theatre) and with a dispensary and sterilising room in spaces below the broad eaves.
A rift opened between this world-view, as material knowledge, and the life-view, understood as Will, expressed in the pessimist philosophies from Schopenhauer onward.
Schweitzer contrasts Paul’s "realistic" dying and rising with Christ to the "symbolism" of Hellenism.
In 1899 Schweitzer became a deacon at the church of Saint Nicholas in Strasbourg.
At this time Schweitzer, born a German citizen, had his parents' former (pre-1871) French citizenship reinstated and became a French citizen.
During his return visits to his home village of Gunsbach, Schweitzer continued to make use of the family house, which after his death became an Archive and Museum to his life and work.
'''Albert Schweitzer''', OM (14 January 1875&nbsp;– 4 September 1965) was a French-German theologian, organist, philosopher, and physician.
The peer-supporting lifelong network of "Schweitzer Fellows for Life" numbered over 2,000 members in 2008, and is growing by nearly 1,000 every four years.
This house is now maintained as a Schweitzer museum.
By comparison, his contemporary Sir Albert Cook in Uganda had been training nurses and midwives since the 1910s and had published a manual of midwifery in the local language of Luganda.
Everyone can have their own Lambaréné."
Blessed is he who heeds the words of the prophecy of this book."
The fact that Christianity started as a Jewish apocalyptic movement is evidenced by the teachings of the Historical Jesus concerning the end of days.
Joseph also returned.
He envisaged instruments in which the French late-romantic full-organ sound should work integrally with the English and German romantic reed pipes, and with the classical Alsace Silbermann organ resources and baroque flue pipes, all in registers regulated (by stops) to access distinct voices in fugue or counterpoint capable of combination without loss of distinctness: different voices singing together in the same music.
Christ-mysticism holds the field until God-mysticism becomes possible, which is in the near future.
Three more, to contain the Chorale Preludes with Schweitzer's analyses, were to be worked on in Africa: but these were never completed, perhaps because for him they were inseparable from his evolving theological thought.
He received the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize for his philosophy of "Reverence for Life", expressed in many ways, but most famously in founding and sustaining the Albert Schweitzer Hospital in Lambaréné, now in Gabon, west central Africa (then French Equatorial Africa).
He was born in the province of Alsace-Lorraine and although that region had been annexed by the German Empire four years earlier, and remained a German possession until 1918, he considered himself French and wrote mostly in French.
He became a welcome guest at the Wagners' home, Wahnfried.
After baptism, the Christian is continually renewed throughout his or her lifetime due to participation in the dying and rising with Christ (most notably through the Sacraments).
In 1906 he published ''Geschichte der Leben-Jesu-Forschung'' ("History of Life-of-Jesus research").
Schweitzer was one of colonialism's harshest critics.
It could then affirm a new Enlightenment through spiritual rationalism, by giving priority to volition or ethical will as the primary meaning of life.
Later in life he became more convinced that "modern civilization" was actually inferior to or the same as previous cultures in terms of morality.
Instead, he conceives of sonship to God as "mediated and effected by means of the mystical union with Christ."
Schweitzer died on 4 September 1965 at his beloved hospital in Lambaréné, Gabon.
Muntz and Friedman, both Holocaust survivors, to record his work and daily life at the hospital.
From 1893 Schweitzer studied Protestant theology at the Kaiser Wilhelm University in Strasbourg.
His medical degree dissertation was another work on the historical Jesus, ''The Psychiatric Study of Jesus''.
In January 1937, he returned again to Lambaréné and continued working there throughout World War II.
Today ASF helps large numbers of young Americans in health-related professional fields find or create "their own Lambaréné" in the U.S. or internationally.
Schweitzer's pedal piano was still in use at Lambaréné in 1946.
His pamphlet "The Art of Organ Building and Organ Playing in Germany and France" (1906, republished with an appendix on the state of the organ-building industry in 1927) effectively launched the 20th-century ''Orgelbewegung'', which turned away from romantic extremes and rediscovered baroque principles—although this sweeping reform movement in organ building eventually went further than Schweitzer himself had intended.
"Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and heed the things which are written in it; for the time is near."
In the Schweitzer method, the figure-8 is replaced by two small diaphragm condenser microphones pointed directly away from each other.
On the other hand, the Hellenist "lives on the store of experience which he acquired in the initiation" and is not continually affected by a shared communal experience.
In 1922, he delivered the Dale Memorial Lectures in Oxford University, and from these in the following year appeared Volumes I and II of his great work, ''The Decay and Restoration of Civilization'' and ''Civilization and Ethics''.
The exposition of these ideas, encouraged by Widor and Munch, became Schweitzer's last task, and appeared in the masterly study ''J.
His contributions to the interpretation of Pauline Christianity are noteworthy because they concern the role of Paul's mysticism of "being in Christ" as primary in importance rather than the secondary doctrine of Justification by Faith.
On departure for Lambaréné in 1913 he was presented with a pedal piano, a piano with pedal attachments (to operate like an organ pedal-keyboard).
Schweitzer developed a technique for recording the performances of Bach's music.
Later Dr. Trensz replaced Nessmann, and Martha Lauterberg and Hans Muggenstorm joined them.
In 1955 he was made an honorary member of the Order of Merit by Queen Elizabeth II.
Rather than reading justification by faith as the main topic of Pauline thought, which has been the most popular argument set forward by Martin Luther, Schweitzer argues that Paul's emphasis was on the mystical union with God by "being in Christ."
In 1957 and 1958 he broadcast four speeches over Radio Oslo which were published in ''Peace or Atomic War''.
Respect for life, overcoming coarser impulses and hollow doctrines, leads the individual to live in the service of other people and of every living creature.
In 1923 the family moved to Königsfeld im Schwarzwald, Baden-Württemberg, where he was building a house for the family.
Saint Paul spoke of the "last times": "Brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none" (1 Corinthians 7:29); "God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son" (Hebrews 1:2); "There be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matthew 16:28) (or, "until they see that the kingdom of God has come with power" (Mark 9:1); or, "till they see the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:27).)
Schweitzer's interpretative approach greatly influenced the modern understanding of Bach's music.
His life was portrayed in the 1952 movie ''Il est minuit, Docteur Schweitzer'', starring Pierre Fresnay as Albert Schweitzer and Jeanne Moreau as his nurse Marie.
In 1917, exhausted by over four years' work and by tropical anaemia, they were taken to Bordeaux and interned first in Garaison and then from March 1918 in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence.
Not only did he preach he would rise from the grave, but that he would also ascend to the Heaven and one day return to judge and rule over the world, saying that no one, including himself, knew the exact time of his return, but it would be before the end of his generation.
Under this title the book became famous in the English-speaking world.
And he said to me, "Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near" (Revelation 22:6, 7, 10, 12).
This book, which established his reputation, was first translated into English by William Montgomery and published in 1910 as ''The Quest of the Historical Jesus''.
In addition to injuries, he was often treating severe sandflea and crawcraw sores, ''framboesia'' (yaws), tropical eating sores, heart disease, tropical dysentery, tropical malaria, sleeping sickness, leprosy, fevers, strangulated hernias, necrosis, abdominal tumours and chronic constipation and nicotine poisoning, while also attempting to deal with deliberate poisonings, fetishism and fear of cannibalism among the Mbahouin.
(Revelation 1:3) Similarly in St Peter: "Christ .. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you" (1 Peter 1:20), and "But the end of all things is at hand" (1 Peter 4:7).
In spring 1913, he and his wife set off to establish a hospital (Albert Schweitzer Hospital) near an already existing mission post.
In a sermon that he preached on 6 January 1905, before he had told anyone of his plans to dedicate the rest of his life to work as a doctor in Africa, he said:
Built especially for the tropics, it was delivered by river in a huge dug-out canoe to Lambaréné, packed in a zinc-lined case.
His mother-tongue was Alsatian German.
For Schweitzer, mankind had to accept that objective reality is ethically neutral.
"Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and heed the things which are written in it; for the time is near" (Revelation 1:3).
A second edition was published in 1953 followed by a republished copy by The Johns Hopkins University Press with the addition of a Foreword by Jaroslav Pelikan in 1998.
During its preparation he became a friend of Cosima Wagner then resident in Strasbourg), with whom he had many theological and musical conversations, exploring his view of Bach's descriptive music, and playing the major Chorale Preludes for her at the Temple Neuf.
Mankind had to choose to create the moral structures of civilization: the world-view must derive from the life-view, not vice versa.
Her father, Charles Schweitzer, was the older brother of Albert Schweitzer's father, Louis Théophile.
Even so, Schweitzer found many instances in world religions and philosophies in which the principle was denied, not least in the European Middle Ages, and in the Indian Brahminic philosophy.
For instance, he thought that Gabonese independence came too early, without adequate education or accommodation to local circumstances.
One of those, Roslï Näf, assisted him for three years before returning to Europe to work with the Red Cross during World War II.
Although several attempts have been made to restore and re-air the film, all access has been denied.
Known as "The Schweitzer Technique", it is a slight improvement on what is commonly known as mid-side.
In 1957, Schweitzer was one of the founders of The Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy.
Paul stands high above primitive mysticism, due to his intellectual writings, but never speaks of being one with God or being in God.
Another major difference between Paul's "realism" and Hellenistic "symbolism" is the exclusive nature of the former and the inclusive nature of the latter.
These recordings were made in the course of a fortnight in October 1936.
Jaroslav Pelikan, in his Forward to ''The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle,'' points out that:
Weeks prior to his death, an American film crew was allowed to visit Schweitzer and Drs.
In ''The Quest'', Schweitzer reviewed all former work on the "historical Jesus" back to the late 18th century.
The on-axis microphone is often a large diaphragm condenser.
He studied organ in Mulhouse from 1885 to 1893 with Eugène Munch, organist at the Protestant cathedral, who inspired Schweitzer with his profound enthusiasm for the music of the German composer Richard Wagner.
The film ''The Legacy of Albert Schweitzer'', narrated by Henry Fonda, was produced by Warner Brothers and aired once.
He refused to attend a committee to inquire into his doctrine, but met each committee member personally and was at last accepted.
Drug advances for sleeping sickness included Germanin and tryparsamide.
An ethical human strives to escape from this contradiction so far as possible.
Then a single cardioid microphone is placed on axis, bisecting the figure-8 pattern.
The mid-side sees a figure-8 microphone pointed off-axis, perpendicular to the sound source.
At the Mulhouse Gymnasium he received his "Abitur" (the certificate at the end of secondary education) in 1893.
Schweitzer was a vegetarian.
Gradually his opinions and concepts became acknowledged, not only in Europe, but worldwide.
S. Bach: Le Musicien-Poète'', written in French and published in 1905.
This provided the basis for the ''International Regulations for Organ Building''.
In 1909 he addressed the ''Third Congress of the International Society of Music'' at Vienna on the subject.
Schweitzer, the pastor's son, grew up in this exceptional environment of religious tolerance, and developed the belief that true Christianity should always work towards a unity of faith and purpose.
Life and love are rooted in this same principle, in a personal spiritual relationship to the universe.
However, human consciousness holds an awareness of, and sympathy for, the will of other beings to live.
Schweitzer explains that Paul focused on the idea of fellowship with the divine being through the "realistic" dying and rising with Christ rather than the "symbolic" Hellenistic act of becoming like Christ through deification.
He maintained that the life of Jesus must be interpreted in the light of Jesus' own convictions, which reflected late Jewish eschatology.
", and his discussion of the modernization of "primeval" societies.
Long disputed, the predominantly German-speaking region of Alsace or Elsass was acquired by France in 1648 with the Treaty of Westphalia; was (re)annexed by Germany in 1871; after World War I, it reverted to France.
In 1899 he astonished Widor by explaining figures and motifs in Bach's Chorale Preludes as painter-like tonal and rhythmic imagery illustrating themes from the words of the hymns on which they were based.
Here he often met with the elderly Aristide Cavaillé-Coll.
Schweitzer, who insisted that the score should show Bach's notation with no additional markings, wrote the commentaries for the Preludes and Fugues, and Widor those for the Sonatas and Concertos: six volumes were published in 1912–14.
Ethics themselves proceed from the need to respect the wish of other beings to exist as one does towards oneself.
Schweitzer's recordings of organ-music, and his innovative recording technique, are described separately below.
In 1912, now armed with a medical degree, Schweitzer made a definite proposal to go as a medical doctor to work at his own expense in the Paris Missionary Society's mission at Lambaréné on the Ogooué river, in what is now Gabon, in Africa (then a French colony).
Schweitzer's wife, Helene Schweitzer, was an anaesthetist for surgical operations.
In July 1918, after being transferred to his home in Alsace, he was a free man again.
