The use of Mercury for alchemy is first documented in the 3rd– or 4th–century ''Arthashastra''.
Mary is known for a number of improvements on alchemy equipment and tools as well as novel techniques in chemistry.
Translations of the time included the Turba Philosophorum, and the works of Avicenna and al-Razi.
‘black earth’, as opposed to red desert sand).
The introduction of alchemy to Latin Europe may be dated to 11 February 1144, with the completion of Robert of Chester's translation of the Arabic ''Book of the Composition of Alchemy''.
Traditional medicine can use the concept of the transmutation of natural substances, using pharmacological or a combination of pharmacological and spiritual techniques.
In the last hundred years, alchemists have been portrayed in a magical and spagyric role in fantasy fiction, film, television, novels, comics and video games.
There were important overlaps between practitioners, and trying to classify them into alchemists, chemists and craftsmen is anachronistic.
Despite this split, which von Franz believes has existed since the Western traditions' origin in a mix of Greek philosophy that was mixed with Egyptian and Mesopotamian technology, numerous sources have stressed an integration of esoteric and exoteric approaches to alchemy as far back as Bolus of Mendes's 3rd-century&nbsp; ''On Physical and Mystical Matters'' ().
Trustworthy scholarship on Indian alchemy must now take the findings of this work into account.
Their cryptic allusions and symbolism led to wide variations in interpretation of the art.
In the 19th-century revival of alchemy, the two most seminal figures were Mary Anne Atwood and Ethan Allen Hitchcock, who independently published similar works regarding spiritual alchemy.
These brought with them many new words to the European vocabulary for which there was no previous Latin equivalent.
After &nbsp;400, Greek alchemical writers occupied themselves solely in commenting on the works of these predecessors.
As such, the Classical elements appear in alchemical writings, as do the seven Classical planets and the corresponding seven metals of antiquity.
By the 1740s, "alchemy" was now restricted to the realm of gold making, leading to the popular belief that alchemists were charlatans, and the tradition itself nothing more than a fraud.
Pope John XXII's 1317 edict, ''Spondent quas non exhibent'' forbade the false promises of transmutation made by pseudo-alchemists.
Reliable scholarship on Indian alchemy has been advanced in a major way by the publication of ''The Alchemical Body'' by David Gordon White.
The science historian, Paul Kraus, wrote:
A large collection of books on alchemy is kept in the Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica in Amsterdam.
By the end of the 13th century, alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of belief.
Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoism and Indian alchemy with the Dharmic faiths, whereas Western alchemy developed its own philosophical system that was largely independent of, but influenced by, various Western religions.
''Literary alchemy'' appears throughout the history of English literature from Shakespeare to J. K. Rowling.
Others authors such as Komarios, and Chymes, we only know through fragments of text.
This approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 18th and 19th centuries, based on revolutionary discoveries of Lavoisier and John Dalton.
The practical, however, confirmed the theoretical thought experiment, and Bacon advocated its uses in natural science and medicine.
Boyle would note the place in which the experiment was carried out, the wind characteristics, the position of the Sun and Moon, and the barometer reading, all just in case they proved to be relevant.
In the late 15th century, Marsilo Ficino translated the Corpus Hermeticum and the works of Plato into Latin.
In order to protect the developing science of modern chemistry from the negative censure of which alchemy was being subjected, academic writers during the scientific Enlightenment attempted, for the sake of survival, to separate and divorce the "new" chemistry from the "old" practices of alchemy.
Concepts were imported from Neoplatonism and earlier Greek cosmology.
Transmutation of lead into gold is presented as an analogy for personal transmutation, purification, and perfection.
His writing portrayed alchemy as a sort of terrestrial astronomy in line with the Hermetic axiom ''As above so below''.
Whereas European alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of base metals into noble metals, Chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to medicine.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, focusing on the esoteric, scholars, such as George Calian and Anna Marie Roos, who question the reading of Principe and Newman, interpret these same decknamen as spiritual, religious, or psychological concepts.
Common aims were chrysopoeia, the transmutation of "base metals" (e.g., lead) into "noble" ones (particularly gold); the creation of an elixir of immortality; the creation of panaceas able to cure any disease; and the development of an alkahest, a universal solvent.
In particular, they wrote refutations against the idea of the transmutation of metals.
Several women figure in the earliest history of alchemy.
", which has contributed to a merger of magic and alchemy in popular thought.
According to Aristotle, each element had a sphere to which it belonged and to which it would return if left undisturbed.
The efforts of the translators were succeeded by that of the encyclopaedists.
Thus, Jabir theorized, by rearranging the qualities of one metal, a different metal would result.
The water-bath, also known as Bain-Marie is said to have been invented by or at least improved by her.
Alchemy has had a long-standing relationship with art, seen both in alchemical texts and in mainstream entertainment.
In the eyes of a variety of esoteric and Hermetic practitioners, alchemy is fundamentally spiritual.
From the time shortly after his death through to the 15th century, more than 28 alchemical tracts were misattributed to him, a common practice giving rise to his reputation as an accomplished alchemist.
Their work was guided by Hermetic principles related to magic, mythology, and religion.
Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the late 16th century, famously received and sponsored various alchemists at his court in Prague, including Dee and his associate Edward Kelley.
The Medieval Latin form was influenced by Greek ''chymeia'' (χυμεία) meaning ‘mixture’ and referring to pharmaceutical chemistry.
Other early writings are found in the Jaina medical treatise ''Kalyāṇakārakam'' of Ugrāditya, written in South India in the early 9th century.
From the 9th to 14th centuries, alchemical theories faced criticism from a variety of practical Muslim chemists, including Alkindus, Abū al-Rayhān al-Bīrūnī, Avicenna and Ibn Khaldun.
The history of alchemy has become a significant and recognized subject of academic study.
Buddhist texts from the 2nd to 5th centuries mention the transmutation of base metals to gold.
His name is derived from the god Thoth and his Greek counterpart Hermes.
Though better known for angel summoning, divination, and his role as astrologer, cryptographer, and consultant to Queen Elizabeth I, Dee's alchemical ''Monas Hieroglyphica'', written in 1564 was his most popular and influential work.
Institutions involved in this research include The Chymistry of Isaac Newton project at Indiana University, the University of Exeter Centre for the Study of Esotericism (EXESESO), the European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism (ESSWE), and the University of Amsterdam's Sub-department for the History of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents.
Initially confounded and at odds with alchemy and its images, after being given a copy of the translation of ''The Secret of the Golden Flower'', a Chinese alchemical text, by his friend Richard Wilhelm, Jung discovered a direct correlation between the symbolic images in the alchemical drawings and the internal or psychic processes of transformation occurring in his patients.
Modern discussions of alchemy are generally split into an examination of its exoteric practical applications and its esoteric spiritual aspects, despite the arguments of scholars like Homyard and von Franz that they should be understood as complementary.
In the 14th century, alchemy became more accessible to Europeans outside the confines of Latin speaking churchmen and scholars.
Chapter 13 of HIML, ''Various works on rasaśāstra and ratnaśāstra'' (or ''Various works on alchemy and gems'') gives brief details of a further 655 (six hundred and fifty-five) treatises.
As previously stated above, Chinese alchemy was more related to medicine.
Through the 14th and 15th centuries, alchemists were much like Flamel: they concentrated on looking for the philosophers' stone.
As late as 1781 James Price claimed to have produced a powder that could transmute mercury into silver or gold.
The discussion of these works in HIML gives a summary of the contents of each work, their special features, and where possible the evidence concerning their dating.
Esoteric systems developed that blended alchemy into a broader occult Hermeticism, fusing it with magic, astrology, and Christian cabala.
The philosopher's stone of European alchemists can be compared to the Grand Elixir of Immortality sought by Chinese alchemists.
In texts that are written according to this view, the cryptic alchemical symbols, diagrams, and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain multiple layers of meanings, allegories, and references to other equally cryptic works; and must be laboriously decoded to discover their true meaning.
Both von Franz and Jung have contributed greatly to the subject and work of alchemy and its continued presence in psychology as well as contemporary culture.
Early alchemists, such as Zosimos of Panopolis (c. AD 300), highlight the spiritual nature of the alchemical quest, symbolic of a religious regeneration of the human soul.
Iatrochemistry also refers to the pharmaceutical applications of alchemy championed by Paracelsus.
Visual artists had a similar relationship with alchemy.
'''Alchemy''' is a philosophical and protoscientific tradition practiced throughout Europe, Egypt and Asia.
A recipe found in a mid 19th century kabbalah based book features  step by step instructions on turning copper into gold.
He noted that the theoretical lay outside the scope of Aristotle, the natural philosophers, and all Latin writers of his time.
Albertus Magnus, a Dominican monk, is known to have written works such as the ''Book of Minerals'' where he observed and commented on the operations and theories of alchemical authorities like Hermes and Democritus and unnamed alchemists of his time.
Isaac Newton devoted considerably more of his writing to the study of alchemy (see Isaac Newton's occult studies) than he did to either optics or physics.
These included the pantheon of gods related to the Classical planets, Isis, Osiris, Jason, and many others.
Albertus critically compared these to the writings of Aristotle and Avicenna, where they concerned the transmutation of metals.
An important modern bibliography on Indian alchemical studies has also been provided by David Gordon White at  Oxford Bibliographies Online.
The esoteric or occultist school, which arose during the 19th century, held (and continues to hold) the view that the substances and operations mentioned in alchemical literature are to be interpreted in a spiritual sense, and it downplays the role of the alchemy as a practical tradition or protoscience.
By the middle of the 7th century alchemy was almost an entirely mystical discipline.
In later European legend, however, Bacon became an archmage.
In his 1766 ''Alchemical Catechism'', Théodore Henri de Tschudi denotes that the usage of the metals was a symbol:
Alchemical symbolism has been important in depth and analytical psychology and was revived and popularized from near extinction by the Swiss psychologist Carl Gustav Jung.
The Arabic word is borrowed from Late Greek ''chēmeía'' (χημεία), ''chēmía'' (χημία) ‘black magic’ with the agglutination of the Arabic definite article ''al-''  ().
Entrepreneurial opportunities were not uncommon for the alchemists of Renaissance Europe.
The word alchemy was borrowed from Old French ''alquemie'', ''alkimie'', taken from Medieval Latin ''alchymia'', and which is in turn borrowed from Arabic ''al-kīmiyā’'' () ‘philosopher's stone’.
This approach continued in the Middle Ages, as metaphysical aspects, substances, physical states, and material processes were used as metaphors for spiritual entities, spiritual states, and, ultimately, transformation.
Beginning around 1720, a rigid distinction was drawn between "alchemy" and "chemistry" for the first time.
Alchemy covers several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents.
His book, ''Rasendramangalam'', is an example of Indian alchemy and medicine.
Legitimate mystical and medical alchemists such as Michael Maier and Heinrich Khunrath wrote about fraudulent transmutations, distinguishing themselves from the con artists.
By this reasoning, the search for the philosopher's stone was introduced to Western alchemy.
Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus, (Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493–1541) cast alchemy into a new form, rejecting some of Agrippa's occultism and moving away from chrysopoeia.
False alchemists were sometimes prosecuted for fraud.
While these were great achievements, Mary the Jewess' most critical contribution is considered to be the identification of hydrochloric acid, a frequently used chemical today.
The schools they founded, ''Les Philosophes de la Nature'' and ''The Paracelsus Research Society'', popularized modern spagyrics including the manufacture of herbal tinctures and products.
The most influential author in this regard was arguably Jabir.
Some early alchemical writings seem to have their origins in the Kaula tantric schools associated to the teachings of the personality of Matsyendranath.
Alchemy coexisted alongside emerging Christianity.
These scholars have reconstructed physicochemical experiments that they say are described in medieval and early modern texts.
Hermes and his caduceus or serpent-staff, were among alchemy's principal symbols.
Both forwarded a completely esoteric view of alchemy, as Atwood claimed: "No modern art or chemistry, notwithstanding all its surreptitious claims, has any thing in common with Alchemy."
This double-boiler was often used in chemistry for processes that might require gentle heating.
Their Hermetism complemented rather than precluded their practical achievements in medicine and science.
These traditions' general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and "genetic" relationships.
This move was mostly successful, and the consequences of this continued into the 19th and 20th centuries, and even to the present day.
Jung wrote volumes on alchemy and his magnum opus is Volume 14 of his Collected Works, ''Mysterium Conuinctionis.''
The perfection of the human body and soul was thought to permit or result from the alchemical magnum opus and, in the Hellenistic and western tradition, the achievement of gnosis.
'''Philosophy''' – Alexandria acted as a melting pot for philosophies of Pythagoreanism, Platonism, Stoicism and Gnosticism which formed the origin of alchemy's character.
The early Islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy.
By purifying the two parts of man's soul, man could be reunited with God.
Their entire philosophy revolved around their belief that man's soul was divided within himself after the fall of Adam.
St&nbsp;Augustine later affirmed this in the 4th & 5th centuries, but also condemned Trismegistus for idolatry.
Michael Maier names Mary the Jewess, Cleopatra the Alchemist, Medera, and Taphnutia as the four women who knew how to make the philosopher's stone.
Similarly, the gods of the Roman pantheon who are associated with these luminaries are discussed in alchemical literature.
He took an approach different from those before him, using this analogy not in the manner of soul-purification but in the manner that humans must have certain balances of minerals in their bodies, and that certain illnesses of the body had chemical remedies that could cure them.
Likewise, alchemical texts have been attributed to Albert's student Thomas Aquinas.
In fact, in the early Song dynasty, followers of this Taoist idea (chiefly the elite and upper class) would ingest mercuric sulfide, which, though tolerable in low levels, led many to suicide.
Zosimos' sister Theosebia (later known as Euthica the Arab) and Isis the Prophetess also play a role in the early alchemical texts.
It aimed to purify, mature, and perfect certain objects.
The ''Hermetica'' of Thrice-Great Hermes is generally understood to form the basis for Western alchemical philosophy and practice, called the hermetic philosophy by its early practitioners.
These were previously unavailable to Europeans who for the first time had a full picture of the alchemical theory that Bacon had declared absent.
In Europe, the creation of a philosopher's stone was variously connected with all of these projects.
The atomic theory of corpuscularianism, where all physical bodies possess an inner and outer layer of minute particles or corpuscles, also has its origins in the work of Jabir.
The concepts of prima materia and anima mundi are central to the theory of the philosopher's stone.
It was at that time that Khalid Ibn Yazid sparked its migration from Alexandria to the Islamic world, facilitating the translation and preservation of Greek alchemical texts in the 8th and 9th centuries.
According to Jabir, in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two were exterior.
Between the time of Bolus and Zosimos, the change took place that transformed this metallurgy into a Hermetic art.
Although the seeds of these events were planted as early as the 17th century, alchemy still flourished for some two hundred years, and in fact may have reached its apogee in the 18th century.
These writings lack the mystical, philosophical elements of alchemy, but do contain the works of Bolus of Mendes (or Pseudo-Democritus), which aligned these recipes with theoretical knowledge of astrology and the classical elements.
Together with his alchemical ''mystica soror,'' Jungian Swiss analyst, Marie-Louise von Franz, Jung began collecting all the old alchemical texts available and pored over them.
His ''Summa Perfectionis'' remained a staple summary of alchemical practice and theory through the medieval and renaissance periods.
Spagyrists of the 20th century, Albert Richard Riedel and Jean Dubuis, merged Paracelsian alchemy with occultism, teaching laboratory pharmaceutical methods.
Through much of the 12th and 13th centuries, alchemical knowledge in Europe remained centered on translations, and new Latin contributions were not made.
Nityanātha Siddha wrote ''Rasaratnākara'', also a highly influential work.
During the occult revival of the early 19th century, alchemy received new attention as an occult science.
The latter interests historians of esotericism, psychologists, and some philosophers and spiritualists.
Due to the complexity and obscurity of alchemical literature, and the 18th-century disappearance of remaining alchemical practitioners into the area of chemistry; the general understanding of alchemy has been strongly influenced by several distinct and radically different interpretations.
Bernard Trevisan and George Ripley made similar contributions.
Here, elements of technology, religion, mythology, and Hellenistic philosophy, each with their own much longer histories, combined to form the earliest known records of alchemy in the West.
These critiques and regulations centered more around pseudo-alchemical charlatanism than the actual study of alchemy, which continued with an increasingly Christian tone.
An important example of alchemy's roots in Greek philosophy, originated by Empedocles and developed by Aristotle, was that all things in the universe were formed from only four elements: earth, air, water, and fire.
The first alchemist is recognized as being Mary the Jewess (c. 200 A.D.).
In this sense, the literal meanings of 'Alchemical Formulas' were a blind, hiding their true spiritual philosophy.
Finally, the alchemists practiced their art: they actively experimented with chemicals and made observations and theories about how the universe operated.
In English, the term is often limited to descriptions of European alchemy, but similar practices existed in the Far East, the Indian subcontinent, and the Muslim world.
Alchemical discourse shifted from scholarly philosophical debate to an exposed social commentary on the alchemists themselves.
Dante, Piers Plowman, and Chaucer all painted unflattering pictures of alchemists as thieves and liars.
In the early 12th century, Peter Abelard followed Anselm's work, laying down the foundation for acceptance of Aristotelian thought before the first works of Aristotle had reached the West.
The tribikos (a basic still) and the kerotakis (a more intricate distilling apparatus) are two other advancements in the process of distillation that are credited to her.
Jabir is thus "considered by many to be the father of chemistry", albeit others reserve that title for Robert Boyle or Antoine Lavoisier.
He is named "alchemy's founder and chief patron, authority, inspiration and guide".
He analyzed each Aristotelian element in terms of four basic qualities of ''hotness'', ''coldness'', ''dryness'', and ''moistness''.
Journals which publish regularly on the topic of Alchemy include 'Ambix', published by the Society for the History of alchemy and Chemistry, and 'Isis', published by The History of Science Society.
Lactantius believed Hermes Trismegistus had prophesied its birth.
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations.
For me such is not the aim, but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines."
Alcohol, carboy, elixir, and athanor are examples.
Islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism.
In his ''De Occulta Philosophia'', he attempted to merge Kabbalah, Hermetism, and alchemy.
Zosimos of Panopolis wrote the oldest known books on alchemy, while Mary the Jewess is credited as being the first non-fictitious Western alchemist.
Later alchemists extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept.
Early modern European alchemy continued to exhibit a diversity of theories, practices, and purposes: "Scholastic and anti-Aristotelian, Paracelsian and anti-Paracelsian, Hermetic, Neoplatonic, mechanistic, vitalistic, and more—plus virtually every combination and compromise thereof."
Paracelsus pioneered the use of chemicals and minerals in medicine and wrote, "Many have said of Alchemy, that it is for the making of gold and silver.
Mary Anne Atwood's ''A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery'' (1850) marks their return during the nineteenth century occult revival.
Though most of these appointments were legitimate, the trend of pseudo-alchemical fraud continued through the Renaissance.
Hitchcock, in his ''Remarks Upon Alchymists'' (1855) attempted to make a case for his spiritual interpretation with his claim that the alchemists wrote about a spiritual discipline under a materialistic guise in order to avoid accusations of blasphemy from the church and state.
Early Islamic chemists such as Jabir Ibn Hayyan, Al-Kindi ("Alkindus") and Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi ("Rasis" or "Rhazes") contributed a number of key chemical discoveries, such as the muriatic (hydrochloric acid), sulfuric and nitric acids, and more.
In some cases Meulenbeld gives notes on the contents and authorship of these works; in other cases references are made only to the unpublished manuscripts of these titles.
While some of them used alchemy as a source of satire, others worked with the alchemists themselves or integrated alchemical thought or symbols in their work.
Platonic and Aristotelian thought, which had already been somewhat appropriated into hermetical science, continued to be assimilated during the late 7th and early 8th centuries through Syriac translations and scholarship.
Like the Greeks before him, Bacon acknowledged the division of alchemy into practical and theoretical spheres.
Michael Sendivogius (''Michał Sędziwój'', 1566–1636), a Polish alchemist, philosopher, medical doctor and pioneer of chemistry wrote mystical works but is also credited with distilling oxygen in a lab sometime around 1600.
In Ayurveda, the samskaras are claimed to transform heavy metals and toxic herbs in a way that removes their toxicity.
Though we have no writing from Maria herself, she is known from the fourth century writings of Zosimos of Panopolis.
Although European craftsmen and technicians preexisted, Robert notes in his preface that alchemy was unknown in Latin Europe at the time of his writing.
Black powder may have been an important invention of Chinese alchemists.
He called the creation of the gold or lapis within the process of "individuation."
The four elements of the Greek were mostly qualitative aspects of matter, not quantitative, as our modern elements are; "...True alchemy never regarded earth, air, water, and fire as corporeal or chemical substances in the present-day sense of the word.
This interpretation further forwarded the view that alchemy is an art primarily concerned with spiritual enlightenment or illumination, as opposed to the physical manipulation of apparatus and chemicals, and claims that the obscure language of the alchemical texts were an allegorical guise for spiritual, moral or mystical processes.
John's son Arthur Dee worked as a court physician to Michael I of Russia and Charles I of England but also compiled the alchemical book ''Fasciculus Chemicus''.
His correspondence with Clement highlighted this, noting the importance of alchemy to the papacy.
The decline of European alchemy was brought about by the rise of modern science with its emphasis on rigorous quantitative experimentation and its disdain for "ancient wisdom".
Most of the Greco-Roman alchemists preceding Zosimos are known only by pseudonyms, such as Moses, Isis, Cleopatra, Democritus, and Ostanes.
In the 14th century, Chaucer began a trend of alchemical satire that can still be seen in recent fantasy works like those of Terry Pratchett.
For example, lead was externally cold and dry, while gold was hot and moist.
King James IV of Scotland, Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Henry V, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Augustus, Elector of Saxony, Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn, and Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel all contracted alchemists.
Grosseteste also did much work to reconcile Platonic and Aristotelian thinking.
In particular, along with Albertus Magnus, he was credited with the forging of a brazen head capable of answering its owner's questions.
The 11th-century Persian chemist and physician Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī, who visited Gujarat as part of the court of Mahmud of Ghazni, reported that they
Greek alchemy may have been introduced to Ancient India through the invasions of Alexander the Great in 325&nbsp;, and kingdoms that were culturally influenced by the Greeks like Gandhāra, although hard evidence for this is lacking.
In 1845, Baron Carl Reichenbach, published his studies on Odic force, a concept with some similarities to alchemy, but his research did not enter the mainstream of scientific discussion.
Jabir himself clearly recognized and proclaimed the importance of experimentation:
Those focusing on the exoteric, such as historians of science Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman, have interpreted the 'decknamen' (or code words) of alchemy as physical substances.
The content of the Sanskrit alchemical corpus has not yet (2014) been adequately integrated into the wider general history of alchemy.
His work spends a great deal of time describing the processes and reactions, but never actually gives the formula for carrying out the transmutations.
Applied to the alchemist himself, the twin goal symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment, and the stone represented a hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal.
'''Mythology''' – Zosimos of Panopolis asserted that alchemy dated back to Pharaonic Egypt where it was the domain of the priestly class, though there is little to no evidence for his assertion.
Today new interpretations of alchemy are still perpetuated, sometimes merging in concepts from New Age or radical environmentalism movements.
Due to the proliferation of pseudepigrapha and anonymous works, it is difficult to know which of the alchemists were actually women.
