He entered the harbor full of fear till he saw his cousin and others of his friends and acquaintance, who invited him to land.
He intended to conquer Carthage and Libya, then to attack Italy and, after winning these, to seize Italy and Peloponnesus.
Afterwards they concluded a temporary alliance with Pharnabazus which secured some much needed immediate cash for the army, but despite this Alcibiades was still forced to depart in search for more booty to pay the soldiers and oarsmen of the fleet.
It was at his suggestion that the size of the fleet was significantly increased from 60 ships to "140 galleys, 5,100 men at arms, and about 1300 archers, slingers, and light armed men".
During the course of the Peloponnesian War, Alcibiades changed his political allegiance several times.
Historians Arnold W. Gomme and Raphael Sealey believe, and Thucydides reports, that Alcibiades was offended that the Spartans had negotiated that treaty through Nicias and Laches, overlooking him on account of his youth.
Alcibiades was recalled by the "intermediate regime" of The Five Thousand, the government which succeeded the Four Hundred in 411, but it is most likely that he waited until 407 BC to actually return to the city.
According to Plutarch, Alcibiades "feared and reverenced Socrates alone, and despised the rest of his lovers".
Therefore, Andocides said of him that "instead of holding that he ought himself to conform with the laws of the state, he expects you to conform with his own way of life".
Alcibiades was able to assert his piety and to raise Athenian morale by leading the solemn procession to Eleusis (for the celebration of the Eleusinian Mysteries) by land for the first time since the Spartans had occupied Decelea.
After making the threat seem imminent, Alcibiades advised the Spartans to send troops and most importantly, a Spartan commander to discipline and aid the Syracusans.
It was primarily Alcibiades, along with Thrasybulus, who calmed the people and showed them the folly of this proposal, which would have sparked civil war and led to the immediate defeat of Athens.
Evangelos P. Fotiadis, a prominent Greek philologist, asserts that Alcibiades was "a first class diplomat" and had "huge skills".
In pursuit of these funds he traveled to the Thracian Chersonese and attacked Selymbria.
During this period, Alcibiades succeeded in raising money from Caria and the neighboring area, with which he was able to pay the rowers and gain their favor.
After a time, Thrasybulus persuaded the assembled troops to vote Alcibiades's recall, a policy that he had supported since before the coup.
Within a month he would escape and resume command.
Epigraphical evidence indicates the Selymbrians surrendered hostages until the treaty was ratified in Athens.
The army, stating that they had not revolted from the city but that the city had revolted from them, resolved to stand by the democracy while continuing to prosecute the war against Sparta.
Kagan argues that at Notium, Alcibiades committed a serious error in leaving the fleet in the hands of an inexperienced officer, and that most of the credit for the brilliant victory at Cyzicus must be assigned to Thrasybulus.
In the years when he served Sparta, Alcibiades played a significant role in Athens's undoing; the capture of Decelea and the revolts of several critical Athenian subjects occurred either at his suggestion or under his supervision.
He played a major role in the second half of that conflict as a strategic advisor, military commander, and politician.
Alcibiades, however, foreseeing that he would be outlawed, gave information to the friends of the Syracusans in Messina, who succeeded in preventing the admission of the Athenians.
He favored unconventional tactics, frequently winning cities over by treachery or negotiation rather than by siege.
Alcibiades however gained no credit, because Phrynichus had anticipated Alcibiades's letter and, before the accusations could arrive, told the army that he had received information of an enemy plan to attack the camp and that they should fortify Samos as quickly as possible.
Samian democrats learned of the conspiracy and notified four prominent Athenians: the generals Leon and Diomedon, the trierarch Thrasybulus, and Thrasyllus, at that time a hoplite in the ranks.
Purportedly based on his own personal experience, Antisthenes described Alcibiades's extraordinary physical strength, courage, and beauty, saying, "If Achilles did not look like this, he was not really handsome."
Russell Meiggs, a British ancient historian, asserts that the Athenian statesman was absolutely unscrupulous despite his great charm and brilliant abilities.
One of Isocrates' speeches, delivered by Alcibiades the Younger, argues that the statesman deserved the Athenians' gratitude for the service he had given them.
Although unable to attain a decisive victory or induce the city to surrender, Alcibiades was able to win a small tactical land battle outside of the city gates and Theramenes concluded an agreement with the Chalcedonians.
Alcibiades is a major character in Paul Levinson's "The Plot to Save Socrates", whose plot assumes that Alcibiades did not die when history records, but lived on secretly and had many further adventures.
She lived with him until her death, which came soon after, and gave birth to two children, a daughter and a son, Alcibiades the Younger.
According to Aristotle, the site of Alcibiades's death was Elaphus, a mountain in Phrygia.
These factors caused the rapid growth of the Peloponnesian fleet at the expense of the Athenian.
Pisander won the argument, putting Alcibiades and his promises at the center.
Kagan argues that this reinstatement was a disappointment to Alcibiades, who had hoped for a glorious return to Athens itself but found himself only restored to the rebellious fleet, where the immunity from prosecution he had been granted "protected him for the time being but not from a reckoning in the future"; furthermore, the recall, which Alcibiades had hoped to bring about through his own prestige and perceived influence, was achieved through the patronage of Thrasybulus.
In the meanwhile Tissaphernes had been replaced by Cyrus the Younger (son of Darius II of Persia) who decided to financially support the Peloponnesians.
Antiochus's ship was sunk, and he was killed by a sudden Spartan attack; the remaining ships of the decoy force were then chased headlong back toward Notium, where the main Athenian force was caught unprepared by the sudden arrival of the whole Spartan fleet.
Seeing Athens thus beleaguered on a second front, members of the Delian League began to contemplate revolt.
In the ''Constitution of the Athenians'', Aristotle does not include Alcibiades in the list of the best Athenian politicians, but in ''Posterior Analytics'' he argues that traits of a proud man like Alcibiades are "equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonor".
He still fascinates the modern world, doing so most notably as the main character in historical novels of authors like Anna Bowman Dodd, Gertrude Atherton, Rosemary Sutcliff, Daniel Chavarria, Steven Pressfield and Peter Green.
Nevertheless, his spiritual powers were not counterbalanced with his magnificent mind and he had the hard luck to lead a people susceptible to demagoguery.
As for democracy, the men of sense among us knew what it was, and I perhaps as well as any, as I have the more cause to complain of it; but there is nothing new to be said of a patent absurdity&nbsp;— meanwhile we did not think it safe to alter it under the pressure of your hostility."
Thrasybulus landed his own force to temporarily relieve pressure on Alcibiades, and meanwhile ordered Theramenes to join up with Athenian land forces nearby and bring them to reinforce the sailors and marines on the beach.
According to Plutarch, Hipparete loved her husband, but she attempted to divorce him because he consorted with courtesans but he dragged her away from her court appearance.
Long after his death, Alcibiades continues to appear in art, both in Medieval and Renaissance works, and in several significant works of modern literature as well.
The men are starving.
The Spartan fleet suffered losses in the flight and reached the shore with the Athenians in close pursuit.
Additionally the Spartans had replaced Mindarus with Lysander, a very capable admiral.
Alcibiades is not held responsible by Thucydides for the destruction of Athens, since "his habits gave offence to every one, and caused the Athenians to commit affairs to other hands, and thus before long to ruin the city".
According to Gomme, "it was a grandiose scheme for an Athenian general at the head of a mainly Peloponnesian army to march through the Peloponnese cocking a snook at Sparta when her reputation was at its lowest".
After an interlude of several months in which the Peloponnesians constructed new ships and the Athenians besieged cities and raised money throughout the Aegean, the next major sea battle took place the spring of 410 BC at Cyzicus.
According to Anthony Andrewes, professor of ancient history, the extravagant hopes that his successes of the previous summer had created were a decisive element in his downfall.
Alcibiades was aware the Spartan fleet was nearby, so he left nearly eighty ships to watch them under the command of his personal helmsman Antiochus, who was given express orders not to attack.
As Kagan points out, Tissaphernes was a prudent leader and had recognized the advantages of wearing each side out without direct Persian involvement.
He was the last famous member of his mother's aristocratic family, the Alcmaeonidae, which fell from prominence after the Peloponnesian War.
One night during preparations for the expedition, the hermai, heads of the god Hermes on a plinth with a phallus, were mutilated throughout Athens.
He also appears as a character in several Socratic dialogues (''Symposium'', ''Protagoras'', ''Alcibiades I'' and ''II'', as well as the eponymous dialogues by Aeschines Socraticus and Antisthenes).
Kagan believes that while Alcibiades was a commander of considerable ability, he was no military genius, and his confidence and ambitions went far beyond his skills.
It was believed that Socrates took Alcibiades as a student because he believed he could change Alcibiades from his vain ways.
Demosthenes defends Alcibiades's achievements, saying that he had taken arms in the cause of democracy, displaying his patriotism, not by gifts of money or by speeches, but by personal service.
Responsibility for the defeat ultimately fell on Alcibiades, and his enemies used the opportunity to attack him and have him removed from command, although some modern scholars believe that Alcibiades was unfairly blamed for Antiochus's mistake.
The Persian satrap Pharnabazus, who had replaced Tissaphernes as the sponsor of the Peloponnesian fleet, moved his land army to the shore to defend the ships and sailors who had beached their ships.
He took advantage of his increasing power to orchestrate the creation of an alliance between Argos, Mantinea, Elis, and other states in the Peloponnese, threatening Sparta's dominance in the region.
"Our party was that of the whole people, our creed being to do our part in preserving the form of government under which the city enjoyed the utmost greatness and freedom, and which we had found existing.
These officers of the Athenian fleet formed a group of conspirators, but were met with opposition from the majority of the soldiers and sailors; these were eventually calmed down "by the advantageous prospect of the pay from the king".
A short time later Sparta petitioned for peace, but their appeals were ultimately rejected by the Athenians.
In 415 BC, delegates from the Sicilian city of Segesta () arrived at Athens to plead for the support of the Athenians in their war against Selinus.
This fiasco at the court of Tissaphernes, however, put an end to the negotiations between the conspirators and Alcibiades.
Alcibiades set about winning over the most influential military officers, and achieved his goal by offering them a threefold plan: the Athenian constitution was to be changed, the recall of Alcibiades was to be voted, and Alcibiades was to win over Tissaphernes and the King of Persia to the Athenian side.
Upon arriving on shore he was greeted with a hero's welcome.
Seeing no chance of escape he rushed out on his assassins, dagger in hand, and was killed by a shower of arrows.
Days later the fleet would be annihilated by Lysander.
Lastly, and most importantly, he told the satrap to be in no hurry to bring the Persian fleet into the conflict, as the longer the war dragged out the more exhausted the combatants would become.
Alcibiades told the heralds that he would follow them back to Athens in his ship, but in Thurii he escaped with his crew; in Athens he was convicted ''in absentia'' and condemned to death.
He then served as an Athenian general (Strategos) for several years, but his enemies eventually succeeded in exiling him a second time.
This was a religious scandal and was seen as a bad omen for the mission.
Alcibiades's military and political talents frequently proved valuable to whichever state currently held his allegiance, but his propensity for making powerful enemies ensured that he never remained in one place for long; and by the end of the war which he had helped to rekindle in the early 410s, his days of political relevance were a bygone memory.
Alcibiades had been forced to flee from Sestos to Cardia to protect his small fleet from the rebuilt Peloponnesian navy, but as soon as the Athenian fleet was reunited there its commanders led it to Cyzicus, where the Athenians had intelligence indicating that Pharnabazus and Mindarus, the Peloponnesian fleet commander, were together plotting their next move.
He advised them to build a permanent fort at Decelea, just over ten miles (16&nbsp;km) from Athens and within sight of the city.
Consequently, Alcibiades condemned himself to exile.
Alcibiades seemed to assume that the "radical democracy" would never agree to his recall to Athens.
The group was convinced that Alcibiades could not deliver his side of the bargain without demanding exorbitantly high concessions of them and they accordingly abandoned their plans to restore him to Athens.
Alcibiades excited in his contemporaries a fear for the safety of the political order.
On the other hand, Diodorus argues that he was "in spirit brilliant and intent upon great enterprises".
His maternal grandfather, also named Alcibiades, was a friend of Cleisthenes, the famous constitutional reformer of the late 6th century BC.
If accurate, this assessment underscores one of Alcibiades's greatest talents, his highly persuasive oratory.
Only the support of the Persian land army and the coming of night saved the Peloponnesian fleet from complete destruction.
In his speech Alcibiades predicted (over-optimistically, in the opinion of most historians) that the Athenians would be able to recruit allies in the region and impose their rule on Syracuse, the most powerful city of Sicily.
Eupolis says that he was "prince of talkers, but in speaking most incapable"; which is to say, more eloquent in his private discourses than when orating before the ecclesia.
Alcibiades was born in Athens.
The next significant part he would play in the war would occur at the Battle of Abydos.
Kagan asserts that Alcibiades had not yet acquired his "legendary" reputation, and the Spartans saw him as "a defeated and hunted man" whose policies "produced strategic failures" and brought "no decisive result".
Even more critically, Athanasios G. Platias and Constantinos Koliopoulos, professors of strategic studies and international politics, state that Alcibiades's own arguments "should be sufficient to do away with the notion that Alcibiades was a great statesman, as some people still believe".
Therefore, he finally sailed into Piraeus where the crowd had gathered, desiring to see the famous Alcibiades.
The procession had been replaced by a journey by sea, but this year Alcibiades used a detachment of soldiers to escort the traditional procession.
During the debates on the undertaking, Nicias was vehemently opposed to Athenian intervention, explaining that the campaign would be very costly and attacking the character and motives of Alcibiades, who had emerged as the supporter of the expedition.
Even today, Alcibiades divides scholars.
Antiochus disobeyed this single order and endeavored to draw Lysander into a fight by imitating the tactics used at Cyzicus.
Much about Alcibiades's death is now uncertain, as there are conflicting accounts.
Despite his critical comments, Thucydides admits in a short digression that "publicly his conduct of the war was as good as could be desired".
The situation at Notium, however, was radically different from that at Cyzicus; the Athenians possessed no element of surprise, and Lysander had been well informed about their fleet by deserters.
Plutarch tells us that, although his recall had already been passed on motion of Critias, a political ally of his, Alcibiades was resolved to come back with glory.
'''Alcibiades, son of Cleinias''', from the deme of Scambonidae (; Greek: , transliterated ''Alkibiádēs Kleiníou Skambōnídēs''; c. 450 – 404 BC), was a prominent Athenian statesman, orator, and general.
'''''Alcibiades' Oration''' before the Sicilian expedition as recorded by Thucydides, (VI, 18); Thucydides  disclaims verbal accuracy.
Paparrigopoulos does not accept Demosthenes's opinion, but acknowledges that the Athenian statesman could sufficiently support his case.
Even in the wake of his recent victories, Alcibiades was exceedingly careful in his return, mindful of the changes in government, the charges still technically hanging over him, and the great injury he had done to Athens.
By doing this, the Spartans cut the Athenians off entirely from their homes and crops and the silver mines of Sunium.
In ancient Greece, Alcibiades was a polarizing figure.
In Sparta too, however, Alcibiades soon made powerful enemies and felt forced to defect to Persia.
His father was Cleinias.
The battle was evenly matched, and raged for a long time, but the balance tipped towards the Athenians when Alcibiades sailed into the Hellespont with eighteen triremes.
In spite of these valuable contributions to the Spartan cause, Alcibiades fell out of favor with the Spartan government at around this time, ruled by Agis II.
Diodorus reports that, in addition to his mistake at Notium, Alcibiades was discharged on account of false accusations brought against him by his enemies.
This was part of Alcibiades's plan to renew the war with Athens in Attica.
Alcibiades responded in kind, sending to the authorities at Samos a letter against Phrynichus, stating what he had done, and requiring that he should be put to death.
Later his opponents, chief among them being Androcles and Thessalus, Cimon's son, enlisted orators to argue that Alcibiades should set sail as planned and stand trial on his return from the campaign.
Plutarch claims that the army sent for Alcibiades so as to use his help in putting down the tyrants in Athens.
At his urging, the satrap reduced the payments he was making to the Peloponnesian fleet and began delivering them irregularly.
For his part, Angelos Vlachos, a Greek Academician, underlines the constant interest of Athens for Sicily from the beginning of the war.
Against his wishes Nicias was appointed General along with Alcibiades and Lamachus, all three of whom were given full powers to do whatever was in the best interests of Athens while in Sicily.
The involvement in the plot of another General, Thrasybulus, remains unclear.
This was regarded as the unluckiest day of the year to undertake anything of importance.
Alcibiades first rose to prominence when he began advocating aggressive Athenian action after the signing of the Peace of Nicias.
The Spartans and Persians, overwhelmed by the arrival of multiple forces from several directions, were defeated and driven off, and the Athenians captured all the Spartan ships which were not destroyed.
On the designated night the defenders left their posts, and the Athenians attacked the Peloponnesian garrison in the city and their boats in the harbor.
These were likely the most capable commanders Athens had at the time, and their removal would help lead to the Athenian surrender only two years later, after their complete defeat at Aegospotami.
When the fleet arrived in Catana, it found the state trireme ''Salaminia'' waiting to bring Alcibiades and the others indicted for mutilating the hermai or profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries back to Athens to stand trial.
According to Plutarch, Alcibiades had several famous teachers, including Socrates, and was well trained in the art of Rhetoric.
He finally sailed to Gytheion to make inquiries, partly about the reported preparations of the Spartans there, and partly about the feelings in Athens about his return.
Though many of his details cannot be independently corroborated, Plutarch's version is this:  Lysander sent an envoy to Pharnabazus who then dispatched his brother to Phrygia where Alcibiades was living with his mistress, Timandra.
The Sicilian Expedition was the idea of Alcibiades, and scholars have argued that, had that expedition been under Alcibiades's command instead of that of Nicias, the expedition might not have met its eventual disastrous fate.
Although the defeat had been minor, it occasioned the removal of not only Alcibiades but also his allies like Thrasybulus, Theramenes and Critias.
In the ensuing fighting, Lysander gained an entire victory.
A similar assessment is made by Hervey Cleckley at the end of chapter 5 in his The Mask of Sanity.
The Athenians initially received these ambassadors well, but Alcibiades met with them in secret before they were to speak to the ecclesia (the Athenian Assembly) and told them that the Assembly was haughty and had great ambitions.
In his native Athens in the early 410s BC, he advocated an aggressive foreign policy and was a prominent proponent of the Sicilian Expedition, but he fled to Sparta after his political enemies brought charges of sacrilege against him.
Sharon Press of Brown University points out that Xenophon emphasizes Alcibiades's service to the state, rather than the harm he was charged with causing it.
Hyperbolos tried to bring about the ostracism of one of this pair, but Nicias and Alcibiades combined their influence to induce the people to expel Hyperbolos instead.
Alcibiades soon returned and desperately tried to undo the defeat at Notium by scoring another victory, but Lysander could not be compelled to attack the fleet again.
Alcibiades took part in the Battle of Potidaea in 432 BC, where Socrates was said to have saved his life and again at the Battle of Delium in 424 BC.
And we cannot fix the exact point at which our empire shall stop; we have reached a position in which we must not be content with retaining but must scheme to extend it, for, if we cease to rule others, we are in danger of being ruled ourselves.
Diodorus and Demosthenes regard him as a great general.
Phrynichus, fearing that Alcibiades if restored would avenge himself upon him for his opposition, sent a secret letter to the Spartan Admiral, Astyochus, to tell him that Alcibiades was ruining their cause by making Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians, and containing an express revelation of the rest of the intrigue.
Although the envoys were angered at the audacity of the Persian demands, they nevertheless departed with the impression that Alcibiades could have brought about an agreement among the powers if he had chosen to do so.
For his part, David Gribble argues that Alcibiades's actions against his city were misunderstood and believes that "the tension which led to Alcibiades's split with the city was between purely personal and civic values".
In this judgement, Kagan agrees with Cornelius Nepos, who said that the Athenians' extravagant opinion of Alcibiades's abilities and valor was his chief misfortune.
He thus was capable of important errors and serious miscalculations.
According to Meiggs his actions were dictated by selfish motives and his feud with Cleon and his successors undermined Athens.
Concealed by storm and darkness, the combined Athenian force reached the vicinity without being spotted by the Peloponnesians.
He failed to take Andros and then he went on to Samos.
This request was denied, and the fleet set sail soon after, with the charges unresolved.
Somewhere in the years 416–415 BC, a complex struggle took place between Hyperbolos on one side and Nicias and Alcibiades on the other.
Alcibiades served as a military adviser to Sparta and helped the Spartans secure several crucial successes.
Alcibiades was suspicious of their intentions, and asked to be allowed to stand trial immediately, under penalty of death, in order to clear his name.
With one exception, Alcibiades's role in the war ended with his command.
The implications of the defeat were severe for Athens.
The representatives agreed and, impressed with Alcibiades, they alienated themselves from Nicias, who genuinely wanted to reach an agreement with the Spartans.
Diodorus, however, does not mention this advice, arguing instead that Alcibiades offered the Generals Thracian aid in exchange for a share in the command.
Despite these events, Pisander and the other envoys of the conspirators arrived at Athens and made a speech before the people.
Never again returning to Athens, he sailed north to the castles in the Thracian Chersonese, which he had secured during his time in the Hellespont.
In the debate at Sparta over whether to send a force to relieve Syracuse, Alcibiades spoke and instilled fear of Athenian ambition into the Spartan ephors by informing them that the Athenians hoped to conquer Sicily, Italy, and even Carthage.
Kagan criticizes Alcibiades for failing to recognize that the large size of the Athenian expedition undermined the diplomatic scheme on which his strategy rested.
The Ecclesia deposed Phrynichus and elected Pisander and ten other envoys to negotiate with Tissaphernes and Alcibiades.
This also Astyochus revealed to Alcibiades who informed the officers at Samos that they had been betrayed by Phrynichus.
Nevertheless, he would often stumble in the midst of his speech, but then he would resume and proceed with all the caution in the world.
This incident reveals that Nicias and Alcibiades each commanded a personal following, whose votes were determined by the wishes of the leaders.
Plutarch asserts that "Alcibiades was a most able speaker in addition to his other gifts", while Theophrastus argues that Alcibiades was the most capable of discovering and understanding what was required in a given case.
Plutarch explains that Androcles, a political leader, used false witnesses who accused Alcibiades and his friends of mutilating the statues, and of profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries.
This would allow the Persians to more easily conquer the region in the aftermath of the fighting.
He did their city no injury whatsoever, but merely took a sum of money from it, set a garrison in it and left.
Thus Alcibiades, instead of going straight home, first went to Samos to pick up 20 ships and proceeded with them to the Ceramic Gulf where he collected 100 talents.
For Demosthenes and other orators, Alcibiades epitomized the figure of the great man during the glorious days of the Athenian democracy and became a rhetorical symbol.
In 404 BC, as he was about to set out for the Persian court, his residence was surrounded and set on fire.
In agreement with Paparrigopoulos, Platias and Koliopoulos underscore the fact that the Sicilian expedition was a strategic blunder of the first magnitude, resulting from a "frivolous attitude and an unbelievable underestimation of the enemy".
This alliance, however, would ultimately be defeated at the Battle of Mantinea.
Tissaphernes would not make an agreement on any terms, wanting to follow his policy of neutrality.
Shortly after Alcibiades's reinstatement as an Athenian general, the government of the Four Hundred was overthrown and replaced by a broader oligarchy, which would eventually give way to democracy.
Alcibiades next advised Tissaphernes to bribe the Generals of the cities to gain valuable intelligence on their activities.
At his first speech to the assembled troops, Alcibiades complained bitterly about the circumstances of his exile, but the greatest part of the speech consisted of boasting about his influence with Tissaphernes.
Plutarch regards him as "the least scrupulous and most entirely careless of human beings".
With the support of these men and the Athenian soldiers in general, the Samian democrats were able to defeat the 300 Samian oligarchs who attempted to seize power there.
In Sparta, he served as a strategic adviser, proposing or supervising several major campaigns against Athens.
On the other hand, Alcibiades argued that a campaign in this new theatre would bring riches to the city and expand the empire, just as the Persian Wars had.
As Alcibiades had suspected, his absence emboldened his enemies, and they began to accuse him of other sacrilegious actions and comments and even alleged that these actions were connected with a plot against the democracy.
On his arrival in the local Persian court, Alcibiades won the trust of the powerful satrap and made several policy suggestions which were well received.
Almost certainly Nicias's intention was to shock the assembly with his high estimate of the forces required, but, instead of dissuading his fellow citizens, his analysis made them all the more eager.
From here Alcibiades joined in the siege of Byzantium along with Theramenes and Thrasyllus.
His performance is judged as skillful by historians, since it saved time, resources, and lives and still fully achieved his goal.
The initial decision of the ecclesia provided however for a reasonable military force, which later became unreasonably large and costly because of Nicias's demands.
While this was certainly his goal, it was again a means to an end, that end being avoiding prosecution upon his return to Athens.
Therefore, he exchanged messages with the Athenian leaders at Samos and suggested that if they could install an oligarchy friendly to him he would return to Athens and bring with him Persian money and possibly the Persian fleet of 147 triremes.
In any case, the Generals of the Athenians, "considering that in case of defeat the blame would attach to them and that in case of success all men would attribute it to Alcibiades", asked him to leave and not come near the camp ever again.
For his part, Demosthenes underscores the fact that Alcibiades was regarded as "the ablest speaker of the day".
Alcibiades thereby, through his mother, belonged to the powerful and controversial family of the Alcmaeonidae; the renowned Pericles and his brother Ariphron were Deinomache's cousins, as her father and their mother were siblings.
According to the oldest of these, the Spartans and specifically Lysander were responsible.
It is alleged that Astiochus, a Spartan Admiral, was sent orders to kill him, but Alcibiades received warning of this order and defected to the Persian satrap Tissaphernes, who had been supporting the Peloponnesian forces financially in 412 BC.
The members of the group assembled and prepared to send Pisander, one of their number, on an embassy to Athens to treat for the restoration of Alcibiades and the abolition of the democracy in the city, and thus to make Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians.
Most of the officers in the Athenian fleet accepted the plan and welcomed the prospect of a narrower constitution, which would allow them a greater share in determining policy.
After their victory, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus began the siege of Chalcedon in 409 BC with about 190 ships.
