The inhabitants of Jdeydeh were mainly brokers who facilitated trade between foreign traders and local merchants.
In 2006, Aleppo was named by the Islamic Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (ISESCO) as the capital of Islamic culture.
Naram-Sin of Akkad mention his destruction of Ebla and Armani/Armanum, in the 23rd century BC.
The Muslim inhabitants fled for Damascus, where the Mamluk leader Qalawun assembled his forces.
At least two protesters had  been shot dead by security forces during a demonstration in Sakhour with tens of thousands attendees.
Ful halabi is a typical Aleppine breakfast meal: fava bean soup with a splash of olive oil, lemon juice, garlic and Aleppo's red peppers.
The Aleppo Public Park opened in 1949, is one of the largest planted parks in Syria, located near the Aziziyeh area, where the Queiq river breaks through the green park.
The most prominent figures in this field are Sabri Mdallal, Sabah Fakhri, Shadi Jamil, Abed Azrie and Nour Mhanna.
The news of an imminent union with Iraq incited a third coup the same year: in December 1949, Adib Shishakly led a coup preempting a union with Iraq that was about to be declared.
The second period of Armenian flow towards Aleppo marked with the withdrawal of the French troops from Cilicia in 1923.
According to the Syrian Foreign Ministry, some 1,000 factories in Aleppo have been plundered, and their stolen goods transferred to Turkey with the full knowledge and facilitation of the Turkish government.
The outcome, however, was disastrous for Aleppo, because as per the Treaty of Lausanne, most of the Province of Aleppo was made part of Turkey with the exception of Aleppo and Alexandretta; thus, Aleppo was cut from its northern satellites and from the Anatolian cities beyond on which Aleppo depended heavily in commerce.
Nowadays, more than 250,000 Christians live in the city representing about 12% of the total population, though the flight of refugees from the city as a result of the Syrian Civil War has led to the Christian population still in Aleppo falling to only 100,000, of whom half are ethnic Armenians.
Instead, Damascus favoured a pro-Egyptian, pro-Saudi orientation and actively participated in the establishment of the Arab League in Alexandria in 1944, an organization that was seen by many Arab nationalists as a 'conspiracy' aimed against the unification of the Fertile Crescent under the Hashimites.
The State of Aleppo as drawn by France contained most of the fertile area of Syria: the fertile countryside of Aleppo in addition to the entire fertile basin of river Euphrates.
Aleppo became part of the Ottoman Empire in 1516, when the city had around 50,000 inhabitants.
Modern-day English-speakers commonly refer to the city as ''Aleppo.''
Finally, the isolation of Syria in the past few decades further exacerbated the situation.
Followed by cholera and plague attacks in 1823 and 1827 respectively, the population of the city declined to 110,000 by the end of the 19th century.
Average humidity is 58%.
In late July 2012, the conflict reached Aleppo in earnest when fighters from the surrounding countryside mounted their first offensive there, apparently trying to capitalise on momentum gained during the Damascus assault.
Souq al-Madina is also home to local products such as wool, agricultural products and soap.
Bit Agusi along with Aleppo was conquered by the Assyrians In the 8th century BC and became part of the Neo-Assyrian Empire until the late 7th century BC, before passing through the hands of the Neo-Babylonians and the Achamenid Persians.
The economy of Aleppo was badly hit by the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.
In December 1947, after the UN decided the partition of Palestine, an Arab mob attacked the Jewish quarter.
Aleppo's large Christian population swelled with the influx of Armenian and Assyrian-Syriac Christian refugees during the early 20th-century and after the Armenian Genocide and Assyrian Genocide of 1915.
''Blue Lagoon'', one of the favourite places of the Aleppine people, is the first water park in Syria.
The Sassanid Persians invaded and controlled Syria briefly in the early 7th century.
After Tamerlane invaded Aleppo in 1400 and destroyed it, the Christians migrated out of the city walls and established their own cell in 1420, at the northwestern suburbs of the city, thus founding the quarters of Jdeydeh.
Aleppo was recovered by the Muslims within a month, and a Mamluk governor placed to govern the city.
New districts and residential communities have been built in the suburbs of Aleppo, many of them are still under construction .
Two major construction projects are scheduled in Aleppo: the "Old City Revival" project and the "Reopening of the stream bed of Queiq River".
On 18 March 2012, another car bomb blast in a residential neighbourhood reportedly killed two security personnel and one female civilian, and wounded 30 residents.
On 24 January 1260, the city was taken by the Mongols under Hulagu in alliance with their vassals the Frank knights of the ruler of Antioch Bohemond VI and his father-in-law the Armenian ruler Hetoum I.
The old city was enclosed within an ancient wall that was last rebuilt by the Mamluks.
According to the Aleppine historian Sheikh ''Kamel Al-Ghazzi'' (1853–1933), the population of Aleppo was around 400,000 before the disastrous earthquake of 1822.
Being surrounded by olive, nut and fruit orchards, Aleppo is famous for a love of eating, as the cuisine is the product of fertile land and location along the Silk Road.
The UDP cooperates closely with other interventions in the sector, namely the EU-supported 'Municipal Administration Modernization' programme.
After World War II, the city was significantly redesigned; in 1954 French architect André Gutton had a number of wide new roads cut through the city to allow easier passage for modern traffic.
Two months later a pro-government demonstration was held in Saadallah Al-Jabiri Square.
According to the official estimate announced by the Aleppo City Council, the population of the city was 2,301,570 by the end of 2005.
Around 20–25 percent of the population died of plague in 1827.
They were later converted into mosques by the Mirdasids during the 11th century.
After the Roman victory over Tigranes, Syria was handed over to Pompey in 64 BC, at which time they became a Roman province.
Later the Hittite king Suppiluliumas I permanently defeated Mitanni and conquered Aleppo in the 14th century BC, Suppiluliumas installed his son Telepinus as king and a dynasty of Suppiluliumas descendents ruled Aleppo until the Late Bronze Age collapse.
As the main economic centre of Syria, Aleppo has a large number of educational institutions.
But this has reversed in recent years with the 2005 introduction of South Korean built DMUs providing a regular bi-hourly express service to both Latakia and Damascus, which miss intermediate stations.
Soon after Aleppo fell to Muslims under Abu Ubaidah ibn al Jarrah in 637.
"Before and after" photographs from Aleppo neighbourhoods of Ard al-Hamra, Tariq al-Bab, and Jabal Badro have shown the destruction where missiles have slammed into residential areas.
In early 2012 security forces began to be targeted with bombings.
Occupying an area of more than , Aleppo is one of the fastest growing cities in the Middle East.
The names of several bishops of the episcopal see of Beroea, which was in the Roman province of Syria Prima, are recorded in extant documents.
Beroea remained under Seleucid rule until 88 BC when Syria was occupied by Tigranes the Great and Beroea became part of the Kingdom of Armenia.
Between 1954 and 1983 many buildings in the old city were demolished to allow for the construction of modern apartment blocks, particularly in the northwestern areas (Bab al-Faraj and Bab al-Jinan).
The city was twice besieged by the Crusaders, in 1098 and in 1124, but was not conquered.
*The restoration of Queiq River is directed towards the revival of the flow of the river, demolishing both the artificial cover of the stream bed and the reinforcement of the stream banks along the river in the city centre.
The issue of the capital became an open debate matter in 1950 when the Popular Party presented a constitution draft that called Damascus a "temporary capital."
Turanshah was shown unusual respect by the Mongols, and was allowed to live because of his age and bravery.
The city and its Emirate became an Imperial vassal from 969 until the Byzantine–Seljuk Wars.
Excavations at Tell as-Sawda and Tell al-Ansari, just south of the old city of Aleppo, show that the area was occupied since at least the latter part of the 3rd millennium BC; and this is also when Aleppo is first mentioned in cuneiform tablets unearthed in Ebla and Mesopotamia, in which it is noted for its commercial and military proficiency.
Since then some of the civil war's "most devastating bombing and fiercest fighting has taken place" in Aleppo, often in residential areas.
He was succeeded by Acacius of Beroea, who governed the see for over 50 years and was at the First Council of Constantinople in 381 and the Council of Ephesus in 431.
Aleppo is an ancient metropolis, and one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world; it may have been inhabited since the 6th millennium BC.
Aleppo lies about  inland from the Mediterranean Sea, on a plateau  above sea level,  east of the Syrian-Turkish border checkpoint of Bab al-Hawa.
Aleppo's western suburbs are home to a group of historical sites and villages which are commonly known as the ''Dead Cities''.
In 438, he was succeeded by Theoctistus, who participated in the Council of Chalcedon in 451 and was a signatory of the joint letter that the bishops of the province of Syria Prima sent in 458 to Emperor Leo I the Thracian about the murder of Proterius of Alexandria.
By the middle of the 16th century, Aleppo had displaced Damascus as the principal market for goods coming to the Mediterranean region from the east.
However, even though a large majority of the Armenians arrived during the period after the Armenian Genocide.
However, after the break-out of the civil war in 2011, the Syrian railway network has suffered major damage and is currently out of use.
Being subjected to constant invasions and political instability, the inhabitants of the city were forced to build cell-like quarters and districts that were socially and economically independent.
Other sweets include mamuniyeh, shuaibiyyat, mushabbak, zilebiyeh, ghazel al-banat etc.
Several night-clubs, bars and cabarets that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city.
Soon thereafter disagreement between the Baathists and the Nasserists over the restoration of the union became a crisis, and the Baathists ousted the Nasserists from power.
The old city of Aleppo lies on the left bank of the Queiq.
In 1183 Aleppo came under the control of Saladin and then the Ayyubid Dynasty.
By mid-century, caravans were no longer bringing silk from Iran to Aleppo, and local Syrian production was insufficient for Europe's demand.
Civilians in Aleppo are living under the blockade and suffering severely from the shortage of medical staff, water, electricity and food.
The state also had access to sea via the autonomous Sanjak of Alexandretta.
In the end however, only three states participated: Aleppo, Damascus, and the Alawite State.
Aleppo was one of the major stations of Syria that has been connected with the Baghdad Railway in 1912, within the Ottoman Empire.
The Christian population was spared.
According to the ''New York Times'', the 11 October 2011 rally in support of president Bashar al-Assad was held by large crowds, while state and local media claimed more than 1.5 million attended and that it was one of the largest rallies ever held in Syria.
This action came after the federation decided to merge the three federated states into one and to take steps encouraging Syria's financial independence, steps which France viewed as too much.
For centuries, Aleppo was the Syrian region's largest city and the Ottoman Empire's third-largest, after Constantinople and Cairo.
Although estimates from this time are very unreliable, it is believed that 230,000 people died, making it the seventh deadliest earthquake in recorded history.
The city of Aleppo is served by a public transport network of buses and minibuses.
The Muslim population was massacred and many Jews were also killed.
Aleppo hosts many music shows and festivals every year at the citadel amphitheatre, such as the "Syrian Song Festival", the "Silk Road Festival" and "Khan al-Harir Festival".
Still under development, it is envisaged to open hotels, exhibition centres and other facilities within the industrial city.
Syrian cuisine in general, and especially Aleppine cuisine, has a very wide selection of dishes.
Soon after Shishakly's domination ended in 1954, a union with Egypt under Gamal Abdul Nasser was implemented in 1958.
Seleucus Nicator established a Hellenic settlement in the site between 301 and 286 BC.
Baroque architecture of the 19th and early 20th centuries is common in the Azizyeh quarter, including the ''Villa Rose''.
The city was originally founded a few kilometres south of the location of the current old city, on the right bank of Queiq River which arises from the Aintab plateau in the north and runs through Aleppo southward to the fertile country of Qinnasrin.
They are mainly Arabs followed by Turkmens and Kurds.
The city's significance in history has been its location at one end of the Silk Road, which passed through central Asia and Mesopotamia.
However, according to the 20th-century historian sheikh Kamel al-Ghazzi and to the contemporary linguist priest Barsoum Ayyoub, the name '''Halab''' (and consequently '''Aleppo''') derives from the Aramaic word '''''Halaba''''' which means "white", referring to the color of soil and marble abundant in the area.
Following the Ottoman provincial reform of 1864 Aleppo became the centre of the newly constituted Vilayet of Aleppo in 1866.
The federation ended in December 1924, when France merged Aleppo and Damascus into a single Syrian State and separated the Alawite State again.
(Arden Shakespeare Edition, 2004).
After the Council of Seleucia of 359, called by Constantius, Meletius of Antioch was transferred from Sebastea to Beroea but in the following year was promoted to Antioch.
Other types of small market-places were called ''caeserias'' (ﻗﻴﺴﺎﺭﻳﺎﺕ).
Many iconic artists of the Arab music like Sayed Darwish and Mohammed Abdel Wahab were visiting Aleppo to recognize the legacy of Aleppine art and learn from its cultural heritage.
''Club d'Alep'' opened in 1945, is a unique social club known for bridge games and other nightlife activities.
As did other Hellenized cities of the Seleucid kingdom, Beroea probably enjoyed a measure of local autonomy, with a local civic assembly or ''boulē'' composed of free Hellenes.
Also, there are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Antioch.
this religious importance continued after the collapse of the Hittite kingdom in the 12th century BC, when Aleppo became part of the Syro-Hittite kingdom of Palistin, whose king renovated the temple of Hadad which was discovered in 2003.
Northern Syria was the center of gravity of the Hellenistic colonizing activity, and therefore of Hellenistic culture in the Seleucid Empire.
The flow of the river was blocked during the 1960s by the Turks, turning the river into a tiny sewage channel, something that led the authorities to cover the stream during the 1970s.
Many villagers and inhabitants of other Syrian districts are migrating to Aleppo in an effort to find better job opportunities, a fact that always increases population pressure, with a growing demand for new residential capacity.
Historically, the city is the main centre of French Catholic Missionaries in Syria.
From the 11th century it was common rabbinic usage to apply the term "Aram-Zobah" to the area of Aleppo, and many Syrian Jews continue to do so.
With a capacity of 75,000 spectators, the Aleppo International Stadium is the largest sports venue in Syria.
Initially, Gouraud envisioned the federation as encompassing all the states, even Lebanon.
A significant number of Assyrians in Aleppo speak Aramaic and hail from the city of Urfa in Turkey.
However, it soon resumed its leading role in Syria when the Hittite power in the region waned due to internal strife.
The za'atar of Aleppo (thyme) is a kind of oregano which is very popular in the regional cuisines.
When the Suez Canal was inaugurated in 1869, trade was diverted to sea and Aleppo began its slow decline.
However, Kemal Atatürk annexed most of the Province of Aleppo as well as Cilicia to Turkey in his War of Independence.
There is also a strong presence of Eastern Catholic Christians in the city including Melkite Catholics, Maronite Catholics, Chaldean Catholics, Syriac Catholics and also there are some who follow the Latin rite.
The Great Synagogue, built in the 5th century, housed the Aleppo Codex.
By 1901, the city's population was around 110,000.
This was why France proposed the idea of a Syrian federation that was realized in 1923.
Soon after, many of the town's remaining 6,000 Jews emigrated.
Syrian nationalists had waged a massive anti-secession public campaign that vigorously mobilized the people against the secession plan, thus leaving the pro-French politicians no choice but to support the union.
The situation was exacerbated further in 1939 when Alexandretta was annexed to Turkey, thus depriving Aleppo of its main port of Iskenderun and leaving it in total isolation within Syria.
On 10 February 2012, suicide car bombs exploded outside two security compounds – the Military Intelligence Directorate's local headquarters, and a Security Preservation forces barracks – reportedly killing 28 (four civilians, thirteen military personnel and eleven security personnel) and wounding 235.
Around 700 abandoned settlements in the northwestern parts of Syria prior to the 5th century, contain remains of Christian Byzantine architecture.
Armenians formed more than half of the Christian community in Aleppo until 1947, when many groups of them left for Soviet Armenia within the frames of the ''Armenian Repatriation Process (1946–1967)''.
The quarters of the Jdeydeh district are home to numerous 16th and 17th-century houses of the Aleppine bourgeoisie, featuring stone engravings.
His successor in Beroea, Anatolius, was at a council in Antioch in 363.
The increasing disagreements between Aleppo and Damascus led eventually to the split of the National Block into two factions: the National Party, established in Damascus in 1946, and the People's Party, established in Aleppo in 1948 by Rushdi Kikhya and Nazim Qudsi.
Each district was characterized by the religious and ethnic characteristics of its inhabitants.
At the beginning of the 1st millennium BC, Aleppo became part of Bit Agusi (which had its capital at Arpad) .
The limited economic resources of the Syrian states made the option of completely independent states undesirable for France, because it threatened an opposite result: the states collapsing and being forced back into unity.
Most of the khans took their names after their location in the souq and function, and are characterized with their beautiful façades and entrances with fortified wooden doors.
Several international institutions have joined efforts with local authorities and the Aleppo Archaeological Society, to rehabilitate the old city by accommodating contemporary life while preserving the old one.
Aleppo served as the company's headquarters until the late 18th century.
After the new council was elected, however, it surprisingly voted to keep the union with Damascus.
The city remained Ottoman until the empire's collapse, but was occasionally riven with internal feuds as well as attacks of cholera from 1823.
However, the prosperity Aleppo experienced in the 16th and 17th century started to fade as silk production in Iran went into decline with the fall of the Safavid dynasty in 1722.
Janissary rebels installed their own government when the Ottoman governor fled.
Occupying an area of  in the north-eastern suburbs of Aleppo, the total investments in the city counted more than US$3.4 billion during 2010.
In October 1271, the Mongols took the city again, attacking with 10,000 horsemen from Anatolia, and defeating the Turcoman troops who were defending Aleppo.
In September 1260, the Egyptian Mamluks negotiated for a treaty with the Franks of Acre which allowed them to pass through Crusader territory unmolested, and engaged the Mongols at the Battle of Ain Jalut on 3 September 1260.
Several areas have a Christian and Armenian majority, such as the old Christian quarter of Jdeydeh.
He called it ''Beroea'' (Βέροια), after Beroea in Macedon.
Aleppo had cultic importance to the Hittites for being the center of worship of the Storm-God.
The Jews of Aleppo were known for their religious commitment, Rabbinic leadership, and their liturgy, consisting of Pizmonim and Baqashot.
Aleppo is the most populous city in Syria, with a population of 2,132,100 as indicated in the latest official census in 2004 by the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS).
The most notable ''Dead cities'' and archaeological sites in Mount Simeon and Mount Kurd near Aleppo include: the Kalota Castle and churches northwest of Aleppo, the Kharab Shams Byzantine basilica of the 4th century, the half-ruined Roman basilica in Fafertin village of 372 AD, the old Byzantine settlement of Surqanya village northwest of Aleppo, the 4th-century Basilic church of Sinhar historic settlement, the Mushabbak Basilica dating back to the second half of the 5th century, the 9th-century BC Assyrian settlement of Kafr Nabo, Brad village and the Saint Julianus Maronite monastery (399–402 AD) where the shrine of Saint Maron is located, the 5th-century Kimar settlement of the Roman and Byzantine eras, the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites of the 5th century, the Syro-Hittite Ain Dara temple of the Iron Age dating back to the 10th and 8th centuries BC, the ancient city of Cyrrhus with the old Roman amphitheatre and two historic bridges, etc.
However, the governor who is being appointed by the president of the republic, has a supreme authority over the city and the entire governorate.
It had nine gates and was surrounded by a broad deep ditch.
Analysis of satellite imagery has shown the destruction as "severely lopsided", with opposition-controlled neighbourhoods overwhelmingly hit.
A series of car bomb attacks and extensive looting have been attributed to opposition forces as well.
As of November 2013, ''The Guardian'' journalist Francesca Borri reports Islamist fighters dominating rebel areas in Aleppo, and claimed they were focusing on enforcing sharia law and fighting one another rather than the government.
It is the country's dominant manufacturing centre, with a share of more than 50% of manufacturing employment and an even greater export share.
This agrarian landscape holds now the remains of large estate houses and churches such as the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites.
Aleppo International Airport (IATA: ALP, ICAO: OSAP) is the international airport serving the city.
As a result of the severe battle, many sections in Al-Madina Souq (part of the Old City of Aleppo World Heritage Site), including parts of the Great Mosque of Aleppo and other medieval buildings in the ancient city, were destroyed and ruined or burnt in late summer 2012 as the armed groups of the Free Syrian Army and the Syrian Arab Army fought for control of the city.
In 1944, Aleppo's population was around 325,000, with 112,110 (34.5%) Christians among which Armenians have counted 60,200.
In the early 20th-century, the town's Jews lived mainly in Al-Jamiliyah, Bab Al-Faraj and the neighbourhoods around the Great Synagogue.
More than 80% of Aleppo's inhabitants are Sunni Muslims.
On 18 August 2016, a report for a Euro-Med Monitor team confirmed that one of the hospitals, overcrowded by injured civilians, was bombarded by Russian warplanes in the western Aleppo countryside, which, according to Euro-Med Monitor, is a very clear violation of the international laws say that those civilians must be protected from the continuing conflict.
Other varieties include the "disk" ''kibbeh'' (''kәbbe ʔrāṣ''), the "plate" ''kibbeh'' (''kәbbe bәṣfīḥa'' or ''kәbbe bṣēniyye'') and the raw ''kibbeh'' (''kәbbe nayye'').
By separating Aleppo from Damascus, Gouraud wanted to capitalize on a traditional state of competition between the two cities and turn it into political division.
It was surrounded by a circle of eight hills surrounding a prominent central hill on which the castle (originally a temple dating to the 2nd millennium BC) was erected.
It was upgraded and developed in the years to 1999 when the new current terminal was opened.
''Souq al-Madina'', as it is locally known, is an active trade centre for imported luxury goods, such as raw silk from Iran, spices and dyes from India, and coffee from Damascus.
Most traveled to the USA, where a sizable number of Syrian Jews currently live in Brooklyn, New York.
The number of the students in Aleppo University is more than 60,000.
Aleppo is also known for its knowledgeable and cultivated listeners, known as ''sammi'a'' or "connoisseur listeners".
Rome's presence afforded relative stability in northern Syria for over three centuries.
Along with the University of Aleppo, there are state colleges and private universities which attract large numbers of students from other regions of Syria and the Arab countries.
The first whose name survives is that of Saint Eustathius of Antioch, who, after being bishop of Beroea, was transferred to the important metropolitan see of Antioch shortly before the 325 First Council of Nicaea.
The commercial traditions in Aleppo have deep roots in the history.
The mountain series that run along the Mediterranean coast, namely Mount Alawites and Mount Amanus, largely block the effects of the Mediterranean on climate (rain shadow effect).
Its subdistrict (''nahiya'') consists of 23 localities with a collective population of 2,181,061 in 2004.
The favourite drink is Arak, which is usually consumed along with meze, Aleppine kebabs and kibbehs.
The city was then given to the former Emir of Homs, al-Ashraf, and a Mongol garrison was established in the city.
The airport serves as a secondary hub for Syrian Arab Airlines.
All of those groups contributed food traditions, since Aleppo was part of the Ottoman Empire.
Contested and rebel held parts of the city have been subject to "continuous jet, mortar, and artillery bombardment" by pro-government forces.
Although the province was administered by a legate from Rome, Rome did not impose its administrative organization on the Greek-speaking ruling class.
): "Set you down this/And say besides that in Aleppo once,/Where a malignant and a turbanned Turk/Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,/I took by th' throat the circumcised dog/And smote him—thus!"
According to the historical data presented by ''Al-Ghazzi'', the vast majority of the Aleppine Christians were Catholics until the latter days of the Ottoman rule.
In 1968, there were an estimated 700 Jews still remaining in Aleppo.
The oldest Armenian church in the city is from 1491 as well, which indicates that they have been here long before the genocide.
The houses and other properties of the Jewish families which were not sold after the migration, remain uninhabited under the protection of the Syrian Government.
The union, however, collapsed only two years later when a junta of young Damascene officers carried out a separatist coup.
This incited a second coup only four months after his.
Some of the spoils were also given to Hethoum I for his assistance in the attack.
The hills are Tell as-Sawda, Tell ʕāysha, Tell as-Sett, Tell al-Yāsmīn (Al-ʕaqaba), Tell al-Ansāri (Yārūqiyya), ʕan at-Tall, al-Jallūm, Baḥsīta.
When the Syrian Revolt erupted in southern Syria in 1925, the French held in Aleppo State new elections that were supposed to lead to the breaking of the union with Damascus and restore the independence of Aleppo State.
On the other hand, Christians who left the city during the Mongol invasion, were unable to resettle back in their own quarter in the old town, a fact that led them to establish a new neighbourhood in 1420, built at the northern suburbs of Aleppo outside the city walls, to become known as ''al-Jdeydeh'' quarter (for "new district" in Arabic).
This decline may have helped to preserve the old city of Aleppo, its medieval architecture and traditional heritage.
One estimate of casualties by an international humanitarian organizations is 13,500 killed – 1,500 under 5 years of age – and 23,000 injured.
The average temperature is .
Branches of the state conservatory and the fine arts school are also operating in the city.
On the other hand, Damascus, which is basically an oasis on the fringes of the Syrian Desert, had neither enough fertile land nor access to sea.
