An Aleut dictionary and grammar have been published, and portions of the Bible were translated into Aleut.
In order to hunt sea mammals and to travel between islands, the Aleuts became experts of sailing and navigation.
The Atka people believed that another people lived in their land before them.
Early Aleut women created baskets and woven mats of exceptional technical quality, using only their thumbnail, grown long and then sharpened, as a tool.
In 1811, in order to obtain more of the commercially valuable otter pelts, a party of Aleut hunters traveled to the coastal island of San Nicolas, near the Alta California-Baja California border.
The human remains are buried in shallow graves at the rear of the cave.
It may be considered a pan-Aleutian mortuary practice.
Inside benches were placed along the sides, with a hearth in the middle.
Nezimov, leader of the Russians ordered two of his men, Stephano (ステッパノ) and Kazhimov (カジモフ) to kill his mistress Oniishin (オニイシン), who was the Aleut chief's daughter, because he doubted that Oniishin had tried to dissuade her father and other leaders from pushing for more goods.
In addition, the population suffered as traditional lifestyles were disrupted.
Each clan would have a specific style to signify their origin.
It was then cut and sewn to make waterproof parkas, bags, and other receptacles (Turner, Ch.
The Aleut survived by hunting and gathering.
By piercing their orifices: the nose, the mouth, and ears, they would stop evil entities, ''khoughkh'', from entering their bodies (Osborn, 52).
The variety of mortuary practices mostly did not included the ritual of including extensive grave goods, as has been found in other cultures.
While English and Russian are the dominant languages used by Aleuts living in the United States and Russia respectively, the Aleut language is still spoken by an estimated 150 people in the United States and 5 people in Russia.
Masks were created to portray figures of their myths and oral history.
Umqan burials are the most widely known type of mortuary practice found in the Aleutian Islands.
The gut was cut and stretched, and fastened to stakes to dry.
Historically carving was a male art and leadership attribute; in today’s world it is an art of both sexes.
They used vermilion paint, hematite, the ink bag of the octopus, and the root of a kind of grass or vine to color the threads.
As Russians opened fire, they started to run away again.
Materials associated with birds were important, as birds were considered to defend animals in the spirit world.
This harpoon separated into four parts.
These more isolated examples include mummification, private burial houses, abandoned houses, etc.
Piercings, such as the nose pin, were common among both men and women and were usually performed a few days after birth.
The lance would penetrate the chest and pass through the chest cavity and exit from the back.
The Aleut Restitution Act of 1988 was an attempt by Congress to compensate the survivors.
Parkas had a hood that could be cinched, as could the wrist openings, so water could not get in.
The Aleut people developed in one of the harshest climates in the world, and learned to create and protect warmth.
These continue to have majority-Aleut communities.
They would sew, or prick, different designs on the chin, the side of the face, or under the nose.
The World War II campaign by the United States to retake Attu and Kiska was a significant component of the operations in the Pacific theater.
The longest part was the shaft with the thicker stalk closer to the tip of the harpoon.
The bedrooms were at the back of the lodge, opposite the entrance.
Together with high fatalities from European diseases, the Nicoleños suffered so much from the loss of their men that by 1853, only one living Nicoleña person remained.
They indicate a pattern of burying the dead within the main activity areas of the settlement.
They often enslaved the natives, forcing them to work for them.
When five Russians opened fire, the Aleuts ran away.
Aleut families used it when traveling among the islands.
The bone tip is fastened to a length of braided twine meanwhile; the hunter held the other end of the twine in his hand.
These burials tend to be isolated and limited to the remains of adult males, which may indicate a specific ritual practice.
Aleut was written in the Cyrillic script beginning in 1829.
According to the up-to-date Encyclopædia Britannica Online, "Early 21st-century population estimates indicated more than 15,000 individuals of Aleut descent."
Men as well as women often carved ivory and wood.
Preparation of the gut for clothing involved several steps.
The length of the compound head was equivalent to the distance between the planes of a man’s chest to his back.
Full-blooded Aleuts still exist and are growing in number, and there are also people who may be part Russian or other descent but solely identify as Aleut.
They portrayed such ancients in their masks, which show anthropomorphic creatures named in their language.
This lack of ritual evidence could hint at either no ritualized ceremony, or one that has not yet been revealed in the archaeological record.
Most commonly the carvings of ivory and wood originated as part of making hunting weapons.
Aleut women sewed finely stitched waterproof parkas from seal gut, and wove fine baskets from dune wildrye grass or ''Elymus mollis''.
The Russians killed four Aleut leaders.
The pit was then covered by a roof framed with driftwood, thatched with grass, then covered with earth for insulation.
They could split threads to make them as fine as a hair.
Men wore breeches made from the esophageal skin of seals.
The fish and sea animals were processed in a variety of ways: dried, smoked or roasted.
The boiled skin and blubber of a whale was a delicacy, as was walrus.
They were also processed as ''alutiqqutigaq'', a mixture of berries, fat and fish.
Each woman had her own sewing needles, which she made, and that often had detailed end of animal heads.
(Gross & Khera, pg.
A thin strip of seal intestine could also be used, twisted to form a thread.
For example, a deconstructed boat was found in a burial cave on Kanaga Island.
In addition to these four main types, other kinds of burials have been found in the Aleutian Islands.
There was high demand for the furs that the Aleut provided from hunting.
Another type of practice has been to bury remains in areas next to the communal houses of the settlement.
Other carvings depicted the animals of their world, which were so important: such as seals and whales.
The Aleut constructed partially underground houses called ''barabara''.
The United States government evacuated hundreds more Aleuts from the western chain and the Pribilofs during WWII, placing them in internment camps in southeast Alaska, where many died.
In May 1784, local Aleut revolted on Amchitka against the Russian traders.
Once the tip penetrates the animal the upper sub head broke off from the rest of the shaft, however, since it was still connected with the braided loop it rotated the head into a horizontal position inside the animal’s body so that it could not get away from the hunter.
The sharp barbs penetrated with ease, but could not be pulled out.
On some hunting trips, the men would take several women with them.
The Russians had a small trading post there.
Body art also enhanced their beauty, social status, and spiritual authority.
The leading Aleuts negotiated with the Russians, saying they had failed to deliver enough supplies in return for furs.
The remains so far have been mainly found with other human and faunal remains.
They fished for salmon, crabs, shellfish, and cod, as well as harvesting sea mammals such as seal, walrus and whales.
In the 1820s, the Russian-American Company administered a large portion of the North Pacific during a Russian-led expansion of the fur trade.
For example, the daughter of a rich, famous ancestor or father would work hard at her tattoos to show the accomplishments of that ancestor or father.
Aleuts traditionally built houses by digging an oblong square pit in the ground, usually  or smaller.
To date, such examples are not considered to be part of a larger, unifying tradition.
19th-century craftsmen were famed for their ornate wooden hunting hats, which feature elaborate and colorful designs and may be trimmed with sea lion whiskers, feathers, and ivory.
Alaskans generally recognize that the Russian occupation, while the colonists were limited in number, resulted in few full-blooded Aleuts today.
Archaeologists have been trying to dissect the absence of a great tradition of grave goods, but findings have been ambiguous and do not really help the academic community to understand these practices more.
Nevizimov, leader of the Russian group, was jailed after the whole incident was reported to Russian officials.
They caught Puffins, Lunda Cirrhata, Fratercula Corniculata, Guillemots, and Cephus & Murres.
After they ran, Russians noticed that all the men had left the village.
The language belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut language family and includes three dialect groupings: Eastern Aleut, spoken on the Eastern Aleutian, Shumagin, Fox and Pribilof Islands; Atkan, spoken on Atka and Bering islands; and the now extinct Attuan dialect.
The 1910 Census count showed 1,491 Aleuts.
They would catch birds and prepare the carcasses and feathers for future use.
Sometimes tattoos signaled social class.
Some women continue to make baskets in this way.
Such mounds were first excavated by archeologists in 1972 on Southwestern Unmak Island, and dated to the early contact period.
According to Lillie McGarvey, a 20th-century Aleut leader, ''barabaras'' keep "occupants dry from the frequent rains, warm at all times, and snugly sheltered from the high winds common to the area".
The next day the Aleut returned, but escaped again when the Russians started firing.
After the arrival of Russian Orthodox missionaries in the late 18th century, many Aleuts became Christian.
Basketry was an art reserved for women.
Archeologists have found many different types of burials, dating from a variety of periods, in the Aleutian Islands.
All parkas were decorated with bird feathers, beard bristles of seal and sea-lion, beaks of sea parrots, bird claws, sea otter fur, dyed leather, and caribou hair sewn in the seams.
The baidarka (small skin boat) was a small boat covered in sea lion skin.
These caves tend to be located next to middens and near villages.
These sarcophagi are left exposed, with no attempt to bury the dead in the ground.
That evening, hundreds of Aleut men gathered on a mountain and marched to the Russians' houses.
The throwing lance usually consisted of three parts: a wooden shaft, a bone ring or belt, and the compound head that was made with a barbed bonehead and a stone tip.
The women wore the skin of seal or sea-otter, and the men wore bird skin parkas, the feathers turned in or out depending on the weather.
Tattooing for women began when they reached physical maturity, or menstruation, at about age 20.
The bone ring was designed to break after impact so that the shaft could be used again for another kill.
(According to , written by Katsuragawa Hoshū after interviewing Daikokuya Kōdayū.)
The barbed head was loosely fitted into the socket of the foreshaft so that when the animal was stabbed, it pulled the head away from the rest of the harpoon.
A male would wear sea lion whiskers in his ears as a trophy of his expertise as a hunter.
The Japanese learned that the Aleut felt the situation was at crisis.
The body orifices were believed to be pathways for the entry of evil entities.
Connected to the fore shaft of the harpoon is the toggle head spear tip.
For regular travel, they used their large baidaras.
Disagreement arose, turning violent; in the ensuing battle, the Aleut killed nearly all the Nicoleño men.
They have had four main types of burials: ''umqan'', cave, above-ground sarcophagi, and burials connected to communal houses.
The prepared intestines were turned inside out.
Russian traders and later Europeans married Aleut women and had families with them.
The simple Aleut harpoon consisted of four main parts: the wooden shaft, the bone foreshaft, and the bonehead (tip) with barbs pointed backward.
Knut Bergsland says their word means “like those found in caves.” Masks were generally carved from wood and were decorated with paints made from berries or other natural products.
According to the 2000 Census, 11,941 people reported Aleut ancestry, while 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors.
The individual with the most piercings held the highest respect.
In the Near Islands, isolated graves have also been found with the remains, and not just the sarcophagus, left exposed on the surface.
It started when supplies ran out which the Russians had provided to local people in trade for their furs.
The main Aleut method of basketry was false embroidery (overlay).
Feathers were inserted into holes carved out for extra decoration.
When the men were hunting on the water, they wore waterproof parkas made from seal or sea-lion guts, or the entrails of bear, walrus, or whales.
Today, Aleut weavers continue to produce woven grass pieces of a remarkable cloth-like texture, works of modern art with roots in ancient tradition.
Throughout the Aleutian Islands, gravesites have been found that are above-ground sarcophagi.
Men traditionally received their first tattoo after killing their first animal, another rite of passage.
There were no other major finds of grave goods in the vicinity.
The '''Aleut people''' () (), also referred to as the "Unangan", are the indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands and Shumagin Islands of Alaska, United States and Kamchatka Krai, Russia.
Worn for decorative reasons, and sometimes to signify social standing, reputation, and the age of the wearer, Aleuts would pierce their lower lips with walrus ivory and wear beads or bones.
The shaft was fitted into the socket of the fore shaft and a bone ring was then placed over the joint to hold the two pieces together, as well as, protecting the wooden shaft from splitting.
Their share in the return for the furs they made also were decreasing, as Russian ships stopped coming to the island.
They resettled many Aleut families to the Commander Islands (within the Aleutsky District of the Kamchatka Krai in Russia) and to the Pribilof Islands (in Alaska).
Foreign diseases, harsh treatment and disruption of traditional society soon reduced the population to less than one-tenth this number.
Strands of grasses or reeds were overlaid upon the basic weaving surface, to obtain a plastic effect.
Sea-lions, harbor seals, and the sea otters are the most abundant marine mammals.
The Pribilof Islands boast the highest number of active speakers of Aleutian.
In these instances, mass graves are common for women and children.
Some grave goods have been found in the caves associated with such burials.
Тhe Aleut (Unangan) people were distributed throughout the Aleutian Islands, the Shumagin Islands, and the far western part of the Alaska Peninsula, with an estimated population of around 25,000 before contact with Europeans.
They collected and dried grasses for their woven baskets.
A bone knife was used to remove the muscle tissue and fat from the walls of the intestine.
The upper sub shaft held the razor stone head and attached to the lower sub shaft with a small braided twine loop.
(See Juana Maria, ''The Lone Woman of San Nicolas'', also known as Karana)
The Aleut carved work, distinct in each region, has attracted traders for centuries, including early Europeans and other Alaska Natives.
The locally resident Nicoleño nation sought a payment from the Aleut hunters for the large number of otters being killed in the area.
The interior regions of the rough, mountainous Aleutian Islands provided little in terms of natural resources for the Aleutian people.
Birch bark, puffin feathers, and baleen are also commonly used by the Aleut in basketry.
The addition of objects to "accompany" the dead is rare.
Cave burials have been found throughout the Eastern Aleutian Islands.
It was developed and used for hunting because of its sturdiness and maneuverability.
This way of erecting sarcophagi above ground is not as common as umqan and cave burials, but it is still widespread.
While hunting, they used small watercraft called ''baidarkas.''
They later transported captive Attu Islanders to Hokkaidō, where they were held as prisoners of war.
Before the 19th century, piercings and tattoos were very common among the Aleut people, especially among women.
This tip was made of two sub shafts that break apart on impact with an animal.
Human remains are abundant in such sites.
It was also used to transport goods for trade, and warriors took them to battle.
Women made needles from the wingbones of seabirds.
This type of mortuary practice has been mainly found in the Near Islands.
Caribou, musk oxen, deer, moose, whale and other types of game were eaten roasted or preserved for later use.
In the 1870, the language was written in the Latin script.
While the men attempted another attack the next day, they yelled and moved more quickly towards the house.
They called these parkas ''kameikas,'' meaning raingear in the English language.
A woman would need a year for all the labor to make one parka.
For everything else, the Aleuts had learned to use the fish and mammals they caught and processed to satisfy their needs.
As a result, archaeologists cannot decipher the context to understand exactly why a certain type of burial was used in particular cases.
Berries were dried.
One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut.
The deck was made with a sturdy chamber, the sides of the craft were nearly vertical and the bottom was rounded.
Each lasted two years with proper care.
They have also adopted new materials and methods for their art.
Prior to major influence from outside, there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts on the archipelago.
Prior to major outside contact, there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts on the archipelago.
The Aleut developed a style of burials that were accommodated to local conditions, and honored the dead.
The Russians arrived in the Aleutian Islands in 1786 and were active there, with small trading settlements and religious missions, through the mid-19th century.
The Aleut term for grass basket is ''qiigam aygaaxsii''.
Jewelry ornaments were made for piercing lips (labrum), nose, and ears, as well as for necklaces.
Children wore parkas made of downy eagle skin with tanned bird skin caps.
The compound harpoon was the most prevalent weapon of the Aleut people.
After they had been killed, the Aleut began to move from Amchitka to neighboring islands.
They made the baidarka for one or two persons only.
One Aleut leader recognized by the State of Alaska for her work in teaching and reviving Aleut basketry was Anfesia Shapsnikoff.
Archeologists and anthropologists have not found much evidence related to burial rituals.
As many Aleut have moved out of the islands to other parts of the state, they have taken with them the knowledge of their arts.
From time to time, adult women decorated the nose pins by hanging pieces of amber and coral from strings on it; the semi-precious objects dangled down to their chins.
In the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut; nearly 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors.
In 1942, during World War II, Japanese forces occupied Attu and Kiska Islands in the western Aleutians.
The baidara was a large, open, walrus-skin-covered boat.
The women undertook the sewing (''Enthnohistory:'' Gross & Khera pg.
In other words, this people suffered high fatalities in the 19th and early 20th centuries from Eurasian infectious diseases to which they had no immunity.
Their influence disrupted Aleut life, and many of the traditional customs disappeared.
The Aleut also carve walrus ivory for other uses, such as jewelry and sewing needles.
They collected stones for weapons, tools, stoves or lamps.
The findings discussed represent only the sites that have been excavated.
Piercing ears was also very common.
