He handled letters to Congress, state governors, and the most powerful generals in the Continental Army; he drafted many of Washington's orders and letters at the latter's direction; he eventually issued orders from Washington over Hamilton's own signature.Hamilton was involved in a wide variety of high-level duties, including intelligence, diplomacy, and negotiation with senior army officers as Washington's emissary.
Hamilton continued his legal and business activities in New York City, but lost much of his national prominence within the Federalist party.
The state convention in Poughkeepsie in June 1788 pitted Hamilton, Jay, James Duane, Robert Livingston, and Richard Morris against the Clintonian faction led by Melancton Smith, Lansing, Yates, and Gilbert Livingston.
She contracted a severe fever and died on February 19, 1768, 1:02&nbsp;am, leaving Hamilton orphaned.
Congress ordered the Army officially disbanded in April 1783.
In this letter he wrote, "The fundamental defect is a want of power in Congress…the confederation itself is defective and requires to be altered; it is neither fit for war, nor peace."
In October 1772, he arrived in the colonies and began learning fundamental subjects missing from his education at the Elizabethtown Academy, a grammar school in Elizabethtown, New Jersey.
It also included the separation of powers into the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches.
The essay impressed community leaders, who collected a fund to send the young Hamilton to the North American colonies for his education.
Those in the army were paying for much of their own supplies, and they had not been paid in eight months.
This draft had most of the features of the actual Constitution.
Hamilton listed his birth year as 1757 when he first arrived in the Thirteen Colonies.
However, the Quasi-War, while hard-fought at sea, was never officially declared and did not involve army action.
10 with bayonets in a nighttime action, as planned.
Hamilton argued that Congress ought to adjourn to Princeton, New Jersey.
He proposed to have an elected President and elected Senators who would serve for life, contingent upon "good behavior" and subject to removal for corruption or abuse; this idea contributed later to the hostile view of Hamilton as a monarchist sympathizer, held by James Madison.
Hamilton, Troup and four other undergraduates formed an unnamed literary society that is regarded as a precursor of the Philolexian Society
Alexander supplemented his education with a family library of 34 books.
During the state convention, New Hampshire and Virginia becoming the ninth and tenth states to ratify the Constitution, respectively, had ensured any adjournment would not happen and a compromise would have to be reached.
Hamilton was a nationalist, who emphasized strong central government and successfully argued that the implied powers of the Constitution provided the legal authority to fund the national debt, assume states' debts, and create the government-backed Bank of the United States.
They encouraged MacDougall to continue his aggressive approach, threatening unknown consequences if their demands were not met, and defeated proposals that would have resolved the crisis without establishing general federal taxation: that the states assume the debt to the army, or that an impost be established dedicated to the sole purpose of paying that debt.
Hamilton and Faucette moved together to her birthplace, Nevis, where she had inherited property from her father.
He wrote an letter to his father that was a detailed account of a hurricane which had devastated Christiansted on August 30, 1772.
But, Hamilton's early life in the Caribbean was recorded in documents which were first published in Danish in 1930; this evidence has caused historians since then to favor a birth year of 1755.
He was appointed in July 1782 to the Congress of the Confederation as a New York representative for the term beginning in November 1782.
They denounced Hamilton as too friendly toward Britain and to monarchy in general.
He was an active participant at Philadelphia; and he helped achieve ratification by writing 51 of the 85 installments of ''The Federalist'' Papers, which to this day are the single most important reference for Constitutional interpretation.
He expressed these criticisms in his letter to James Duane dated September 3, 1780.
Hamilton supervised the entire project, enlisted the participants, wrote the majority of the essays, and oversaw the publication.
Hamilton submitted various financial reports to Congress.
He came under the influence of William Livingston, a leading intellectual and revolutionary, with whom he lived for a time at his Liberty Hall.
When Vice President Burr ran for governor of New York state in 1804, Hamilton crusaded against him as unworthy.
Hamilton's highlights included discussion that although republics have been culpable for disorders in the past, advances in the "science of politics" had fostered principles that ensured that those abuses could be prevented, such as the division of powers, legislative checks and balances, an independent judiciary, and legislators that were represented by electors (Numbers 7–9).
Thereafter, she supported her children in St. Croix, keeping a small store in Christiansted.
He left office on the last day of January 1795.
When they began to march toward Philadelphia, Congress charged Hamilton and two others with intercepting the mob.
This continued until early July 1781, when Hamilton submitted a letter to Washington with his commission enclosed, "thus tacitly threatening to resign if he didn't get his desired command."
While writing the report he also sought out suggestions from contemporaries such as John Knox Witherspoon, and Madison.
It may be said this constitutes as an elective monarchy…But by making the executive subject to impeachment, the term 'monarchy' cannot apply…" During the convention, Hamilton constructed a draft for the Constitution based on the convention debates, but he never presented it.
Although they agreed on additional taxes such as distilleries and duties on imported liquors and land taxes, Madison feared that the securities from the government debt would fall in foreign hands.
In 1788, Hamilton served yet another term in what proved to be the last session of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation.
He tried to control the policies of President Adams (1797–1801).
In 1790 negotiators discussed not only boundary, but also financial compensation of New York land-grantees whose grants Vermont refused to recognize because they conflicted with earlier grants from New Hampshire.
Jay wrote the next four papers to elaborate on the confederation's weakness and the need for unity against foreign aggression and against splitting into rival confederacies, and, except for Number 64, was not further involved.
By the early 1780s, due to the structure of the government under the Articles of Confederation, it had no power to tax to either raise revenue or pay its soldiers.
Early in the Convention he made a speech proposing a President-for-Life; it had no effect upon the deliberations of the convention.
Furthermore, the Continental officers had been promised, in May 1778, after Valley Forge, a pension of half their pay when they were discharged.
Much of the structure of the government of the United States was worked out in those five years, beginning with the structure and function of the cabinet itself.
The Morrises and Hamilton contacted Knox to suggest he and the officers defy civil authority, at least by not disbanding if the army were not satisfied; Hamilton wrote Washington to suggest that Hamilton covertly "take direction" of the officers' efforts to secure redress, to secure continental funding but keep the army within the limits of moderation.
After the Battle of Yorktown, Hamilton resigned his commission.
Although Hamilton was a supporter of the Revolutionary cause at this pre-war stage, he did not approve of mob reprisals against Loyalists.
Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress had no power to collect taxes or to demand money from the states.
Subtle differences appeared with the two when discussing the necessity of standing armies
Madison joined Hamilton in persuading Congress to send a delegation to persuade Rhode Island to change its mind.
While on Washington's staff, Hamilton long sought command and a return to active combat.
He specialized in defending Tories and British subjects, as in ''Rutgers v. Waddington'', in which he defeated a claim for damages done to a brewery by the Englishmen who held it during the military occupation of New York.
So, the great enterprise in Hamilton's project of an administrative republic is the establishment of stability.
Hamilton was one of the men who restored King's College, which had been suspended since 1776 and severely damaged during the War, as Columbia College.
When Jefferson and Aaron Burr tied for the presidency in the electoral college in 1801, Hamilton helped to defeat Burr, whom he found unprincipled, and to elect Jefferson despite philosophical differences.
As the war drew nearer to an end, he knew that opportunities for military glory were diminishing.
During the war, Hamilton became close friends with several fellow officers.
The President of Congress, John Dickinson, feared that the Pennsylvania state militia was unreliable, and refused its help.
On July 31, 1781, Washington relented and assigned Hamilton as commander of a New York light infantry battalion.
Hamilton became a clerk at a local import-export firm, Beekman and Cruger, which traded with New England; he was left in charge of the firm for five months in 1771, while the owner was at sea.
In 1782 after several months without pay, a group of officers organized to send a delegation to lobby Congress, led by Capt.
Chernow says that, "Hamilton's famous letter about the storm astounds the reader for two reasons: for all its bombastic excesses, it does seem wondrous the 17-year-old self-educated clerk could write with such verve and gusto.
Hamilton argued, "And let me observe that an executive is less dangerous to the liberties of the people when in office during life than for seven years.
In the planning for the assault on Yorktown, Hamilton was given command of three battalions, which were to fight in conjunction with the allied French troops in taking Redoubts No.
The peace treaty of 1783 that ended the war included Vermont within the boundaries of the United States.
Through his connections with influential New York patriots such as Alexander McDougall and John Jay, he raised the New York Provincial Company of Artillery of sixty men in 1776, and was elected captain.
Hamilton blamed Burr for this result, and ill characterizations of Burr appear in his correspondence thereafter.
Taking offense at some of Hamilton's comments, Burr challenged him to a duel in 1804 and mortally wounded Hamilton, who died the next day.
He celebrated his birthday on January 11.
Hamilton recruited John Jay and James Madison to write a series of essays defending the proposed Constitution, now known as ''The Federalist'' Papers, and made the largest contribution to that effort, writing 51 of 85 essays published (Madison wrote 29, Jay only five).
It is not certain whether the year of Hamilton's birth was 1757 or 1755; most historical evidence after Hamilton's arrival in North America supports the idea that he was born in 1757, and many historians had accepted this birth date.
In probate court, Faucette's "first husband seized her estate" and obtained the few valuables she had owned, including some household silver.
In 1764 King George III had ruled in favor of New York in a dispute between New York and New Hampshire over the region that later became the state of Vermont.
Consequently, the people of the disputed territory, called the New Hampshire Grants, resisted the enforcement of New York's laws within the Grants.
Hamilton transmitted a letter arguing that Congress already had the power to tax, since it had the power to fix the sums due from the several states; but Virginia's rescission of its own ratification ended the Rhode Island negotiations.
He declined these invitations, believing his best chance for improving his station in life was glory on the battlefield.
Hamilton also wrote an extensive defense of the constitution (No.
Under fire from HMS ''Asia'', he led a successful raid for British cannons in the Battery, the capture of which resulted in the Hearts of Oak becoming an artillery company thereafter.
This resolution contained many features of the future U.S. Constitution, including a strong federal government with the ability to collect taxes and raise an army.
The sources that Hamilton used ranged from Frenchmen such as Jacques Necker and Montesquieu to British writers such as Hume, Hobbes, and Malachy Postlethwayt.
This may have had severe emotional consequences for him, even by the standards of an 18th-century childhood.
The French also fought bravely, suffered heavy casualties, and took Redoubt No.
Clearly, Hamilton was highly literate and already had considerable fund of verbal riches."
Hugh Knox, a minister and journalist, published the letter in the ''Royal Danish-American Gazette''.
Both were fluent in French and shared similar interests.
These programs were funded primarily by a tariff on imports, and later also by a highly controversial tax on whiskey.
Hamilton and his battalions fought bravely and took Redoubt No.
Hamilton requested militia from Pennsylvania's Supreme Executive Council, but was turned down.
In later life, he tended to give his age only in round figures.
Hamilton resigned from Congress, and in July 1783 was authorized to practice law in New York after several months of self-directed education.
New York then refused to recognize claims to property derived from grants by New Hampshire governor Benning Wentworth during the preceding 15 years when the territory had been governed as a de facto part of New Hampshire.
When the term of Philip Schuyler was up in 1791, elected in his place was the attorney general of New York, one Aaron Burr.
While on Washington's staff, Hamilton had become frustrated with the decentralized nature of the wartime Continental Congress, particularly its dependence upon the states for voluntary financial support.
He soon became the senior aide to General Washington, the American forces' commander-in-chief.
Hamilton was invited to become an aide to William Alexander, Lord Stirling and one other general, perhaps Nathanael Greene or Alexander McDougall.
Seabury essentially tried to provoke fear into the colonies and his main objective was to stopgap the potential of a union among the colonies.
Indeed, Ethan Allen's militia called the Green Mountain Boys, noted for successes in the war against the British in 1775, was originally formed for the purpose of resisting the colonial government of New York.
Frustrated with the weakness of the central government, Hamilton while in Princeton drafted a call to revise the Articles of Confederation.
Congress rejected the proposal.
23–36), and discussed the Senate and executive and judicial branches in Numbers 65–85.
It established friendly economic relations with Britain to the chagrin of France and the supporters of the French Revolution.
During the project each person was responsible for their areas of expertise; Jay covered foreign relations, Madison covered the history of republics and confederacies, along with the anatomy of the new government and Hamilton covered the branches of government most pertinent to him: the executive and judicial branches, with some aspects of the Senate, as well as covering military matters and taxation The papers first appeared in ''The Independent Journal'' on October 27, 1787.
Hamilton's opposition to Adams' re-election helped cause his defeat in the 1800 election.
On March 15, Washington defused the Newburgh situation by giving a speech to the officers.
In early 1776, he raised a provincial artillery company, to which he was appointed captain.
Before his appointment to Congress in 1782, Hamilton was already sharing his criticisms of Congress.
In the same month, Congress passed a new measure for a twenty-five-year impost—which Hamilton voted against—that again required the consent of all the states; it also approved a commutation of the officers' pensions to five years of full pay.
It took part in the campaign of 1776 around New York City, particularly at the Battle of White Plains; at the Battle of Trenton, it was stationed at the high point of town, the meeting of the present Warren and Broad Streets, to keep the Hessians pinned in the Trenton Barracks.
Hamilton's arguments used for the ratifications were largely iterations of work from ''The Federalist'' Papers, and Smith eventually went for ratification, though it was more out of necessity than Hamilton's rhetoric.
'''Alexander Hamilton''' (January 11, 1755 or 1757July 12, 1804) was an American statesman.
When the Church of England clergyman Samuel Seabury published a series of pamphlets promoting the Loyalist cause in 1774, Hamilton responded anonymously with his first political writings, ''A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress'' and ''The Farmer Refuted''.
Alexander MacDougall.
Consideration of the bill was deferred to a later date.
Their report recommending the delegation argued the federal government needed not just some level of financial autonomy, but also the ability to make laws that superseded those of the individual states.
His mother moved with the young Hamilton to St. Croix in the Virgin Islands, then ruled by Denmark.
Hamilton wrote the first paper signed as Publius, and all of the subsequent papers were signed under the name.
Hamilton's mother had been married previously to Johann Michael Lavien of St. Croix.
While Hamilton continued clerking, he remained an avid reader and later developed an interest in writing.
Many items were auctioned off, but a friend purchased the family's books and returned them to the young Hamilton.
He first used the popularity of the Constitution by the masses to compel George Clinton to sign, but was unsuccessful.
Long dissatisfied with the weak Articles of Confederation, he played a major leadership role at the Annapolis Convention in 1786.
Hamilton published two additional pieces attacking the Quebec Act and may have also authored the fifteen anonymous installments of "The Monitor" for Holt's ''New York Journal''.
He drilled with the company, before classes, in the graveyard of nearby St. George's Chapel.
In 1791, while Secretary, Hamilton was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Among these are the First Report on the Public Credit, Operations of the Act Laying Duties on Imports, Report on a National Bank, On the Establishment of a Mint, Report on Manufactures, and the Report on a Plan for the Further Support of Public Credit.
Hamilton eventually received an invitation he felt he could not refuse: to serve as Washington's aide, with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
He drafted its resolution for a constitutional convention, and in doing so brought his longtime desire to have a more powerful, more financially independent federal government one step closer to reality.
A major issue splitting the parties was the Jay Treaty, largely designed by Hamilton in 1794.
Washington wrote Hamilton back, declining to introduce the army; after the crisis had ended, he warned of the dangers of using the army as leverage to gain support for the national funding plan.
Hamilton had written to Robert Morris as early as 1781 that fixing the public credit will win their objective of independence.
During 1777–1785, Vermont was repeatedly denied representation in the Continental Congress, largely because New York insisted that Vermont was legally a part of New York.
Washington did request Hamilton's advice and assistance on matters outside the purview of the Treasury Department.
He led the Annapolis Convention, which successfully influenced Congress to issue a call for the Philadelphia Convention, in order to create a new constitution.
The mob arrived in Philadelphia, and the soldiers proceeded to harangue Congress for their pay.
After the war, Hamilton was elected to the Congress of the Confederation from New York.
One of the Founding Fathers of the United States, he was an influential interpreter and promoter of the U.S. Constitution, as well as the founder of the nation's financial system, the Federalist Party, the United States Coast Guard and ''The New York Post'' newspaper.
The latter Haldimand negotiations led to some exchanges of prisoners of war.
Most of the army was then posted at Newburgh, New York.
The northern will be glad to find a counterpoise in Vermont.
The President would have an absolute veto.
The hereditary interest of the king was so interwoven with that of the nation, and his personal emoluments so great, that he was placed above the danger of being corrupted from abroad…Let one executive be appointed for life who dares execute his powers."
The two men did work together from time to time thereafter on various projects, including Hamilton's army of 1798 and the Manhattan Water Company.
Facing well-organized opposition from Jefferson and Madison, Hamilton mobilized a nationwide network of friends of the government, especially bankers and businessmen.
Hamilton was among those dissatisfied with the weak national government.
In 1773 he studied with Francis Barber at Elizabethtown in preparation for college work.
Because Alexander and James Jr.'s parents were not legally married, the Church of England denied them membership and education in the church school.
An amendment to the Articles had been proposed by Thomas Burke, in February 1781, to give Congress the power to collect a 5% impost, or duty on all imports, but this required ratification by all states; securing its passage as law proved impossible after it was rejected by Rhode Island in November 1782.
In 1787, Hamilton served as assemblyman from New York County in the New York State Legislature and was chosen as a delegate for the Constitutional Convention by his father-in-law Philip Schuyler.
This lack of a stable source of funding had made it difficult for the Continental Army both to obtain its necessary provisions and to pay its soldiers.
Jackson was unsuccessful.
In what is credited as his first public appearance, on July 6, 1774 at the liberty pole at King's College, Hamilton's friend Robert Troup spoke glowingly of Hamilton's ability to clearly and concisely explain the rights and reasons the patriots have in their case against the British.
James Hamilton abandoned Rachel Faucette and their sons, allegedly to "spare her a charge of bigamy ... after finding out that her first husband intended to divorce her under Danish law on grounds of adultery and desertion."
In 1775, after the first engagement of American troops with the British at Lexington and Concord, Hamilton and other King's College students joined a New York volunteer militia company called the Corsicans, later renamed or reformed as the Hearts of Oak.
It became the Federalist Party.
Hamilton instructed Assistant Secretary of War William Jackson to intercept the men.
On March 2, 1784, Governor George Clinton of New York asked Congress to declare war for the purpose of overthrowing the government of Vermont, but Congress made no decision.
In 1798 and 99, Hamilton called for mobilization against France after the XYZ Affair and became commander of a new army, which he readied for war.
In 1790 the New York legislature decided to give up New York's claim to Vermont if Congress decided to admit Vermont to the Union and if negotiations between New York and Vermont on the boundary between the two states were successfully concluded.
He began to desire a life outside the island where he lived.
At the end of the Convention, Hamilton was still not content with the final Constitution, but signed it anyway as a vast improvement over the Articles of Confederation, and urged his fellow delegates to do so also.
He asked Washington and others for a field command.
The two boys were described as looking much alike.
President George Washington appointed Hamilton as the first United States Secretary of the Treasury on September 11, 1789.
Hamilton and Madison worked to describe the anarchic state of the confederation in numbers 15–22, and have been described as not being entirely different in thought during this time period in contrast to their stark opposition later in life.
Since the other two members of the New York delegation, Lansing and Yates, had already withdrawn, Hamilton was the only New York signer to the United States Constitution.
In 1795, he returned to the practice of law in New York.
Hamilton wrote: One of the first subjects of deliberation with the new Congress will be the independence of Kentucky at that time still a part of Virginia, for which the southern states will be anxious.
In June 1783, a different group of disgruntled soldiers from Lancaster, Pennsylvania, sent Congress a petition demanding their back pay.
In 1787 through 1789 Hamilton exchange letters with Nathaniel Chipman, a lawyer representing Vermont.
Hamilton studied military history and tactics on his own and was soon recommended for promotion.
While Hamilton was in Congress, discontented soldiers began to pose a danger to the young United States.
He practiced law in New York City in partnership with Richard Harison.
10 of the British fortifications at Yorktown.
In the end, Adams found a diplomatic solution which avoided a war with France.
The officers had three demands: the Army's pay, their own pensions, and commutation of those pensions into a lump-sum payment if Congress were unable to afford the half-salary pensions for life.
Born out of wedlock, raised in the West Indies, and orphaned as a child, Hamilton pursued a college education through the help of local wealthy men.
Hamilton played a central role in the Federalist party, which dominated national and state politics until it lost the election of 1800 to Jefferson's Democratic Republicans.
On May 10, 1775, Hamilton won credit for saving his college president Myles Cooper, a Loyalist, from an angry mob by speaking to the crowd long enough for Cooper to escape.
His letters to the Marquis de Lafayette and to John Laurens, employing the sentimental literary conventions of the late eighteenth century and alluding to Greek history and mythology, have been read by Jonathan Katz as revealing a homosocial or perhaps homosexual relationship, but few historians agree.
Biographer Forrest McDonald argues that Hamilton saw his office, like that of the British First Lord of the Treasury, as the equivalent of a Prime Minister; Hamilton would oversee his colleagues under the elective reign of George Washington.
He was opposed by the Republican Party, led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison.
Hamilton became the leading cabinet member in the new government under President Washington.
He pleaded for the Mayor's Court to interpret state law consistent with the 1783 Treaty of Paris which had ended the Revolutionary War.
He then took a highly active part in the successful campaign for the document's ratification in New York in 1788, which was a crucial step in its national ratification.
At the start of the war in 1775, he joined a militia company.
He resigned, to practice law, and founded the Bank of New York.
Historians have posited reasons for the different dates of birth being used: If 1755 is correct, Hamilton may have been trying to appear younger than his college classmates or perhaps wished to avoid standing out as older; if 1757 is correct, the probate document indicating a birth year of 1755 may have been in error, or Hamilton may have been attempting to pass as 13, in order to be more employable after his mother's death.
Probate papers from St. Croix in 1768, after the death of Hamilton's mother, list him as then 13 years old, a date that would support a birth year of 1755.
Hamilton played a major role in the American Revolutionary War.
Rhode Island again opposed these provisions, and Hamilton's robust assertions of national prerogatives in his previous letter were widely held to be excessive.
Hamilton took the lead in the funding of the states' debts by the Federal government, the establishment of a national bank, a system of tariffs, and friendly trade relations with Britain.
Recognized for his abilities and talent, he was sent to King's College (now Columbia University) in New York City.
Governor George Clinton's faction in the New York legislature had chosen New York's other two delegates, John Lansing, Jr. and Robert Yates, and both of them opposed Hamilton's goal of a strong national government.
The Supreme Court was to have immediate jurisdiction over all lawsuits involving the United States, and state governors were to be appointed by the federal government.
They received "individual tutoring" and classes in a private school led by a Jewish headmistress.
Thus, whenever the other two members of the New York delegation were present, they decided New York's vote, to ensure that there were no major alterations to the Articles of Confederation.
