His campaigns greatly increased contacts and trade between East and West, and vast areas to the east were significantly exposed to Greek civilization and influence.
When "his engineers pointed out to him that because of the height of the mound it would be impossible… this encouraged Alexander all the more to make the attempt".
He appointed Porus as satrap, and added to Porus' territory land that he did not previously own, towards the south-east, up to the Hyphasis (Beas).
In his first battle in Asia, at Granicus, Alexander used only a small part of his forces, perhaps 13,000 infantry with 5,000 cavalry, against a much larger Persian force of 40,000.
His extraordinary achievements, coupled with his own ineffable sense of destiny and the flattery of his companions, may have combined to produce this effect.
At that point, his empire stretched from the Adriatic Sea to the Indus River.
Henceforth, Alexander often referred to Zeus-Ammon as his true father, and after his death, currency depicted him adorned with rams horn as a symbol of his divinity.
During the ensuing Battle of Chaeronea, Philip commanded the right wing and Alexander the left, accompanied by a group of Philip's trusted generals.
Alexander then marched for three days to the Danube, encountering the Getae tribe on the opposite shore.
One Greek king, Menander I, probably became Buddhist, and was immortalized in Buddhist literature as 'Milinda'.
The Syriac version of the ''Alexander Romance'' portrays him as an ideal Christian world conqueror who prayed to "the one true God".
His intelligent and rational side was amply demonstrated by his ability and success as a general.
Hephaestion's death devastated Alexander, and he ordered the preparation of an expensive funeral pyre in Babylon, as well as a decree for public mourning.
Alexander was proclaimed king by the nobles and army at the age of 20.
His son and successor, Caracalla, a great admirer, visited the tomb during his own reign.
From Pamphylia onwards the coast held no major ports and Alexander moved inland.
Alexander personally led the charge in the center, routing the opposing army.
However, his father Philip was Alexander's most immediate and influential role model, as the young Alexander watched him campaign practically every year, winning victory after victory while ignoring severe wounds.
The figure of Dhul-Qarnayn (literally "the Two-Horned One") mentioned in the Quran is believed by some scholars to represent Alexander, due to parallels with the ''Alexander Romance''.
Years later upon revisiting the city he had burnt, Alexander would regret the burning of Persepolis.
The famous encounter between Alexander and Diogenes the Cynic occurred during Alexander's stay in Corinth.
Alexander accumulated a harem in the style of Persian kings, but he used it rather sparingly; showing great self-control in "pleasures of the body".
Contemporaries who wrote accounts of his life included Alexander's campaign historian Callisthenes; Alexander's generals Ptolemy and Nearchus; Aristobulus, a junior officer on the campaigns; and Onesicritus, Alexander's chief helmsman.
The Macriani, a Roman family that in the person of Macrinus briefly ascended to the imperial throne, kept images of Alexander on their persons, either on jewelry, or embroidered into their clothes.
Plutarch's account is that roughly 14 days before his death, Alexander entertained admiral Nearchus, and spent the night and next day drinking with Medius of Larissa.
His court historian Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis.
Alexander arranged a double phalanx, with the center advancing at an angle, parting when the chariots bore down and then reforming.
After the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana (Raoxshna in Old Iranian) to cement relations with his new satrapies, Alexander turned to the Indian subcontinent.
Justin stated that Alexander was the victim of a poisoning conspiracy, Plutarch dismissed it as a fabrication, while both Diodorus and Arrian noted that they mentioned it only for the sake of completeness.
The anguish that Alexander felt after Hephaestion's death may also have contributed to his declining health.
It was originally thought to have been the sarcophagus of Abdalonymus (died 311&nbsp;BC), the king of Sidon appointed by Alexander immediately following the battle of Issus in 331.
Alexander was raised in the manner of noble Macedonian youths, learning to read, play the lyre, ride, fight, and hunt.
One well-known fable among Greek seamen involves a solitary mermaid who would grasp a ship's prow during a storm and ask the captain "Is King Alexander alive?"
Alexander and his exploits were admired by many Romans, especially generals, who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements.
Darius fled the battle, causing his army to collapse, and left behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and a fabulous treasure.
Alexander earned the epithet "the Great" due to his unparalleled success as a military commander.
He developed a fever, which worsened until he was unable to speak.
He overcame this by being personally involved in battle, in the manner of a Macedonian king.
The Athenians, led by Demosthenes, voted to seek alliance with Thebes against Macedonia.
In spring 333 BC, Alexander crossed the Taurus into Cilicia.
There are two different versions of Alexander's death and details of the death differ slightly in each.
He began to identify himself as the son of Zeus-Ammon.
Following the conquest of Asia Minor, Alexander broke the power of Persia in a series of decisive battles, most notably the battles of Issus and Gaugamela.
Some of the most pronounced effects of Hellenization can be seen in Afghanistan and India, in the region of the relatively late-rising Greco-Bactrian Kingdom (250 BC-125 BC) (in modern Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Tajikistan) and the Indo-Greek Kingdom (180 BC - 10 CE) in modern Afghanistan and India.
Other illnesses fit the symptoms, including acute pancreatitis and West Nile virus.
Alexander adopted elements of Persian dress and customs at court, notably ''proskynesis'', a practice of which Macedonians disapproved, and were loath to perform.
East of Porus' kingdom, near the Ganges River, were the Nanda Empire of Magadha and further east the Gangaridai Empire (of modern-day Bengal region of the Indian subcontinent).
* Erection of great temples in Delos, Delphi, Dodona, Dium, Amphipolis, and a monumental temple to Athena at Troy
Later Persian writers associate him with philosophy, portraying him at a symposium with figures such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, in search of immortality.
The eastern borders of Alexander's empire began to collapse even during his lifetime.
They went on to occupy the city of Elatea, only a few days' march from both Athens and Thebes.
Alexander admired Cyrus, from an early age reading Xenophon's ''Cyropaedia'', which described Cyrus's heroism in battle and governance as a king and legislator.
The Persian king no longer controlled his own destiny, and was taken prisoner by Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman.
The recent discovery of an enormous tomb in northern Greece, at Amphipolis, dating from the time of Alexander the Great  has given rise to speculation that its original intent was to be the burial place of Alexander.
Further south, at Halicarnassus, in Caria, Alexander successfully waged his first large-scale siege, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea.
On the subsequent advance of the Macedonian king, Taxiles accompanied him with a force of 5000 men and took part in the battle of the Hydaspes River.
Alexander stopped at Thermopylae, where he was recognized as the leader of the Amphictyonic League before heading south to Corinth.
Alexander began his reign by eliminating potential rivals to the throne.
Several legends surround Alexander's birth and childhood.
However, a century or so after Alexander's death, many of the Alexandrias were thriving, with elaborate public buildings and substantial populations that included both Greek and local peoples.
The cities' locations reflected trade routes as well as defensive positions.
He had great charisma and force of personality, characteristics which made him a great leader.
Alexander's legacy extended beyond his military conquests.
It was also said that on this day, the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, burnt down.
Such legends may have emerged when Alexander was king, and possibly at his own instigation, to show that he was superhuman and destined for greatness from conception.
Alexander also had a close relationship with his friend, general, and bodyguard Hephaestion, the son of a Macedonian noble.
He had his cousin, the former Amyntas IV, executed.
Caligula was said to have taken Alexander's breastplate from the tomb for his own use.
Some of the cities he founded became major cultural centers, many surviving into the 21st century.
According to the ancient sources, the two sides fought bitterly for some time.
In a 2014 manuscript in the journal Clinical Toxicology Schep suggested Alexander's wine was spiked with ''Veratrum album'', and that this would produce poisoning symptoms that match the course of events described in the ''Alexander Romance''.
Plutarch recounts an anecdote in which Alexander pauses and talks to a fallen statue of Xerxes the Great as if it were a live person:
This river thus marks the easternmost extent of Alexander's conquests.
In the process, both Alexander IV and Philip III were murdered.
At the ancient Phrygian capital of Gordium, Alexander "undid" the hitherto unsolvable Gordian Knot, a feat said to await the future "king of Asia".
Ptolemy IX Lathyros, one of Ptolemy's final successors, replaced Alexander's sarcophagus with a glass one so he could convert the original to coinage.
Miletus, held by Achaemenid forces, required a delicate siege operation, with Persian naval forces nearby.
In Hindi and Urdu, the name "Sikandar", derived from Persian, denotes a rising young talent.
In Islamic Iran, under the influence of the ''Alexander Romance'' (in  ''Iskandarnamah''), a more positive portrayal of Alexander emerges.
Diodorus also referred to an advance force already present in Asia, which Polyaenus, in his Stratagems of War (5.44.4), said numbered 10,000 men.)
Perdiccas initially did not claim power, instead suggesting that Roxane's baby would be king, if male; with himself, Craterus, Leonnatus, and Antipater as guardians.
Crossing the river at night, he surprised them and forced their army to retreat after the first cavalry skirmish.
Philip marched on Amphissa (ostensibly acting on the request of the Amphictyonic League), capturing the mercenaries sent there by Demosthenes and accepting the city's surrender.
This behaviour cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen.
Fearing the prospect of facing other large armies and exhausted by years of campaigning, Alexander's army mutinied at the Hyphasis River (Beas), refusing to march farther east.
The earliest of these is Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), followed by Quintus Curtius Rufus (mid-to-late 1st century AD), Arrian (1st to 2nd century AD), the biographer Plutarch (1st to 2nd century AD), and finally Justin, whose work dated as late as the 4th century.
He was the son of the king of Macedon, Philip II, and his fourth wife, Olympias, the daughter of Neoptolemus I, king of Epirus.
In the years following his death, a series of civil wars tore his empire apart, resulting in several states ruled by the Diadochi, Alexander's surviving generals and heirs.
The Macedonians quickly begged forgiveness, which Alexander accepted, and held a great banquet for several thousand of his men at which he and they ate together.
Still occupied in Thrace, he ordered Alexander to muster an army for a campaign in Greece.
Left to fight alone, they were defeated.
Eventually, the two sides reconciled, and after the birth of Alexander IV, he and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only.
He also had two Macedonian princes from the region of Lyncestis killed, but spared a third, Alexander Lyncestes.
Julius Caesar dedicated a Lysippean equestrian bronze statue but replaced Alexander's head with his own, while Octavian visited Alexander's tomb in Alexandria and temporarily changed his seal from a sphinx to Alexander's profile.
A similar slaughter followed at Ora.
Attalus also had severely insulted Alexander, and following Cleopatra's murder, Alexander may have considered him too dangerous to leave alive.
After the defeat, Spitamenes was killed by his own men, who then sued for peace.
Pompey, Julius Caesar and Augustus all visited the tomb in Alexandria, where Augustus, allegedly, accidentally knocked the nose off.
Though outmanoeuvered by Darius' significantly larger army, he marched back to Cilicia, where he defeated Darius at Issus.
The successor states that emerged were, at least initially, dominant forces, and these 300&nbsp;years are often referred to as the Hellenistic period.
However, the power vacuum he left in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent directly gave rise to one of the most powerful Indian dynasties in history, the Maurya Empire.
Alexander sent back vast sums from his conquest, which stimulated the economy and increased trade across his empire.
His mother had huge ambitions, and encouraged him to believe it was his destiny to conquer the Persian Empire.
Alexander left the government of Caria to a member of the Hecatomnid dynasty, Ada, who adopted Alexander.
Choosing a local helped him control these lands so distant from Greece.
Philip then returned to Elatea, sending a final offer of peace to Athens and Thebes, who both rejected it.
Their works are lost, but later works based on these original sources have survived.
When news of the revolts reached Alexander, he responded quickly.
Alexander founded two cities on opposite sides of the Hydaspes river, naming one Bucephala, in honour of his horse, who died around this time.
Born in Pella in 356 BC, Alexander succeeded his father, Philip II, to the throne at the age of twenty.
''Veratrum album'' poisoning can have a prolonged course and it was suggested that if Alexander was poisoned, ''Veratrum album'' offers the most plausible cause.
His successor, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, transferred the sarcophagus to Alexandria, where it remained until at least late Antiquity.
Nevertheless, Hellenization occurred throughout the region, accompanied by a distinct and opposite 'Orientalization' of the successor states.
Philip and his army joined his son in 338 BC, and they marched south through Thermopylae, taking it after stubborn resistance from its Theban garrison.
His chroniclers recorded valuable information about the areas through which he marched, while the Greeks themselves got a sense of belonging to a world beyond the Mediterranean.
Lysippos had often used the contrapposto sculptural scheme to portray Alexander and other characters such as Apoxyomenos, Hermes and Eros.
The Greeks regarded the gesture as the province of deities and believed that Alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it.
He then travelled the known world in search for the Water of Life and Immortality, eventually becoming a prophet.
Alexander eventually agreed and turned south, marching along the Indus.
However, when, at some point later, Alexander was on the Jaxartes dealing with an incursion by a horse nomad army, Spitamenes raised Sogdiana in revolt.
Apart from a few inscriptions and fragments, texts written by people who actually knew Alexander or who gathered information from men who served with Alexander were all lost.
In summer 336&nbsp;BC, while at Aegae attending the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra to Olympias's brother, Alexander I of Epirus, Philip was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguards, Pausanias.
He subsequently overthrew the Persian King Darius III and conquered the Achaemenid Empire in its entirety.
Alexander's relationship with his father forged the competitive side of his personality; he had a need to out-do his father, illustrated by his reckless behaviour in battle.
Olympias always insisted to him that he was the son of Zeus, a theory apparently confirmed to him by the oracle of Amun at Siwa.
Noting that the word ''eromenos'' (ancient Greek for beloved) does not necessarily bear sexual meaning, Alexander may have been bisexual, which in his time was not controversial.
The so-called "Alexander Sarcophagus", discovered near Sidon and now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum, is so named not because it was thought to have contained Alexander's remains, but because its bas-reliefs depict Alexander and his companions fighting the Persians and hunting.
However, he was relatively young when he died, and Ogden suggests that Alexander's matrimonial record is more impressive than his father's at the same age.
The ''Alexander Romance'', in particular, has had a significant impact on portrayals of Alexander in later cultures, from Persian to medieval European to modern Greek.
In the end, Philip chose Aristotle and provided the Temple of the Nymphs at Mieza as a classroom.
In 334 BC, he invaded the Achaemenid Empire, and began a series of campaigns that lasted ten years.
Alexander's settlement of Greek colonists and the resulting spread of Greek culture in the east resulted in a new Hellenistic civilization, aspects of which were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century and the presence of Greek speakers in central and far eastern Anatolia until the 1920s.
The other was Nicaea (Victory), thought to be located at the site of modern-day Mong, Punjab.
Given the propensity of the Macedonian aristocracy to assassination, foul play featured in multiple accounts of his death.
According to the ancient Greek biographer Plutarch, Olympias, on the eve of the consummation of her marriage to Philip, dreamed that her womb was struck by a thunder bolt, causing a flame that spread "far and wide" before dying away.
Under Aristotle's tutelage, Alexander developed a passion for the works of Homer, and in particular the ''Iliad''; Aristotle gave him an annotated copy, which Alexander later carried on his campaigns.
Along the way his army conquered the Malhi (in modern-day Multan) and other Indian tribes and Alexander sustained an injury during the siege.
In his early years, Alexander was raised by a nurse, Lanike, sister of Alexander's future general Cleitus the Black.
Alexander features prominently in modern Greek folklore, more so than any other ancient figure.
Attalus was at that time corresponding with Demosthenes, regarding the possibility of defecting to Athens.
He sent the bulk of his army to the Persian ceremonial capital of Persepolis via the Persian Royal Road.
At age 16, Alexander's education under Aristotle ended.
Aristotle taught Alexander and his companions about medicine, philosophy, morals, religion, logic, and art.
In the following year, 332&nbsp;BC, he was forced to attack Tyre, which he captured after a long and difficult siege.
Meanwhile, upon his return to Persia, Alexander learned that guards of the tomb of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae had desecrated it, and swiftly executed them.
Lysippos' sculpture, famous for its naturalism, as opposed to a stiffer, more static pose, is thought to be the most faithful depiction.
In return for teaching Alexander, Philip agreed to rebuild Aristotle's hometown of Stageira, which Philip had razed, and to repopulate it by buying and freeing the ex-citizens who were slaves, or pardoning those who were in exile.
A 1998 article in the ''New England Journal of Medicine'' attributed his death to typhoid fever complicated by bowel perforation and ascending paralysis.
Alexander reached Susa in 324&nbsp;BC, but not before losing many men to the harsh desert.
That same day, Philip received news that his general Parmenion had defeated the combined Illyrian and Paeonian armies, and that his horses had won at the Olympic Games.
Alexander buried Darius' remains next to his Achaemenid predecessors in a regal funeral.
He lost another child when Roxana miscarried at Babylon.
This campaign, initially against Bessus, turned into a grand tour of central Asia.
Plutarch stated that Philip, overjoyed at this display of courage and ambition, kissed his son tearfully, declaring: "My boy, you must find a kingdom big enough for your ambitions.
After the victory at Chaeronea, Philip and Alexander marched unopposed into the Peloponnese, welcomed by all cities; however, when they reached Sparta, they were refused, but did not resort to war.
Around AD&nbsp;200, Emperor Septimius Severus closed Alexander's tomb to the public.
Alexander however, detecting the horse's fear of its own shadow, asked to tame the horse, which he eventually managed.
However, in a 2003 BBC documentary investigating the death of Alexander, Leo Schep from the New Zealand National Poisons Centre proposed that the plant white hellebore (''Veratrum album''), which was known in antiquity, may have been used to poison Alexander.
With the Athenians lost, the Thebans were surrounded.
At the decisive encounter with Darius at Gaugamela, Darius equipped his chariots with scythes on the wheels to break up the phalanx and equipped his cavalry with pikes.
Arrian and Plutarch claimed that Alexander was speechless by this point, implying that this was an apocryphal story.
According to Curtius, "Not only did Alexander slaughter the entire population of Massaga, but also did he reduce its buildings to rubble."
Writing shortly after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, invented a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons.
Alexander reacted by sending an actor, Thessalus of Corinth, to tell Pixodarus that he should not offer his daughter's hand to an illegitimate son, but instead to Alexander.
Green argues that there is little evidence in ancient sources that Alexander had much carnal interest in women; he did not produce an heir until the very end of his life.
According to Plutarch, among Alexander's traits were a violent temper and rash, impulsive nature, which undoubtedly contributed to some of his decisions.
This culminated in his aspiration to homogenize the populations of Asia and Europe.
His delusions of grandeur are readily visible in his testament and in his desire to conquer the world, in as much as he is by various sources described as having ''boundless ambition'', an epithet, the meaning of which, has descended into an historical cliché.
During the wedding banquet, a drunken Attalus publicly prayed to the gods that the union would produce a legitimate heir.
Alexander also recognized the potential for disunity among his diverse army, which employed various languages and weapons.
At Issus in 333&nbsp;BC, his first confrontation with Darius, he used the same deployment, and again the central phalanx pushed through.
While the other cities again hesitated, Thebes decided to fight.
Alexander was emboldened to divide his forces, and Ambhi assisted Hephaestion and Perdiccas in constructing a bridge over the Indus where it bends at Hund (Fox 1973), supplied their troops with provisions, and received Alexander himself, and his whole army, in his capital city of Taxila, with every demonstration of friendship and the most liberal hospitality.
In pre-Islamic Middle Persian (Zoroastrian) literature, Alexander is referred to by the epithet ''gujastak'', meaning "accursed", and is accused of destroying temples and burning the sacred texts of Zoroastrianism.
The Macedonian phalanx, armed with the sarissa, a spear  long, had been developed and perfected by Philip II through rigorous training, and Alexander used its speed and maneuverability to great effect against larger but more disparate Persian forces.
Athens sued for peace and Alexander pardoned the rebels.
As Pausanias tried to escape, he tripped over a vine and was killed by his pursuers, including two of Alexander's companions, Perdiccas and Leonnatus.
The end of Thebes cowed Athens, leaving all of Greece temporarily at peace.
* Circumnavigation of Africa
He was undefeated in battle and is widely considered one of history's most successful military commanders.
Alexander spared Arrhidaeus, who was by all accounts mentally disabled, possibly as a result of poisoning by Olympias.
However, Alexander also was a pragmatic ruler who understood the difficulties of ruling culturally disparate peoples, many of whom lived in kingdoms where the king was divine.
Alexander founded a series of new cities, all called Alexandria, including modern Kandahar in Afghanistan, and Alexandria Eschate ("The Furthest") in modern Tajikistan.
After this, details on the fate of the tomb are hazy.
The strongest argument against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days passed between the start of his illness and his death; such long-acting poisons were probably not available.
According to Aelian, a seer called Aristander foretold that the land where Alexander was laid to rest "would be happy and unvanquishable forever".
Olympias and several of Alexander's friends suggested this showed Philip intended to make Arrhidaeus his heir.
Alexander tried to persuade his soldiers to march farther, but his general Coenus pleaded with him to change his opinion and return; the men, he said, "longed to again see their parents, their wives and children, their homeland".
The correct answer is "He is alive and well and rules the world!"
The emperor Trajan also admired Alexander, as did Nero and Caracalla.
With these victories, he secured his northern frontier.
Alexander followed close behind and captured the strategic hill-fort after four bloody days.
Thus, in Bactria and Sogdiana, Alexander successfully used his javelin throwers and archers to prevent outflanking movements, while massing his cavalry at the center.
The first, and greatest, was Alexandria in Egypt, which would become one of the leading Mediterranean cities.
After Philip's assassination in 336&nbsp;BC, Alexander succeeded his father to the throne and inherited a strong kingdom and an experienced army.
Though advised to use diplomacy, Alexander mustered 3,000 Macedonian cavalry and rode south towards Thessaly.
Alexander then faced the Assakenoi, who fought in the strongholds of Massaga, Ora and Aornos.
During this time, Alexander adopted some elements of Persian dress and customs at his court, notably the custom of ''proskynesis'', either a symbolic kissing of the hand, or prostration on the ground, that Persians showed to their social superiors.
During his stay in Egypt, he founded Alexandria-by-Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic Kingdom after his death.
Campaigning against the Greek city of Perinthus, Alexander is reported to have saved his father's life.
