Its low elevation on the Nile delta makes it highly vulnerable to rising sea levels.
The Pharos lighthouse was destroyed by an earthquake in the 14th century, making it the second longest surviving ancient wonder, after the Great Pyramid of Giza.
#The Musaeum with its famous Library and theater in the same region; site unknown.
Alexandria is known as the yearly starting point of Cross Egypt Challenge and a huge celebration is conducted the night before the rally starts after all the international participants arrive to the city.
Member churches include Saint Catherine Church in Mansheya and Church of the Jesuits in Cleopatra.
**''The Bat'' (part of the ''Drifting Cities'' trilogy) (1965, set in 1943–44) by Stratis Tsirkas.
#The Mausolea of Alexander (Soma) and the Ptolemies in one ring-fence, near the point of intersection of the two main streets.
In antiquity, Alexandria was a major center of the cosmopolitan religious movement called Gnosticism (today mainly remembered as a Christian heresy).
Alexandria was the second most powerful city of the ancient world after Rome.
Alexandria figured prominently in the military operations of Napoleon's expedition to Egypt in 1798.
*Smouha SC – in "Smouha"
The catacombs were long forgotten by the citizens until they were discovered by accident in 1900.
The light was produced by a furnace at the top and the tower was built mostly with solid blocks of limestone.
The Bibliotheca Alexandrina was inaugurated in 2003, near the site of the old Library.
In July 1882, the city came under bombardment from British naval forces and was occupied.
#The Navalia (Docks), lying west of the Timonium, along the seafront as far as the mole
The first starts at Bolkly (Isis) and ends at San Stefano.
Alexandria is the base of the Salafi movement's in Egypt.
**''Girls of Alexandria'' (tr.
It is an important industrial center because of its natural gas and oil pipelines from Suez.
*Borg El Arab Stadium
Alexandria has a number of higher education institutions.
The Pope of Alexandria was second only to the bishop of Rome, the capital of the Roman Empire until 430.
(from Coptic ''Rakotə'' "Alexandria").
Only the outer wall and the pylons remain from the temple.
Route 6 starts at Sidi Gaber El Sheikh in the outer route between Sporting and Mostatfa Kamel.
Port Said, Kosseir, Baltim, Damietta and Alexandria have the least temperature variation in Egypt.
Europeans began leaving Alexandria following the 1956 Suez Crisis that led to an outburst of Arab nationalism.
Route 2 takes the route opposite to Route 1 in both these areas.
It is located on Alexandria's ancient acropolis—a modest hill located adjacent to the city's Arab cemetery—and was originally part of a temple colonnade.
Most of the vehicles are blue in color.
**''The Alexandria Rhapsody'' (2011) by George Leonardos
:The old city of Rhakotis that had been absorbed into Alexandria was occupied chiefly by Egyptians.
There is evidence to prove that sacred animals were worshiped there.
331 BC by Alexander the Great.
Dihya approached the Banu Dubayb (a tribe which converted to Islam and had good relations with Muslims) for help.
The first Ptolemy began the project, and the second Ptolemy (Ptolemy II Philadelphus) completed it, at a total cost of 800&nbsp;talents.
Greeks, followed by other Europeans and others, began moving to the city.
The tram fares are 25 piastres (0.25 pounds) during most of the day, and 50 piastres (0.50 pounds) after 9pm.
**''Hand of Isis'' (2009, set in late Ptolomaic period) by Jo Graham
1993, set in the 1930s and '40s) by Edwar Al-Kharrat.
This point is very near the present mosque of Nebi Daniel; and the line of the great East–West "Canopic" street, only slightly diverged from that of the modern Boulevard de Rosette (now Sharia Fouad).
#The Gymnasium and the Palaestra are both inland, near the Boulevard de Rosette in the eastern half of the town; sites unknown.
**''Alexandria: A History and a Guide'' (1922; numerous reprints) by E.M. Forster.
The city and its museum attracted many of the greatest scholars, including Greeks, Jews and Syrians.
He sent Hatib bin Abi Baltaeh with a letter to the king of Egypt and Alexandria called Muqawqis In the letter Muhammad said: "I invite you to accept Islam, Allah the sublime, shall reward you doubly.
Just east of Alexandria (where Abu Qir Bay is now), there was in ancient times marshland and several islands.
Encouragement and help have been given by the local Archaeological Society, and by many individuals, notably Greeks proud of a city which is one of the glories of their national history.
To this day the details of the destruction (or destructions) remain a lively source of controversy.
*El-Ittihad El-Iskandary Club
Of Arabic novels set in Alexandria, Naguib Mahfouz's ''Miramar'' is the best known.
**''The House over the Catacombs'' (1993) and the ''Song of the Soul'' (1997) by George Leonardos.
The Muslim army fought with Banu Judham, killed several of them (inflicting heavy casualties), including their chief, Al-Hunayd ibn Arid and his son, and captured 1000 camels, 5000 of their cattle and a 100 women and boys.
An Egyptian city, Rhakotis, already existed on the shore also, and later gave its name to Alexandria in the Egyptian language (Egyptian '''*Raˁ-Ḳāṭit''', written ''rˁ-ḳṭy.t'', 'That which is built up').
#The Great Theater, on the modern Hospital Hill near the Ramleh station.
It has revealed the ancient city's well-preserved theater, and the remains of its Roman-era baths.
Situated in East Alexandria, Qaitbay citadel is one of the few remaining citadels in city from 15th century
There has been a land subsidence here, as throughout the northeast coast of Africa.
Pompey's Pillar may have been erected using the same methods that were used to erect the ancient obelisks.
Cavafy incorporated Greek history, mythology, and his homosexuality into his poetry.
*Alexandria Country club
In more recent years, many ancient artifacts have been discovered from the surrounding sea, mostly pieces of old pottery.
In the 19th century, Catholic and Protestant missionaries converted some of the adherents of the Orthodox churches to their respective faiths.
Alexandria was the intellectual and cultural center of the ancient world for some time.
Alexandria is Egypt's largest seaport, serving approximately 80% of Egypt's imports and exports.
Blue public buses run the length of the Courniche.
The highest recorded temperature was  on May 30, 1961 and the coldest recorded temperature was  on January 31, 1994.
Alexandria's catacombs, known as ''Kom al-Shoqafa'', are a short distance southwest of the pillar, consist of a multi-level labyrinth, reached via a large spiral staircase, and featuring dozens of chambers adorned with sculpted pillars, statues, and other syncretic Romano-Egyptian religious symbols, burial niches, and sarcophagi, as well as a large Roman-style banquet room, where memorial meals were conducted by relatives of the deceased.
It became Egypt's main Greek city, with Greek people from diverse backgrounds.
These contain one very remarkable vault with curious painted reliefs, now artificially lit and open to visitors.
Cavafy and the Indian-born Briton Lawrence Durrell, author of ''The Alexandria Quartet''.
Archaeologists found an animal necropolis near the temple.
#The Poseidon, or Temple of the Sea God, close to the theater
2004) Harry E. Tzalas.
This temple became, in time, the Patriarchal Church, though some ancient remains of the temple have been discovered.
Also found in the same area are remains of public baths built by the emperor Justinian, a seawall, quays and a bridge.
The Romans had cranes but they were not strong enough to lift something this heavy.
Alexandria has four stadiums:
:the Royal or Greek quarter, forming the most magnificent portion of the city.
The actual Caesareum, the parts not eroded by the waves, lies under the houses lining the new seawall.
But if you refuse to do so, you will bear the burden of the transgression of all the Copts".
#The Royal Palaces, filling the northeast angle of the town and occupying the promontory of Lochias, which shut in the Great Harbor on the east.
In AD 115, large parts of Alexandria were destroyed during the Kitos War, which gave Hadrian and his architect, Decriannus, an opportunity to rebuild it.
Two writers loom large over the modern literature of Alexandria: the Alexandria-born Greek poet C.P.
Ongoing maritime archaeology in the harbor of Alexandria, which began in 1994, is revealing details of Alexandria both before the arrival of Alexander, when a city named Rhacotis existed there, and during the Ptolemaic dynasty.
*Alexandria Sporting Club – in "Sporting"
Fare is generally L.E.
French troops stormed the city on 2 July 1798, and it remained in their hands until the arrival of a British expedition in 1801.
Alexandria was founded around a small Ancient Egyptian town ''c.''
The Islamic prophet, Muhammad's first interaction with the people of Egypt was during the Expedition of Zaid ibn Haritha (Hisma).
Route 1 takes the inner route between San Stefano and Bolkly and the outer route between Sporting and Mostafa Kamel.
Today, the Patriarchal seat of the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church is Saint Mark Cathedral in Ramleh.
The Septuagint, a Greek version of the Tanakh, was produced there.
The shaft is  high, and made out of a single piece of granite.
Alexandria was founded by Alexander the Great in April 331 BC as  (''Alexandria'').
It is generally thought to have been founded at the beginning of the 3rd century BC, during the reign of Ptolemy II of Egypt.
The other begins at Sporting the Major and ends at Mostafa Kamel.
Alexandria plays host to two intercity railway stations: the aforementioned Misr Station (in the older Manshia district in the western part of the city) and Sidi Gaber railway station (in the district of Sidi Gaber in the center of the eastern expansion in which most Alexandrines reside), both of which also serve the commuter rail line.
The British won a considerable victory over the French at the Battle of Alexandria on 21 March 1801, following which they besieged the city, which fell to them on 2 September 1801.
Here, substructures of a large building or group of buildings have been exposed, which are perhaps part of the Serapeum.
The latter was recently rediscovered under water.
There are only two German schools in Alexandria which are Deutsche Schule der Borromärinnen (DSB of Saint Charles Borromé) and Future Deutsche Schule.
All the four start at Alraml, but only two (1 and 2) reach Victoria.
July and August are the hottest and driest months of the year, with an average daily maximum temperature of .
Other less popular sports like tennis and squash are usually played in private social and sports clubs, like:
It is usually frequented by the children of French expatriates and diplomats in Alexandria.
Many of its faculties are internationally renowned, most notably its Faculty of Medicine & Faculty of Engineering.
None, however, are as famous as the building that stood on the eastern point of Pharos island.
'''Alexandria''' ( or ; Arabic:  '''';  '''';  '''') is the second largest city and a major economic centre in Egypt, extending about  along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in the north central part of the country.
The structure was plundered and demolished in the 4th century when a bishop decreed that Paganism must be eradicated.
The most extensive ancient excavation currently being conducted in Alexandria is known as ''Kom al-Dikka''.
The Church of Alexandria had jurisdiction over most of the continent of Africa.
Excavations were performed in the city by Greeks seeking the tomb of Alexander the Great without success.
The most important synagogue in Alexandria is the Eliyahu Hanavi Synagogue.
The Italian school is the Istituto "Don Bosco".
"Pompey's Pillar", a Roman triumphal column, is one of the best-known ancient monuments still standing in Alexandria today.
**''Alexandria (2009, historical crime, set in AD77) by Lindsey Davis.
The most important Coptic Orthodox churches in Alexandria include Pope Cyril I Church in Cleopatra, Saint Georges Church in Sporting, Saint Mark & Pope Peter I Church in Sidi Bishr, Saint Mary Church in Assafra, Saint Mary Church in Gianaclis, Saint Mina Church in Fleming, Saint Mina Church in Mandara and Saint Takla Haymanot's Church in Ibrahimeya.
1989, set in the 1930s) by Edwar Al-Kharrat.
The past and present directors of the museum have been enabled from time to time to carry out systematic excavations whenever opportunity is offered; D. G. Hogarth made tentative researches on behalf of the Egypt Exploration Fund and the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies in 1895; and a German expedition worked for two years (1898–1899).
**''Farewell to Alexandria'' (tr.
The first foreign schools date to the early 19th century, when French missionaries began establishing French charitable schools to educate the Egyptians.
Alexandria Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Alexandria, Egypt.
After the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, the Church of Alexandria was split between the Miaphysites and the Melkites.
Some smaller vehicles colored in yellow have further routes beyond the two main endpoints.
+Alexandria mean sea temperature
Strabo tells us that this stood in the west of the city; and recent discoveries go far as to place it near “Pompey's Pillar,” which was an independent monument erected to commemorate Diocletian's siege of the city.
The city is also the nominal see of the Melkite Greek Catholic titular Patriarchate of Alexandria (generally vested in its leading Patriarch of Antioch) and the actual cathedral see of its Patriarchal territory of Egypt, Sudan and South Sudan, which uses the Byzantine Rite, and the nominal see of the Armenian Catholic diocese of Iskandkeriya (for all Egypt and Sudan, whose actual cathedral is in Cairo), a suffragan of the Armenian Catholic Patriarch of Cilicia, using the Armenian Rite.
Route 5 starts at San Stefano and takes the inner route to Bolkly.
Durrell used the cosmopolitan city as a landscape to explore human desires.
These are being opened up to tourists, to some controversy.
The Ras al-Tin quarter represents all that is left of the island of Pharos, the site of the actual lighthouse having been weathered away by the sea.
**''The Alexander Cipher'' (2007) by Will Adams.
:forming the northeast portion of the city;
The main sport that interests Alexandrians is football, as is the case in the rest of Egypt and Africa.
In the 1st century, the population of Alexandria contained over 180,000 adult male citizens, according to a census dated from 32 CE, in addition to a large number of freedmen, women, children and slaves.
It is currently used mostly for football matches, and was used for the 2006 African Cup of Nations.
Today, the most important French schools in Alexandria run by Catholic missionaries include Collège de la Mère de Dieu, Collège Notre Dame de Sion, Collège Saint Marc, Ecoles des Soeurs Franciscaines (four different schools), École Gérard, École Saint Gabriel, École Saint-Vincent de Paul, École saint joseph, École Sainte Catherine, and Institution Sainte Jeanne-Antide.
The city was later plundered and lost its significance.
Sea sports such as surfing, jet-skiing and water polo are practiced on a lower scale.
*Acacia Country Club
It is considered the most reputable university in Egypt after the AUC American University in Cairo because of its worldwide recognition from (board of engineers at UK & ABET in US).
Fare (any distance) is 2 L.E.
The Miaphysites went on to constitute what is known today as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.
Hogarth explored part of an immense brick structure under the mound of ''Kom al-Dikka'', which may have been part of the Paneum, the Mausolea, or a Roman fortress.
The wealth underground is doubtlessly immense; but despite all efforts, there is not much for antiquarians to see in Alexandria outside the museum and the neighborhood of “Pompey's Pillar”.
Since the great and growing modern city stands immediately over the ancient one, it is almost impossible to find any considerable space in which to dig, except at enormous cost.
The community once numbered 50,000 but is now estimated at below 50.
It is located in Abusir, the western suburb of Alexandria in Borg el Arab city.
It is commercial harbor for general cargo and phosphates.
The early Ptolemies kept it in order and fostered the development of its museum into the leading Hellenistic center of learning (Library of Alexandria), but were careful to maintain the distinction of its population's three largest ethnicities: Greek, Jewish, and Egyptian.
When the news reached Muhammad, he immediately dispatched Zayd ibn Haritha with 500 men to battle.
**''Out of Egypt'' (1994; fictionalized description of family history in Alexandria) by André Aciman.
Inheriting the trade of ruined Tyre and becoming the center of the new commerce between Europe and the Arabian and Indian East, the city grew in less than a generation to be larger than Carthage.
"Pompey's Pillar" is a misnomer, as it has nothing to do with Pompey, having been erected in 293 for Diocletian, possibly in memory of the rebellion of Domitius Domitianus.
*Alexandria Stadium
The Tram is considered the cheapest method of public transport.
This underwater section, containing many of the most interesting sections of the Hellenistic city, including the palace quarter, was explored in 1992 and is still being extensively investigated by the French underwater archaeologist Franck Goddio and his team.
The making of the new foreshore led to the dredging up of remains of the Patriarchal Church; and the foundations of modern buildings are seldom laid without some objects of antiquity being discovered.
Alexandria experiences violent storms, rain and sometimes sleet and hail during the cooler months; these events, combined with a poor drainage system, have been responsible for occasional flooding in the city.
**''Pashazade'' (2001) alternate history by Jon Courtenay Grimwood.
One of the main tourism attractions that start every year from the city is Cross Egypt Challenge.
#The Temple of Saturn; site unknown.
Most Jewish residents of Egypt fled to the newly established Israel, France, Brazil and other countries in the 1950s and 1960s.
Alexandria consisted originally of little more than the island of Pharos, which was joined to the mainland by a mole nearly a mile long (1260 metres) and called the ''Heptastadion'' ("seven stadia"—a ''stadium'' was a Greek unit of length measuring approximately ).
2.00 to travel the whole route.
Egypt turned to Europe in their effort to modernize the country.
But two difficulties face the would-be excavator in Alexandria: lack of space for excavation and the underwater location of some areas of interest.
*Haras El Hodood Club
*Lagoon Resort Courts
Alexandria has a long history of foreign educational institutions.
''Karmouz''), Ras El Tin, El Labban, Mina El Basal, Western Harbor, Qabbary, Wardian, El Max, Dekheila, Agami (Al Bitaash (Originally "Beau Tache") – Al Hanuviel (Originally "Hameaux Ville"), Amreya, King Mariout, Burg al-Arab
The nationalization of property by Nasser, which reached its highest point in 1961, drove out nearly all the rest.
#The Emporium (Exchange)
The new chief of the Banu Judham who had embraced Islam appealed to Muhammad to release his fellow tribesmen, and Muhammad released them.
The most important English language schools in the city include: Riada Language School (RLS) Also known as "Leadership Schools of Languages",Alexandria Language School(ALS), Future Language School(FLS), Future International Schools :(Future IGCSE, Future American School and future new German school), Alexandria American School, British School of Alexandria, Egyptian American School, Pioneers Language School, Princesses Girls' School, Sidi Gaber Language Schools, Riada American school, Taymour English School (TES), Sacred Heart Girls' School (SHS), Schutz American School, Victoria College, El Manar Language School for Girls, previously called (Scottish School for Girls), Kaumeya Language School (KLS), El Nasr Boys' School (EBS) Previously called (British Boys" School), and El Nasr Girls' College (EGC).
#The Serapeum, the most famous of all Alexandrian temples.
Most of these schools were nationalized during the era of Nasser, and are currently Egyptian public schools run by the Egyptian Ministry of Education.
The stadium holds 20,000 people.
The end of this abutted on the land at the head of the present Grand Square, where the "Moon Gate" rose.
Roger Hopkins and Mark Lehrner conducted several obelisk erecting experiments including a successful attempt to erect a 25-ton obelisk in 1999.
**''The Alexandria Semaphore'' (1994) by Robert Solé.
From late 2011, Alexandria International was to be closed to commercial operations for two years as it underwent expansion, with all airlines operating out of Borg al Arab Airport from then onwards, where a brand new terminal was completed in February 2010.
Following a struggle with the other successors of Alexander, his general Ptolemy succeeded in bringing Alexander's body to Alexandria, though it was eventually lost after being separated from its burial site there.
N.B: The most notable public schools in Alexandria include, AlAbasseia High School and Gamal Abdel Nasser High School.
On 21 July 365, Alexandria was devastated by a tsunami (365 Crete earthquake), an event annually commemorated years later as a "day of horror."
**''Unreal City'' (1952) by Robert Liddell.
Cleopatra VII's royal quarters were inundated by earthquakes and tidal waves, leading to gradual subsidence in the 4th century AD.
Alexandria University is a public university that follows the Egyptian system of higher education.
Alexandria was intended to supersede Naucratis as a Hellenistic center in Egypt, and to be the link between Greece and the rich Nile valley.
#The Apostases (Magazines)
The city's climate is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea, moderating its temperatures, causing variable rainy winters and moderately hot summers that, at times, can be very humid; January and February are the coolest months, with daily maximum temperatures typically ranging from  and minimum temperatures that could reach .
Two main streets, lined with colonnades and said to have been each about  wide, intersected in the center of the city, close to the point where the Sema (or Soma) of Alexander (his Mausoleum) rose.
**''Growing Up Jewish in Alexandria: The Story of a Sephardic Family's Exodus from Egypt" (2014) by Lucienne Carasso.
In 215, the emperor Caracalla visited the city and, because of some insulting satires that the inhabitants had directed at him, abruptly commanded his troops to put to death all youths capable of bearing arms.
The trams are given one of four numbers: 1, 2, 5, and 6.
On 26 October 1954, Alexandria's Mansheya Square was the site of a failed assassination attempt on Gamal Abdel Nasser.
The stadium is the oldest stadium in Egypt and Africa, being built in 1929.
Other institutions of higher education in Alexandria include Alexandria Institute of Technology (AIT) and Pharos University in Alexandria.
**''Flow Down Like Silver, Hypatia of Alexandria'' (2009) by Ki Longfellow.
