In his final, and some of his most productive years, Bell split his residency between Washington, D.C., where he and his family initially resided for most of the year, and at Beinn Bhreagh where they spent increasing amounts of time.
The Bell Homestead, the Henderson Home telephone museum, and the National Historic Site's reception centre are all maintained by the Bell Homestead Society;
His older brother Melville had married and moved out.
With no formal training, he mastered the piano and became the family's pianist.
A top speed of  was achieved, with the hydrofoil exhibiting rapid acceleration, good stability and steering along with the ability to take waves without difficulty.
Although Bell was, and still is, accused of stealing the telephone from Gray, Bell used Gray's water transmitter design only after Bell's patent had been granted, and only as a proof of concept scientific experiment, to prove to his own satisfaction that intelligible "articulate speech" (Bell's words) could be electrically transmitted.
However, due to the efforts of Congressman Vito Fossella, the U.S. House of Representatives on June 11, 2002, stated that Meucci's "work in the invention of the telephone should be acknowledged", even though this did not put an end to a still contentious issue.
A number of historic sites and other marks commemorate Bell in North America and Europe, including the first telephone companies of the United States and Canada.
The strain put on Bell by his constant appearances in court, necessitated by the legal battles, eventually resulted in his resignation from the company.
He told Bell that his claim for the variable resistance feature was also described in Gray's caveat.
The following night, he amazed guests as well as his family when a message was received at the Bell home from Brantford, four miles (six km) distant, along an improvised wire strung up along telegraph lines and fences, and laid through a tunnel.
Once the family was settled in, both Bell and his father made plans to establish a teaching practice and in 1871, he accompanied his father to Montreal, where Melville was offered a position to teach his System of Visible Speech.
Bell Company engineers made numerous other improvements to the telephone, which emerged as one of the most successful products ever.
Bell was connected with the eugenics movement in the United States.
During the year he spent with his grandfather, a love of learning was born, with long hours spent in serious discussion and study.
Although the trio briefly experimented with the concept, they could not develop a workable prototype.
Alexander Bell was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, on March 3, 1847.
Meucci's work, like many other inventors of the period, was based on earlier acoustic principles and despite evidence of earlier experiments, the final case involving Meucci was eventually dropped upon Meucci's death.
They abandoned the idea, never realizing they had glimpsed a basic principle which would one day find its application in the tape recorder, the hard disc and floppy disc drive and other magnetic media.
On March 10, 1876, three days after his patent was issued, Bell succeeded in getting his telephone to work, using a liquid transmitter similar to Gray's design.
The ''White Wing'' and ''June Bug'' were to follow and by the end of 1908, over 150 flights without mishap had been accomplished.
Bell's inventions spanned a wide range of interests and included a metal jacket to assist in breathing, the audiometer to detect minor hearing problems, a device to locate icebergs, investigations on how to separate salt from seawater, and work on finding alternative fuels.
The president's surgeons, who were skeptical of the device, ignored Bell's requests to move the president to a bed not fitted with metal springs.
He continued his interest in the study of the human voice and when he discovered the Six Nations Reserve across the river at Onondaga, he learned the Mohawk language and translated its unwritten vocabulary into Visible Speech symbols.
Bell's name is still widely known and used as part of the names of dozens of educational institutes, corporate namesakes, street and place names around the world.
he also became a Regent of the Smithsonian Institution (1898–1922).
Born as just "Alexander Bell", at age 10 he made a plea to his father to have a middle name like his two brothers.
In 1913, Dr. Bell hired Walter Pinaud, a Sydney yacht designer and builder as well as the proprietor of Pinaud's Yacht Yard in Westmount, Nova Scotia to work on the pontoons of the HD-4.
Having lost her hearing after a near-fatal bout of scarlet fever close to her fifth birthday, she had learned to read lips but her father, Gardiner Greene Hubbard, Bell's benefactor and personal friend, wanted her to work directly with her teacher.
Bell claimed they discussed the patent only in general terms, although in a letter to Gray, Bell admitted that he learned some of the technical details.
Bell was in Boston on February 14 and did not arrive in Washington until February 26.
Although the telephone appeared to be an "instant" success, it was not initially a profitable venture and Bell's main sources of income were from lectures until after 1897.
In 1969 the building was carefully moved to the historic Bell Homestead National Historic Site in Brantford, Ontario, and was refurbished to become a telephone museum.
The French government conferred on him the decoration of the Légion d'honneur (Legion of Honor); the Royal Society of Arts in London awarded him the Albert Medal in 1902; the University of Würzburg, Bavaria, granted him a PhD, and he was awarded the Franklin Institute's Elliott Cresson Medal in 1912.
The family home was at 16 South Charlotte Street, and has a stone inscription marking it as Alexander Graham Bell's birthplace.
Shortly thereafter, the newlyweds embarked on a year-long honeymoon in Europe.
* Marian Hubbard Bell (1880–1962) who was referred to as "Daisy".
Dr. Alexander Graham Bell was buried atop Beinn Bhreagh mountain, on his estate where he had resided increasingly for the last 35 years of his life, overlooking Bras d'Or Lake.
In 1868, not long before he departed for Canada with his family, Bell completed his matriculation exams and was accepted for admission to the University of London.
On July 11, 1877, a few days after the Bell Telephone Company was established, Bell married Mabel Hubbard (1857–1923) at the Hubbard estate in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
174,465 dated March 7, 1876, and No.
The stamp became, and remains to this day, the most valuable one of the series.
Upon his brother's death, Bell returned home in 1867.
Methane gas, he reasoned, could be produced from the waste of farms and factories.
His school record was undistinguished, marked by absenteeism and lacklustre grades.
Since 1976 the IEEE's Alexander Graham Bell Medal has been awarded to honor outstanding contributions in the field of telecommunications.
In 1921, he was the honorary president of the Second International Congress of Eugenics held under the auspices of the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
The patent examiner, Zenas Fisk Wilber, later stated in an affidavit that he was an alcoholic who was much in debt to Bell's lawyer, Marcellus Bailey, with whom he had served in the Civil War.
A large number of Bell's writings, personal correspondence, notebooks, papers and other documents reside at both the United States Library of Congress Manuscript Division (as the ''Alexander Graham Bell Family Papers''), and at the Alexander Graham Bell Institute, Cape Breton University, Nova Scotia; major portions of which are available for online viewing.
His main interest remained in the sciences, especially biology, while he treated other school subjects with indifference, to the dismay of his demanding father.
There is considerable debate about who arrived first and Gray later challenged the primacy of Bell's patent.
This led to the "gallows" sound-powered telephone, which could transmit indistinct, voice-like sounds, but not clear speech.
After he taught it to growl continuously, Bell would reach into its mouth and manipulate the dog's lips and vocal cords to produce a crude-sounding "Ow ah oo ga ma ma".
His father encouraged Bell's interest in speech and, in 1863, took his sons to see a unique automaton developed by Sir Charles Wheatstone based on the earlier work of Baron Wolfgang von Kempelen.
The March 1906 ''Scientific American'' article by American pioneer William E. Meacham explained the basic principle of hydrofoils and hydroplanes.
On returning to Baddeck, a number of initial concepts were built as experimental models, including the ''Dhonnas Beag'' (Scottish Gaelic for ''little devil''), the first self-propelled Bell-Baldwin hydrofoil.
But he had no working model to demonstrate the feasibility of these ideas.
* Elsie May Bell (1878–1964) who married Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor of National Geographic fame.
That summer, the Bells had a vacation on Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, spending time at the small village of Baddeck.
Several influential people of the time, including Bell, viewed deafness as something that should be eradicated, and also believed that with resources and effort they could teach the deaf to speak and avoid the use of sign language, thus enabling their integration within the wider society from which many were often being excluded.
Their father, highly interested in their project, offered to pay for any supplies and spurred the boys on with the enticement of a "big prize" if they were successful.
The photophone was a precursor to the fiber-optic communication systems which achieved popular worldwide usage in the 1980s.
Baldwin studied the work of the Italian inventor Enrico Forlanini and began testing models.
With curious onlookers packed into the office as witnesses, faint voices were heard replying.
In January 1915, Bell made the first ceremonial transcontinental telephone call.
His research on hearing and speech further led him to experiment with hearing devices which eventually culminated in Bell being awarded the first U.S. patent for the telephone in 1876.
The Bell stamp became very popular and sold out in little time.
As a child, young Bell displayed a natural curiosity about his world, resulting in gathering botanical specimens as well as experimenting even at an early age.
When Bell mentioned to Gardiner Hubbard and Thomas Sanders that he was working on a method of sending multiple tones on a telegraph wire using a multi-reed device, the two wealthy patrons began to financially support Bell's experiments.
Mabel and Bell mobilized the community to help victims in Halifax.
He also developed a technique of speaking in clear, modulated tones directly into his mother's forehead wherein she would hear him with reasonable clarity.
He continued his research in sound and endeavored to find a way to transmit musical notes and articulate speech, but although absorbed by his experiments, he found it difficult to devote enough time to experimentation.
With aspirations to obtain a degree at University College London, Bell considered his next years as preparation for the degree examinations, devoting his spare time at his family's residence to studying.
Gray had reinvented the variable resistance telephone, but Bell was the first to write down the idea and the first to test it in a telephone.
It was then recollected that underneath the horse-hair mattress on which the President lay was another mattress composed of steel wires.
For his 11th birthday, his father acquiesced and allowed him to adopt the name "Graham", chosen out of respect for Alexander Graham, a Canadian being treated by his father who had become a family friend.
As is sometimes common in scientific discoveries, simultaneous developments can occur, as evidenced by a number of inventors who were at work on the telephone.
The committee unequivocally extended the principle to humans.
When Bell spoke the famous sentence "Mr. Watson—Come here—I want to see you" into the liquid transmitter, Watson, listening at the receiving end in an adjoining room, heard the words clearly.
Edward would never recover.
This led him and Bell to the development of practical hydrofoil watercraft.
In partnership with Gardiner Greene Hubbard, Bell helped establish the publication Science during the early 1880s.
Bell thought it might be possible to generate undulating electrical currents that corresponded to sound waves.
At an early age, he was enrolled at the Royal High School, Edinburgh, Scotland, which he left at age 15, completing only the first four forms.
Returning in 1886, Bell started building an estate on a point across from Baddeck, overlooking Bras d'Or Lake.
Some of Bell's kites are on display at the Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site.
The ''bel'' (B) and the smaller ''decibel'' (dB) are units of measurement of sound intensity invented by Bell Labs and named after him.
During his life he also received dozens of major awards, medals and other tributes.
Based on information gained from that article he began to sketch concepts of what is now called a hydrofoil boat.
The Bell Telephone Company was created in 1877, and by 1886, more than 150,000 people in the U.S. owned telephones.
While his older brother seemed to achieve success on many fronts including opening his own elocution school, applying for a patent on an invention, and starting a family, Bell continued as a teacher.
The Volta Prize was conceived by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1801, and named in honor of Alessandro Volta, with Bell receiving the third grand prize in its history.
Influential visitors to the exhibition included Emperor Pedro II of Brazil.
He was survived by his wife Mabel, his two daughters, Elsie May and Marian, and nine of his grandchildren.
The 150th anniversary of Bell's birth in 1997 was marked by a special issue of commemorative £1 banknotes from the Royal Bank of Scotland.
While tending to him after his long illness, Mabel, his wife, whispered, "Don't leave me."
Both Mabel and Bell became immersed in the Baddeck community and were accepted by the villagers as "their own".
in 1896, possibly 1881
While he was working as a private tutor, one of his most famous pupils was Helen Keller, who came to him as a young child unable to see, hear, or speak.
My colleagues in the Government join with me in expressing to you our sense of the world's loss in the death of your distinguished husband.
Throughout late 1867, his health faltered mainly through exhaustion.
He could decipher Visible Speech representing virtually every language, including Latin, Scottish Gaelic, and even Sanskrit, accurately reciting written tracts without any prior knowledge of their pronunciation.
Bell was fascinated by the machine and after he obtained a copy of von Kempelen's book, published in German, and had laboriously translated it, he and his older brother Melville built their own automaton head.
However, the AEA had depleted its initial reserves and only a $15,000 grant from Mrs. Bell allowed it to continue with experiments.
* The Bell Homestead National Historic Site, includes the Bell family home, "Melville House", and farm overlooking Brantford, Ontario and the Grand River.
''The Standard Elocutionist'' appeared in 168 British editions and sold over a quarter of a million copies in the United States alone.
Bell believed the photophone's principles were his life's "greatest achievement", telling a reporter shortly before his death that the photophone was "the greatest invention I have ever made, greater than the telephone".
Unsure of his future, he first contemplated returning to London to complete his studies, but decided to return to Boston as a teacher.
Bell's coffin was constructed of Beinn Bhreagh pine by his laboratory staff, lined with the same red silk fabric used in his tetrahedral kite experiments.
Bell died of complications arising from diabetes on August 2, 1922, at his private estate, Beinn Bhreagh, Nova Scotia, at age 75.
Meucci's evidence in this case was disputed due to a lack of material evidence for his inventions as his working models were purportedly lost at the laboratory of American District Telegraph (ADT) of New York, which was later incorporated as a subsidiary of Western Union in 1901.
Bell's preoccupation with his mother's deafness led him to study acoustics.
Bell received numerous honorary degrees from colleges and universities, to the point that the requests almost became burdensome.
By 1885, a new summer retreat was contemplated.
A short time later, his demonstration of an early telephone prototype at the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia brought the telephone to international attention.
George's father, Thomas Sanders, a wealthy businessman, offered Bell a place to stay in nearby Salem with Georgie's grandmother, complete with a room to "experiment".
The laboratory was also the site where he and his associate invented his "proudest achievement", "the photophone", the "optical telephone" which presaged fibre optical telecommunications, while the Volta Bureau would later evolve into the Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (the AG Bell), a leading center for the research and pedagogy of deafness.
The First Day of Issue ceremony was held on October 28 in Boston, Massachusetts, the city where Bell spent considerable time on research and working with the deaf.
In 1898, Bell was elected as the second president of the National Geographic Society, serving until 1903, and was primarily responsible for the extensive use of illustrations, including photography, in the magazine.
* Gallaudet College (then named National Deaf-Mute College) in Washington, D.C.  (Ph.D.) in 1880
* George Washington University in Washington, D.C.
Organizations such as these advocated passing laws (with success in some states) that established the compulsory sterilization of people deemed to be, as Bell called them, a "defective variety of the human race".
In personal correspondence to Bell, both Gray and Dolbear had acknowledged his prior work, which considerably weakened their later claims.
In return, Ben's father John Herdman gave both boys the run of a small workshop in which to "invent".
In 1865, when the Bell family moved to London, Bell returned to Weston House as an assistant master and, in his spare hours, continued experiments on sound using a minimum of laboratory equipment.
* University of Oxford in Oxford, England (D.Sc.)
Bell had also been afflicted with pernicious anemia.
His father was Professor Alexander Melville Bell, a phonetician, and his mother was Eliza Grace (née Symonds).
Baldwin described it as being as smooth as flying.
At his Canadian estate in Nova Scotia, he experimented with composting toilets and devices to capture water from the atmosphere.
Reluctantly, Bell also had to conclude a relationship with Marie Eccleston, who, as he had surmised, was not prepared to leave England with him.
Until the end of his life, Bell and his family would alternate between the two homes, but ''Beinn Bhreagh'' would, over the next 30 years, become more than a summer home as Bell became so absorbed in his experiments that his annual stays lengthened.
On February 14, 1876, Gray filed a caveat with the U.S. Patent Office for a telephone design that used a water transmitter.
Bell concentrated on experimenting with electricity to convey sound and later installed a telegraph wire from his room in Somerset College to that of a friend.
The arrangement was for teacher and student to continue their work together, with free room and board thrown in.
After setting up his workshop, Bell continued experiments based on Helmholtz's work with electricity and sound.
In a magazine interview published shortly before his death, he reflected on the possibility of using solar panels to heat houses.
Bell's report to the U.S. Navy permitted him to obtain two  engines in July 1919.
Bell had a specially made table where he could place his notes and equipment inside a locking cover.
That declaration greatly encouraged Bell to keep trying, even though he did not have the equipment needed to continue his experiments, nor the ability to create a working model of his ideas.
Bell also thought that multiple metal reeds tuned to different frequencies like a harp would be able to convert the undulating currents back into sound.
Meanwhile, Elisha Gray was also experimenting with acoustic telegraphy and thought of a way to transmit speech using a water transmitter.
Bell's own home used a primitive form of air conditioning, in which fans blew currents of air across great blocks of ice.
Upon leaving school, Bell travelled to London to live with his grandfather, Alexander Bell.
By the late 1930s, about half the states in the U.S. had eugenics laws, and California's compulsory sterilization law was used as a model for that of Nazi Germany.
In 1886, in the first of three cases in which he was involved, Meucci took the stand as a witness in the hopes of establishing his invention's priority.
Despite this declaration, Bell has been proudly claimed as a "native son" by all three countries he resided in: the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
If I had been able to read German in those days, I might never have commenced my experiments!"
By way of reply, Bell signed "no...", lost consciousness, and died shortly after.
The Bell company lawyers successfully fought off myriad lawsuits generated initially around the challenges by Elisha Gray and Amos Dolbear.
The basic concept behind his device was that messages could be sent through a single wire if each message was transmitted at a different pitch, but work on both the transmitter and receiver was needed.
Alexander Graham Bell, who could not complete the university program of his youth, received at least a dozen honorary degrees from academic institutions, including eight honorary LL.D.s (Doctorate of Laws), two Ph.D.s, a D.Sc.
She was later to say that Bell dedicated his life to the penetration of that "inhuman silence which separates and estranges".
The rudimentary "mechanical man" simulated a human voice.
Although Bell was not one of the 33 founders of the National Geographic Society, he had a strong influence on the magazine while serving as the second president from January 7, 1898, until 1903.
Continuing his experiments in Brantford, Bell brought home a working model of his telephone.
His father published a variety of works on the subject, several of which are still well known, especially his ''The Standard Elocutionist'' (1860), which appeared in Edinburgh in 1868.
More indicative of his playful nature, his experiments convinced onlookers that they saw a "talking dog".
In this treatise, his father explains his methods of how to instruct deaf-mutes (as they were then known) to articulate words and read other people's lip movements to decipher meaning.
Bell had filed the mercury application at the patent office a year earlier on February 25, 1875, long before Elisha Gray described the water device.
The range of Bell's inventive genius is represented only in part by the 18 patents granted in his name alone and the 12 he shared with his collaborators.
The Volta Laboratory became an experimental facility devoted to scientific discovery, and the very next year it improved Edison's phonograph by substituting wax for tinfoil as the recording medium and incising the recording rather than indenting it, key upgrades that Edison himself later adopted.
The question of priority for the variable resistance feature of the telephone was raised by the examiner before he approved Bell's patent application.
By the time that the trial wound its way through nine years of legal battles, the U.S. prosecuting attorney had died and the two Bell patents (No.
Bell worked extensively in medical research and invented techniques for teaching speech to the deaf.
From 1912 until 1918 he was the chairman of the board of scientific advisers to the Eugenics Record Office associated with Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, and regularly attended meetings.
While Bell recovered (by then referring to himself in correspondence as "A. G. Bell") and served the next year as an instructor at Somerset College, Bath, England, his brother's condition deteriorated.
As a young child, Bell, like his brothers, received his early schooling at home from his father.
Intrigued by the results of the automaton, Bell continued to experiment with a live subject, the family's Skye Terrier, "Trouve".
McCurdy–Baldwin and McCurdy being new engineering graduates from the University of Toronto.
Many other inventions marked Bell's later life, including groundbreaking work in optical telecommunications, hydrofoils and aeronautics.
The Siemens company produced near-identical copies of the Bell telephone without having to pay royalties.
* Canada's first telephone company building, the "Henderson Home" of the late 1870s, a predecessor of the Bell Telephone Company of Canada (officially chartered in 1880).
Orton had contracted with inventors Thomas Edison and Elisha Gray to find a way to send multiple telegraph messages on each telegraph line to avoid the great cost of constructing new lines.
Two years later, he told colleagues that if he could get the patent for $25&nbsp;million he would consider it a bargain.
The device was quickly put together in an attempt to find the bullet in the body of U.S. President James Garfield.
Among the major sites are:
* The Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site, maintained by Parks Canada, which incorporates the Alexander Graham Bell Museum, in Baddeck, Nova Scotia, close to the Bell estate Beinn Bhreagh
The innovations that were incorporated into this design included a cockpit enclosure and tail rudder (later variations on the original design would add ailerons as a means of control).
In 1893, Keller performed the sod-breaking ceremony for the construction of the new Bell's new Volta Bureau, dedicated to "the increase and diffusion of knowledge relating to the deaf".
In a footnote, Bell adds, "The death of President Garfield and the subsequent ''post-mortem'' examination, however, proved that the bullet was at too great a distance from the surface to have affected our apparatus."
* Illinois College, in Jacksonville, Illinois (LL.D.)
Married David Fairchild.
These included statuary monuments to both him and the new form of communication his telephone created, notably the Bell Telephone Memorial erected in his honor in ''Alexander Graham Bell Gardens'' in Brantford, Ontario, in 1917.
They had rides in the Forlanini hydrofoil boat over Lake Maggiore.
Bell was a supporter of aerospace engineering research through the Aerial Experiment Association (AEA), officially formed at Baddeck, Nova Scotia, in October 1907 at the suggestion of his wife Mabel and with her financial support after the sale of some of her real estate.
Worse still, his health deteriorated as he suffered severe headaches.
However, these initial forays into experimentation with sound led Bell to undertake his first serious work on the transmission of sound, using tuning forks to explore resonance.
At age 16, Bell secured a position as a "pupil-teacher" of elocution and music, in Weston House Academy, at Elgin, Moray, Scotland.
:Glad did I live and gladly die
From his early years, Bell showed a sensitive nature and a talent for art, poetry, and music that was encouraged by his mother.
Upon obtaining a duplicate, the mattress was found to consist of a sort of net of woven steel wires, with large meshes.
Their final aircraft design, the ''Silver Dart'', embodied all of the advancements found in the earlier machines.
He had two brothers: Melville James Bell (1845–70) and Edward Charles Bell (1848–67), both of whom would die of tuberculosis.
By then, the Bell company no longer wanted to sell the patent.
Bell's own detailed account, presented to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1882, differs in several particulars from most of the many and varied versions now in circulation, most notably by concluding that extraneous metal was not to blame for failure to locate the bullet.
Owing to his efforts to suppress the teaching of sign language, Bell is often viewed negatively by those embracing Deaf culture.
Bell pointed to a variable resistance device in Bell's previous application in which Bell described a cup of mercury, not water.
Bell's image, and also those of his many inventions have graced paper money, coinage and postal stamps in numerous countries worldwide for many dozens of years.
Bell's laboratory notes and family letters were the key to establishing a long lineage to his experiments.
