She goes to live in his huge English country house, and struggles with the lingering reputation of the elegant and worldly first wife, whose name was Rebecca and who died under mysterious circumstances.
It features James Stewart in the leading role, and was the first of four films that Stewart made with Hitchcock.
He was likewise influenced by other foreign filmmakers whose work he absorbed as one of the earliest members of the "seminal"  London Film Society, formed in 1925.
In the late 1950s, French New Wave critics, especially Éric Rohmer, Claude Chabrol and François Truffaut, were among the first to see and promote Hitchcock's films as artistic works.
Stewart tries to convince both his policeman buddy (Wendell Corey) and his glamorous model-girlfriend (Kelly, whom screenwriter John Michael Hayes based on his own wife), and eventually he succeeds.
In ''Writing with Hitchcock'', a book-length study of Hitchcock's working method with his writers, author Steven DeRosa noted that "Although he rarely did any actual 'writing', especially on his Hollywood productions, Hitchcock supervised and guided his writers through every draft, insisting on a strict attention to detail and a preference for telling the story through visual rather than verbal means.
It avoided direct references to Nazism, Germany and Germans to comply with Hollywood's Production Code censorship.
I had no use for that kind of actor.
Hitchcock also wrote a mystery story for ''Look'' magazine in 1943, "The Murder of Monty Woolley".
McGilligan writes that Hitchcock consulted Dr. Robert Millikan of Caltech about the development of an atomic bomb.
Working at 20th Century Fox, Hitchcock adapted a script of John Steinbeck's, which recorded the experiences of the survivors of a German U-boat attack in the film ''Lifeboat'' (1944).
The collection includes home movies, 16mm film shot on the set of ''Blackmail'' (1929) and ''Frenzy'' (1972), and the earliest known colour footage of Hitchcock.
In ''The 39 Steps'', the MacGuffin is a stolen set of design plans.
This was Hitchcock's first proper production for Warner Bros., which had distributed ''Rope'' and ''Under Capricorn'', because Transatlantic Pictures was experiencing financial difficulties.
Hitchcock's luck changed with his first thriller, ''The Lodger: A Story of the London Fog'' (1927), a suspense film about the hunt for a Jack the Ripper type of serial killer in London.
Herrmann was sacked when Hitchcock was unsatisfied with his score.
Hitchcock gave a book-length interview to François Truffaut, in which he said that Selznick had sold the director, the two stars (Grant and Bergman), and the screenplay (by Ben Hecht) to RKO Radio Pictures as a "package" for $500,000 due to cost overruns on Selznick's ''Duel in the Sun'' (1946).
The title-sequence of the show pictured a minimalist caricature of Hitchcock's profile (he drew it himself; it is composed of only nine strokes), which his real silhouette then filled.
Some transitions between reels were hidden by having a dark object fill the entire screen for a moment.
After Famous Players-Lasky pulled out of London in 1922, Hitchcock stayed as part of the studio staff.
Stewart plays "Scottie", a former police investigator suffering from acrophobia, who develops an obsession with a woman that he is shadowing (Novak).
In 2002, the magazine ''MovieMaker'' named Hitchcock the most influential filmmaker of all time.
In the story’s 40 sentences, confusion regarding the questions “Who’s me?” and "Who’s you?” rise to comic emotional heights.
In the 1980s, a new version of ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents'' was produced for television, making use of Hitchcock's original introductions in a colourised form.
Hitchcock then moved to Paramount Pictures and filmed ''Rear Window'' (1954), starring James Stewart and Kelly again, as well as Thelma Ritter and Raymond Burr.
He often used the same actors in many of his films.
'', a photographic dramatisation of the dangers of rumours during wartime, for ''Life'' magazine.
After leaving, he became a draftsman and advertising designer with a cable company called Henley's.
The character that Grant plays in the film is a killer in the book the film is based on, ''Before the Fact'' by Francis Iles, but Hitchcock and the studio felt that Grant's image would be tarnished by that.
Hitchcock became known for his alleged observation, "Actors are cattle".
Hitchcock was quickly impressed with the superior resources of the American studios compared with the financial limits that he had often faced in Britain.
Krohn's extensive analysis of the production of Hitchcock classics like ''Notorious'' reveals that Hitchcock was flexible enough to change a film's conception during its production.
Many of the mysteries, however, are used as decoys or "MacGuffins" that serve the films' themes and the psychological examinations of their characters.
His stylistic trademarks include the use of camera movement that mimics a person's gaze, forcing viewers to engage in a form of voyeurism.
Several critics have observed that despite his reputation as a man who disliked actors, several actors who worked with him gave fine, often brilliant performances and these performances contribute to the film's success.
It was an early 'talkie', often cited by film historians as a landmark film, and is often considered to be the first British sound feature film.
Two point-of-view shots were achieved by building a large wooden hand (which would appear to belong to the character whose point of view the camera took) and out-sized props for it to hold: a bucket-sized glass of milk and a large wooden gun.
The series theme tune was ''Funeral March of a Marionette'', by the French composer Charles Gounod (1818–1893), the composer of the 1859 opera ''Faust''.
The film went through various titles including ''Deceit'' and ''Missing Heir''.
Critic Roger Ebert wrote: "Other British directors like Sir Carol Reed and Sir Charlie Chaplin were knighted years ago, while Hitchcock, universally considered by film students to be one of the greatest filmmakers of all time, was passed over".
The film mixed footage of European scenes with scenes filmed on a Hollywood back lot.
The English 'Hitchcock blonde' was based on his preference for the heroines to have an "indirect" sex appeal of English women, ladylike in public, but whores in the bedroom, with Hitchcock stating to Truffaut:
It was produced by Sidney Bernstein of the British Ministry of Information, and was assembled in London.
This differed from coverage in that the films were not necessarily shot from varying angles so as to give the editor options to shape the film how he/she chooses (often under the producer's aegis).
Notwithstanding his technical brilliance as a director, Hitchcock relied on his writers a great deal."
"The History of Pea Eating" (1920) is a satirical disquisition on the various attempts that people have made over the centuries to eat peas successfully.
In 1978, film critic John Russell Taylor described Hitchcock as "the most universally recognizable person in the world", and "a straightforward middle-class Englishman who just happened to be an artistic genius."
Hitchcock's films also borrow many themes from psychoanalysis and sometimes feature strong sexual overtones.
He also used this as an excuse to never have to change his films from his initial vision.
Hitchcock's films sometimes feature characters struggling in their relationships with their mothers.
Joan Fontaine won Best Actress Oscar for her performance.
Hitchcock became a highly visible public figure through interviews, movie trailers, cameo appearances in his own films, and the ten years in which he hosted the television program ''Alfred Hitchcock Presents''.
He subsequently swapped his rights to ''Psycho'' and his TV anthology for 150,000 shares of MCA, making him the third largest shareholder in MCA Inc. and his own boss at Universal, in theory at least, but that did not stop them from interfering with him.
It became ''The Alfred Hitchcock Hour'' in 1962.
With ''Dial M,'' Hitchcock experimented with 3D cinematography, with the film now being available in the 3D format on Blu-ray.
Hitchcock moved to Hollywood in 1939 and became a US citizen in 1955.
"Sordid" (1920) surrounds an attempt to buy a sword from an antiques dealer, with another twist ending.
The cause of the birds' attack is left unanswered, "perhaps highlighting the mystery of forces unknown".
In one scene Hitchcock uses a lightbulb to illuminate what might be a fatal glass of milk that Grant is bringing to his wife.
In 2012, Hedren described Hitchcock as a "sad character"; a man of "unusual genius", yet "evil, and deviant, almost to the point of dangerous, because of the effect that he could have on people that were totally unsuspecting."
& Mrs. Smith'' (1941), Carole Lombard brought some heifers onto the set with name tags of Lombard, Robert Montgomery and Gene Raymond, the stars of the film, to surprise the director.
Hitchcock has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, receiving one for his contribution to television and another for his work in motion pictures.
While working at Henley's, Hitchcock began to dabble in creative writing.
Both received mixed reviews from critics.
Novak, who worked on Hitchcock's ''Vertigo'', told the ''Telegraph'' "I never saw him make a pass at anybody or act strange to anybody."
It is the only Hitchcock film scored by John Williams.
It was premiered in the San Sebastián International Film Festival, where Hitchcock won a Silver Seashell.
He had a successful career in British cinema with both silent films and early talkies and became renowned as England's best director.
Hitchcock told Truffaut that his lifelong fear of the police attracted him to the subject and was embedded in many scenes.
Equally important is Hitchcock's tendency to shoot alternate takes of scenes.
This was the only film of Hitchcock to star Henry Fonda, who plays a Stork Club musician mistaken for a liquor store thief who is arrested and tried for robbery, while his wife (Vera Miles) emotionally collapses under the strain.
In ''The Birds'' (1963), the Rod Taylor character, an innocent man, finds his world under attack by vicious birds, and struggles to free himself of a clinging mother (Jessica Tandy).
In the PBS series ''The Men Who Made The Movies'', Hitchcock explained how he used early sound recording as a special element of the film, stressing the word "knife" in a conversation with the woman suspected of murder.
On his motivation for making the films, Hitchcock stated: "I felt the need to make a little contribution to the war effort, and I was both overweight and over-age for military service.
Hitchcock again filmed extensively on location, this time in the Northern California city of Santa Rosa during the summer of 1942.
When Hitchcock was 15, his father died.
Breaking with Hollywood conventions of the time, Hitchcock did extensive location filming, especially in New York City, and depicted a confrontation between a suspected saboteur (Cummings) and a real saboteur (Norman Lloyd) atop the Statue of Liberty.
Failing health reduced Hitchcock's output during the last two decades of his life.
The film-makers were commissioned to provide irrefutable evidence of the Nazis' crimes, and the film recorded the liberation of Nazi concentration camps.
Hitchcock was one of the first directors to whom they applied their auteur theory, which stresses the artistic authority of the director in the film-making process.
In ''The 39 Steps'', Hitchcock's glamorous blonde star, Madeleine Carroll, is put in handcuffs.
An English Heritage blue plaque, unveiled in 1999, marks where Sir Alfred Hitchcock lived in London at 153 Cromwell Road, Kensington and Chelsea, SW5.
After the scene was filmed, the publicity department asked Hitchcock to make storyboards to promote the film and Hitchcock in turn hired an artist to match the scenes in detail.
Alfred Hitchcock was born on 13 August 1899 in Leytonstone, which at the time was part of Essex (now part of the London Borough of Waltham Forest).
In 1955, Hitchcock became a United States citizen.
His final piece, "Fedora" (1921), is his shortest and most enigmatic contribution.
His first directing project came in 1922 with the aptly titled ''Number 13'', filmed in London.
The public loved the film, with lines stretching outside of cinemas as people had to wait for the next showing.
For Hitchcock, the actors, like the props, were part of the film's setting, as he said to Truffaut:
Released in January 1927, it was a major commercial and critical success in the United Kingdom.
In ''North by Northwest'', Cary Grant portrays Roger Thornhill, a Madison Avenue advertising executive who is mistaken for a government secret agent.
Hitchcock remade his own 1934 film ''The Man Who Knew Too Much'' in 1956.
It was Hitchcock's last film with Kelly.
... Producer was king, The most flattering thing Mr. Selznick ever said about me—and it shows you the amount of control—he said I was the "only director" he'd "trust with a film".
''Vertigo'' explores more frankly and at greater length his interest in the relation between sex and death than any other film in his filmography.
''Saboteur'' (1942) is the first of two films that Hitchcock made for Universal during the decade.
Hitchcock returned to England to film his penultimate film ''Frenzy'' (1972).
He again used Technicolor in this production, then returned to black-and-white films for several years.
However, Hedren appeared in two TV shows during the two years after ''Marnie''.
A great example would be the celebrated crop-spraying sequence of ''North by Northwest'' which was not storyboarded at all.
His last film under his contract with Selznick was ''The Paradine Case'' (1947), a courtroom drama which critics thought lost momentum because it apparently ran too long and exhausted its resource of ideas.
Gregory Peck plays amnesiac Dr. Anthony Edwardes under the treatment of analyst Dr. Peterson (Ingrid Bergman), who falls in love with him while trying to unlock his repressed past.
Hitchcock cast Hedren again opposite Sean Connery in ''Marnie'' (1964), a romantic drama and psychological thriller.
That was solved by having Hitchcock's image appear in a newspaper that William Bendix is reading in the boat, showing the director in a before-and-after advertisement for "Reduco-Obesity Slayer".
A young man goes out looking for a brothel, only to stumble into the house of his best friend's girl.
Hitchcock joined a cadet regiment of the Royal Engineers in 1917.
The Selznick picture ''Rebecca'' (1940) was Hitchcock's first American film, set in a Hollywood version of England's Cornwall and based on a novel by English novelist Daphne du Maurier.
She kills the hired assassin in self-defence, so Milland manipulates the evidence to make it look like a premeditated murder by his wife.
Hitchcock filmed ''Stage Fright'' (1950) at studios in Elstree, England where he had worked during his British International Pictures contract many years before.
It captures the zany confusion that happens when a group of actors decide to put together a sketch in which they will impersonate themselves.
This was caused primarily by Hitchcock's seriously declining health and his concerns for his wife, Alma, who had suffered a stroke.
Lew Wasserman, board chairman and chief executive officer of MCA Inc. and previously Hitchcock’s longtime agent, stated:
Many of Hitchcock's films have twist endings and thrilling plots featuring depictions of murder and other violence.
It had previously been ranked just behind ''Citizen Kane'' (1941) in earlier ''Sight and Sound'' decade polls, but it was voted best ever film in the 2012 ''Sight & Sound'' critics poll.
Hitchcock himself was not actually involved in the reading, reviewing, editing or selection of the short stories; in fact, even his introductions were ghost-written.
His first film for the company ''The Man Who Knew Too Much'' (1934) was a success and his second ''The 39 Steps'' (1935) is often considered one of the best films from his early period, with the British Film Institute ranking it the fourth best British film of the 20th century.
While biographer Spoto wrote that Hitchcock "rejected suggestions that he allow a priest ... to come for a visit, or celebrate a quiet, informal ritual at the house for his comfort," Jesuit priest Father Mark Henninger wrote that he and fellow priest Tom Sullivan celebrated Mass at the filmmaker's home; Father Sullivan heard Hitchcock's confession.
In the same year, he left St. Ignatius to study at the London County Council School of Engineering and Navigation in Poplar, London.
The statuette was given to Selznick, as the film's producer.
While there he made two short films for the British Ministry of Information: ''Bon Voyage'' and ''Aventure Malgache''.
Near the end of his life, Hitchcock had worked on the script for a projected spy thriller, ''The Short Night'', collaborating with James Costigan, Ernest Lehman and David Freeman.
That year, he also directed ''Have You Heard?
In 1939, Hitchcock received the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director, the only time he received an award for his direction.
Some commentators regard this piece as the first truly "Hitchcockian" film, incorporating such themes as the "wrong man".
The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1940.
His first piece was "Gas" (1919), published in the first issue, in which a young woman imagines that she is being assaulted one night in London – only for the twist to reveal that it was all just a hallucination in the dentist's chair induced by the anesthetic.
The long-running detective series was created by Robert Arthur, who wrote the first several books, although other authors took over after he left the series.
Newcomer Tippi Hedren co-starred with Rod Taylor and Suzanne Pleshette.
But Hitchcock continued to produce his own films for the rest of his life.
Some notable writers whose works were used in the collection include Shirley Jackson (''Strangers in Town'', ''The Lottery''), T. H. White (''The Once and Future King''), Robert Bloch, H. G. Wells (''The War of the Worlds''), Robert Louis Stevenson, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Mark Twain and the creator of ''The Three Investigators'', Robert Arthur.
By this time, Hitchcock had filmed in many areas of the US.
Selznick was the Big Producer.
Norman Bates has troubles with his mother in ''Psycho''.
The unprecedented violence of the shower scene, the early death of the heroine and the innocent lives extinguished by a disturbed murderer became the defining hallmarks of a new horror film genre and have been copied by many authors of subsequent films.
He also shows rare sympathy for the chief inspector and his comic domestic life.
Hitchcock used those points to hide the cut, and began the next take with the camera in the same place.
Along with Walt Disney, Hitchcock was among the first prominent film producers to fully envisage just how popular the medium of television would become.
In a ''Sight and Sound'' interview, he stated that, 'the method actor is OK in the theatre because he has a free space to move about.
As with many of his earlier works, this film was influenced by Expressionist techniques Hitchcock had witnessed first-hand in Germany.
The action sequences were shot in a small boat in the studio water tank.
He was excused from military service with a 'C3' classification due to his size, height or an unnamed medical condition, but he was "able to stand service conditions in garrisons at home".
He often described a lonely and sheltered childhood worsened by his obesity.
The Alfred Hitchcock papers at the Academy's Margaret Herrick Library complement the film material.
Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops Orchestra included the piece on one of their extended play 45-rpm discs for RCA Victor during the 1950s.
''Variety'' magazine referred to him as, "probably the best native director in England."
At the same time, Selznick complained about Hitchcock's "goddamn jigsaw cutting", which meant that the producer did not have nearly the leeway to create his own film as he liked, but had to follow Hitchcock's vision of the finished product.
He matched one of Warner Bros.' most popular stars, Jane Wyman, with the expatriate German actress Marlene Dietrich and used several prominent British actors, including Michael Wilding, Richard Todd and Alastair Sim.
After two espionage films, the plot marks a return to the murder thriller genre, and is based upon the novel ''Goodbye Piccadilly, Farewell Leicester Square''.
Her lover Mark Halliday (Robert Cummings) and Police Inspector Hubbard (John Williams) work urgently to save her from execution.
Out of boredom, he begins observing his neighbours across the courtyard, and then becomes convinced that one of them (Raymond Burr) has murdered his wife.
Even when storyboards were made, scenes that were shot differed from them significantly.
For the first time, Hitchcock allowed nudity and profane language, which had previously been taboo, in one of his films.
She married Prince Rainier of Monaco in 1956, and ended her film career.
''Notorious'' stars Hitchcock regulars Ingrid Bergman and Cary Grant, and features a plot about Nazis, uranium and South America.
Hitchcock returned several times to cinematic devices such as suspense, the audience as voyeur, and his well-known "MacGuffin," a plot device that is essential to the characters on the screen, but is irrelevant to the audience.
His rise from title designer to film director took five years.
I'm not quite sure in what context I might have made such a statement.
''Blackmail'' began the Hitchcock tradition of using famous landmarks as a backdrop for suspense sequences, with the climax of the film taking place on the dome of the British Museum.
Krohn's work also sheds light on Hitchcock's practice of generally shooting in chronological order, which he notes sent many films over budget and over schedule and, more importantly, differed from the standard operating procedure of Hollywood in the Studio System Era.
Their only child, daughter Patricia, was born on 7 July 1928.
In my opinion, the chief requisite for an actor is the ability to do nothing well, which is by no means as easy as it sounds.
The director showcased his personal fascination with crime and criminals when he had two of his characters discuss various ways of killing people, to the obvious annoyance of Charlotte.
According to Krohn, this and a great deal of other information revealed through his research of Hitchcock's personal papers, script revisions and the like refute the notion of Hitchcock as a director who was always in control of his films, whose vision of his films did not change during production, which Krohn notes has remained the central long-standing myth of Alfred Hitchcock.
If a studio asked him to change a film, he would claim that it was already shot in a single way, and that there were no alternate takes to consider.
Yet Patrick McGilligan wrote that Breen and others often realised that Hitchcock was inserting such things and were actually amused as well as alarmed by Hitchcock's "inescapable inferences".
In ''Rear Window'', Lisa (Grace Kelly again) risks her life by breaking into Lars Thorwald's apartment.
Hitchcock was a multiple nominee and winner of a number of prestigious awards, receiving two Golden Globes, eight Laurel Awards, and five lifetime achievement awards including the first BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, as well as being five times nominated for, albeit never winning, an Academy Award as Best Director.
Hitchcock's funeral Mass was held at Good Shepherd Catholic Church in Beverly Hills on 30 April 1980, after which his body was cremated and his remains were scattered over the Pacific Ocean on 10 May 1980.
Another BIP musical revue, ''Harmony Heaven'' (1929), reportedly had minor input from Hitchcock, but his name does not appear in the credits.
Hitchcock appears as a character in the popular juvenile detective book series, ''Alfred Hitchcock and the Three Investigators''.
In the film, two men casually meet, one of whom speculates on a foolproof method to murder; he suggests that two people, each wishing to do away with someone, should each perform the other's murder.
However, over time the work of many of his writers has been attributed solely to Hitchcock's creative genius, a misconception he rarely went out of his way to correct.
A central theme of Hitchcock's films was murder and the psychology behind it.
It also features one of his longest cameo appearances, which shows him being bothered by a small boy as he reads a book on the London Underground.
He pioneered many elements of the suspense and psychological thriller genres.
He approached Dashiell Hammett to write the dialogue, but Raymond Chandler took over, then left over disagreements with the director.
While at Fox, Hitchcock seriously considered directing the film version of A. J. Cronin's novel about a Catholic priest in China, ''The Keys of the Kingdom'', but the plans for this fell through.
His prescient use of uranium as a plot device led to Hitchcock's being briefly under FBI surveillance.
While ''Family Plot'' was based on the Victor Canning novel ''The Rainbird Pattern'', the novel's tone is more sinister and dark than what Hitchcock wanted for the film.
Hitchcock appears briefly in most of his own films.
Following the success of ''The Lodger'', Hitchcock hired a publicist to help strengthen his growing reputation.
In ''To Catch a Thief'' (1955), Francie (Grace Kelly) offers to help a man she believes is a burglar.
He noted that the myth of storyboards in relation to Hitchcock, often regurgitated by generations of commentators on his films, was to a great degree perpetuated by Hitchcock himself or the publicity arm of the studios.
''Family Plot'' (1976) was Hitchcock's last film.
The series was a collection of short stories by popular short-story writers, primarily focused on suspense and thrillers.
The film appears to have been shot in a single take, but it was actually shot in 10 takes ranging from 4-½ to 10 minutes each, a 10-minute length of film being the maximum that a camera's film magazine could hold at the time.
It may have been made ... when we used actors who were simultaneously performing in stage plays.
His flair was for narrative, cruelly withholding crucial information (from his characters and from viewers) and engaging the emotions of the audience like no one else."
In September 1940 the Hitchcocks bought the  Cornwall Ranch near Scotts Valley in the Santa Cruz Mountains.
It was transferred in 1952 from the British War Office film vaults to London's Imperial War Museum and remained unreleased until 1985, when an edited version was broadcast as an episode of the PBS network series ''Frontline'' under the title which the Imperial War Museum had given it: ''Memory of the Camps''.
Some critics, including Donald Spoto and Roger Ebert, agree that ''Vertigo'' represents the director's most personal and revealing film, dealing with the obsessions of a man who crafts a woman into the woman that he desires.
The film was acclaimed in Britain, and it made Hitchcock a star in the United States, and established the quintessential English "Hitchcock blonde" Madeleine Carroll as the template for his succession of ice cold and elegant leading ladies.
The short story "And There Was No Rainbow" (1920) is Hitchcock's first brush with possibly censurable material.
His third Grace Kelly film ''To Catch a Thief'' (1955) is set in the French Riviera, and pairs her with Cary Grant.
Goldwyn had also negotiated with Hitchcock on a possible contract, only to be outbid by Selznick.
''Shadow of a Doubt'' (1943) was Hitchcock's personal favourite of all his films and the second of the early Universal films.
Hitchcock was brought up as a Roman Catholic and was sent to Salesian College, Battersea, and the Jesuit grammar school St Ignatius' College in Stamford Hill, London.
Hitchcock addressed this story in his interview with François Truffaut:
Hitchcock died aged 80 in his Bel Air home of renal failure on 29 April 1980.
Their primary residence was an English-style home in Bel Air which was purchased in 1942.
