Wallace wrote on other social and political topics including his support for women's suffrage, and repeatedly on the dangers and wastefulness of militarism.
Unlike some of his contemporaries in the British scientific community, such as Darwin and Charles Lyell, he had no family wealth to fall back on, and he was unsuccessful in finding a long-term salaried position, receiving no regular income until he was awarded a small government pension, through Darwin's efforts, in 1881.
His death was widely reported in the press.
Wallace did extensive fieldwork, first in the Amazon River basin and then in the Malay Archipelago, where he identified the faunal divide now termed the Wallace Line, which separates the Indonesian archipelago into two distinct parts: a western portion in which the animals are largely of Asian origin, and an eastern portion where the fauna reflect Australasia.
In the late 1860s and 1870s, Wallace was very concerned about the financial security of his family.
In 1898, Wallace wrote a paper advocating a pure paper money system, not backed by silver or gold, which impressed the economist Irving Fisher so much that he dedicated his 1920 book ''Stabilizing the Dollar'' to Wallace.
While recovering from his travels, Wallace organised his collections and gave numerous lectures about his adventures and discoveries to scientific societies such as the Zoological Society of London.
During his work in the Amazon basin, he came to realise that geographical barriers—such as the Amazon and its major tributaries—often separated the ranges of closely allied species, and he included these observations in his 1853 paper "On the Monkeys of the Amazon".
He left London in 1837 to live with William and work as his apprentice for six years.
'''Alfred Russel Wallace'''  (8 January 1823&nbsp;– 7 November 1913) was a British naturalist, explorer, geographer, anthropologist, and biologist.
Wallace did months of research, consulted various experts, and produced his own scientific analysis of the Martian climate and atmospheric conditions.
He ate some income-generating property, but bad investments and failed business ventures resulted in a steady deterioration of the family's financial position.
It continues to be a topic of research in evolutionary biology today, with both computer simulation and empirical results supporting its validity.
In 1889, Wallace published the book ''Darwinism'' as a response to the scientific critics of natural selection.
Darwin had come to believe that sexual selection, an agency to which Wallace did not attribute the same importance as Darwin did, explained many conspicuous animal colour schemes.
He believed that rural land should be owned by the state and leased to people who would make whatever use of it that would benefit the largest number of people, thus breaking the often-abused power of wealthy landowners in British society.
More controversially he maintained that it was unlikely that other stars in the galaxy could have planets with the necessary properties (the existence of other galaxies not having been proved at the time).
In 1872, Wallace built the Dell, a house of concrete, on land he leased in Grays in Essex, where he lived until 1876.
Wallace thus answered the question he had posed in his earlier paper on the monkeys of the Amazon river basin.
Wallace was apparently the first evolutionist to recognize clearly that&nbsp;... with the emergence of that bodily specialization which constitutes the human brain, bodily specialization itself might be said to be outmoded."
Wallace also hoped to gather evidence of the transmutation of species.
In a 2010 book, the environmentalist Tim Flannery claimed that Wallace was 'the first modern scientist to comprehend how essential cooperation is to our survival,' and suggested that Wallace's understanding of natural selection and his later work on the atmosphere be seen as a forerunner to modern ecological thinking.
Wallace and Bates spent most of their first year collecting near Belém do Pará, then explored inland separately, occasionally meeting to discuss their findings.
Darwin's social and scientific status was far greater than Wallace's, and it was unlikely that, without Darwin, Wallace's views on evolution would have been taken seriously.
In ''The World of Life'' (1911) he wrote:
When he began his experiments with mesmerism, the topic was very controversial and early experimenters, such as John Elliotson, had been harshly criticised by the medical and scientific establishment.
In it, he proposed the hypothesis that natural selection could drive the reproductive isolation of two varieties by encouraging the development of barriers against hybridisation.
However, some historians have questioned this because neither of his parents was Welsh, his family only briefly lived in Monmouthshire, the Welsh people Wallace knew in his childhood considered him to be English, and because Wallace himself consistently referred to himself as English rather than Welsh (even when writing about his time in Wales).
However, many, including Huxley, Hooker, and Darwin himself, were critical of Wallace.
When this was destroyed, the heavy tropical rains soon washed away the soil, and has left a vast expanse of bare rock or sterile clay.
While he was exploring the archipelago, he refined his thoughts about evolution and had his famous insight on natural selection.
In 1849, they were briefly joined by another young explorer, botanist Richard Spruce, along with Wallace's younger brother Herbert.
Wallace and other scientists who defended spiritualism, notably William Crookes, were subject to much criticism from the press, with ''The Lancet'' as the leading English medical journal of the time being particularly harsh.
Other scholars have preferred to emphasise instead Wallace's desire to find rational and scientific explanations for all phenomena, both material and non-material, of the natural world and of human society.
He criticised the UK's free trade policies for the negative impact they had on working-class people.
One result of Wallace's early travels is a modern controversy about his nationality.
Wallace continued charting the Rio Negro for four years, collecting specimens and making notes on the peoples and languages he encountered as well as the geography, flora, and fauna.
Charles Lyell endorsed Wallace's views on human evolution rather than Darwin's.
Wallace's essay was presented to the Linnean Society of London on 1 July 1858, along with excerpts from an essay which Darwin had disclosed privately to Hooker in 1847 and a letter Darwin had written to Asa Gray in 1857.
In reality, Wallace developed his own distinct evolutionary views which diverged from Darwin's, and was considered by many (especially Darwin) to be a leading thinker on evolution in his day, whose ideas could not be ignored.
He provided maps that displayed factors, such as elevation of mountains, depths of oceans, and the character of regional vegetation, that affected the distribution of animals.
He was also profoundly influenced by Robert Chambers' work, ''Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation'', a highly controversial work of popular science published anonymously in 1844 that advocated an evolutionary origin for the solar system, the earth, and living things.
''Island Life'' was considered a very important work at the time of its publication.
Vaguely thinking over the enormous and constant destruction which this implied, it occurred to me to ask the question, why do some die and some live?
It has been suggested that Wallace accepted the idea of the transmutation of species in part because he was always inclined to favour radical ideas in politics, religion and science, and because he was unusually open to marginal, even fringe, ideas in science.
When Wallace returned to the UK, he met Darwin.
Moreover, no one knew enough about the human immune system to understand why vaccination worked.
From 1854 to 1862, age 31 to 39, Wallace travelled through the Malay Archipelago or East Indies (now Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia), to collect specimens for sale and to study natural history.
Wallace drew a connection between his experiences with mesmerism and his later investigations into spiritualism.
Here he was exposed to the radical political ideas of the Welsh social reformer Robert Owen and of Thomas Paine.
I do not consider it a hasty generalization, but rather as an ingenious hypothesis strongly supported by some striking facts and analogies, but which remains to be proven by more facts and the additional light which more research may throw upon the problem.
Early in his career, he experimented with hypnosis, then known as mesmerism.
to criticise the claims made by Percival Lowell that there were Martian canals built by intelligent beings.
Heggestad began documenting references in Wallace's work to specimens in the cabinet, resulting in a 62-page report to support the theory that the collection once belonged to Wallace.
''The Lancet'' averred that Wallace and the other anti-vaccination activists were being selective in their choice of statistics, ignoring large quantities of data inconsistent with their position.
In 1890, he wrote a critical review in ''Nature'' of his friend Edward Bagnall Poulton's ''The Colours of Animals'' which supported Darwin on sexual selection, attacking especially Poulton's claims on the "aesthetic preferences of the insect world".
During the trip, he was reunited with his brother John who had emigrated to California years before.
During this period, despite having lost almost all of the notes from his South American expedition, he wrote six academic papers (which included "On the Monkeys of the Amazon") and two books; ''Palm Trees of the Amazon and Their Uses'' and ''Travels on the Amazon''.
Wallace had written only a handful of articles on political and social issues between 1873 and 1879 when, at the age of 56, he entered the debates over trade policy and land reform in earnest.
While Wallace's essay obviously did not employ Darwin's term "natural selection", it did outline the mechanics of an evolutionary divergence of species from similar ones due to environmental pressures.
In 1847, he wrote to Bates:
In ''Island Life'', Wallace again mentioned deforestation and also the impact of invasive species.
He talked about how isolation affected evolution and how that could result in the preservation of classes of animals, such as the lemurs of Madagascar that were remnants of once widespread continental faunas.
Oceanic islands, such as the Galapagos and Hawaiian Islands (then known as the Sandwich Islands) formed in mid-ocean and never part of any large continent.
Bates was 19 years old, and in 1843 he had published a paper on beetles in the journal ''Zoologist''.
Wallace then moved to London to board with his older brother John, a 19-year-old apprentice builder.
Wallace assembled a huge collection of flora and fauna which were kept in "cabinets."
On 24 January, his portrait was unveiled in the Main Hall of the museum by Bill Bailey, a fervent admirer.
Uses my simile of tree but it seems all creation with him."
In 1898, Wallace published a book entitled ''The Wonderful Century: Its Successes and Its Failures'' about developments in the 19th century.
While some historians have concluded that Wallace's belief that natural selection was insufficient to explain the development of consciousness and the human mind was directly caused by his adoption of spiritualism, other Wallace scholars have disagreed, and some maintain that Wallace never believed natural selection applied to those areas.
Wallace persuaded his brother John to join him in starting another architecture and civil engineering firm, which carried out a number of projects, including the design of a building for the Neath Mechanics' Institute, founded in 1843.
Others have noted that another difference was that Wallace appeared to have envisioned natural selection as a kind of feedback mechanism keeping species and varieties adapted to their environment.
Alfred Wallace was born in the Welsh village of Llanbadoc, near Usk, Monmouthshire.
In this sense, it was very similar to the theory that Darwin had worked on for twenty years, but had yet to publish.
This, combined with Darwin's (as well as Hooker's and Lyell's) advocacy on his behalf, would give Wallace greater access to the highest levels of the scientific community.
In a letter published by the Daily Mail in 1909, with aviation in its infancy, he advocated an international treaty to ban the military use of aircraft, arguing against the idea "...that this new horror is "inevitable," and that all we can do is to be sure and be in the front rank of the aerial assassins—for surely no other term can so fitly describe the dropping of, say, ten thousand bombs at midnight into an enemy's capital from an invisible flight of airships."
They point to a largely overlooked passage of Wallace's famous 1858 paper:
In 1872, at the urging of many of his friends, including Darwin, Philip Sclater, and Alfred Newton, Wallace began research for a general review of the geographic distribution of animals.
Wallace was unable to accept that he had replicated their feats utilizing natural methods, and stated that Maskelyne possessed supernatural powers.
He befriended Wallace and started him collecting insects.
Both objects were at the same height above the water, and he mounted a telescope on a bridge at the same height above the water as well.
His observations of the marked zoological differences across a narrow strait in the archipelago led to his proposing the zoogeographical boundary now known as the Wallace line.
Some historians, notably Peter J. Bowler, have suggested the possibility that in the paper he mailed to Darwin, Wallace was not discussing selection of individual variations at all but rather group selection.
The statue was donated by the A. R. Wallace Memorial Fund, and was sculpted by Anthony Smith.
Herbert left soon thereafter (dying two years later from yellow fever), but Spruce, like Bates, would spend over ten years collecting in South America.
This idea came to be known as the Wallace effect.
Although Wallace had sent several articles for journal publication during his travels through the Malay archipelago, the Ternate essay was in a private letter.
He was considered the 19th century's leading expert on the geographical distribution of animal species and is sometimes called the "father of biogeography".
Another commentator in the same edition said "No apology need be made for the few literary or scientific follies of the author of that great book on the 'Malay Archipelago'."
The Wallaces had three children: Herbert (1867–1874), Violet (1869–1945), and William (1871–1951).
The East India Company took possession of the island in 1651, and about the year 1700 it began to be seen that the forests were fast diminishing, and required some protection.
...&nbsp;I remain an utter disbeliever in almost all that you consider the most sacred truths.
However, Hudson's photographs had previously been exposed as fraudulent in 1872.
At about the same time, he began to maintain that natural selection cannot account for mathematical, artistic, or musical genius, as well as metaphysical musings, and wit and humour.
When the £200 annual pension was awarded in 1881, it helped to stabilise Wallace's financial position by supplementing the income from his writings.
Since Wallace was born in Monmouthshire, some sources have considered him to be Welsh.
He managed to save a few notes and pencil sketches and little else.
Wallace originally saw the issue as a matter of personal liberty; but, after studying some of the statistics provided by anti-vaccination activists, he began to question the efficacy of vaccination.
He eventually said that something in "the unseen universe of Spirit" had interceded at least three times in history.
Between 1840 and 1843, Wallace did land surveying work in the countryside of the west of England and Wales.
Always suspicious of authority, Wallace suspected that physicians had a vested interest in promoting vaccination, and became convinced that reductions in the incidence of smallpox that had been attributed to vaccination were, in fact, due to better hygiene and improvements in public sanitation.
Prominent anatomists and geologists such as Georges Cuvier, Richard Owen, Adam Sedgwick, and Charles Lyell attacked it vigorously.
There he attended Hertford Grammar School until financial difficulties forced his family to withdraw him in 1836, when he was aged 14.
But whether there be a God and whatever be His nature; whether we have an immortal soul or not, or whatever may be our state after death, I can have no fear of having to suffer for the study of nature and the search for truth, or believe that those will be better off in a future state who have lived in the belief of doctrines inculcated from childhood, and which are to them rather a matter of blind faith than intelligent conviction.
Bateson revisited the topic in his 1979 book ''Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity'', and other scholars have continued to explore the connection between natural selection and systems theory.
The ''Jordeson'''s provisions were strained by the unexpected passengers, but after a difficult passage on very short rations the ship finally reached its destination on 1 October 1852.
This prompted Darwin to publish his own ideas in ''On the Origin of Species.''
A collector named Robert Heggestad found this cabinet/collection in Washington DC in 1979 and purchased it for $600 (not knowing who had assembled it).
From 1858 to 1861 he rented a house on Ternate from the Dutchman Maarten Dirk van Renesse van Duivenbode.
These included the concept of warning colouration in animals, and the Wallace effect, a hypothesis on how natural selection could contribute to speciation by encouraging the development of barriers against hybridisation.
Hooker eventually relented and agreed to support the pension request.
He sued Wallace and launched a campaign, which persisted for several years, of writing letters to various publications and to organisations of which Wallace was a member denouncing him as a swindler and a thief.
At the time, the germ theory of disease was very new and far from universally accepted.
The second was the introduction of consciousness in the higher animals.
In February 1855, while working in Sarawak on the island of Borneo, Wallace wrote "On the Law which has Regulated the Introduction of New Species", a paper which was published in the ''Annals and Magazine of Natural History'' in September 1855.
Such islands were characterised by a complete lack of terrestrial mammals and amphibians, and their inhabitants (with the exceptions of migratory birds and species introduced by human activity) were typically the result of accidental colonisation and subsequent evolution.
One Wallace scholar has stated that the most reasonable interpretation is therefore that he was an Englishman born in Wales.
During the 1860s, Wallace wrote papers and gave lectures defending natural selection.
And the answer was clearly, on the whole the best fitted live&nbsp;... and considering the amount of individual variation that my experience as a collector had shown me to exist, then it followed that all the changes necessary for the adaptation of the species to the changing conditions would be brought about&nbsp;...
In 1869, Weir published data from experiments and observations involving brightly coloured caterpillars that supported Wallace's idea.
By the 1880s, evolution was widely accepted in scientific circles, but Wallace and August Weismann were nearly alone among prominent biologists in believing that natural selection was the major driving force behind it.
He discussed all of the factors then known to influence the current and past geographic distribution of animals within each geographical region.
He also made connections with a number of other British naturalists—most significantly, Darwin.
After a year of courtship, Wallace became engaged in 1864 to a young woman whom, in his autobiography, he would only identify as Miss L. Miss L. was the daughter of Lewis Leslie who played chess with Wallace.
Above all, his role as the co-discoverer of natural selection and his work on zoogeography marked him out as an exceptional figure.
For this paper he won Darwin's praise.
This was a stopgap measure until William, his oldest brother, was ready to take him on as an apprentice surveyor.
John Stuart Mill was impressed by remarks criticising English society that Wallace had included in ''The Malay Archipelago''.
Despite this hint, Darwin mistook Wallace's conclusion for the progressive creationism of the time and wrote that it was "nothing very new&nbsp;...
However, several scholars who have researched Wallace's views in depth have emphasised that, for him, spiritualism was a matter of science and philosophy rather than religious belief.
I have a rather more favourable opinion of the 'Vestiges' than you appear to have.
The commission found that smallpox vaccination was effective and should remain compulsory, though they did recommend some changes in procedures to improve safety, and that the penalties for people who refused to comply be made less severe.
Darwin demurred at first, then began writing up a ''species sketch'' of his continuing work in May 1856.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Browne ''Charles Darwin: Voyaging'' pp.
It has also been noted that, unlike today, Monmouthshire was technically part of England rather than Wales at the time Wallace was born.
The second letter, dated 22 December 1857, said how glad he was that Wallace was theorising about distribution, adding that "without speculation there is no good and original observation" while commenting that "I believe I go much further than you".
In the first letter, dated 1 May 1857, Darwin commented that Wallace's letter of 10 October which he had recently received, as well as Wallace's paper "On the Law which has regulated the Introduction of New Species" of 1855, showed that they were both thinking alike and to some extent reaching similar conclusions, and said that he was preparing his own work for publication in about two years time.
In 2007 a literary critic for ''New Yorker'' magazine observed that five such biographies and two such anthologies had been published since 2000.
Richard Milner comments: "It was the brilliant and eccentric evolutionist Alfred Russel Wallace&nbsp;... who effectively debunked Lowell's illusionary network of Martian canals."
Historians of science have noted that, while Darwin considered the ideas in Wallace's paper to be essentially the same as his own, there were differences.
Unlike Darwin, Wallace began his career as a travelling naturalist already believing in the transmutation of species.
According to his autobiography, it was while he was in bed with a fever that Wallace thought about Thomas Malthus's idea of positive checks on human population growth and came up with the idea of natural selection.
During this period, he read avidly, exchanging letters with Bates about Robert Chambers' anonymously published evolutionary treatise ''Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation'', Charles Darwin's ''The Voyage of the Beagle'', and Charles Lyell's ''Principles of Geology''.
I thus learnt my first great lesson in the inquiry into these obscure fields of knowledge, never to accept the disbelief of great men or their accusations of imposture or of imbecility, as of any weight when opposed to the repeated observation of facts by other men, admittedly sane and honest.
Later that year, he visited Darwin at Down House, and became friendly with both Charles Lyell and Herbert Spencer.
After the publication of Darwin's ''On the Origin of Species'', Wallace became one of its staunchest defenders on his return to England in 1862.
I will pass over as utterly contemptible the oft-repeated accusation that sceptics shut out evidence because they will not be governed by the morality of Christianity&nbsp;...
Despite assistance from his friends, he was never able to secure a permanent salaried position such as a curatorship in a museum.
''It then occurred to me that these causes or their equivalents are continually acting in the case of animals also; and as animals usually breed much more quickly than does mankind, the destruction every year from these causes must be enormous in order to keep down the numbers of each species, since evidently they do not increase regularly from year to year, as otherwise the world would long ago have been crowded with those that breed most quickly.
At the end of 1839, they moved to Kington, Hereford, near the Welsh border, before eventually settling at Neath in Glamorgan in Wales.
In the early 1980s, two books, one written by Arnold Brackman and another by John Langdon Brooks, even suggested not only that there had been a conspiracy to rob Wallace of his proper credit, but that Darwin had actually stolen a key idea from Wallace to finish his own theory.
On 7 November 2013, the 100th anniversary of Wallace's death, Sir David Attenborough unveiled a statue of Wallace at the museum.
For a long time, he was treated as a relatively obscure figure in the history of science.
In one incident in 1863 that particularly pleased Darwin, Wallace published the short paper "Remarks on the Rev.
Only one of these collections remains in its original cabinet.
Wallace and the crew spent ten days in an open boat before being picked up by the brig ''Jordeson'', which was sailing from Cuba to London.
During the 1860s the stage magician John Nevil Maskelyne exposed the trickery of the Davenport brothers.
All of the specimens Wallace had on the ship, mostly collected during the last two, and most interesting, years of his trip, were lost.
These claims have been examined in detail by a number of scholars who have not found them to be convincing.
Wallace continued his scientific work in parallel with his social commentary.
Wallace is the most-cited naturalist in Darwin's ''Descent of Man'', often in strong disagreement.
Spiritualism appealed to many educated Victorians who no longer found traditional religious doctrine, such as that of the Church of England, acceptable yet were unsatisfied with the completely materialistic and mechanical view of the world that was increasingly emerging from 19th-century science.
Several thousand of them represented species new to science.
Around the start of 1856, he told Darwin about Wallace's paper, as did Edward Blyth who thought it "Good!
He was 90 years old.
The concept had been advocated by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Erasmus Darwin, and Robert Grant, among others.
Wallace said in his autobiography that he was on the island of Ternate at the time; but historians have questioned this, saying that on the basis of the journal he kept at the time, he was on the island of Gilolo.
Yet during the past century, which has seen those great advances in the knowledge of Nature of which we are so proud, there has been no corresponding development of a love or reverence for her works; so that never before has there been such widespread ravage of the earth's surface by destruction of native vegetation and with it of much animal life, and such wholesale defacement of the earth by mineral workings and by pouring into our streams and rivers the refuse of manufactories and of cities; and this has been done by all the greatest nations claiming the first place for civilisation and religion!
After reviewing the literature on the topic and attempting to test the phenomena he witnessed at séances, he came to accept that the belief was connected to a natural reality.
One of his better-known species descriptions during this trip is that of the gliding tree frog ''Rhacophorus nigropalmatus'', known as Wallace's flying frog.
In ''The Geographical Distribution of Animals'' (1876) he wrote, "We live in a zoologically impoverished world, from which all the hugest, and fiercest, and strangest forms have recently disappeared".
Wallace describes how he discovered natural selection as follows:
His family, like many Wallaces, claimed a connection to William Wallace, a leader of Scottish forces during the Wars of Scottish Independence in the 13th century.
After his return to the UK, Wallace spent 18 months in London living on the insurance payment for his lost collection and selling a few specimens that had been shipped back to Britain prior to his starting his exploration of the Rio Negro.
A set of 80 bird skeletons he collected in Indonesia and associated documentation can be found in the Cambridge University Museum of Zoology.
In 1889, Wallace wrote the book ''Darwinism'', which explained and defended natural selection.
The text was organised so that it would be easy for a traveller to learn what animals could be found in a particular location.
Episode two featured birds of paradise.
In the autumn of 1846, John and he purchased a cottage near Neath, where they lived with their mother and sister Fanny (his father had died in 1843).
In 1889, Wallace read ''Looking Backward'' by Edward Bellamy and declared himself a socialist.
In 1865, he began investigating spiritualism.
Near the end of the paper he asks the question, "Are very closely allied species ever separated by a wide interval of country?"
Wallace and other anti-vaccinationists pointed out that vaccination, which at the time was often done in a sloppy and unsanitary manner, could be dangerous.
Some of Wallace's friends suggested that he be buried in Westminster Abbey, but his wife followed his wishes and had him buried in the small cemetery at Broadstone, Dorset.
Aside from scientific work, he was a social activist who was critical of what he considered to be an unjust social and economic system (capitalism) in 19th-century Britain.
Wallace's very public advocacy of spiritualism and his repeated defence of spiritualist mediums against allegations of fraud in the 1870s damaged his scientific reputation.
His 1889 book ''Darwinism'' used information he collected on his American trip, and information he had compiled for the lectures.
There has also been a web page created that is dedicated to Wallace scholarship.
Much later in his life Wallace returned to these themes, that evolution suggested that the universe might have a purpose and that certain aspects of living organisms might not be explainable in terms of purely materialistic processes, in a 1909 magazine article entitled ''The World of Life'', which he later expanded into a book of the same name; a work that Shermer said anticipated some ideas about design in nature and directed evolution that would arise from various religious traditions throughout the 20th century.
When seen through the telescope, one object appeared higher than the other, showing the curvature of the earth.
He was often sought out by journalists and others for his views on a variety of topics.
William died in March 1845, and Wallace left his teaching position to assume control of his brother's firm in Neath, but his brother John and he were unable to make the business work.
In 1848, Wallace and Henry Bates left for Brazil aboard the ''Mischief''.
The first was the creation of life from inorganic matter.
In 1866, Wallace married Annie Mitten.
Another factor in Wallace's thinking was his belief that, because of the action of natural selection, organisms were in a state of balance with their environment, and that everything in nature, even disease-causing organisms, served a useful purpose in the natural order of things; he feared vaccination might upset that natural balance with unfortunate results.
An even lengthier defence of Darwin's work was "Creation by Law", a review Wallace wrote in 1867 for ''The Quarterly Journal of Science'' of the book ''The Reign of Law'', which had been written by George Campbell, the 8th Duke of Argyll, as a refutation of natural selection.
Wallace opposed eugenics, an idea supported by other prominent 19th-century evolutionary thinkers, on the grounds that contemporary society was too corrupt and unjust to allow any reasonable determination of who was fit or unfit.
''The New York Times'' called him "the last of the giants belonging to that wonderful group of intellectuals that included, among others, Darwin, Huxley, Spencer, Lyell, and Owen, whose daring investigations revolutionised and evolutionised the thought of the century."
For the rest of his life, he remained convinced that at least some séance phenomena were genuine, no matter how many accusations of fraud sceptics made or how much evidence of trickery was produced.
