The impression one receives is of a hodgepodge of miscellaneous laws.
Of the authenticity of the work as a whole, there seems to be little doubt.
In contrast, the Danes preferred to choose easy targets, mapping cautious forays designed to avoid risking all their accumulated plunder with high-stake attacks for more.
Alfred was originally buried temporarily in the Old Minster in Winchester; then, four years after his death, he was moved to the New Minster (perhaps built especially to receive his body).
The year which followed has been called "Alfred's year of battles".
He recruited scholars from the Continent and from Britain to aid in the revival of Christian learning in Wessex and to provide the king personal instruction.
Soon after the dissolution of the abbey in 1539, during the reign of Henry VIII, the church was demolished, leaving the graves intact.
The Danes realised that they were outmanoeuvred.
The need to persuade his nobles to undertake work for the 'common good' led Alfred and his court scholars to strengthen and deepen the conception of Christian kingship that he had inherited by building upon the legacy of earlier kings such as Offa as well as clerical writers such as Bede, Alcuin and the other luminaries of the Carolingian renaissance.
If the Christian faith fell into ruin in his kingdom, if the clergy were too ignorant to understand the Latin words they butchered in their offices and liturgies, if the ancient monasteries and collegiate churches lay deserted out of indifference, he was answerable before God, as Josiah had been.
This was not, as the Victorians asserted, the birth of the English Navy.
historical Wessex), and Æthelwulf would rule in the east.
The chronicler flattered his royal patron by boasting that Alfred's ships were not only larger, but swifter, steadier and rode higher in the water than either Danish or Frisian ships.
The means by which the Anglo-Saxons marshaled forces to defend against marauders also left them vulnerable to the Vikings.
The Introduction may best be understood as Alfred's meditation upon the meaning of Christian law.
Osferth was described as a relative in King Alfred's will and he attested charters in a high position until 934.
The Danes, heavily outnumbered, would have been wiped out if the tide had not risen.
One might add to this list Alfred's translation, in his law code, of excerpts from the Vulgate Book of Exodus.
Consequently, it was writers of the sixteenth century who gave Alfred his epithet as 'the Great', rather than any of Alfred's contemporaries.
Alfred personally collected details of this trip.
Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge suggest this also for Bald's ''Leechbook'' and the anonymous ''Old English Martyrology''.
"It is clear", Brooks concludes, "that the metropolitan church of Canterbury must have been quite unable to provide any effective training in the scriptures or in Christian worship".
In January 878, the Danes made a sudden attack on Chippenham, a royal stronghold in which Alfred had been staying over Christmas, "and most of the people they killed, except the King Alfred, and he with a little band made his way by wood and swamp, and after Easter he made a fort at Athelney in the marshes of Somerset, and from that fort kept fighting against the foe".
In fact, he writes in the prelude that he first created a prose work and then used it as the basis for his poem ''Metres of Boethius''.
He spent a great deal of time working on these books, which he tells us he gradually wrote through the many stressful times of his reign to refresh his mind.
Believing that without Christian wisdom there can be neither prosperity nor success in war, Alfred aimed "to set to learning (as long as they are not useful for some other employment) all the free-born young men now in England who have the means to apply themselves to it".
Among these gifts was reputed to be a piece of the true cross, a true treasure for the devout Saxon king.
Alfred had a reputation as a learned and merciful man of a gracious and level-headed nature who encouraged education and improved his kingdom's legal system, military structure and his people's quality of life.
The law code, as it has been preserved, is singularly unsuitable for use in lawsuits.
The jewel is about  long, made of filigreed gold, enclosing a highly polished piece of quartz crystal beneath which is set a cloisonné enamel plaque, with an enamelled image of a man holding floriate sceptres, perhaps personifying Sight or the Wisdom of God.
Alfred's educational ambitions seem to have extended beyond the establishment of a court school.
The link between the Mosaic Law and Alfred's code is the "Apostolic Letter," which explained that Christ "had come not to shatter or annul the commandments but to fulfill them; and he taught mercy and meekness" (Intro, 49.1).
The next year, 896 (or 897), they gave up the struggle.
Nonetheless, the consensus remains that they were part of the Alfredian programme of translation.
Interest in Alfred's translation of ''Pastoral Care'' was so enduring that copies were still being made in the 11th century.
Manuscript production in England dropped off precipitously around the 860s when the Viking invasions began in earnest, not to be revived until the end of the century.
The bones were subsequently radiocarbon dated, but the results showed that they were from the 1300s and therefore unrelated to Alfred.
Asser underscores his concern for judicial fairness.
These bases were prepared in advance, often by capturing an estate and augmenting its defences with surrounding ditches, ramparts and palisades.
How he died is unknown, although he suffered throughout his life with a painful and unpleasant illness.
The hide was the basic unit of the system on which the tenant's public obligations were assessed.
The system threatened Viking routes and communications making it far more dangerous for the Viking raiders.
Offa is not known to have issued a law code, leading historian Patrick Wormald to speculate that Alfred had in mind the legatine capitulary of 786 that was presented to Offa by two papal legates.
For the next five years, the Danes occupied other parts of England.
He was equally comfortable distributing his translation of Gregory the Great's ''Pastoral Care'' to his bishops so that they might better train and supervise priests, and using those same bishops as royal officials and judges.
His grandson King Eadred seems to have suffered from a similar illness.
*The University of Winchester was created from the former 'King Alfred's College, Winchester' (1928 to 2004).
The Vikings lacked both the equipment necessary to undertake a siege against the burh and a developed doctrine of siegecraft, having tailored their methods of fighting to rapid strikes and unimpeded retreats to well defended fortifications.
Some retired to Northumbria, some to East Anglia.
This was not, however, the point at which Alfred came to be known as King of England; in fact he would never adopt the title for himself.
The Old English name for the fine due for neglecting military service was  ''fierdwite'' or ''fyrdwitee''.
The Gaini were probably one of the tribal groups of the Mercians.
''The Proverbs of Alfred'', a thirteenth-century work, contains sayings that are not likely to have originated with Alfred but attest to his posthumous medieval reputation for wisdom).
22:39–40) to love your secular lord as you would love the Lord Christ himself underscores the importance that Alfred placed upon lordship, which he understood as a sacred bond instituted by God for the governance of man.
As king he saw himself as responsible for both the temporal and spiritual welfare of his subjects.
For him the key to the kingdom's spiritual revival was to appoint pious, learned, and trustworthy bishops and abbots.
Married and had children
Alfred's ships may have been superior in conception.
Married (1) Ecgwynn, (2) Ælfflæd, (3) 919 Eadgifu
The Alfred jewel, discovered in Somerset in 1693, has long been associated with King Alfred because of its Old English inscription "AELFRED MEC HEHT GEWYRCAN" (''Alfred ordered me to be made'').
In 1866, amateur antiquarian John Mellor claimed to have recovered a number of bones from the site which he said were those of Alfred.
Around 890, Wulfstan of Hedeby undertook a journey from Hedeby on Jutland along the Baltic Sea to the Prussian trading town of Truso.
The 1999 archeological excavation uncovered the foundations of the abbey buildings and some bones.
*King's College, Taunton, Somerset.
With all the other kingdoms having fallen to the Vikings, Wessex alone was still resisting.
Alfred's relations with the Celtic princes in the western half of Britain are clearer.
The formal Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum, preserved in Old English in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge (Manuscript 383), and in a Latin compilation known as ''Quadripartitus'', was negotiated later, perhaps in 879 or 880, when King Ceolwulf II of Mercia was deposed.
Together these laws are arranged into 120 chapters.
That treaty divided up the kingdom of Mercia.
It is true, however, that Alfred was an excellent listener and had an incredible memory, and he retained poetry and psalms very well.
This network posed significant obstacles to Viking invaders, especially those laden with booty.
Also, there had been a system of fortifications in pre-Viking Mercia that may have been an influence.
*King Alfred's Academy, a secondary school in Wantage, Oxfordshire, the birthplace of Alfred.
To maintain the burhs, and to reorganize the fyrd as a standing army, Alfred expanded the tax and conscription system based on the productivity of a tenant's landholding.
A contemporary document now known as the Burghal Hidage provides an insight into how the system worked.
Guthrum's passing changed the political landscape for Alfred.
Æthelred died shortly afterwards on 23 April.
By doing so, it links the holy past to the historical present and represents Alfred's law-giving as a type of divine legislation.
It was with the backdrop of a rampaging Viking army that Alfred's public life began, with the accession of his third brother, Æthelred of Wessex, in 865.
A hide is thought to represent the amount of land required to support one family.
Married Baldwin II d. 918; had children
In response to this incursion, Alfred led an Anglo-Saxon force against the Danes who, instead of engaging the army of Wessex, fled to their beached ships and sailed to another part of Britain.
878 was the low-water mark in the history of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms.
Nine engagements were fought, with varying outcomes, though the places and dates of two of these battles have not been recorded.
In his introduction, Alfred explains that he gathered together the laws he found in many "synod-books" and "ordered to be written many of the ones that our forefathers observed—those that pleased me; and many of the ones that did not please me, I rejected with the advice of my councillors, and commanded them to be observed in a different way".
That Latin learning had not been obliterated is evidenced by the presence in his court of learned Mercian and West Saxon clerics such as Plegmund, Wæferth, and Wulfsige.
He was forced instead to make peace with them, according to sources that do not tell what the terms of the peace were.
This revival entailed the recruitment of clerical scholars from Mercia, Wales and abroad to enhance the tenor of the court and of the episcopacy; the establishment of a court school to educate his own children, the sons of his nobles, and intellectually promising boys of lesser birth; an attempt to require literacy in those who held offices of authority; a series of translations into the vernacular of Latin works the king deemed "most necessary for all men to know"; the compilation of a chronicle detailing the rise of Alfred's kingdom and house, with a genealogy that stretched back to Adam, thus giving the West Saxon kings a biblical ancestry.
It is thought that he may have suffered from Crohn's disease.
Alfred's burh system posed such a formidable challenge against Viking attack that when the Vikings returned in 892 and successfully stormed a half-made, poorly garrisoned fortress up the Lympne estuary in Kent, the Anglo-Saxons were able to limit their penetration to the outer frontiers of Wessex and Mercia
In their raids, the Anglo-Saxons traditionally preferred to attack head-on by assembling their forces in a shield wall, advancing against their target and overcoming the oncoming wall marshaled against them in defence.
After the arm and axe were replaced the statue was again vandalised on Christmas Eve 2008, losing its axe.
It is also written by Asser that Alfred did not learn to read until he was twelve years old or later, which is described as "shameful negligence" of his parents and tutors.
Alfred at once hurried westward and raised the Siege of Exeter.
Wessex possessed a royal fleet before this.
In other words, Alfred succeeded to Ceolwulf's kingdom, consisting of western Mercia; and Guthrum incorporated the eastern part of Mercia into an enlarged kingdom of East Anglia (henceforward known as the Danelaw).
When King Æthelwulf died in 858, Wessex was ruled by three of Alfred's brothers in succession: Æthelbald, Æthelberht and Æthelred.
Æthelbald would retain the western shires (i.e.
The resulting power vacuum stirred up other power–hungry warlords eager to take his place in the following years.
This threefold obligation has traditionally been called ''trinoda neccessitas'' or ''trimoda neccessitas''.
Alfred won a decisive victory in the ensuing Battle of Edington which may have been fought near Westbury, Wiltshire.
On a trip to Rome, Alfred had stayed with Charles the Bald and it is possible that he may have studied how the Carolingian kings had dealt with the Viking problem, and learning from their experience was able to put together a system of taxation and defence for his own kingdom.
He believed, as did other kings in ninth-century England and Francia, that God had entrusted him with the spiritual as well as physical welfare of his people.
Alfred's ultimate responsibility was the pastoral care of his people.
Under the terms of the so-called Treaty of Wedmore, the converted Guthrum was required to leave Wessex and return to East Anglia.
According to Asser, Alfred enticed foreign monks to England for his monastery at Athelney as there was little interest for the locals to take up the monastic life.
After another lull, in the autumn of 892 or 893, the Danes attacked again.
He was an early advocate for education.
This was not a cynical use of religion to manipulate his subjects into obedience, but an intrinsic element in Alfred's worldview.
(Some identify this with Buttington Tump at the mouth of the River Wye, others with Buttington near Welshpool.)
Secular and spiritual authority were not distinct categories for Alfred.
The pursuit of wisdom, he assured his readers of the Boethius, was the surest path to power: "Study Wisdom, then, and, when you have learned it, condemn it not, for I tell you that by its means you may without fail attain to power, yea, even though not desiring it".
However, it was announced in January 2014 that a fragment of pelvis unearthed in the 1999 excavation of the Hyde site, that had subsequently lain in a Winchester museum store room, had been radiocarbon dated to the correct period.
*King's Lodge School, in Chippenham, Wiltshire is so named because King Alfred's hunting lodge is reputed to have stood on or near the site of the school.
That Alfred sent alms to Irish and Continental monasteries may be taken on Asser's authority.
Alfred is particularly credited with the success of this last battle.
Helplessly, the English watched as the Vikings rowed past them.
The Danish raids had a devastating effect on learning in England.
Historian Richard Abels sees Alfred's educational and military reforms as complementary.
The English did not attempt a winter blockade, but contented themselves with destroying all the supplies in the district.
Further excavations in 1866 and 1897 were inconclusive.
Alfred's ships immediately moved to block their escape to the sea.
This arrangement may have been sanctioned by Alfred's father, or by the Witan, to guard against the danger of a disputed succession should Æthelred fall in battle.
In one of these the writing is prose, in the other a combination of prose and alliterating verse.
Alfred also tried his hand at naval design.
The Danes withdrew to Mercia.
Nor did his piety prevent him from expropriating strategically sited church lands, especially estates along the border with the Danelaw, and transferring them to royal thegns and officials who could better defend them against Viking attacks.
In 868, Alfred is recorded as fighting beside Æthelred in an unsuccessful attempt to keep the Great Heathen Army, led by Ivar the Boneless, out of the adjoining Kingdom of Mercia.
Asser writes that "Alfred could not satisfy his craving for what he desired the most, namely the liberal arts; for, as he used to say, there were no good scholars in the entire kingdom of the West Saxons at that time".
Finding their position in mainland Europe precarious, they crossed to England in 330 ships in two divisions.
After the signing of the treaty with Guthrum, Alfred was spared any large-scale conflicts for some time.
*In honour of Alfred, the University of Liverpool created a King Alfred Chair of English Literature.
While at Wedmore Alfred and Guthrum negotiated what some historians have called the Treaty of Wedmore, however it was to be some years after the ceasing of hostilities that a formal treaty was actually signed.
The invaders brought their wives and children with them, indicating a meaningful attempt at conquest and colonisation.
By the time of the Reformation Alfred was seen as being a pious Christian ruler, who promoted the use of English rather than Latin, and so the translations that he commissioned were viewed as untainted by the later Roman Catholic influences of the Normans.
Prisoners dug across the width of the altar area in order to dispose of rubble left at the dissolution.
The others being Bede, Caedmon, and Dunston.
*The King Alfred School in Barnet, North London, UK.
Bones suggested at the time to be those of Alfred proved instead to belong to an elderly woman.
And a solemn diploma from Christ Church, Canterbury dated 873 is so poorly constructed and written that historian Nicholas Brooks posited a scribe who was either so blind he could not read what he wrote or who knew little or no Latin.
A year later, in 886, Alfred reoccupied the city of London and set out to make it habitable again.
Many of the burhs were twin towns that straddled a river and connected by a fortified bridge, like those built by Charles the Bald a generation before.
It is probable that, under the classical tutelage of Asser, Alfred utilised the design of Greek and Roman warships, with high sides, designed for fighting rather than for navigation.
Alfred lamented in the preface to his translation of Gregory's ''Pastoral Care'' that "learning had declined so thoroughly in England that there were very few men on this side of the Humber who could understand their divine services in English, or even translate a single letter from Latin into English: and I suppose that there were not many beyond the Humber either".
Alfred commissioned Bishop Asser to write his biography, which inevitably emphasised Alfred's positive aspects.
An attempt to break through the English lines was defeated.
Conscious of the decay of Latin literacy in his realm, Alfred proposed that primary education be taught in English, with those wishing to advance to holy orders to continue their studies in Latin.
A charter from the reign of his son Edward the Elder depicts Alfred as hearing one such appeal in his chamber, while washing his hands.
Alfred undoubtedly exaggerated for dramatic effect the abysmal state of learning in England during his youth.
A letter of Leo IV shows that Alfred was made a "consul"; a misinterpretation of this investiture, deliberate or accidental, could explain later confusion.
Although he described his method as translating "sometimes word for word, sometimes sense for sense," Alfred's translation actually keeps very close to his original, although through his choice of language he blurred throughout the distinction between spiritual and secular authority.
Similarly, Alfred divided his code into 120 chapters because 120 was the age at which Moses died and, in the number-symbolism of early medieval biblical exegetes, 120 stood for law.
This was in accordance with the agreement that Æthelred and Alfred had made earlier that year in an assembly at ''Swinbeorg''.
Statues of Alfred in Winchester and Wantage portray him as a great warrior.
A story is told by Asser about how his mother held up a book of Saxon poetry to him and his brothers, and said; "I shall give this book to whichever one of you can learn it the fastest."
And although the landowners were obliged to the king to supply these men when called, during the attacks in 878, many of them opportunistically abandoned their king and collaborated with Guthrum.
In 896, he ordered the construction of a small fleet, perhaps a dozen or so longships, that, at 60 oars, were twice the size of Viking warships.
A total of 27,071 soldiers were needed system wide, or approximately one in four of all the free men in Wessex.
Four days later, the Anglo-Saxons won a brilliant victory at the Battle of Ashdown on the Berkshire Downs, possibly near Compton or Aldworth.
Early in 894 or 895, lack of food obliged the Danes to retire once more to Essex.
The one ship that escaped managed to do so only because all of Alfred's heavy ships became grounded when the tide went out.
They were met by a large force under the three great ealdormen of Mercia, Wiltshire and Somerset, and forced to head off to the northwest, being finally overtaken and blockaded at Buttington.
The Danes, however, broke their word and, after killing all the hostages, slipped away under cover of night to Exeter in Devon.
Consequently, in 879 the Viking army left Chippenham and made its way to Cirencester.
It was the responsibility of the shire fyrd to deal with local raids.
Tenants in Anglo-Saxon England had a threefold obligation based on their landholding; the so-called "common burdens" of military service, fortress work, and bridge repair.
Alfred devoted considerable attention and thought to judicial matters.
In the 880s, at the same time that he was "cajoling and threatening" his nobles to build and man the burhs, Alfred, perhaps inspired by the example of Charlemagne almost a century before, undertook an equally ambitious effort to revive learning.
Although its function is unknown, it has been often suggested that the jewel was one of the ''æstels''—pointers for reading—that Alfred ordered sent to every bishopric accompanying a copy of his translation of the ''Pastoral Care''.
The burhs were also interconnected by a road system  maintained for army use (known as ''herepaths'').
They struck off north-westwards and wintered at Cwatbridge near Bridgnorth.
Only one made it; Alfred's ships intercepted the other two.
The Danish fleet defeated Alfred's fleet, which may have been weakened in the previous engagement.
It may also be based on Alfred's later having accompanied his father on a pilgrimage to Rome, where he spent some time at the court of Charles the Bald, King of the Franks, around 854–855.
Evidence suggests he was not physically strong, and though not lacking in courage, he was noted more for his intellect than as a warlike character.
The last of Alfred's works is one to which he gave the name ''Blostman'', i.e., "Blooms" or Anthology.
King Athelstan of Kent and Ealdorman Ealhhere had defeated a Viking fleet in 851, capturing nine ships, and Alfred himself had conducted naval actions in 882.
Apart from the lost ''Handboc'' or ''Encheiridion,'' which seems to have been a commonplace book kept by the king, the earliest work to be translated was the ''Dialogues'' of Gregory the Great, a book greatly popular in the Middle Ages.
The arrangement of crowning a successor as royal prince and military commander is well known among other Germanic tribes, such as the Swedes and Franks, to whom the Anglo-Saxons were closely related.
About a fifth of the law code is taken up by Alfred's introduction, which includes translations into English of the Decalogue, a few chapters from the Book of Exodus, and the "Apostolic Letter" from Acts of the Apostles (15:23–29).
During the short reigns of the older two of his three elder brothers, Æthelbald of Wessex and Æthelberht of Wessex, Alfred is not mentioned.
It was at one time attached to a thin rod or stick based on the hollow socket at its base.
Boethius' ''Consolation of Philosophy'' was the most popular philosophical handbook of the Middle Ages.
Asser's account of the raid places the Danish raiders at the Saxon city of Rochester, where they built a temporary fortress in order to besiege the city.
The jewel certainly dates from Alfred's reign.
With civil war looming, the magnates of the realm met in council to hammer out a compromise.
The last words of it may be quoted; they form a fitting epitaph for the noblest of English kings.
Alfred's first translation was of Pope Gregory the Great's ''Pastoral Care,'' which he prefaced with an introduction explaining why he thought it necessary to translate works such as this one from Latin into English.
Alfred, in 893 or 894, took up a position from which he could observe both forces.
While he was busy with the burial ceremonies for his brother, the Danes defeated the Saxon army in his absence at an unnamed spot, and then again in his presence at Wilton in May.
Alfred had seapower in mind—if he could intercept raiding fleets before they landed, he could spare his kingdom from ravaging.
The hide would differ in size according to the value and resources of the land and the landowner would have to provide service based on how many hides he owned.
His contemporary biographer Asser wrote that many nobles balked at the new demands placed upon them even though they were for "the common needs of the kingdom".
Numerous Anglo-Saxon manuscripts burnt up along with the churches that housed them.
In 868, Alfred married Ealhswith, daughter of a Mercian nobleman, Æthelred Mucil, Ealdorman of the Gaini.
The restoration of London progressed through the latter half of the 880s and is believed to have revolved around a new street plan; added fortifications in addition to the existing Roman walls; and, some believe, the construction of matching fortifications on the south bank of the River Thames.
A direct attack on the Danish lines failed but, later in the year, Alfred saw a means of obstructing the river so as to prevent the egress of the Danish ships.
Later medieval historians, such as Geoffrey of Monmouth also reinforced Alfred's favourable image.
They were defeated again on 22 March at the Battle of Merton (perhaps Marden in Wiltshire or Martin in Dorset).
Although he was the youngest of his brothers, he was probably the most open-minded.
