He conceives of reality as composed of processes of dynamic "becoming" rather than static "being", emphasizing that all physical things change and evolve, and that changeless "essences" such as matter are mere abstractions from the interrelated events that are the final real things that make up the world.
John B. Cobb, Jr. is a process theologian who has also written books on biology and economics.
His system required that an order exist among possibilities, an order that allowed for novelty in the world and provided an aim to all entities.
It is used for understanding and evaluating educational curriculum under the assumption that the purpose of education is to "help a person become whole."
As opposed to the most widely accepted forms of Christianity, Whitehead emphasized an idea of God that he called "the brief Galilean vision of humility":
Religion is world-loyalty.
Freedom always exists within limits.
The book can be seen as an attempt to understand the growth in unity and interconnection of mathematics as a whole, as well as an examination of the mutual influence of mathematics and philosophy, language, and physics.
Today, Nicholas Rescher is one example of a philosopher who advocates both process philosophy and pragmatism.
His father, Alfred Whitehead, was a minister and schoolmaster of Chatham House Academy, a successful school for boys established by Thomas Whitehead, Alfred North's grandfather.
Beginning in the late 1910s and early 1920s, Whitehead gradually turned his attention from mathematics to philosophy of science, and finally to metaphysics.
In Temple's Gifford Lectures of 1932-1934 (subsequently published as "Nature, Man and God"), Whitehead is one of a number of philosophers of the emergent evolution approach Temple interacts with.
French sociologist and anthropologist Bruno Latour even went so far as to call Whitehead "the greatest philosopher of the 20th century."
For Whitehead, the term "prehension" indicates that the perceiver actually incorporates aspects of the perceived thing into itself.
Presentational immediacy, on the other hand, is what is usually referred to as "pure sense perception", unmediated by any causal or symbolic interpretation, even unconscious interpretation.
An exact replacement of Whitehead's cosmology would need to admit a Riemannian geometry.
"It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World creates God&nbsp;...
Of course, most entities do not have consciousness.
In other words, the universe is a community which makes itself whole through the relatedness of each individual entity to all the others – meaning and value do not exist for the individual alone, but only in the context of the universal community.
"It does not emphasize the ruling Caesar, or the ruthless moralist, or the unmoved mover.
While he acknowledged that individuals cannot ever be fully separated from their society, he argued that life is an internal fact for its own sake before it is an external fact relating to others.
Outside of these circles his influence is relatively small and diffuse, and has tended to come chiefly through the work of his students and admirers rather than Whitehead himself.
It is, in other words, the sense of causal relations between entities, a feeling of being influenced and affected by the surrounding environment, unmediated by the senses.
Identities do not define people, people define identities.
Whitehead questioned western philosophy's most dearly held assumptions about how the universe works, but in doing so he managed to anticipate a number of 21st century scientific and philosophical problems and provide novel solutions.
But while Claremont remains the most concentrated hub of Whiteheadian activity, the place where Whitehead's thought currently seems to be growing the most quickly is in China.
Currently, there is also no critical edition of Whitehead's writings, though the Whitehead Research Project of the Center for Process Studies is currently working on one such edition.
The audience at subsequent lectures was only about half a dozen in all.
A Theology of Ecology'' (1971) was the first single-authored book in environmental ethics.
Another model is the FEELS model developed by Xie Bangxiu and deployed successfully in China.
Despite the initial loss, today there is likely no major academic library in the world which does not hold a copy of ''Principia Mathematica''.
This work has been pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr., whose book ''Is It Too Late?
In this way, entities are constituted by their perceptions and relations, rather than being independent of them.
Whitehead's process philosophy argues that "there is urgency in coming to see the world as a web of interrelated processes of which we are integral parts, so that all of our choices and actions have consequences for the world around us."
In fact, process theology is difficult to define because process theologians are so diverse and transdisciplinary in their views and interests.
Whitehead also calls this primordial aspect "the lure for feeling, the eternal urge of desire," pulling the entities in the universe toward as-yet unrealized possibilities.
It is this assumption that I call 'scientific materialism.'
He earned his BA from Trinity in 1884, and graduated as fourth wrangler.
''A Treatise on Universal Algebra'' sought to examine Hermann Grassmann's theory of extension ("Ausdehnungslehre"), Boole's algebra of logic, and Hamilton's quaternions (this last number system was to be taken up in Volume II, which was never finished due to Whitehead's work on ''Principia Mathematica'').
One of the leading figures having an explicitly Whiteheadian and panexperientialist stance towards management is Mark Dibben, who works in what he calls "applied process thought" to articulate a philosophy of management and business administration as part of a wider examination of the social sciences through the lens of process metaphysics.
Whitehead was unimpressed by this objection.
"Every school is bound on pain of extinction to train its boys for a small set of definite examinations.
His philosophical work is generally considered to be among the most difficult to understand in all of the western canon.
They taught generations of Whitehead scholars, the most notable of which is John B. Cobb, Jr.
Franklin I. Gamwell writes on theology and political theory.
Additionally, Whitehead was known for his "almost fanatical belief in the right to privacy", and for writing very few personal letters of the kind that would help to gain insight on his life.
Rather than seeing God as impassive or emotionless, process theologians view God as "the fellow sufferer who understands", and as the being who is supremely affected by temporal events.
After all, people change all the time, if only because they have aged by another second and had some further experience.
In this sense, God is the great companion – the fellow-sufferer who understands."
Early in his life he showed great interest in and respect for philosophy and metaphysics, but it is evident that he considered himself a rank amateur.
Whitehead writes further that each entity "can find no such value till it has merged its individual claim with that of the objective universe.
In summary, Whitehead rejects the idea of separate and unchanging bits of matter as the most basic building blocks of reality, in favor of the idea of reality as interrelated events in process.
His most famous remark on religion is that "religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness&nbsp;... and if you are never solitary, you are never religious."
First, it obscures and minimizes the importance of change.
It has been severely criticized.
"What is done in the world is transformed into a reality in heaven, and the reality in heaven passes back into the world&nbsp;...
Whitehead's theories on education also led to the formation of new modes of learning and new models of teaching.
Yutaka Tanaka, who suggests that the gravitational constant disagrees with experimental findings, proposes that Einstein's work does not actually refute Whitehead's formulation.
It just does what it does do, following a fixed routine imposed by external relations which do not spring from the nature of its being.
In his essay "Universities and Their Function", Whitehead writes provocatively on imagination:
Whitehead argued that curriculum should be developed specifically for its own students by its own staff, or else risk total stagnation, interrupted only by occasional movements from one group of inert ideas to another.
Yet the limitations of everyday living and everyday speech should not prevent people from realizing that "material substances" or "essences" are a convenient generalized description of a continuum of particular, concrete processes.
"There persists&nbsp;... a fixed scientific cosmology which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute matter, or material, spread through space in a flux of configurations.
In addition to his legacy as a co-writer of ''Principia Mathematica'', Whitehead's theory of "extensive abstraction" is considered foundational for the branch of ontology and computer science known as "mereotopology", a theory describing spatial relations among wholes, parts, parts of parts, and the boundaries between parts.
Moreover, inability to predict an electron's movement (for instance) is not due to faulty understanding or inadequate technology; rather, the fundamental creativity/freedom of all entities means that there will always remain phenomena that are unpredictable.
"Imagination is not to be divorced from the facts: it is a way of illuminating the facts.
Professors such as Wieman, Charles Hartshorne, Bernard Loomer, Bernard Meland, and Daniel Day Williams made Whitehead's philosophy arguably the most important intellectual thread running through the Divinity School.
A student taking notes in one of Whitehead's fall 1924 classes wrote that:
"It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the World is one and God many.
Alfred North retired from Harvard in 1937 and remained in Cambridge, Massachusetts until his death on 30 December 1947.
In order to address the challenges of modernization and industrialization, China has begun to blend traditions of Taoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism with Whitehead's "constructive post-modern" philosophy in order to create an "ecological civilization."
Consequently, Whitehead's cosmology must be regarded as a local approximation, and his assumption of a uniform spatio-temporal geometry, Minkowskian in particular, as an often-locally-adequate approximation.
Here Whitehead is criticizing Christianity for defining God as primarily a divine king who imposes his will on the world, and whose most important attribute is power.
He took special care to note that while religion is often a good influence, it is not ''necessarily'' good – an idea which he called a "dangerous delusion" (e.g., a religion might encourage the violent extermination of a rival religion's adherents).
"It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World transcends God.
By assuming that enduring objects are the most real and fundamental things in the universe, materialists have mistaken the abstract for the concrete (what Whitehead calls the "fallacy of misplaced concreteness").
After publishing ''The Concept of Nature'' in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923.
Dibben has published two books on applied process thought, '' Applied Process Thought I: Initial Explorations in Theory and Research'' (2008), and '' Applied Process Thought II: Following a Trail Ablaze'' (2009), as well as other papers in this vein in the fields of philosophy of management and business ethics.
No headmaster has a free hand to develop his general education or his specialist studies in accordance with the opportunities of his school, which are created by its staff, its environment, its class of boys, and its endowments.
On the other hand, what ordinary thinking often regards as "the essence of a thing" or "the identity/core of a person" is an abstract generalization of what is regarded as that person or thing's most important or salient features across time.
It enables men to construct an intellectual vision of a new world."
Whitehead referred to his metaphysical system as "philosophy of organism", but it would become known more widely as "process philosophy."
In this way of thinking, things and people are seen as fundamentally the same through time, with any changes being qualitative and secondary to their core identity (e.g.
Whitehead himself recalled both of them as being very successful schoolmasters, but that his grandfather was the more extraordinary man.
Above all else in his educational writings, Whitehead emphasized the importance of imagination and the free play of ideas.
Noted neopragmatist Richard Rorty was in turn a student of Hartshorne.
Process philosophy is even more difficult to pin down than process theology.
In 1918 Whitehead's academic responsibilities began to seriously expand as he accepted a number of high administrative positions within the University of London system, of which Imperial College London was a member at the time.
He sees entities in the world as fluent and changing things that yearn for a permanence which only God can provide by taking them into God's self, thereafter changing God and affecting the rest of the universe throughout time.
Though ''Process and Reality'' has been called "arguably the most impressive single metaphysical text of the twentieth century," it has been little-read and little-understood, partly because it demands – as Isabelle Stengers puts it – "that its readers accept the adventure of the questions that will separate them from every consensus."
The term he coined was "prehension", which comes from the Latin ''prehensio'', meaning "to seize."
Further, Whitehead regards perception as occurring in two modes, ''causal efficacy'' (or "physical prehension") and ''presentational immediacy'' (or "conceptual prehension").
After all, each moment of each person's life can hardly be given a different proper name, and it is easy and convenient to think of people and objects as remaining fundamentally the same things, rather than constantly keeping in mind that each thing is a different thing from what it was a moment ago.
Whitehead's view has now been rendered obsolete, with the discovery of gravitational waves.
His most notable work in these fields is the three-volume ''Principia Mathematica'' (1910–13), which he wrote with former student Bertrand Russell.
I suggest that no system of external tests which aims primarily at examining individual scholars can result in anything but educational waste."
Whitehead describes causal efficacy as "the experience dominating the primitive living organisms, which have a sense for the fate from which they have emerged, and the fate towards which they go."
A real thing is just that which forces the rest of the universe to in some way conform to it; that is to say, if theoretically a thing made strictly no difference to any other entity (i.e.
Cobb has attributed China's interest in process philosophy partly to Whitehead's stress on the mutual interdependence of humanity and nature, as well as his emphasis on an educational system that includes the teaching of values rather than simply bare facts.
The primordial nature he described as "the unlimited conceptual realization of the absolute wealth of potentiality," i.e., the unlimited possibility of the universe.
In other words, it is pure appearance, which may or may not be delusive (e.g.
Distinguished University of Chicago Divinity School theologian Shailer Mathews once remarked of Whitehead's 1926 book ''Religion in the Making'': "It is infuriating, and I must say embarrassing as well, to read page after page of relatively familiar words without understanding a single sentence."
Whitehead wrote in the preface:
In a separate review, G. B. Mathews wrote, "It possesses a unity of design which is really remarkable, considering the variety of its themes."
Perhaps foremost among what Whitehead considered faulty metaphysical assumptions was the Cartesian idea that reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter that exist totally independently of one another, which he rejected in favor of an event-based or "process" ontology in which events are primary and are fundamentally interrelated and dependent on one another.
Whitehead was educated at Sherborne School, Dorset, then considered one of the best public schools in the country.
Process theology typically stresses God's relational nature.
For Dibben, this allows "a comprehensive exploration of life as perpetually active experiencing, as opposed to occasional – and thoroughly passive – happening."
''Principia Mathematica'' is considered one of the twentieth century's most important works in mathematical logic, and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library.
Whitehead thus sees God and the world as fulfilling one another.
Deleuze's and Latour's opinions, however, are minority ones, as Whitehead has not been recognized as particularly influential within the most dominant philosophical schools.
He articulated a view that might perhaps be regarded as dual to Einstein's general relativity, see Whitehead's theory of gravitation.
For this reason, one of the most promising applications of Whitehead's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization and environmental ethics pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr.
Henry Stapp and David Bohm are among those whose work has been influenced by Whitehead.
An ordinary person looks up, sees a colored shape, and immediately infers that it is a chair.
Indeed, it may not be inappropriate to speculate that some fair portion of the respect generally shown to Whitehead by his philosophical peers at the time arose from their sheer bafflement.
His hope of "forming a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras" presumably would have been developed in Volume II, had Whitehead completed it.
After a few decades of discussion and analysis one will be able to understand it more readily than can now be done."
''Principia Mathematica'' in particular is regarded as one of the most important works in mathematical logic of the 20th century.
While Whitehead acknowledged that "philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles," he argued that people need to continually re-imagine their basic assumptions about how the universe works if philosophy and science are to make any real progress, even if that progress remains permanently asymptotic.
He was elected Dean of the Faculty of Science at the University of London in late 1918 (a post he held for four years), a member of the University of London's Senate in 1919, and chairman of the Senate's Academic (leadership) Council in 1920, a post which he held until he departed for America in 1924.
In other words, God saves and cherishes all experiences forever, and those experiences go on to change the way God interacts with the world.
Unlike Whitehead's previous two books on mathematics, ''An Introduction to Mathematics'' (1911) was not aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, but was intended for a larger audience.
Instead, all things have some measure of freedom or creativity, however small, which allows them to be at least partly self-directed.
"Reality applies to ''connections'', and only relatively to the things connected.
Dr. Howard Woodhouse at the University of Saskatchewan remains a strong proponent of Whiteheadian education.
The spirit at once surrenders itself to this universal claim and appropriates it for itself."
Two recent books which further develop Whitehead's philosophy of education include: ''Modes of Learning: Whitehead's Metaphysics and the Stages of Education'' (2012) by George Allan; and ''The Adventure of Education: Process Philosophers on Learning, Teaching, and Research'' (2009) by Adam Scarfe.
Wieman's words proved prophetic.
Whitehead saw religion as a system of general truths that transformed a person's character.
In 1880, Whitehead began attending Trinity College, Cambridge, and studied mathematics.
"FEELS" stands for five things in curriculum and education: Flexible-goals, Engaged-learner, Embodied-knowledge, Learning-through-interactions, and Supportive-teacher.
Whitehead has had some influence on philosophy of business administration and organizational theory.
In other words, bits of disconnected knowledge are meaningless; all knowledge must find some imaginative application to the students' own lives, or else it becomes so much useless trivia, and the students themselves become good at parroting facts but not thinking for themselves.
Indeed, in recent decades attention to Whitehead's work has become more widespread, with interest extending to intellectuals in Europe and China, and coming from such diverse fields as ecology, physics, biology, education, economics, and psychology.
Whitehead argued that reality consists of processes rather than material objects, and that processes are best defined by their relations with other processes, thus rejecting the theory that reality is fundamentally constructed by bits of matter that exist independently of one another.
Whitehead's philosophy was highly original, and soon garnered interest in philosophical circles.
For Whitehead, there is no such thing as wholly inert matter.
Though he had no advanced training in philosophy, his philosophical work soon became highly regarded.
What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized."
It is the task of religion to make philosophy applicable to the everyday lives of ordinary people.
Moreover, animals do the same thing.
He opined that "education with inert ideas is not only useless: it is, above all things, harmful."
Whitehead and Russell had thought originally that ''Principia Mathematica'' would take a year to complete; it ended up taking them ten years.
"It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is immanent in the World.
What is ordinarily conceived of as a single person, for instance, is philosophically described as a continuum of overlapping events.
However, an artist, Whitehead supposes, "might not have jumped to the notion of a chair", but instead "might have stopped at the mere contemplation of a beautiful color and a beautiful shape."
In this way, ''Principia Mathematica'''s legacy might be described as its key role in disproving the possibility of achieving its own stated goals.
mistaking an image in a mirror for "the real thing").
It is generally accepted that Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem of 1931 definitively demonstrated that for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics, there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them, and hence that ''Principia Mathematica'' could never achieve its aims.
To date, the Chinese government has encouraged the building of twenty-three university-based centers for the study of Whitehead's philosophy, and books by process philosophers John Cobb and David Ray Griffin are becoming required reading for Chinese graduate students.
But in Whitehead's view, relations take a primary role, perhaps even more important than the relata themselves.
In other words, religion takes deeply felt emotions and contextualizes them within a system of general truths about the world, helping people to identify their wider meaning and significance.
Love neither rules, nor is it unmoved; also it is a little oblivious as to morals.
However, Gödel could not have come to this conclusion without Whitehead and Russell's book.
Whitehead is widely known for his influence in education theory.
In Whitehead's view, scientists and philosophers make metaphysical assumptions about how the universe works all the time, but such assumptions are not easily seen precisely because they remain unexamined and unquestioned.
Even professional philosophers struggled to follow Whitehead's writings.
Here it is worthwhile to quote Whitehead at length:
Cobb followed this with a second book, ''Sustaining the Common Good: A Christian Perspective on the Global Economy'' (1994), which aimed to challenge "economists' zealous faith in the great god of growth."
Whitehead makes the startling observation that "life is comparatively deficient in survival value."
In this way symbolic reference is a fusion of pure sense perceptions on the one hand and causal relations on the other, and that it is in fact the causal relationships that dominate the more basic mentality (as the dog illustrates), while it is the sense perceptions which indicate a higher grade mentality (as the artist illustrates).
Since Whitehead's metaphysics described a universe in which all entities experience, he needed a new way of describing perception that was not limited to living, self-conscious beings.
In other words, Whitehead sees life as directed toward the purpose of increasing its own satisfaction.
The former two books were aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, while the latter book was intended for a larger audience, covering the history of mathematics and its philosophical foundations.
Although the book is little-read, in some ways it prefigures certain points of Whitehead's later work in philosophy and metaphysics.
In 1925, he wrote ''Science and the Modern World'', which was immediately hailed as an alternative to the Cartesian dualism that plagued popular science.
In fact, there were numerous philosophers and theologians at Chicago's Divinity School that perceived the importance of what Whitehead was doing without fully grasping all of the details and implications.
Roland Faber and Catherine Keller integrate Whitehead with poststructuralist, postcolonialist, and feminist theory.
In physics, Whitehead's thought has had some influence.
At the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively multiplicative class.
In Whitehead's view, there are a number of problems with this notion of "irreducible brute matter."
No one questions that a ten-year-old person is quite different by the time he or she turns thirty years old, and in many ways is not the same person at all; Whitehead points out that it is not philosophically or ontologically sound to think that a person is the same from one second to the next.
Today Whitehead's philosophical works – particularly ''Process and Reality'' – are regarded as the foundational texts of process philosophy.
Eric Whitehead died in action while serving in the Royal Flying Corps during World War I at the age of 19.
He used the term "experience" very broadly, so that even inanimate processes such as electron collisions are said to manifest some degree of experience.
Charles Hartshorne (along with Paul Weiss) edited the collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, one of the founders of pragmatism.
In 1927 they invited one of America's only Whitehead experts – Henry Nelson Wieman – to Chicago to give a lecture explaining Whitehead's thought.
During his time at Harvard, Whitehead produced his most important philosophical contributions.
After publishing ''The Concept of Nature'' in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923, and Henri Bergson was quoted as saying that Whitehead was "the best philosopher writing in English."
Eddington was a marvellous popular lecturer who had enthralled an audience of 600 for his entire course.
Whitehead's conception of God as a "dipolar" entity has called for fresh theological thinking.
Whitehead's most complete work on education is the 1929 book ''The Aims of Education and Other Essays'', which collected numerous essays and addresses by Whitehead on the subject published between 1912 and 1927.
"It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that the World is permanent and God is fluent.
As Jordan and Raymond P. Shepard put it: "Because it has not defined the nature of man, education is in the untenable position of having to devote its energies to the development of curricula without any coherent ideas about the nature of the creature for whom they are intended."
"The object of the following Chapters is not to teach mathematics, but to enable students from the very beginning of their course to know what the science is about, and why it is necessarily the foundation of exact thought as applied to natural phenomena."
"Mark's hair has turned gray as he has gotten older, but he is still the same person").
Process philosopher David Ray Griffin coined the term "panexperientialism" (the idea that all entities experience) to describe Whitehead's view, and to distinguish it from panpsychism (the idea that all matter has consciousness).
Although interest in Whitehead has since faded at Chicago's Divinity School, Cobb effectively grabbed the torch and planted it firmly in Claremont, California, where he began teaching at Claremont School of Theology in 1958 and founded the Center for Process Studies with David Ray Griffin in 1973.
Whitehead posited that these ordered potentials exist in what he called the ''primordial nature'' of God.
However, it was not until the 1970s and 1980s that Whitehead's thought drew much attention outside of a small group of philosophers and theologians, primarily Americans, and even today he is not considered especially influential outside of relatively specialized circles.
Isabelle Stengers wrote that "Whiteheadians are recruited among both philosophers and theologians, and the palette has been enriched by practitioners from the most diverse horizons, from ecology to feminism, practices that unite political struggle and spirituality with the sciences of education."
Instead, as the being who is most affected by the world, God is the being who can most appropriately respond to the world.
Without such a goal, he sees the rise of life as totally unintelligible.
The ever-more impressive accomplishments of empirical science had led to a general consensus in academia that the development of comprehensive metaphysical systems was a waste of time because they were not subject to empirical testing.
In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast.
It is also intended to make clear Whitehead's rejection of the theory of ''representative'' perception, in which the mind only has private ideas about other entities.
My father remarked to me afterwards that if he had not known Whitehead well he would have suspected that it was an imposter making it up as he went along&nbsp;...
Stout and Staton see both Whitehead and Follett as sharing an ontology that "understands becoming as a relational process; difference as being related, yet unique; and the purpose of becoming as harmonizing difference."
Everything changes from moment to moment, and to think of anything as having an "enduring essence" misses the fact that "all things flow", though it is often a useful way of speaking.
