Following the Revolution and Algerian independence, all but 6,500 of the country's 140,000 Jews left the country, of whom about 90% moved to France with the Pied-Noirs and 10% moved to Israel.
The vast mountain ranges of Aures and Nememcha occupy the entire northeastern Algeria and are delineated by the Tunisian border.
During his election campaign and following his re-election, Bouteflika promised to extend the programme of national reconciliation and a $150-billion spending programme to create three million new jobs, the construction of one million new housing units, and to continue public sector and infrastructure modernisation programmes.
The Algerian national oil company is Sonatrach, which plays a key role in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in Algeria.
The historic roots of Algerian literature goes back to the Numidian era, when Apuleius wrote ''The Golden Ass'', the only Latin novel to survive in its entirety.
According to the European Audiovisual Observatory's LUMIERE database, 41 Algerian films were distributed in Europe between 1996 and 2013; 21 films in this repertoire were Algerian-French co-productions.
''(Days of Glory)'' (2006) and ''Outside the Law'' (2010) recorded the highest number of admissions in the European Union, 3,172,612 and 474,722, respectively.
28.1% of Algerians are under the age of 15.
Several Amazigh dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages in the Maghreb and other nearby lands.
The dey was in effect a constitutional autocrat.
If hydrocarbons are excluded, growth has been estimated at 4.8%.
Its capital and most populous city is Algiers, located in the country's far north.
For several centuries Algeria was ruled by the Romans, who founded many colonies in the region.
Under Ben Bella, the government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian; Boumédienne continued this trend.
The earliest blade industries in North Africa are called Iberomaurusian (located mainly in Oran region).
Chaâbi music is a typically Algerian musical genre characterized by specific rhythms and of Qacidate (Popular poems) in Arabic dialect.
Algerian painters, like Mohamed Racim or Baya, attempted to revive the prestigious Algerian past prior to French colonization, at the same time that they have contributed to the preservation of the authentic values of Algeria.
Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic, Tamazight and French, has been strongly influenced by the country's recent history.
Algerian Arabic (Darja) is the language used by the majority of the population.
Moreover, Spanish was spoken by these Aragonese and Castillian Morisco descendants deep into the 18th century, and even Catalan was spoken at the same time by Catalan Morisco descendants in the small town of Grish El-Oued.
Colloquial Algerian Arabic is heavily infused with borrowings from French and Berber.
After the death of General Larbi Belkheir, Bouteflika put loyalists in key posts, notably at Sonatrach, and secured constitutional amendments that make him re-electable indefinitely.
Berber civilization was already at a stage in which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organization supported several states.
It can be regarded as the ''de facto'' co-official language of Algeria.
This period had also known Augustine of Hippo, Nonius Marcellus and Martianus Capella, among many others.
Economic recession caused by the crash in world oil prices resulted in Algerian social unrest during the 1980s; by the end of the decade, Bendjedid introduced a multi-party system.
Some 99% of Algerians living in urban areas, but only 82% of those living in rural areas, had access to "improved sanitation".
Acacias with wild olives are the predominant flora in the remainder of the Sahara.
Growth of 3% is expected in 2012, rising to 4.2% in 2013.
The most powerful man may be Mohamed Mediène, head of the military intelligence.
Ben Bella was overthrown in 1965 by Houari Boumediene, his former ally and defence minister.
Berber has been recognized as a "national language" by the constitutional amendment of 8 May 2002.
Algeria has the 10th-largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas exporter.
The North African country supplies large amounts of natural gas to Europe, and energy exports are the backbone of the economy.
Given Algeria's young population, policy favors preventive health care and clinics over hospitals.
Merguez sausage is widely used in Algeria, but it differs, depending on the region and on the added spices.
In 2008, the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 22.3%, 15.6% for men and 29.0% for women.
The war led to the death of hundreds of thousands of Algerians and hundreds of thousands of injuries.
In keeping with this policy, the government maintains an immunization program.
In the same year, few merchants of Algiers ceded one of the rocky islets in their harbor to Spain, which built a fort on it.
From their principal center of power at Carthage, the Carthaginians expanded and established small settlements along the North African coast; by 600 BC, a Phoenician presence existed at Tipasa, east of Cherchell, Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) and Rusicade (modern Skikda).
In April 2011, Bouteflika promised further constitutional and political reform.
This network will be complemented by the East-West Highway, a major infrastructure project currently under construction.
A wave of economic protests in February and March 2011 prompted the Algerian government to offer more than $23 billion in public grants and retroactive salary and benefit increases.
From 1848 until independence, France administered the whole Mediterranean region of Algeria as an integral part and ''département'' of the nation.
The Armed Islamic Group declared a ceasefire in October 1997.
Among the most important universities, there are the University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene, the University of Mentouri Constantine, University of Oran Es-Senia.
Historians have estimated that between 30,000 and 150,000 Harkis and their dependents were killed by the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) or by lynch mobs in Algeria.
Other Algerian singers of the diaspora include Manel Filali in Germany and Kenza Farah in France.
Oil extraction facilities were nationalized.
Its crude oil production stands at around 1.1 million barrels/day, but it is also a major gas producer and exporter, with important links to Europe.
To the north, the Tell Atlas form with the Saharan Atlas, further south, two parallel sets of reliefs in approaching eastbound, and between which are inserted vast plains and highlands.
About 14% of the labor force are employed in the agricultural sector.
Teachers of Arabic, brought in from other Muslim countries, spread conventional Islamic thought in schools and sowed the seeds of a return to Orthodox Islam.
The war against French rule concluded in 1962, when Algeria gained complete independence following the March 1962 Evian agreements and the July 1962 self-determination referendum.
The country was considered as the "granary of Rome".
Modern Standard Arabic is the official language.
Algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of age.
The city's name in turn derives from the Arabic ''al-Jazā'ir'' (الجزائر, "The Islands"), a truncated form of the older ''Jazā'ir Banī Mazghanna'' (جزائر بني مزغنة, "Islands of the Mazghanna Tribe"), employed by medieval geographers such as al-Idrisi.
At several points in the conflict, the situation in Algeria became a point of international concern, most notably during the crisis surrounding Air France Flight 8969, a hijacking perpetrated by the Armed Islamic Group.
The presidios in North Africa turned out to be a costly and largely ineffective military endeavor that did not guarantee access for Spain's merchant fleet.
The most commonly seen animals include the wild boars, jackals, and gazelles, although it is not uncommon to spot fennecs (foxes), and jerboas.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration reported that in 2005, Algeria had  of proven natural-gas reserves.
In a 2009 study the UNO estimated there were 45,000 Catholics and 50,000–100,000 Protestants in Algeria.
Following those wars, Algeria was weaker, and Europeans, with an Anglo-Dutch fleet commanded by the British Lord Exmouth, attacked Algiers.
Fig, eucalyptus, agave, and various palm trees grow in the warmer areas.
The programme comprised economic, institutional, political and social reform to modernise the country, raise living standards, and tackle the causes of alienation.
One of France's longest-held overseas territories, Algeria became a destination for hundreds of thousands of European immigrants, who became known as ''colons'' and later, as ''Pied-Noirs.''
The government's efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector have done little to reduce high youth unemployment rates or to address housing shortages.
Giving incentives and rewarding best performers, as well as offering funds in a faster and more flexible manner, are the two main principles underlying the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) that came into force in 2014.
The then Fatimid vizier devised to relinquish control of the Maghreb and obtained the agreement of his sovereign.
Among the important novelists of the 1980s were Rachid Mimouni, later vice-president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views.
At the outset of the 20th century, its population was approximately four million.
The undisputed master of this music is El Hadj M'Hamed El Anka.
Public spending has increased by 27% annually during the past 5 years.
Many animals are now extinct, including the Barbary lions, Atlas bears and crocodiles.
He appoints the Prime Minister who is also the head of government.
The Zirids, however, were ultimately defeated ushering in an adoption of Arab customs and culture.
Income from oil and gas rose in 2011 as a result of continuing high oil prices, though the trend in production volume is downwards.
These settlers benefited from the French government's confiscation of communal land from tribal peoples, and the application of modern agricultural techniques that increased the amount of arable land.
Since 1972, Arabic is used as the language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling.
Instead, a group of unelected civilian and military "décideurs", known as "le pouvoir" ("the power"), actually rule the country, even deciding who should be president.
The Constantinois Malouf style is saved by musician from whom Mohamed Tahar Fergani is a performer.
Algerian cuisine is rich and diverse.
The Fatimid Islamic state, also known as Fatimid Caliphate made an Islamic empire that included North Africa, Sicily, Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, the Red Sea coast of Africa, Tihamah, Hejaz, and Yemen.
They did not make any significant settlement on the land, as they were harassed by local tribes, in fact by the time the Byzantines arrived Lepcis Magna was abandoned and the Msellata region was occupied by the indigenous Laguatan who had been busy facilitating an Amazigh political, military and cultural revival.
Several men and women were champions in athletics in the 1990s including Noureddine Morceli, Hassiba Boulmerka, Nouria Merah-Benida, and Taoufik Makhloufi, all specialized in middle distance running.
Subsequently, with the institution of a regular Ottoman administration, governors with the title of pasha ruled for three-year terms.
In December 1991 the Islamic Salvation Front dominated the first of two rounds of legislative elections.
In recent years, many of these generals have died or retired.
The government strengthened in 2011 the job programmes introduced in 1988, in particular in the framework of the programme to aid those seeking work (Dispositif d'Aide à l'Insertion Professionnelle).
Rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the Tell Atlas, ranging from  annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east.
The poor generally receive health care free of charge.
There has been a transition from cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned with the everyday lives of Algerians.
A 2015 study estimates 380,000 Muslims converted to Christianity in Algeria.
However, traditional cakes are also made at home, following the habits and customs of each family.
From the third year, French is taught and it is also the language of instruction for science classes.
Cakes are marketed and can be found in cities either in Algeria, in Europe or North America.
In March 2006, Russia agreed to erase $4.74&nbsp;billion of Algeria's Soviet-era debt during a visit by Russian President Vladimir Putin to the country, the first by a Russian leader in half a century.
During the Middle Ages, North Africa was home to many great Scholars, Saints, and Sovereigns including Judah Ibn Quraysh the first grammarian to suggest the Afroasiatic language family, the great Sufi masters Sidi Boumediene (Abu Madyan) and Sidi El Houari, as well as the Emirs Abd Al Mu'min and Yāghmūrasen.
All foreign operators must work in partnership with Sonatrach, which usually has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements.
The Algerian parliament is bicameral; the lower house, the People's National Assembly, has 462 members who are directly elected for five-year terms, while the upper house, the Council of the Nation, has 144 members serving six-year terms, of which 96 members are chosen by local assemblies and 48 are appointed by the president.
The threat was so severe that residents abandoned the island of Formentera.
As a consequence, French government favored the Kabyles.
'''Algeria''' ( ''''; ; ), officially the '''People's Democratic Republic of Algeria''', is a sovereign state in North Africa on the Mediterranean coast.
Indigenous Berbers as well as Phoenicians, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Turks, various Sub-Saharan Africans, and French  have contributed to the history of Algeria.
Production from the oil and gas sector in terms of volume, continues to decline, dropping from 43.2 million tonnes to 32 million tonnes between 2007 and 2011.
As a first step, Algerian literature was marked by works whose main concern was the assertion of the Algerian national entity, there is the publication of novels as the ''Algerian trilogy'' of Mohammed Dib, or even ''Nedjma'' of Kateb Yacine novel which is often regarded as a monumental and major work.
The current-account surplus is estimated at 9.3% of GDP and at the end of December 2011, official reserves were put at US$182 billion.
The area from the coast to the Tell Atlas is fertile.
The AIS disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly.
He promoted a policy of Arabisation in Algerian society and public life.
The high point of Berber civilization, unequaled until the coming of the Almohads and Almoravids more than a millennium later, was reached during the reign of Massinissa in the 2nd century BC.
The economy remains very dependent on hydrocarbon wealth, and, despite high foreign exchange reserves (US$178 billion, equivalent to three years of imports), current expenditure growth makes Algeria's budget more vulnerable to the risk of prolonged lower hydrocarbon revenues.
The military expenditure was 4.3% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012.
This was especially beneficial to the leadership after the international 1973 oil crisis.
It also included a second amnesty initiative, the Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation, which was approved in a referendum in September 2005.
Whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment.
The works of the Sanusi family in pre-colonial times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times, are widely noted.
The Carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the Romans in the Punic Wars.
These settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages.
In 146 BC the city of Carthage was destroyed.
Sonatrach, the national oil company, is the largest company in Africa.
Each region of the Maghreb contained several tribes (for example, Sanhadja, Houara, Zenata, Masmouda, Kutama, Awarba, and Berghwata).
In the Aures, people played several games such As El Kherdba or El khergueba (chess variant).
Two weeks earlier another pirate ship from Salé in Morocco had also raided in Iceland.
Russia is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for Algeria.
The largest concentration of Algerian migrants outside Algeria is in France, which has reportedly over 1.7 million Algerians of up to the second generation.
In the north, some of the native flora includes Macchia scrub, olive trees, oaks, cedars and other conifers.
Algiers lost from 30,000 to 50,000 inhabitants to the plague in 1620–21, and suffered high fatalities in 1654–57, 1665, 1691, and 1740–42.
He collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialization drive.
The Middle Ages have known many Arabic writers who revolutionized the Arab world literature, with authors like Ahmad al-Buni, Ibn Manzur and Ibn Khaldoun, who wrote the Muqaddimah while staying in Algeria, and many others.
The region of Algeria was partially ruled by Ottomans for three centuries from 1516 to 1830.
25 of these universities and almost all of the institutions of higher education were founded after the independence of the country.
The flood was still rising and in 1057, the Arabs spread on the high plains of Constantine where they gradually choked Qalaa of Banu Hammad, as they had done Kairouan few decades ago.
It was at first dominated by the ''ojaq''; but by the 18th century, it had become the dey's instrument.
Algeria is also crossed by the Trans-Sahara Highway, which is now completely paved.
The indigenous Amazigh tribes, however, remained largely independent, and depending on tribe, location, and time controlled varying parts of the Maghreb, at times unifying it (as under the Fatimids).
Abdelaziz Bouteflika has been President since 1999.
The country is a semi-presidential republic consisting of 48 provinces and 1,541 communes (counties).
In the Revolt of the Mercenaries, Berber soldiers rebelled from 241 to 238 BC after being unpaid following the defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War.
Other tradionel meals (Chakhchokha-Hassoua-T'chicha-Mahjouba and Doubara) are famous in Biskra.
In January 2016 Algeria's population was an estimated 40.4&nbsp;million, who are mainly Arab-Berber ethnically.
Playing cards, checkers and chess games are part of Algerian culture.
Colloquial Algerian Arabic is spoken by about 72% of the population and Berber by 27–30%.
This not only prompted the Bedouins to leave, but the Fatimid treasury even gave them a light expatriation cash allowance.
Gradually, dissatisfaction among the Muslim population, which lacked political and economic status in the colonial system, gave rise to demands for greater political autonomy, and eventually independence from France.
Various games have existed in Algeria since antiquity.
During the colonial period, there was a large (10% in 1960) European population who became known as ''Pied-Noirs''.
Fiscal policy in 2011 remained expansionist and made it possible to maintain the pace of public investment and to contain the strong demand for jobs and housing.
The pasha was assisted by janissaries, known in Algeria as the ojaq and led by an agha.
In recent decades the government has reinforced the study of French and TV programs have reinforced use of the language.
In 2007, the Algerian Air Force signed a deal with Russia to purchase 49 MiG-29SMT and 6 MiG-29UBT at an estimated cost of $1.9&nbsp;billion.
It has a budget of €15.4 billion and provides the bulk of funding through a number of programmes.
Inflation, the lowest in the region, has remained stable at 4% on average between 2003 and 2007.
The overall rate of unemployment was 10% in 2011, but remained higher among young people, with a rate of 21.5% for those aged between 15 and 24.
The Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat (GSPC), a splinter group of the Group Islamic Armée, continued a terrorist campaign against the Government.
Although the regency patronized the tribal chieftains, it never had the unanimous allegiance of the countryside, where heavy taxation frequently provoked unrest.
The highest point is Mount Tahat ( m).
Albert Camus was an Algerian-born French Pied-Noir author.
French policy was predicated on "civilizing" the country.
It banned the FIS, triggering a civil insurgency between the Front's armed wing, the Armed Islamic Group, and the national armed forces, in which more than 100,000 people are thought to have died.
In the 1960s and 1970s under President Houari Boumediene, Algeria pursued a programme of industrialisation within a state-controlled socialist economy.
From there, they gradually gained the upper Algiers and Oran plains, some were forcibly taken by the Almohads in the second half of the 12th century.
Algeria has not joined the WTO, despite several years of negotiations.
The highest official temperature was  at In Salah.
Between 1825 and 1847, 50,000 French people immigrated to Algeria.
Several names are engraved in the history of the sport, including Lakhdar Belloumi, Rachid Mekhloufi, Hassen Lalmas, Rabah Madjer, Salah Assad and Djamel Zidane.
Algeria has 26 universities and 67 institutions of higher education, which must accommodate a million Algerians and 80,000 foreign students in 2008.
The dey was elected for a life term, but in the 159 years (1671–1830) that the system survived, fourteen of the twenty-nine deys were assassinated.
The Algerian Football Federation is an association of Algeria football clubs organizing national competitions and international matches of the selection of Algeria national football team.
Today Algeria contains, in its literary landscape, big names having not only marked the Algerian literature, but also the universal literary heritage in Arabic and French.
After 1689, the right to select the dey passed to the divan, a council of some sixty nobles.
Tergui music is sung in Tuareg languages generally, Tinariwen had a worldwide success.
In return, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika agreed to buy $7.5&nbsp;billion worth of combat planes, air-defence systems and other arms from Russia, according to the head of Russia's state arms exporter Rosoboronexport.
About 80% of Indigenous schools were constructed for Kabyles.
Finally, the staïfi music is born in Sétif and remains a unique style of its kind.
The University of Algiers, founded in 1879, is the oldest, it offers education in various disciplines (law, medicine, science and letters).
The Amazighs historically consisted of several tribes.
Apart from the 122 private, learning at school, the Universities of the State are free of charge.
In November 2008, the Algerian Constitution was amended following a vote in Parliament, removing the two-term limit on Presidential incumbents.
In 1544, Hayreddin captured the island of Ischia, taking 4,000 prisoners, and enslaved some 9,000 inhabitants of Lipari, almost the entire population.
Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are noted for their thoughts on decolonization; Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (modern-day Souk Ahras); and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while staying in Algeria.
Hydrocarbons have long been the backbone of the economy, accounting for roughly 60% of budget revenues, 30% of GDP, and over 95% of export earnings.
Algeria is bordered to the northeast by Tunisia, to the east by Libya, to the west by Morocco, to the southwest by the Western Saharan territory, Mauritania, and Mali, to the southeast by Niger, and to the north by the Mediterranean Sea.
In addition, the Dey agreed to end the practice of enslaving Christians.
Algeria's currency is the dinar (DZD).
The Fatimid state was too weak to attempt a punitive expedition; The Viceroy, el-Mu'izz, also found another means of revenge.
Precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern Algeria, where it reaches as much as  in some years.
In 2009, 35,000 Chinese migrant workers lived in Algeria.
They are located about  south of the capital, Algiers, and just west of Tamanghasset.
The second Algerian Medalist was Alain Mimoun in 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne.
The resultant war is recounted in the epic Tāghribāt.
Another challenge is the pollution of water resources.
In 2002, Algeria had inadequate numbers of physicians (1.13 per 1,000 people), nurses (2.23 per 1,000 people), and dentists (0.31 per 1,000 people).
South of the Tell Atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the Saharan Atlas; farther south, there is the Sahara desert.
The president was formerly limited to two five-year terms, but a constitutional amendment passed by the Parliament on 11 November 2008 removed this limitation.
Algeria is a member of the African Union, the Arab League, OPEC, the United Nations and is the founding member of the Maghreb Union.
Algeria has one of the largest militaries in Africa and the largest defence budget on the continent; most of Algeria's weapons are imported from Russia, with whom they are a close ally.
Algeria, whose economy is reliant on petroleum, has been an OPEC member since 1969.
