Finally, he tried to mitigate the severity of the siege by his insistence that Uthman should be allowed water.
The Shia regard Ali as the most important figure after Muhammad.
Ali's mother, Fatima bint Asad, also belonged to Banu Hashim, making Ali a descendant of Ismail (Ishmael), the son of Ibrahim (Abraham).
Some historians and scholars believe Ali's conversion is not worthy enough to consider him the first male Muslim because he was a child at the time.
Ali participated in the funeral of Abu Bakr.
His policy of equal distribution of taxes and booty gained the support of Muhammad's companions, especially the Ansar who were subordinated by the Quraysh leadership after Muhammad, the traditional tribal leaders, and the Qurra or Quran reciters that sought pious Islamic leadership.
Abi Mikhnaf is one of the most renowned writers of this period who tried to gather all of the reports.
War ensued during which Muawiyah gradually subverted the generals and commanders of Hasan's army with large sums of money and deceiving promises until the army rebelled against him.
However, according to Shia, as well as non-Shia reports, the majority of those who supported Ali after his election as caliph, were shia politically, not religiously.
Uthman's assassination meant that rebels had to select a new caliph.
There is controversy among historians about the relationship between Ali and Uthman.
Sunnis view Ali as one of the greatest warrior champions of Islam.
During the persecution of Muslims and boycott of the Banu Hashim in Mecca, Ali stood firmly in support of Muhammad.
He had four children with Fatimah, Hasan ibn Ali, Husayn ibn Ali, Zaynab bint Ali and Umm Kulthum bint Ali.
Ali was sent to Yemen one year later to spread the teachings of Islam.
However another story, usually maintained by some Afghans, notes that his body was taken and buried in the Afghan city of Mazar-E-Sharif at the famous Blue Mosque or Rawze-e-Sharif.
Ali compiled a complete version of the Quran, ''mus'haf'', six months after the death of Muhammad.
When Muhammad reported that he had received a divine revelation, Ali, then only about ten years old, believed him and professed to Islam.
Following his election to the caliphate, Abu Bakr and Umar with a few other companions headed to Fatimah's house to force Ali and his supporters who had gathered there to give their allegiance to Abu Bakr.
The Sunni scholars believe that the verse is about Ali but does not recognise him as an Imam while, in the Shia Muslim view, Ali had been chosen by God as successor of Muhammad.
There had been a common tendency among the earlier western scholars against these narrations and reports gathered in later periods due to their tendency towards later Sunni and Shī'a partisan positions; such scholars regarding them as later fabrications.
Sufis believe that Ali inherited from Muhammad the saintly power ''wilayah'' that makes the spiritual journey to God possible.
In this battle some of Ali's other sons were killed.
Muhammad named him Ali, meaning "the exalted one".
Ali was so reliable and trustworthy that Muhammad asked him to carry the messages and declare the orders.
As Islam began to spread throughout Arabia, Ali helped establish the new Islamic order.
Although Ali won the battle by a huge margin, the constant conflict had begun to affect his standing.
On the basis of this hadith, Shia say that Ali later insisted that his religious authority was superior to that of Abu Bakr and Umar.
Sunni and Shia scholars agree that the verse of Wilayah was narrated in honour of Ali, but there are differing interpretations of ''wilayah'' and the ''Imamate''.
Madelung says Ali was deeply convinced of his right and his religious mission, unwilling to compromise his principles for the sake of political expediency, and ready to fight against overwhelming odds.
Ali first distinguished himself as a warrior in 624 at the Battle of Badr.
Hasan, born in AD 625, was the second Shia Imam and he also occupied the outward function of caliph for about six months.
Then, it is alleged that Umar threatened to set the house on fire unless they came out and swore allegiance to Abu Bakr.
Amr had first taken Egypt eighteen years earlier from the Romans but had been dismissed by Uthman.
The most vociferous opponents in Ali's camp were the very same people who had forced Ali into the ceasefire.
Ali was also a great scholar of Arabic literature and pioneered in the field of Arabic grammar and rhetoric.
After migrating to Medina, he married Muhammad's daughter Fatimah.
It is important to note that this was not the position of Ali himself.
After uniting the Arabian tribes into a single Muslim religious polity in the last years of his life, Muhammad's death in 632 signalled disagreement over who would succeed him as leader of the Muslim community.
Finally, Ali was urged to accept Abu Musa.
A'isha, Talhah, Al-Zubayr and the Umayyads, especially Muawiyah I and Marwan I, wanted Ali to punish the rioters who had killed Uthman.
Ali said, 'Was it fitting that we should wrangle over the caliphate even before the Prophet was buried?'
The Qurra then became known as the Kharijites.
In the last year of Ali's caliphate, the mood in Kufa and Basra changed in his favour as the people became disillusioned with Muawiyah's reign and policies.
The Druze believe that God was incarnated in human beings, especially Ali and his descendants, including Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah.
Ali's descendants by Fatimah are known as ''sharifs'', ''sayeds'' or ''sayyids''.
Ali was prominent at the Battle of Uhud, as well as many other battles where he wielded a bifurcated sword known as Zulfiqar.
The refusal of the largest bloc in Ali's army to fight was the decisive factor in his acceptance of the arbitration.
When the time arrived for taking a decision about the caliphate, Amr bin al-A'as convinced Abu Musa al-Ashari into entertaining the opinion that they should deprive both Ali and Muawiya of the caliphate, and give to the Muslims the right to elect the caliph.
The primary sources for scholarship on the life of Ali are the Quran and the Hadith, as well as other texts of early Islamic history.
Then he narrates that Imam Ali al-Rida, eighth Shia Imam, in discussion with Al-Ma'mun, Abbasid caliph, referred to this verse to prove the superiority of Muhammad's progeny over the rest of the Muslim community, and considered it the proof for Ali's right for caliphate due to God having made Ali like the self of Muhammad.
Al-Tabari has mentioned their names in his history: Al-Abbas ibn Ali, the holder of Husayn's standard, Ja'far, Abdallah and Uthman, the four sons born to Fatima binte Hizam; Muhammad and Abu Bakr.
At this time, Ali had acted as a restraining influence on Uthman without directly opposing him.
According to him, Caetani's approach is inconsistent.
Umayyad caliphate later became a centralised monarchy by Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan.
Seven months later the two arbitrators met at Adhruh about 10 miles north west of Maan in Jordan in February 658.
Following the Roman-Persian Wars and the Byzantine–Sasanian wars that lasted for hundreds of years, there were deep rooted differences between Iraq, formally under the Persian Sassanid Empire and Syria formally under the Byzantine Empire.
They wanted Ali to arrest Uthman ibn Affan's killer and not to fight Muawiyah I.
Also, Talhah and Zubayr later claimed they supported him reluctantly.
He instructed to Malik to give more attention to development of the land than to the collection of the tax, because tax can only be obtained by the development of the land and whoever demands tax without developing the land ruins the country and destroys the people.
They were also glorified in the Quran in several cases such as "the verse of purification".
Later when Fatimah and Ali sought aid from the Companions in the matter of his right to the caliphate, they answered 'O daughter of the Messenger of God!
When the arbitrators assembled at Daumet-ul-Jandal, a series of daily meetings were arranged for them to discuss the matters in hand.
When the economic situations of the Muslims became better, Fatimah gained some maids but treated them like her family and performed the house duties with them.
While Sunnis consider Ali the fourth and final of the ''Rashidun'' (rightly guided) caliphs, Shias regard Ali as the first Imam after Muhammad due to their interpretation of the events at Ghadir Khumm.
At the beginning they were extremely poor.
Although the Imam was not the recipient of a divine revelation, he had a close relationship with God, through which God guides him, and the Imam in turn guides the people.
Of course, ''Peak of Eloquence'' (''Nahj al-Balagha'') is an extract of Ali's quotations from a literal viewpoint as its compiler mentioned in the preface, while there are many other quotations, prayers (Du'as), sermons and letters in other literal, historic and religious books.
After likening Jesus' miraculous birth to Adam's creation, Muhammad called them to ''mubahala'' (conversation), where each party should bring their knowledgeable men, women and children, and ask God to curse the lying party and their followers.
For several years after his marriage, Fatimah did all of the household work by herself.
This event is known as the Hadith of Warning.
The second period of Ali's life began in 610 when he declared Islam at age 10 and ended with the Hijra of Muhammad to Medina in 622.
Following this battle Mohammad gave Ali the name ''Asadullah'', which in Arabic means "Lion of God".
Initially Ali refused to accept simply because his most vigorous supporters were rebels.
We have given our allegiance to Abu Bakr.
They are described as ''ghulat'' (Ar: غُلاة) "exaggerators" by the majority of Islamic scholars.
Just a small minority of them believed that Ali was the best Muslim after Muhammad and the only one entitled to rule them, while the majority supported him due to their distrust and opposition to Muawiyah.
Abu Musa al-Ashari also decided to act accordingly.
Ali opened negotiations hoping to regain his allegiance, but Muawiyah insisted on Levant autonomy under his rule.
In 622, the year of Muhammad's migration to Yathrib (now Medina), Ali risked his life by sleeping in Muhammad's bed to impersonate him and thwart an assassination plot so that Muhammad could escape in safety.
He ordered Ali to break all the idols worshipped by the Banu Aus, Banu Khazraj, Tayy, and those in the Kaaba to purify it after its defilement by the polytheism of the pre-Islamic era.
Responding to this question that why the names of the Imams are not mentioned in Quran expressly Muhammad al-Baqir answers: "Allah revealed Salat to his Prophet but never said of three or four Rakats, revealed Zakat but did not mention to its details, revealed Hajj but did not count its Tawaf and the Prophet interpreted their details.
However, when some notable companions of Muhammad, in addition to the residents of Medina, urged him to accept the offer, he finally agreed.
Their two sons (Hasan and Husain) were cited by Muhammad to be his own sons, honoured numerous times in his lifetime and titled "the leaders of the youth of Jannah" (Heaven, the hereafter.)
According to some sources, Ali did not give his oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr until some time after the death of his wife, Fatimah in the year AD 633.
The First Fitna, 656–661, followed the assassination of Uthman, continued during the caliphate of Ali, and was ended by Muawiyah's assumption of the caliphate.
In 650 during pilgrimage, he confronted Uthman with reproaches for his change of the prayer ritual.
Ali refused to accept the verdict of him stepping down and for an election to be held and found himself technically in breach of his pledge to abide by the arbitration.
Since the majority of Ali's subjects were nomads and peasants, he was concerned with agriculture.
According to some hadith, a verse was revealed about Ali concerning his sacrifice on the night of Hijra which says "And among men is he who sells his ''nafs'' (self) in exchange for the pleasure of Allah."
Soon after Ali became caliph, he dismissed provincial governors who had been appointed by Uthman, replacing them with trusted aides.
This put Ali in a weak position even amongst his own supporters.
9th and 10th century historians collected, selected and arranged the available narrations.
He had the special role of protecting Muhammad when most of the Muslim army fled from the battle of Uhud and it was said "There is no brave youth except Ali and there is no sword which renders service except Zulfiqar."
Muhammad took Ali into his home to raise him.
He used his time to serve his family and worked as a farmer.
In the memory of later generations Ali became the ideal Commander of the Faithful.
For the ten years that Muhammad led the community in Medina, Ali was extremely active in his service as his secretary and deputy, serving in his armies, the bearer of his banner in every battle, leading parties of warriors on raids, and carrying messages and orders.
Under the Safavid Empire, his grave became the focus of much devoted attention, exemplified in the pilgrimage made by Shah Ismail I to Najaf and Karbala.
This diverse coalition became known as ''Shi'a Ali'', meaning "party" or "faction of Ali".
He withdrew from political affairs, especially after the death of his wife, Fatimah Zahra.
Recognising Ali's continual and singular response to his call, Muhammad declared that Ali was his brother, inheritor and vice-regent and people must obey him.
Fatimah asked Abu Bakr to turn over their property, the lands of Fadak and Khaybar.
Muawiyah replied by mobilising his Levantine supporters and refusing to pay homage to Ali on the pretext that his contingent had not participated in his election.
On the other hand, the rebels maintained that Uthman had been justly killed, for not governing according to Quran and Sunnah, hence no vengeance was to be invoked.
In particular, he clashed with Uthman on the question of religious law.
The death of the last one is doubtful.
The majority of Islamic commentators do not believe Ali is mentioned by name in the Quran.
Ali did not change his mind when he finally pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr and then to Umar and to Uthman but had done so for the sake of the unity of Islam, at a time when it was clear that the Muslims had turned away from him.
Muhammad invited people to Islam in secret for three years before he started inviting them publicly.
There were three candidates: Ali, Talhah and al-Zubayr.
In 623, Muhammad told Ali that God ordered him to give his daughter Fatimah Zahra to Ali in marriage.
This civil war created permanent divisions within the Muslim community regarding who had the legitimate right to occupy the caliphate.
He lived under severe conditions of suppression and persecution by Mu'awiyah.
In 659 Ali's forces and the Kharijites met in the Battle of Nahrawan.
Talhah, Zubayr and other companions also refused the rebels' offer of the caliphate.
According to him, there is even no evidence that Ali had close relations with rebels who supported his caliphate or directed their actions.
During the Conquest of Mecca in 630, Muhammad asked Ali to guarantee that the conquest would be bloodless.
Ali was the first young male who accepted Islam.
Together with Umm Ayman, Ali testified to the fact that Muhammad granted it to Fatimah Zahra, when Abu Bakr requested her to summon witnesses for her claim.
Although at this time there were many who counted as political Shia, few of them believed Ali's religious leadership.
In the following years Muawiyah's army occupied many cities of Iraq, which Ali's governors could not prevent, and people did not support him to fight with them.
His other well-known sons were al-Abbas ibn Ali, born to Fatima binte Hizam (Um al-Banin), and Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah.
If Ali had come to us before this, we would certainly not have abandoned him'.
Muhammad, to prove to them that he was a prophet, brought his daughter Fatimah, Ali and his grandchildren Hasan and Husayn.
There are also some books known as ''Manāqib'' which describe Ali's character from a religious viewpoint.
Some Muslims, known as Uthmanis, considered Uthman a rightful and just caliph till the end, who had been unlawfully killed.
This invitation was repeated three times, but Ali was the only person who answered Muhammad.
Skirmishes between the parties led to the Battle of Siffin in 657.
Wilferd Madelung has rejected the stance of indiscriminately dismissing everything not included in "early sources" and in this approach tendentiousness alone is no evidence for late origin.
The choice of Abu Bakr was disputed by some of Muhammad's companions, who held that Ali had been designated his successor by Muhammad himself.
Ali dug a lot of wells and planted gardens near Medina and endowed them for public use.
Regular public cursing of Imam Ali in the congregational prayers remained a vital institution which was not abolished until 60 years later by Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz.
In addition, Umar gave the casting vote to Abdur Rahman.
Ali's influence has been important throughout Islamic history.
He also spent a lot of time fighting the Kharijites.
Ali then went to Medina with his mother, Muhammad's daughter Fatimah and two other women.
He insisted that religious punishment had to be done in several cases such as Ubayd Allah ibn Umar and Walid ibn Uqba.
While Ali and the rest of Muhammad's close family were washing his body for burial, at a gathering attended by a small group of Muslims at Saqifah, a close companion of Muhammad named Abu Bakr was nominated for the leadership of the community.
Although polygamy was permitted, Ali did not marry another woman while Fatimah was alive, and his marriage to her possesses a special spiritual significance for all Muslims because it is seen as the marriage between two great figures surrounding Muhammad.
The successful formation of this diverse coalition seems to be due to Ali's charismatic character.
Ali had four children born to Fatimah, the only child of Muhammad to have surviving progeny.
In the public declaration that followed Abu Musa observed his part of the agreement, but Amr declared Ali deposed and confirmed Muawiya as caliph.
They broke away from Ali's force, rallying under the slogan "arbitration belongs to God alone."
However, there are many verses interpreted by Shiite scholars as referring to Ali or other Shiite Imams.
In 630, Ali recited to a large gathering of pilgrims in Mecca a portion of the Quran that declared Muhammad and the Islamic community were no longer bound by agreements made earlier with Arab polytheists.
The first one among Arabs to deal with it was Ali.
At about the same time, unrest was brewing in Egypt.
On several occasions Ali disagreed with Uthman in the application of the Hudud; he had publicly shown sympathy for Abu Dharr al-Ghifari and had spoken strongly in the defence of Ammar ibn Yasir.
Ali's grandfather, along with some members of the Bani Hashim clan, were ''Hanifs'', or followers of a monotheistic belief system prior to the coming of Islam.
Ali took part in the early caravan raids from Mecca and later in almost all the battles fought by the nascent Muslim community.
Others added their support and Abu Bakr was made the first caliph.
Amr ibn al-As convinced Abu Musa Ash'ari that both Ali and Muawiyah should step down and a new caliph be elected.
According to hadith collections, in 631 an Arab Christian envoy from Najran (currently in northern Yemen and partly in Saudi Arabia) came to Muhammad to argue which of the two parties erred in its doctrine concerning Jesus.
Born to Abu Talib and Fatima bint Asad, Ali was the only person born in the sacred sanctuary of the Kaaba in Mecca, the holiest place in Islam, according to many classical Islamic sources, especially Shia ones.
The order of this ''mus'haf'' differed from that which was gathered later during the Uthmanic era.
Thus some authors have pointed out that he lacked political skill and flexibility.
After a week of combat was followed by a violent battle known as ''laylat al-harir'' (the night of clamour), Muawiyah's army was on the point of being routed when Amr ibn al-Aas advised Muawiyah to have his soldiers hoist ''mus'haf'' (either parchments inscribed with verses of the Quran, or complete copies of it) on their spearheads in order to cause disagreement and confusion in Ali's army.
As a result, Ali found it hard to expand the state on its eastern front.
Ali did not actively assert his own right because he did not want to throw the nascent Muslim community into strife.
The Kharijites then started killing Ali's supporters and other Muslims.
Nothing of the sort had been circulated among their distinguished figures or those of lower ranks.
They considered everyone to be their enemy.
Momen has listed many of these verses in his ''An Introduction to Shi'i Islam''.
Ali is recorded in some traditions as having forbidden those who sought to worship him in his own lifetime.
His daughter Zaynab—who was in Karbala—was captured by Yazid's army and later played a great role in revealing what happened to Husayn and his followers.
Ali succeeded in forming a broad coalition especially after the Battle of the Camel.
Some say the caliphate was a gift of the rebels and Ali did not have enough force to control or punish them, while others say Ali accepted the rebels' argument or at least did not consider Uthman a just ruler.
Fatimah, in support of her husband, started a commotion and threatened to "uncover her hair", at which Abu Bakr relented and withdrew.
However, the people's attitude toward Ali differed deeply.
They have also become the basis of literary works or have been integrated into poetic verse in many languages.
At the beginning of Abu Bakr's caliphate, there was a controversy about Muhammad's endowment to his daughter, especially Fadak, between Fatimah and Ali on one side and Abu Bakr on the other side.
They considered anyone who was not part of their group as an unbeliever.
Under such circumstances, a schism took place which led to the first civil war in Muslim history.
This night is called ''Laylat al-Mabit''.
Ali then moved his armies north and the two armies encamped themselves at Siffin for more than one hundred days, most of the time being spent in negotiations.
In this way Muawiyah captured the Islamic caliphate and tuned it to a secular kingdom (Sultanate).
Its influence can be sensed in the logical co-ordination of terms, the deduction of correct conclusions, and the creation of certain technical terms in Arabic which entered the literary and philosophical language independently of the translation into Arabic of Greek texts.
In later Islamic philosophy, especially in the teachings of Mulla Sadra and his followers, like Allameh Tabatabaei, Ali's sayings and sermons were increasingly regarded as central sources of metaphysical knowledge, or divine philosophy.
Finally, Hasan was forced to make peace and to yield the caliphate to Muawiyah.
Sufis recite ''Manqabat'' Ali in the praise of Ali.
He was also an uncle of Muhammad.
Ali's father Abu Talib was the custodian of the Ka'bah and a sheikh of the Banu Hashim, an important branch of the powerful Quraysh tribe.
The arbitration resulted in the dissolution of Ali's coalition and some have opined that this was Muawiyah's intention.
He also advised Umar to set Hijra as the beginning of the Islamic calendar.
According to Henry Corbin, the ''Nahj al-Balagha'' may be regarded as one of the most important sources of doctrines professed by Shia thinkers, especially after AD 1500.
No one among the Islamic nobility was more temperate toward our master than your master.
The verse of Mawadda ( Quran, 42:23) is another verse which Shiite scholar along with Sunni ones like Al-Baydawi and Al-Zamakhshari and Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi believe that the phrase Kinship refers to Ali, Fatimah and their sons, Hasan and Husayn.
Therefore, some historians consider Ali one of the leading members of Uthman's opposition, if not the main one.
Already in the 8th century, literary authorities such as 'Abd al-Hamid ibn Yahya al-'Amiri pointed to the unparalleled eloquence of Ali's sermons and sayings, as did al-Jahiz in the following century.
Their marriage lasted until Fatimah's death ten years later.
Eminent Sufis such as Ali Hujwiri claim that the tradition began with Ali and Junayd of Baghdad regarded Ali as the Sheikh of the principles and practices of Sufism.
Muhammad designated Ali as one of the scribes who would write down the text of the Quran, which had been revealed to Muhammad during the previous two decades.
Ali inherited the Rashidun caliphate—which extended from Egypt in the west to the Iranian highlands in the east—while the situation in the Hejaz and the other provinces on the eve of his election was unsettled.
The two armies finally agreed to settle the matter of who should be caliph by arbitration.
He was instructed to write down the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, the peace treaty between Muhammad and the Quraysh in 628.
This is supported by numerous Hadiths which have been narrated by Shias, including Hadith of the pond of Khumm, Hadith of the two weighty things, Hadith of the pen and paper, Hadith of the Cloak, Hadith of position, Hadith of the invitation of the close families, and Hadith of the Twelve Successors.
Some of Muhammad's companions tried to persuade Ali to accept the office, but he turned down the offer, suggesting to be a counsellor instead of a chief.
He was known to have broken idols in the mould of Abraham and asked people why they worshipped something they made themselves.
He told Abu Bakr that his delay in pledging allegiance (''bay'ah'') as caliph was based on his belief of his own prior title.
