The concentration differences of these charged particles causes a difference in electric potential between the inside and outside of cells, known as the membrane potential.
The inert atmosphere used may be argon or nitrogen gas, except for lithium, which reacts with nitrogen.
The melting point of a substance is the point where it changes state from solid to liquid while the boiling point of a substance (in liquid state) is the point where the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the environmental pressure surrounding the liquid and all the liquid changes state to gas.
It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%); with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements.
In a given sample of uranium, there is estimated to be only one francium atom for every 1018 uranium atoms.
Excessive ingestion of lithium causes drowsiness, slurred speech and vomiting, among other symptoms, and poisons the central nervous system, which is dangerous as the required dosage of lithium to treat bipolar disorder is only slightly lower than the toxic dosage.
This is due to the greater size of the P3− and As3− ions, so that less lattice energy needs to be released for the salts to form.
Ammonium is expected to behave stably as a metal ( ions in a sea of electrons) at very high pressures (though less than the typical pressure where transitions from insulating to metallic behaviour occur around, 100&nbsp;GPa), and could possibly occur inside the ice giants Uranus and Neptune, which may have significant impacts on their interior magnetic fields.
In contrast to the trend of decreasing electronegativities and ionisation energies of the alkali metals, francium's electronegativity and ionisation energy are predicted to be higher than caesium's due to the relativistic stabilisation of the 7s electrons; also, its atomic radius is expected to be abnormally low.
The chemistry of lithium shows several differences from that of the rest of the group as the small Li+ cation polarises anions and gives its compounds a more covalent character.
Hydrogen, like the alkali metals, has one valence electron and reacts easily with the halogens, but the similarities end there.
Ternary alkali metal halide oxides, such as Na3ClO, K3BrO (yellow), Na4Br2O, Na4I2O, and K4Br2O, are also known.
As the atoms increase in size going down the group (because their atomic radius increases), the nuclei of the ions move further away from the delocalised electrons and hence the metallic bond becomes weaker so that the metal can more easily melt and boil, thus lowering the melting and boiling points.
The cell membrane potential created by potassium and sodium ions allows the cell to generate an action potential—a "spike" of electrical discharge.
Potassium hydroxide is a very strong base, and is used to control the pH of various substances.
Pure rubidium and caesium metals are produced by reducing their chlorides with calcium metal at 750&nbsp;°C and low pressure.
(The oxides and peroxides for these alkali metals do exist, but do not form upon direct reaction of the metal with oxygen at standard conditions.)
Group IB was nonetheless parenthesised to note that it was tentative.
This group lies in the s-block of the periodic table of elements as all alkali metals have their outermost electron in an s-orbital: this shared electron configuration results in them having very similar characteristic properties.
However, the 7d electrons of unhexpentium may also be able to participate in chemical reactions along with the 9s electron, possibly allowing oxidation states beyond +1 and perhaps even making unhexpentium behave more like a boron group element or group 11 element than an alkali metal.
Because of their high reactivity, they must be stored under oil to prevent reaction with air, and are found naturally only in salts and never as the free elements.
From their silicate ores, all the stable alkali metals may be obtained the same way: sulfuric acid is first used to dissolve the desired alkali metal ion and aluminium(III) ions from the ore (leaching), whereupon basic precipitation removes aluminium ions from the mixture by precipitating it as the hydroxide.
Its diagonal relationship with magnesium often allows it to replace magnesium in ferromagnesium minerals, where its crustal concentration is about 18&nbsp;ppm, comparable to that of gallium and niobium.
They easily react with carbon dioxide to form carbonates or bicarbonates, or with hydrogen sulfide to form sulfides or bisulfides, and may be used to separate thiols from petroleum.
Lithium, the lightest of the alkali metals, is the only alkali metal which reacts with nitrogen at standard conditions, and its nitride is the only stable alkali metal nitride.
The last of these may be heated under vacuum to generate Cs2O.
The alkali metals dissolve slowly in liquid ammonia, forming ammoniacal solutions of solvated M+ and e−, which react to form hydrogen gas and the alkali metal amide (MNH2, where M represents an alkali metal): this was first noted by Humphry Davy in 1809 and rediscovered by W. Weyl in 1864.
While analogous lithium bonds are also known, they are mostly electrostatic.
These substances include some elements and many more polyatomic ions; the polyatomic ions are especially similar to the alkali metals in their large size and weak polarising power.
Previously, potassium was generally made from the electrolysis of potassium chloride or potassium hydroxide, found extensively in places such as Canada, Russia, Belarus, Germany, Israel, United States, and Jordan, in a method similar to how sodium was produced in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
Potassium forms a mixture of potassium peroxide and potassium superoxide, while rubidium and caesium form the superoxide exclusively.
Lithium carbonate is used as a mood stabiliser in psychiatry to treat bipolar disorder (manic-depression) in daily doses of about 0.5 to 2&nbsp;grams, although there are side-effects.
Boron is a special case, being the only nonmetal in group 13.
In aqueous solution, the alkali metal ions form aqua ions of the formula M(H2O)''n''+, where ''n'' is the solvation number.
These compounds are over 200 times more electrically conductive than pure graphite, suggesting that the valence electron of the alkali metal is transferred to the graphite layers (e.g.
They react with amphoteric oxides: for example, the oxides of aluminium, zinc, tin, and lead react with the alkali metal hydroxides to give aluminates, zincates, stannates, and plumbates.
While most metals form arsenides, only the alkali and alkaline earth metals form mostly ionic arsenides.
The chemistry of alkali metal germanides, involving the germanide ion Ge4− and other cluster (Zintl) ions such as , , , and (Ge9)26−, is largely analogous to that of the corresponding silicides.
These are not the only phosphides and arsenides of the alkali metals: for example, potassium has nine different known phosphides, with formulae K3P, K4P3, K5P4, KP, K4P6, K3P7, K3P11, KP10.3, and KP15.
Standard atomic weight&nbsp;(u)
The alkalides are an exception: they are unstable compounds which contain alkali metals in a −1 oxidation state, which is very unusual as before the discovery of the alkalides, the alkali metals were not expected to be able to form anions and were thought to be able to appear in salts only as cations.
Together with caesium-134, iodine-131, and strontium-90, caesium-137 was among the isotopes distributed by the Chernobyl disaster which constitute the greatest risk to health.
An example of an organolithium compound is methyllithium ((CH3Li)''x''), which exists in tetrameric (''x'' = 4, tetrahedral) and hexameric (''x'' = 6, octahedral) forms.
Perhaps the best-known case is the Goiânia accident of 1987, in which an improperly-disposed-of radiation therapy system from an abandoned clinic in the city of Goiânia, Brazil, was scavenged from a junkyard, and the glowing caesium salt sold to curious, uneducated buyers.
Transition metals to the left of group 11 experience interactions between ''s'' electrons and the partially filled ''d'' subshell that lower electron mobility."
Sodium salts of fatty acids are uesd as soap.
When the only natural isotope francium-223 is specifically required, it is produced as the alpha daughter of actinium-227, itself produced synthetically from the neutron irradiation of natural radium-226, one of the daughters of natural uranium-238.
The mass of the Earth is approximately 5.98&nbsp;kg.
This stems from the filled d subshell providing a much weaker shielding effect on the outermost s electron than the filled p subshell, so that the coinage metals have much higher first ionisation energies and smaller ionic radii than do the corresponding alkali metals.
They all crystallise in the body-centered cubic crystal structure, and have distinctive flame colours because their outer s electron is very easily excited.
Due to the great rarity of odd–odd nuclei, almost all the primordial isotopes of the alkali metals are odd–even (the exceptions being the light stable isotope lithium-6 and the long-lived radioisotope potassium-40).
Previous attempts at electrolysis of the aqueous salt were unsuccessful due to potassium's extreme reactivity.
Perey thought this decay activity might have been caused by a previously unidentified decay product, one that was separated during purification, but emerged again out of the pure actinium-227.
The alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other.
The trivial name "alkali metals" comes from the fact that the hydroxides of the group 1 elements are all strong alkalis when dissolved in water.
Unlike alkyllithium compounds, alkylsodiums and alkylpotassiums cannot be made by reacting the metals with alkyl halides because Wurtz coupling occurs:
Caesium is more abundant than some commonly known elements, such as antimony, cadmium, tin, and tungsten, but is much less abundant than rubidium.
Rubidium (and to a much lesser extent caesium) can function as temporary cures for hypokalemia; while rubidium can adequately physiologically substitute potassium in some systems, caesium is never able to do so.
Other solid deposits include halite, amphibole, cryolite, nitratine, and zeolite.
This reaction becomes more vigorous going down the group: lithium reacts steadily with effervescence, but sodium and potassium can ignite and rubidium and caesium sink in water and generate hydrogen gas so rapidly that shock waves form in the water that may shatter glass containers.
The coinage metals' filled d shell is much more easily disrupted than the alkali metals' filled p shell, so that the second and third ionisation energies are lower, enabling higher oxidation states than +1 and a richer coordination chemistry, thus giving the group 11 metals clear transition metal character.
Caesium-137, with a half-life of 30.17&nbsp;years, is one of the two principal medium-lived fission products, along with strontium-90, which are responsible for most of the radioactivity of spent nuclear fuel after several years of cooling, up to several hundred years after use.
It displays the +1 oxidation state that all the known alkali metals display, and thallium compounds with thallium in its +1 oxidation state closely resemble the corresponding potassium or silver compounds stoichiometrically due to the similar ionic radii of the Tl+ (164&nbsp;pm), K+ (152&nbsp;pm) and Ag+ (129&nbsp;pm) ions.
Instead, the mining of pollucite ore is the main method of obtaining pure caesium, extracted from the ore mainly by three methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct reduction.
Solvated electrons are powerful reducing agents and are often used in chemical synthesis.
Lithium, sodium, and potassium were part of the discovery of periodicity, as they are among a series of triads of elements in the same group that were noted by Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner in 1850 as having similar properties.
NaK is an alloy of sodium and potassium that is very useful because it is liquid at room temperature, although precautions must be taken due to its extreme reactivity towards water and air.
One of the very few properties of the alkali metals that does not display a very smooth trend is their reduction potentials: lithium's value is anomalous, being more negative than the others.
Most alkali metals have many different applications.
The heavier alkali metals also favour the sterically congested conformation.
The radius of the H− anion also does not fit the trend of increasing size going down the halogens: indeed, H− is very diffuse because  its single proton cannot easily control both electrons.
All the alkali metals react with water, with the heavier alkali metals reacting more vigorously than the lighter ones.
For use as bases, butyllithiums are often used and are commercially available.
Lithium stearate is a thickener and can be used to make lubricating greases; it is produced from lithium hydroxide, which is also used to absorb carbon dioxide in space capsules and submarines.
It is a strong emitter of gamma radiation.
Alkali metal cations do not usually form coordination complexes with simple Lewis bases due to their low charge of just +1 and their relatively large size; thus the Li+ ion forms most complexes and the heavier alkali metal ions form less and less (though exceptions occur for weak complexes).
The most well-known of the twenty is certainly sodium chloride, otherwise known as common salt.
It can also be produced from seawater.
Tetraalkylammonium hydroxides, like alkali metal hydroxides, are very strong bases that react with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form carbonates.
One of the best-known applications of the pure elements the use of rubidium and caesium in atomic clocks, of which caesium atomic clocks are the most accurate and precise representation of time.
They form various types of oxides, such as simple oxides (containing the O2− ion), peroxides (containing the  ion, where there is a single bond between the two oxygen atoms), superoxides (containing the  ion), and many others.
Heat of formation&nbsp;of&nbsp;monatomic&nbsp;gas&nbsp;(kJ·mol−1)
Their discovery of rubidium came the following year in Heidelberg, Germany, finding it in the mineral lepidolite.
All alkali metals melt as a part of the reaction with water.
Sodium chloride (also known as common salt) is the principal source of sodium in the diet, and is used as seasoning and preservative, such as for pickling and jerky; most of it comes from processed foods.
The alkali metal hydroxides are the most basic known hydroxides.
This secondary hydrogen gas explosion produces the visible flame above the bowl of water, lake or other body of water, not the initial reaction of the metal with water (which tends to happen mostly under water).
Lithium chloride is used as a brazing alloy for aluminium parts.
Its chemistry is predicted to be closer to that of potassium or rubidium instead of caesium or francium.
They thermally decompose to eliminate a β-hydrogen, producing alkenes and lithium hydride: another route is the reaction of ethers with alkyl- and aryllithiums that act as strong bases.
The antimonides are unstable and reactive as the Sb3− ion is a strong reducing agent; reaction of them with acids form the toxic and unstable gas stibine (SbH3).
Group 14 is also a good fit in terms of thermodynamic properties such as ionisation energy and electron affinity, but makes chemical nonsense because hydrogen cannot be tetravalent.
Sodium and potassium occur in all known biological systems, generally functioning as electrolytes inside and outside cells.
These alkali metal germanides, stannides, and plumbides may be produced by reducing germanium, tin, and lead with sodium metal in liquid ammonia.
Being the first period 8 element, the undiscovered element ununennium (element 119) is predicted to be the next alkali metal after francium and behave much like their lighter congeners; however, it is also predicted to differ from the lighter alkali metals in some properties.
It has been estimated that the transition from a mixture of ammonia and dihydrogen molecules to metallic ammonium may occur at pressures just below 25&nbsp;GPa.
The first ionisation energy of hydrogen (1312.0 kJ/mol) is much higher than that of the alkali metals.
Because of the shielding effect, when an atom has more than one electron shell, each electron feels electric repulsion from the other electrons as well as electric attraction from the nucleus.
Caesium, the fifth alkali metal, is the most reactive of all the metals.
They also react with carbon dioxide and carbon tetrachloride, so that normal fire extinguishers are counterproductive when used on alkali metal fires.
Hence it can lose an electron to form the hydron H+, or gain one to form the hydride ion H−.
Interest in the chemical properties of ununennium and unhexpentium stems from the fact that both elements are located close to the expected locations of islands of stabilities, centered at elements 122 (306Ubb) and 164 (482Uhq).
Small amounts of caesium-134 and caesium-137 were released into the environment during nearly all nuclear weapon tests and some nuclear accidents, most notably the Goiânia accident and the Chernobyl disaster.
It constitutes most of the radioactivity still left from the Chernobyl accident.
While it was previously thought that the heavier alkali metals also formed octahedral hexaaqua ions, it has since been found that potassium and rubidium probably form the K(H2O)8+ and Rb(H2O)8+ ions, which have the square antiprismatic structure, and that caesium forms the 12-coordinate Cs(H2O)12+ ion.
The ammonium ion () has very similar properties to the heavier alkali metals, acting as an alkali metal intermediate between potassium and rubidium, and is often considered a close relative.
The ionic radii of the alkali metals are much smaller than their atomic radii.
Around 1865 John Newlands produced a series of papers where he listed the elements in order of increasing atomic weight and similar physical and chemical properties that recurred at intervals of eight; he likened such periodicity to the octaves of music.
Furthermore, the nitrogen atom may be replaced by a phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony atom, creating a phosphonium () or arsonium () cation that can itself be substituted similarly; indeed, stibonium () itself is not known, and only some of its organic derivatives are characterised.
Although a simple extrapolation of the periodic table would put element 169, unhexennium, under ununennium, Dirac-Fock calculations predict that the next alkali metal after ununennium may actually be element 165, unhexpentium, which is predicted to have the electron configuration Uuo 5g18 6f14 7d10 8s2 8p1/22 9s1.
For example, lithium iodide (LiI) will dissolve in organic solvents, a property of most covalent compounds.
Rubidium can form Rb6O and Rb9O2 (copper-coloured) upon oxidation in air, while caesium forms an immense variety of oxides, such as the ozonide CsO3 and several brightly coloured suboxides, such as Cs7O (bronze), Cs4O (red-violet), Cs11O3 (violet), Cs3O (dark green), CsO, Cs3O2, as well as Cs7O2.
They are occasionally classified as post-transition metals.
Being a strong reducing agent, it is often used to reduce many other metals, such as titanium and zirconium, from their chlorides.
His version put all the alkali metals then known (lithium to caesium), as well as copper, silver, and thallium (which show the +1 oxidation state characteristic of the alkali metals), together into a group.
Therefore, the falling melting and boiling points of the alkali metals indicate that the strength of the metallic bonds of the alkali metals decreases down the group.
Physically, they have the relatively low melting points and high electronegativity values associated with post-transition metals.
Alkyllithiums and aryllithiums may also react with ''N'',''N''-disubstituted amides to give aldehydes and ketones, and symmetrical ketones by reacting with carbon monoxide.
"The filled ''d'' subshell and free ''s'' electron of Cu, Ag, and Au contribute to their high electrical and thermal conductivity.
He named the metal inside the material "''lithium''".
The names of rubidium and caesium come from the most prominent lines in their emission spectra: a bright red line for rubidium (from the Latin word ''rubidus'', meaning dark red or bright red), and a sky-blue line for caesium (derived from the Latin word ''caesius'', meaning sky-blue).
Because of this, anhydrous salts containing alkali metal cations are often used as desiccants.
The resultant trend is that the densities of the alkali metals increase down the table, with an exception at potassium.
The heavier alkali metals are also less abundant than the lighter ones as the alkali metals from rubidium onward can only be synthesised in supernovae and not in stellar nucleosynthesis.
This is because metal atoms are held together by the electromagnetic attraction from the positive ions to the delocalised electrons.
If the bond between sodium and chlorine in sodium chloride were covalent, the pair of shared electrons would be attracted to the chlorine because the effective nuclear charge on the outer electrons is +7 in chlorine but is only +1 in sodium.
They are all white ionic crystalline solids that have high melting points.
No atoms were identified, leading to a limiting yield of 300 nb.
Iridocene (involving iridium) would presumably be still more potent, but is not very well-studied due to its instability.
Atomic radius&nbsp;(pm)
The balance between potassium and sodium is maintained by ion pumps in the cell membrane.
The hydroxides themselves are the most basic hydroxides known, reacting with acids to give salts and with alcohols to give oligomeric alkoxides.
Lithium is also much less abundant than sodium and potassium as it is poorly synthesised in both Big Bang nucleosynthesis and in stars: the Big Bang could only produce trace quantities of lithium, beryllium and boron due to the absence of a stable nucleus with 5 or 8 nucleons, and stellar nucleosynthesis could only pass this bottleneck by the triple-alpha process, fusing three helium nuclei to form carbon, and skipping over those three elements.
Indeed, the alkali metals provide the best example of group trends in properties in the periodic table, with elements exhibiting well-characterised homologous behaviour.
This rule argues that elements with odd atomic numbers have one unpaired proton and are more likely to capture another, thus increasing their atomic number.
It is sometimes placed above carbon due to their similar electronegativities or fluorine due to their similar chemical properties.
Other alkali metal arsenides not conforming to the formula M3As are known, such as LiAs, which has a metallic lustre and electrical conductivity indicating the presence of some metallic bonding.
12-crown-4 for Li+, 15-crown-5 for Na+, 18-crown-6 for K+, and 21-crown-7 for Rb+) and cryptands due to electrostatic attraction.
They may be obtained directly from the elements in liquid ammonia or when air is not present, and are colourless, water-soluble compounds that air oxidises quickly back to selenium or tellurium.
Pure potassium metal is not often used, but its alloys with sodium may substitute for pure sodium in fast breeder nuclear reactors.
All known physical properties of francium also deviate from the clear trends going from lithium to caesium, such as the first ionisation energy, electron affinity, and anion polarisability, though due to the paucity of known data about francium many sources give extrapolated values, ignoring that relativistic effects make the trend from lithium to caesium become inapplicable at francium.
Rubidium has no known biological role, but may help stimulate metabolism, and, similarly to caesium, replace potassium in the body causing potassium deficiency.
Organolithium compounds, especially ''n''-butyllithium, are useful reagents in organic synthesis, as might be expected given lithium's diagonal relationship with magnesium, which plays an important role in the Grignard reaction.
Additionally, francium superoxide (FrO2) is expected to have significant covalent character, unlike the other alkali metal superoxides, because of bonding contributions from the 6p electrons of francium.
No attempts at synthesis have been made for any heavier alkali metals, such as unhexpentium, due to their extremely high atomic number: they would require new, more powerful technology to make.
All the alkali metals are highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in nature.
The limited applications and the lack of a mineral rich in rubidium limit the production of rubidium compounds to 2 to 4 tonnes per year.
There were at least four erroneous and incomplete discoveries before Marguerite Perey of the Curie Institute in Paris, France discovered francium in 1939 by purifying a sample of actinium-227, which had been reported to have a decay energy of 220&nbsp;keV.
Finally, the alkali metals are at the top of the electrochemical series, whereas the coinage metals are almost at the very bottom.
While potash has been used since ancient times, it was not understood for most of its history to be a fundamentally different substance from sodium mineral salts.
Thus, contrary to expectation, caesium is the most reactive of the alkali metals, not francium.
For instance, when moving down the table, all known alkali metals show increasing atomic radius, decreasing electronegativity, increasing reactivity, and decreasing melting and boiling points as well as heats of fusion and vaporisation.
The atomisation energy measures the strength of the metallic bond of an element, which falls down the group as the atoms increase in radius and thus the metallic bond must increase in length, making the delocalised electrons further away from the attraction of the nuclei of the heavier alkali metals.
Rubidium and caesium were the first elements to be discovered using the spectroscope, invented in 1859 by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff.
The alkali metals are among the most electropositive elements on the periodic table and thus tend to bond ionically to the most electronegative elements on the periodic table, the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine), forming salts known as the alkali metal halides.
In addition, the small size of the Li+ and O2− ions contributes to their forming a stable ionic lattice structure.
The ability of cells to produce electrical discharge is critical for body functions such as neurotransmission, muscle contraction, and heart function.
Nevertheless, hydrogen can take on the same structural role as the alkali metals in some molecular crystals, and has a close relationship with the lightest alkali metals (especially lithium).
The most important of these compounds is sodium cyclopentadienide, NaC5H5, an important precursor to many transition metal cyclopentadienyl derivatives.
However, ununennium may not be an alkali metal due to relativistic effects, which are predicted to have a large influence on the chemical properties of superheavy elements; even if it does turn out to be an alkali metal, it is predicted to have some differences in physical and chemical properties from its lighter homologues.
Table salt, or sodium chloride, has been used since antiquity.
The latter are said to reside in the second coordination sphere.
Caesium chloride has been promoted as an alternative cancer therapy, but has been linked to the deaths of over 50 patients, on whom it was used as part of a scientifically unvalidated cancer treatment.
For example, lithium forms a stable nitride, a property common among all the alkaline earth metals (magnesium's group) but unique among the alkali metals.
Because of the higher electronegativity of lithium, some of its compounds have a more covalent character.
For several years in the 1950s and 1960s, a by-product of the potassium production called Alkarb was a main source for rubidium.
It has been calculated that there is at most 30&nbsp;g of francium in the earth's crust at any time, due to its extremely short half-life of 22 minutes.
Various tests eliminated the possibility of the unknown element being thorium, radium, lead, bismuth, or thallium.
In this 1871 version, copper, silver, and gold were placed twice, once as part of group IB, and once as part of a "group VIII" encompassing today's groups 8 to 11.
Their lustre tarnishes rapidly in air due to oxidation.
The reactivities of the alkali metals increase going down the group.
The mass of an alkali metal atom also increases going down the group.
Francium is also predicted to show some differences due to its high atomic weight, causing its electrons to travel at considerable fractions of the speed of light and thus making relativistic effects more prominent.
Potassium, rubidium and caesium are also incompatible elements due to their large ionic radii.
Because the superoxide releases the most energy when formed, the superoxide is preferentially formed for the larger alkali metals where the more complex anions are not polarised.
The eutectic mixture melts at −12.6&nbsp;°C.
The intermetallic compounds of the alkali metals with the heavier group 13 elements (aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium), such as NaTl, are poor conductors or semiconductors, unlike the normal alloys with the preceding elements, implying that the alkali metal involved has lost an electron to the Zintl anions involved.
The alkali metal polonides are all ionic compounds containing the Po2− ion; they are very chemically stable and can be produced by direct reaction of the elements at around 300–400&nbsp;°C.
The physical and chemical properties of the alkali metals can be readily explained by their having an ns1 valence electron configuration, which results in weak metallic bonding.
While methylsodium forms tetramers like methyllithium, methylpotassium is more ionic and has the nickel arsenide structure with discrete methyl anions and potassium cations.
When the alkali metals react with the heavier elements in the carbon group (silicon, germanium, tin, and lead), ionic substances with cage-like structures are formed, such as the silicides M4Si4 (M = K, Rb, or Cs), which contains M+ and tetrahedral  ions.
Particularly noteworthy is gold forming ionic compounds with rubidium and caesium, in which it forms the auride ion (Au−) which also occurs in solvated form in liquid ammonia solution: here gold behaves as a pseudohalogen because its 5d106s1 configuration has one electron less than the quasi-closed shell 5d106s2 configuration of mercury.
:Li+RCONi(CO)3−  Li+ + RCHO + (solvent)Ni(CO)3
For that reason, caesium atoms are used as the definition of the second.
The structure of Na3As is complex with unusually short Na–Na distances of 328–330 pm which are shorter than in sodium metal, and this indicates that even with these electropositive metals the bonding cannot be straightforwardly ionic.
Soon afterwards, a majority of chemists chose to classify these elements in group IB and remove them from group VIII for the resulting symmetry: this was the predominant classification until the rise of the modern medium-long 18-column periodic table, which separated the alkali metals and group 11 metals.
Liquid ammonia, ether, or hydrocarbon solvents are used, the most common of which being tetrahydrofuran.
The group 11 metals (or coinage metals), copper, silver, and gold, are typically categorised as transition metals given they can form ions with incomplete d-shells.
Today the largest producers of caesium, for example the Tanco Mine in Manitoba, Canada, produce rubidium as by-product from pollucite.
Many cobaltocenium salts coprecipitate with caesium salts, and cobaltocenium hydroxide is a strong base that absorbs atmospheric carbon dioxide to form cobaltocenium carbonate.
The electrical resistivity of liquid metallic hydrogen at 3000 K is approximately equal to that of liquid rubidium and caesium at 2000 K at the respective pressures when they undergo a nonmetal-to-metal transition.
Commercially, the most important lithium mineral is spodumene, which occurs in large deposits worldwide.
:RM + R'X → R–R' + MX
All twenty stable alkali metal halides are known; the unstable ones are not known, with the exception of sodium astatide, because of the great instability and rarity of astatine and francium.
Consequently, many chemical reactions of Co(C5H5)2 are characterized by its tendency to lose this "extra" electron, yielding a very stable 18-electron cation known as cobaltocenium.
The synthesis of ununennium was first attempted in 1985 by bombarding a target of einsteinium-254 with calcium-48 ions at the superHILAC accelerator at Berkeley, California.
In Mendeleev's 1871 periodic table, copper, silver, and gold are listed twice, once under group VIII (with the iron triad and platinum group metals), and once under group IB.
Its placement above lithium is primarily due to its electron configuration.
Further calculations show that unhexpentium would follow the trend of increasing ionisation energy beyond caesium, having an ionisation energy comparable to that of sodium, and that it should also continue the trend of decreasing atomic radii beyond caesium, having an atomic radius comparable to that of potassium.
After 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev proposed his periodic table placing lithium at the top of a group with sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, and thallium.
