Diesel fuels are characterized by their cetane number, cetane being an old name for hexadecane.
Methane is also present in what is called biogas, produced by animals and decaying matter, which is a possible renewable energy source.
Usually, energy in the form of heat or light is required.
Also on Titan the Cassini mission has imaged seasonal methane/ethane lakes near the polar regions of Titan.
Alkanes will react with steam in the presence of a nickel catalyst to give hydrogen.
Experiments have shown that all halogenation produces a mixture of all possible isomers, indicating that all hydrogen atoms are susceptible to reaction.
Edible vegetable oils also typically contain small fractions of biogenic alkanes with a wide spectrum of carbon numbers, mainly 8 to 35, usually peaking in the low to upper 20s, with concentrations up to dozens of milligrams per kilogram (parts per million by weight) and sometimes over a hundred for the total alkane fraction.
Branched-chain alkanes are called ''isoparaffins''.
A straight-chain alkane will have a boiling point higher than a branched-chain alkane due to the greater surface area in contact, thus the greater van der Waals forces, between adjacent molecules.
Cycloalkanes are also called naphthenes.
* '''Chain termination''' where the radicals recombine.
However, the higher alkanes have little value and are usually split into lower alkanes by cracking.
This is a consequence of the free rotation about a carbon–carbon single bond.
Carbon chains with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption at around 725&nbsp;cm−1.
In crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically unchanged for millions of years.
The members of the series (in terms of number of carbon atoms) are named as follows:
Symmetric compounds will have two ways of arriving at the same name.
Natural gas contains primarily methane and ethane, with some propane and butane: oil is a mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons.
:hexane, C6H14 – six carbon and 14 hydrogen
As stated earlier, the most important source of alkanes is natural gas and crude oil.
Alkanes have a high ionization energy, and the molecular ion is usually weak.
This method is used to produce substitutes for petroleum distillates.
Other lower alkanes can also form explosive mixtures with air.
In the latter function, they work at the same time as anti-corrosive agents, as their hydrophobic nature means that water cannot reach the metal surface.
Sand bees use pheromones in order to identify a mate; in the case of ''A.
The standard enthalpy change of combustion, Δc''H''o, for alkanes increases by about 650&nbsp;kJ/mol per CH2 group.
Since the hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule, the coexistence of an alkane and water leads to an increase in molecular order (a reduction in entropy).
Their solubility in nonpolar solvents is relatively good, a property that is called lipophilicity.
The case of higher alkanes is more complex but based on similar principles, with the antiperiplanar conformation always being the most favored around each carbon–carbon bond.
Dragan and his colleague were the first to report about isomerization in alkanes.
The exact composition of the layer of wax is not only species-dependent, but changes also with the season and such environmental factors as lighting conditions, temperature or humidity.
These orbitals, which have identical energies, are arranged spatially in the form of a tetrahedron, the angle of cos−1(−)&nbsp;≈&nbsp;109.47° between them.
Alkanes are found in animal products, although they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons.
For a more complete list, see List of alkanes.
For example, an ethyl group is an alkyl group; when this is attached to a hydroxy group, it gives ethanol, which is not an alkane.
Branched-chain alkanes are preferred as they are much less prone to premature ignition, which causes knocking, than their straight-chain homologues.
The fungus ''Amorphotheca resinae'' prefers the longer-chain alkanes in aviation fuel, and can cause serious problems for aircraft in tropical regions.
The product is an alcohol, that could be next oxidized to an aldehyde, and finally to a carboxylic acid.
The carbon–hydrogen stretching mode gives a strong absorption between 2850 and 2960&nbsp;cm−1, while the carbon–carbon stretching mode absorbs between 800 and 1300&nbsp;cm−1.
These materials are used in innumerable applications, and billions of kilograms of these materials are made and used each year.
Methanogens are also the producers of marsh gas in wetlands, and release about two billion tonnes of methane per year—the atmospheric content of this gas is produced nearly exclusively by them.
There is one significant difference between boiling points and melting points.
The carbon–hydrogen bending modes depend on the nature of the group: methyl groups show bands at 1450&nbsp;cm−1 and 1375&nbsp;cm−1, while methylene groups show bands at 1465&nbsp;cm−1 and 1450&nbsp;cm−1.
Trivial names for compounds are usually historical artifacts.
Propane and butane can be liquefied at fairly low pressures, and are well known as liquified petroleum gas (LPG).
The orchid takes advantage of this mating arrangement to get the male bee to collect and disseminate its pollen; parts of its flower not only resemble the appearance of sand bees, but also produce large quantities of the three alkanes in the same ratio as female sand bees.
Reaction with oxygen (''if'' present in sufficient quantity to satisfy the reaction stoichiometry) leads to combustion without any smoke, producing carbon dioxide and water.
:C6H12O6 → 3&nbsp;CH4 + 3&nbsp;CO2
The acid dissociation constant (pKa) values of all alkanes are above 60, hence they are practically inert to acids and bases (see: carbon acids).
The resulting fatty acid could be metabolized through the fatty acid degradation pathway.
Titan (1.6% methane), a satellite of Saturn, was examined by the ''Huygens'' probe, which indicated that Titan's atmosphere periodically rains liquid methane onto the moon's surface.
It is probable that our current deposits of natural gas were formed in a similar way.
With others like the tsetse fly ''Glossina morsitans morsitans'', the pheromone contains the four alkanes 2-methylheptadecane (C18H38), 17,21-dimethylheptatriacontane (C39H80), 15,19-dimethylheptatriacontane (C39H80) and 15,19,23-trimethylheptatriacontane (C40H82), and acts by smell over longer distances.
The use of the term "paraffin" is a general term and often does not distinguish between pure compounds and mixtures of isomers, i.e., compounds with the same chemical formula, e.g., pentane and isopentane.
Chemical analysis showed that the abundances of ethane and methane were roughly equal, which is thought to imply that its ices formed in interstellar space, away from the Sun, which would have evaporated these volatile molecules.
Also, alkanes are generally unreactive chemically or biologically, and do not undergo functional group interconversions cleanly.
Although this is not strictly necessary, the usage is still common in cases where there is an important difference in properties between the straight-chain and branched-chain isomers, e.g., ''n''-hexane or 2- or 3-methylpentane.
Alkanes form a small portion of the atmospheres of the outer gas planets such as Jupiter (0.1% methane, 2&nbsp;ppm ethane), Saturn (0.2% methane, 5&nbsp;ppm ethane), Uranus (1.99% methane, 2.5&nbsp;ppm ethane) and Neptune (1.5% methane, 1.5&nbsp;ppm ethane).
In plants, the solid long-chain alkanes are found in the plant cuticle and epicuticular wax of many species, but are only rarely major constituents.
The carbon chains in plant alkanes are usually odd-numbered, between 27 and 33 carbon atoms in length and are made by the plants by decarboxylation of even-numbered fatty acids.
Many solid alkanes find use as paraffin wax, for example, in candles.
The depletion of these hydrocarbons reserves is the basis for what is known as the energy crisis.
nigroaenea'', the females emit a mixture of tricosane (C23H48), pentacosane (C25H52) and heptacosane (C27H56) in the ratio 3:3:1, and males are attracted by specifically this odor.
This isomer is sometimes called the ''n''-isomer (''n'' for "normal", although it is not necessarily the most common).
The lighter liquid alkanes are highly flammable, although this risk decreases with the length of the carbon chain.
On the other hand, cycloalkanes tend to have higher boiling points than their linear counterparts due to the locked conformations of the molecules, which give a plane of intermolecular contact.
Free radicals are the reactive species that participate in the reaction, which usually leads to a mixture of products.
'''Considerations for detection / risk control:'''
In an alkane, each carbon atom has 4 bonds (either C-C or C-H), and each hydrogen atom is joined to one of the carbon atoms (so in a C-H bond).
Apart from their use as fuels, the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar substances.
Alkanes have a low solubility in water, so the content in the oceans is negligible; however, at high pressures and low temperatures (such as at the bottom of the oceans), methane can co-crystallize with water to form a solid methane clathrate (methane hydrate).
In both types of processes, the corresponding reactive intermediates (radicals, ions) are permanently regenerated, and thus they proceed by a self-propagating chain mechanism.
Solids have more rigid and fixed structure than liquids.
For this reason, alkanes are usually shown in a zigzag arrangement in diagrams or in models.
Alkanes from nonane to, for instance, hexadecane (an alkane with sixteen carbon atoms) are liquids of higher viscosity, less and less suitable for use in gasoline.
Alkanes are the acyclic (loopless) ones, corresponding to ''k''&nbsp;=&nbsp;0.
For alkanes, this can be seen from the graph above (i.e., the blue line).
Alkanes have the general chemical formula ''n''2''n''+2.
The proton resonances of alkanes are usually found at ''δ''H = 0.5–1.5.
For example, the case of ''n''&nbsp;=&nbsp;1 is CH4, which is methane.
However, the higher melting points of these alkanes can cause problems at low temperatures and in polar regions, where the fuel becomes too thick to flow correctly.
Different alkanes are, for example, miscible in all proportions among themselves.
Methanogenic archaea are, hence, at the end of the carbon cycle, with carbon being released back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis.
It is almost certain that the term ''paraffin'' stems from the petrochemical industry.
For the latter case, two molecules 2,3-dimethylbutane can "lock" into each other better than the cross-shaped 2,2-dimethylbutane, hence the greater van der Waals forces.
Methane is explosive when mixed with air (1–8% CH4).
Straight-chain alkanes are sometimes indicated by the prefix "''n''-" (for ''normal'') where a non-linear isomer exists.
Pentane, hexane, heptane, and octane are classed as ''dangerous for the environment'' and ''harmful''.
Free radical halogenation reactions occur with halogens, leading to the production of haloalkanes.
The prefix is generally Greek, however alkanes with a carbon atom count ending in nine, for example nonane, use the Latin prefix '''non-'''.
Alkanes can be chlorosulfonated and nitrated, although both reactions require special conditions.
* '''Chain reaction''' or '''Propagation''' then takes place—the halogen radical abstracts a hydrogen from the alkane to give an alkyl radical.
The alkanes have two main commercial sources: petroleum (crude oil) and natural gas.
* Butane is heavier than air (possibility of pooling at ground levels / pits)
There is a further degree of freedom for each carbon–carbon bond: the torsion angle between the atoms or groups bound to the atoms at each end of the bond.
Propane, for example, is used in the propane gas burner and as a fuel for cars, butane in disposable cigarette lighters.
The thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism with formation of free-radicals.
The catalytic cracking process involves the presence of acid catalysts (usually solid acids such as silica-alumina and zeolites), which promote a heterolytic (asymmetric) breakage of bonds yielding pairs of ions of opposite charges, usually a carbocation and the very unstable hydride anion.
As there is no significant bonding between water molecules and alkane molecules, the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this reduction in entropy should be minimized by minimizing the contact between alkane and water: Alkanes are said to be hydrophobic in that they repel water.
* Propane is heavier than air (possibility of pooling at ground levels / pits)
The molecular structure of the alkanes directly affects their physical and chemical characteristics.
Emission of gaseous and volatile alkanes such as ethane, pentane, and hexane by plants has also been documented at low levels, though they are not generally considered to be a major component of biogenic air pollution.
Beyond that the compounds are solids at '''standard ambient temperature and pressure''' ('''SATP''').
The fragmentation pattern can be difficult to interpret, but, in the case of branched chain alkanes, the carbon chain is preferentially cleaved at tertiary or quaternary carbons due to the relative stability of the resulting free radicals.
The carbon-13 resonances depend on the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon: ''δ''C = 8–30 (primary, methyl, –CH3), 15–55 (secondary, methylene, –CH2–), 20–60 (tertiary, methyne, C–H) and quaternary.
This reacts further.
However, some bacteria can metabolize some alkanes (especially those linear and short), by oxidizing the terminal carbon atom.
Together, alkanes are known as the ''paraffin series''.
The spatial arrangement described by the torsion angles of the molecule is known as its conformation.
The spatial arrangement of the bonds is similar to that of the four sp3 orbitals—they are tetrahedrally arranged, with an angle of 109.47° between them.
This is because even numbered alkanes pack well in the solid phase, forming a well-organized structure, which requires more energy to break apart.
The density of the alkanes usually increases with the number of carbon atoms, but remains less than that of water.
Although this cannot be commercially exploited at the present time, the amount of combustible energy of the known methane clathrate fields exceeds the energy content of all the natural gas and oil deposits put together.
: C4H9Li + H2O → C4H10 + LiOH
:ethane, C2H6 – two carbon and six hydrogen
Alkanes have also been detected in meteorites such as carbonaceous chondrites.
However redox reactions of alkanes, in particular with oxygen and the halogens, are possible as the carbon atoms are in a strongly reduced condition; in the case of methane, the lowest possible oxidation state for carbon (−4) is reached.
For example, the use of ''n''-butyllithium as a strong base gives the conjugate acid, ''n''-butane as a side-product:
Alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by adding the suffix '''-ane''' to the appropriate numerical multiplier prefix with elision of any terminal vowel (''-a'' or ''-o'') from the basic numerical term.
When alkanes are produced in the laboratory, it is often a side-product of a reaction.
Alkanes are only weakly reactive with ionic and other polar substances.
The alkanes range in complexity from the simplest case of methane, CH4 (sometimes called the parent molecule), to arbitrarily large molecules.
Alkyl groups can be transferred from one compound to another by transmetalation reactions.
Methane and ethane have also been detected in the tail of the comet Hyakutake.
In isomerization, the alkanes become branched-chain isomers.
An '''alkyl group''', generally abbreviated with the symbol R, is a functional group that, like an alkane, consists solely of single-bonded carbon and hydrogen atoms connected acyclically—for example a methyl or ethyl group.
Carbon-localized free radicals and cations are both highly unstable and undergo processes of chain rearrangement, C–C scission in position beta (i.e., cracking) and intra- and intermolecular hydrogen transfer or hydride transfer.
Such compounds are called cycloalkanes.
The two alkanes are used as propellants in aerosol sprays.
The applications of a certain alkane can be determined quite well according to the number of carbon atoms.
the support beetle ''Xylotrechus colonus'', pentacosane (C25H52), 3-methylpentaicosane (C26H54) and 9-methylpentaicosane (C26H54) are transferred by body contact.
For this reason they do not form hydrogen bonds and are insoluble in polar solvents such as water.
Methane extracted from methane clathrate is therefore a candidate for future fuels.
They are used as fuels in internal combustion engines, as they vaporise easily on entry into the combustion chamber without forming droplets, which would impair the uniformity of the combustion.
Alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in various different ways, forming structural isomers.
Methane and ethane are the main components of natural gas; they are normally stored as gases under pressure.
Alkanes with a chain length of approximately 35 or more carbon atoms are found in bitumen, used, for example, in road surfacing.
and the Clemmensen reduction removes carbonyl groups from aldehydes and ketones to form alkanes or alkyl-substituted compounds e.g.
There is usually little need for alkanes to be synthesized in the laboratory, since they are usually commercially available.
The melting points of branched-chain alkanes can be either higher or lower than those of the corresponding straight-chain alkanes, again depending on the ability of the alkane in question to pack well in the solid phase: This is particularly true for isoalkanes (2-methyl isomers), which often have melting points higher than those of the linear analogues.
* isopentane for 2-methylbutane
The methane output of cattle and other herbivores, which can release up to 150 liters per day, and of termites, is also due to methanogens.
However, the torsion angle between a given hydrogen atom attached to the front carbon and a given hydrogen atom attached to the rear carbon can vary freely between 0° and 360°.
They are important as pheromones, chemical messenger materials, on which insects depend for communication.
As a rule of thumb, the boiling point rises 20–30&nbsp;°C for each carbon added to the chain; this rule applies to other homologous series.
Isomerization and reformation are processes in which straight-chain alkanes are heated in the presence of a platinum catalyst.
The former result from the overlap of an sp3 orbital of carbon with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen; the latter by the overlap of two sp3 orbitals on different carbon atoms.
Alkanes are separated in an oil refinery by fractional distillation and processed into many different products.
According to the definition by IUPAC, the former two are alkanes, whereas the third group is called cycloalkanes.
:methane, CH4 – one carbon and four hydrogen
The simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no branches.
Hence, pentane, C5H12; hexane, C6H14; heptane, C7H16; octane, C8H18; etc.
which will be dispersed after the departure of the frustrated male to different blooms.
Some synthetic polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene are alkanes with chains containing hundreds of thousands of carbon atoms.
The number of carbon atoms may be thought of as the size of the alkane, so one might speak for instance of a "C2 alkane."
One group of the higher alkanes are waxes for which the number of carbons in the carbon backbone is greater than about 17.
The two conformations, also known as rotamers, differ in energy: The staggered conformation is 12.6&nbsp;kJ/mol lower in energy (more stable) than the eclipsed conformation (the least stable).
Some specialized yeasts, e.g., ''Candida tropicale'', ''Pichia'' sp., ''Rhodotorula'' sp., can use alkanes as a source of carbon or energy.
However, at times it may be desirable to make a section of a molecule into an alkane like functionality (alkyl group) using the above or similar methods.
* C5: 3 isomers: pentane, isopentane, and neopentane
Nucleophilic Abstraction can be used to separate an alkane from a metal.
These hydrocarbons were formed when marine animals and plants (zooplankton and phytoplankton) died and sank to the bottom of ancient seas and were covered with sediments in an anoxic environment and converted over many millions of years at high temperatures and high pressure to their current form.
Free radicals, molecules with unpaired electrons, play a large role in most reactions of alkanes, such as cracking and reformation where long-chain alkanes are converted into shorter-chain alkanes and straight-chain alkanes into branched-chain isomers.
This propensity to premature ignition is measured by the octane rating of the fuel, where 2,2,4-trimethylpentane (''isooctane'') has an arbitrary value of 100, and heptane has a value of zero.
Alkanes do not conduct electricity, nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field.
Alkanes are not very reactive and have little biological activity.
Alkanes or alkyl groups can also be prepared directly from alkyl halides in the Corey–House–Posner–Whitesides reaction.
That is, (all other things being equal) the larger the molecule the higher the melting point.
The Barton–McCombie deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups from alcohols e.g.
Both of these processes raise the octane number of the substance.
They have formed over millions of years and once exhausted cannot be readily replaced.
The Jeffrey pine is noted for producing exceptionally high levels of ''n''-heptane in its resin, for which reason its distillate was designated as the zero point for one octane rating.
Alkanes also play a role, if a minor role, in the biology of the three eukaryotic groups of organisms: fungi, plants and animals.
The reaction is highly exothermic, and can lead to an explosion.
The trivial (non-systematic) name for alkanes is ''paraffins''.
These reactions are an important industrial route to halogenated hydrocarbons.
Branched-chain alkanes have lower values of Δc''H''o than straight-chain alkanes of the same number of carbon atoms, and so can be seen to be somewhat more stable.
The first four names were derived from methanol, ether, propionic acid and butyric acid, respectively.
However the chain of carbon atoms may also be branched at one or more points.
The fermentation of alkanes to carboxylic acids is of some technical importance.
Under standard conditions, from CH4 to C4H10 alkanes are gaseous; from C5H12 to C17H36 they are liquids; and after C18H38 they are solids.
The structural formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient to completely describe the geometry of a molecule.
In other words, an alkane consists of hydrogen and carbon atoms arranged in a tree structure in which all the carbon-carbon bonds are single.
They can be viewed as molecular trees upon which can be hung the more active/reactive functional groups of biological molecules.
Alkanes are notable for having no other groups, and therefore for the ''absence'' of other characteristic spectroscopic features of different functional group like –OH, –CHO, –COOH etc.
In the Reed reaction, sulfur dioxide, chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to sulfonyl chlorides.
To do so, the best-known methods are hydrogenation of alkenes:
Substituted cycloalkanes are named similarly to substituted alkanes — the cycloalkane ring is stated, and the substituents are according to their position on the ring, with the numbering decided by the Cahn–Ingold–Prelog priority rules.
As the boiling point of alkanes is primarily determined by weight, it should not be a surprise that the boiling point has almost a linear relationship with the size (molecular weight) of the molecule.
This is because shorter chains attached to longer chains are prefixes and the convention includes brackets.
In reformation, the alkanes become cycloalkanes or aromatic hydrocarbons, giving off hydrogen as a by-product.
In addition to the alkane isomers, the chain of carbon atoms may form one or more loops.
* '''Initiation''' the halogen radicals form by homolysis.
The hydrogen atoms of the alkane are progressively replaced by halogen atoms.
The Fischer–Tropsch process is a method to synthesize liquid hydrocarbons, including alkanes, from carbon monoxide and hydrogen.
In highly branched alkanes, the bond angle may differ significantly from the optimal value (109.5°) in order to allow the different groups sufficient space.
Alternative names for this group are: '''linear paraffins''' or '''''n''-paraffins'''.
Butane is the most common alkane that is put under the process of isomerization, as it makes many branched alkanes with high octane numbers.
The fragment resulting from the loss of a single methyl group (''M''&nbsp;−&nbsp;15) is often absent, and other fragment are often spaced by intervals of fourteen mass units, corresponding to sequential loss of CH2 groups.
In organic chemistry, an '''alkane''', or '''paraffin''' (a historical name that also has other meanings), is an acyclic saturated hydrocarbon.
