The narrowest is Calletta Varisco, which just ; Calle Stretta is  wide and Calle Ca’ Zusto .
The origin of the word alley is late Middle English, from  "walking or passage", from '''' "go", from  "to walk".
At its narrowest the alley is a mere 90&nbsp;cm (35 inches) wide, making it the narrowest street in Stockholm.
In hilly San Francisco, California alleys often take the form of steps and it has several hundred public stairways.
North German architecture has had a strong influence in the Old Town's buildings.
These homes are typically built into pre-existing lots, usually in the backyard and opening onto the back lane.
These craftsmen were called ''Lindslizer'', meaning ''Linden splitter''.
It is a pedestrian zone and though only some 130 metres long, is nevertheless famous for its medieval history.
In most cases, the trees planted in an avenue will be all of the same species or cultivar, so as to give uniform appearance along the full length of the avenue.
It ranges from  at its narrowest to  at its widest.
One of the older thoroughfares in Covent Garden, Cecil Court dates back to the end of the 17th century.
As with the term hutong, the Shanghai longdang can either refers to the lanes that the houses face onto, or a group of houses connected by the lane.
Many residents left the lanes where their families lived for generations for apartment buildings with modern amenities.
''Spreuerhofstraße'' is the world's narrowest street, found in the city of Reutlingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
Nowadays, most of the surrounding area has been redeveloped.
The "List of streets and squares in Gamla stan" provides links to many pages that describe other alleys in the oldest part of Stockholm; e.g.
"Public Alley 438").
In an old neighbourhood of the City of London, Exchange Alley or Change Alley is a narrow alleyway connecting shops and coffeehouses.
Bartholomew Close is a narrow winding lane which can be called an alley by virtue of its narrowness, and because through-access requires the use of passages and courts between Little Britain, and Long Lane and Aldersgate Street.
Because of geography, steps (stairs) are the predominant form of alley in hilly cities and towns.
Alleys may be paved, or unpaved, and a blind alley is a cul-de-sac.
A laneway house is a form of housing that has been proposed on the west coast of Canada, especially in the Metro Vancouver area.
In 1810 William Johnson gave it the name of "Philadelphia Alley", although locals call the "elegantly landscaped thoroughfare" "Dueler’s Alley".
The club built its own building in nearby Sweeting's Alley in 1773, dubbed the "New Jonathan's", later renamed the Stock Exchange.
The '''Shanghai longtang''' is loosely equivalent to the hutong of Beijing.
Cincinnati is a city of hills.
Their width varies from just over  to .
That encouraged the creation of shortcuts, which over time became paved alleys.
Greenwich Village also has a number of private alleys that lead to back houses, which can only be accessed by residents, including Grove Court, Patchin Place and Milligan Place, blind alleys.
Some alleys are roofed because they are within buildings, such as the traboules of Lyon, or when they are a pedestrian passage through railway embankments in Britain.
A covered alley or passageway, often with shops, may be called an arcade.
Smaller ones are ''callètte'' or ''callesèlle'', while larger ones are ''calli large''.
When the hotel was torn down, and replaced with One Astor Plaza (1515 Broadway), the apparent width of the alley increased, as the new building did not go all the way to the westernmost edge of the building lot.
Venice is largely a traffic free city and there is, in addition to the canals, a maze of around 3000 lanes and alleys called ''calli'' (which means narrow).
Closed off in the mid 19th century, not to be reopened until 1945, its present name was officially sanctioned by the city in 1949.
In 2007, the Chicago Department of Transportation started converting conventional alleys which were paved with asphalt into so called Green Alleys.
The latter is a blind alley or ''cul-de-sac''.
A vennel is a passageway between the gables of two buildings which can in effect be a minor street in Scotland and the north east of England, particularly in the old centre of Durham.
While both a court and close are usually defined as blind alleys, or ''cul-de-sacs'', several in London are throughways, for example Cavendish Court, a narrow passage leading from Houndsditch into Devonshire Square, and Angel Court, which links King Street and Pall Mall.
Actors once gathered in the alley, hoping to attract the attention of the Shubert Brothers and get employment in their theatrical productions.
Unlike a tenement entry to private property, known as a "close", a vennel was a public way leading from a typical high street to the open ground beyond the burgage plots.
I was told they actually had a Department of Steps.
As the Roman Empire disintegrated, the residents of early Lyon—Lugdunum, the capital of Roman Gaul—were forced to move from the Fourvière hill to the banks of the river Saône when their aqueducts began to fail.
Vancouver's average laneway house is one and a half stories, with one or two bedrooms.
Some of Stockholm's alleys are very narrow pedestrian footpaths, while others are very narrow, cobbled streets, or lanes open to slow moving traffic.
It was originally a gambling district with restaurants, shops, and opium dens.
Some ten of these survive, and the city has recently worked on making them more attractive.
Patchin Place is notable for the writers who lived there.
The alley is named after the merchant and burgher Mårten Trotzig (1559–1617), who, born in Wittenberg, emigrated to Stockholm in 1581, and bought properties in the alley in 1597 and 1599, also opening a shop there.
Close is the generic Scots term for alleyways, although they may be individually named closes, entries, courts and wynds.
These alleys include Willings Alley, between S. 3rd and S. 4th Streets and Walnut and Spruce Streets.
Many neighbourhoods were formed by joining one ''siheyuan'' to another to form a hutong, and then joining one hutong to another.
West of the City there are a number of alleys just north of Trafalgar Square, including Brydges Place which is situated right next to the Coliseum Theatre and just 15 inches wide at its narrowest point, only one person can walk down it at a time.
The word "medina" ( ) itself simply means "city" or "town" in modern Arabic.
While most Beijing hutongs are straight, Jiudaowan (九道弯, literally "Nine Turns") Hutong turns nineteen times.
At its narrowest point it is only  wide.
The City of Pittsburgh maintains 712 sets of city-owned steps, some of which are shown as streets on maps.
However this was discontinued in 2006 after staff reviewed the impact on services and safety.
Modern urban developments may also provide a service road to allow for waste collection, or rear access for fire engines and parking.
Most are two-storey, having a small bar at street level and either another bar or a tiny flat upstairs, reached by a steep set of stairs.
The Lamb & Flag in Rose Street has a reputation as the oldest pub in the area, though records are not clear.
In the Beacon Hill district of Boston, Massachusetts, Acorn Street, a narrow cobbled lane with row houses, is one of Boston's more attractive and historic alleys.
With this program, the water will be able to seep through semi-permeable concrete or asphalt in which a colony of fungi and bacteria will establish itself.
This makes them unique among highly populated urban centres.
During the Middle Ages, the area was also known as ''platēa subri'' or ''platēa suberis'', meaning street of ''Quercus suber'', the cork oak tree.
For three hundred years, another of Charleston's narrow lanes, Lodge Alley, served a commercial purpose.
The Latin form is ''venella''.
For centuries they were used by people to fetch water from the river and then by craftsmen and traders to transport their goods.
Numerous cities in the United States and Canada, such as Chicago, Seattle, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Washington, D.C., and Montréal, have started reclaiming their alleys from garbage and crime by greening the service lanes, or back ways, that run behind some houses.
This type of alley is found in the older parts of many cities, including American cities like Philadelphia and Boston (see Elfreth's Alley, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania).
is a small area of Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, famous both as an area of architectural interest and for its nightlife.
Québec City was originally built on the riverside bluff Cap Diamant in the 17th century, and throughout Quebec City there are strategically placed public stairways that link the bluff to the lower parts of the city.
In recent years many steps have fallen into disrepair but there is a movement now to rehabilitate them.
It was the temporary home of an eight-year-old Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart while he was touring Europe in 1764.
However, many of Beijing’s ancient hutongs still stand, and a number of them have been designated protected areas.
The bacteria will help breakup oils before the water is absorbed into the ground.
In the United States alleys exist in both older commercial and residential areas, for both service purposes and automobile access.
This program, called the Green Alley Program, is supposed to enable easier water runoff, as the alleyways in Chicago are not connected directly to the sewer system.
In the French Quarter of Charleston’s historic district, Philadelphia Alley (c. 1766), originally named "Cow Alley", is one of several picturesque alleys.
Many of the bars only welcome regular customers, who initially should be introduced by an existing patron, although many others welcome non-regulars, some even making efforts to attract overseas tourists by displaying signs and price lists in English.
Shubert Alley is a  long pedestrian alley at the heart of the Broadway theater district of New York City.
In older cities and towns in Europe, alleys are often what is left of a medieval street network, or a right of way or ancient footpath.
The lighter color of the pavement will also reflect more light, making the area next to the alley cooler.
This includes Pittsburgh (see Steps of Pittsburgh), Cincinnati (see Steps of Cincinnati), Minneapolis, Seattle, and San Francisco in the United States, as well as Hong Kong, Genoa and Rome.
Originally French Hugenot merchants built homes on it, along with warehouses to store supplies their ships.
At the turn of the 20th century, the Qing court was disintegrating as China’s dynastic era came to an end.
There are numerous cobblestoned residential passages in Philadelphia, many no wider than a truck, and typically flanked with brick houses.
Alleys and ginnels were also the product of the 1875 Public Health Act in the United Kingdom, where usually alleys run along the back of streets of terraced houses, with ginnels connecting them to the street every fifth house.
The first mention of a pub on the site is 1772.
Bazaars and Souqs are an early form of arcade found in Asia and North Africa.
Lombard Street and Change Alley had been the open-air meeting place of London's mercantile community before Thomas Gresham founded the Royal Exchange in 1565.
** (b) A narrow street between the fronts of houses or businesses.
In 1698, John Castaing began publishing the prices of stocks and commodities in Jonathan's Coffeehouse, providing the first evidence of systematic exchange of securities in London.
Because of the very narrow streets, medinas are generally free from car traffic, and in some cases even motorcycle and bicycle traffic.
Chicago, Illinois has about  of alleyways.
The area was home to San Francisco's first French settlers.
The term '''''close''''' has an unvoiced "s" as in ''sad''.
Close by is another very narrow passage, Lazenby Court, which runs from Rose Street to Floral Street down the side of the Lamb and Flag pub; in order to pass people must turn slightly sideways.
In 1608 it is referred to ''Trappegrenden'' ("The Stairs Alley"), but a map dated 1733 calls it ''Trotz gränd''.
Many are open to traffic.
They are distinct from most other alleys in that they are mainly enclosed within buildings and may include staircases.
Following the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, many of the old hutongs of Beijing disappeared, replaced by wide boulevards and high rises.
It was built, as an alley, along the backs of houses on Upper Street, then Islington High Street, in 1767.
An alley in London can also be called a passage, court, place, lane, and less commonly path, arcade, walk, steps, yard, terrace, and close.
A pend is  a passageway that passes through a building, often from a street through to a courtyard, and typically designed for vehicular rather than exclusively pedestrian access.
The first film-related company arrived in Cecil Court in 1897, a year after the first demonstration of moving pictures in the United Kingdom and a decade before London’s first purpose built cinema opened its doors.
By the 18th century they were invaluable to what had become the city’s defining industry, textiles, especially silk.
A benefit of this was the location of these activities to the rear, less public side of a dwelling.
It is composed of a network of six narrow alleys, connected by even narrower passageways which are just about wide enough for a single person to pass through.
Fan Tan Alley is an alley in Victoria, British Columbia's Chinatown.
The greening of such alleys or laneways can also involve the planting of native plants to further absorb rain water and moderate temperature.
And then the steps.
Typically, the buildings are just a few feet wide and are built so close to the ones next door that they nearly touch.
A pend is distinct from a vennel or a close, as it has rooms directly above it, whereas vennels and closes are not covered over.
File:Old medina of morocco.jpg|Alley in Chefchaouen, Morocco
The medina is typically walled, contains many narrow and maze-like streets.
Other heritage features are buildings more than a century old lining the alley and a rare metal carriage curb that edges the sidewalk on the southern end.
At its narrowest section, Qianshi Hutong near Qianmen (Front Gate) is only 40 centimeters (16 inches) wide.
It served as a convenient shortcut from the Royal Exchange on Cornhill to the Post Office on Lombard Street and remains as one of a number of alleys linking the two streets.
In Scotland and Northern Ireland the Scots terms close, wynd, pend and vennel are general in most towns and cities.
The pedestrian-only avenue is a quarter-mile corridor of privately owned public spaces, such as open-access lobbies and canopied space, which are open except at night.
The alley was originally created as a fire exit between the Shubert Theatre on West 45th Street and the Booth Theatre on West 44th Street, and the Astor Hotel to their east.
Many houses in this residential neighborhood are accessible only from the steps.
The town dates back to the 13th century, with medieval alleyways, cobbled streets, and historic buildings.
The Medina of Fes, Morocco or Fes el Bali, is considered one of the largest car-free urban areas in the world.
Change Alley was the site of some noteworthy events in England's financial history, including the South Sea Bubble from 1711 to 1720 and the panic of 1745.
In fact, most wynds are straight.
''Gränd'' is Swedish for an alley and there are numerous ''gränder'', or alleys in Gamla stan, The Old Town, of Stockholm, Sweden.
In residential areas, particularly in those that were built before 1950, alleys provide rear access to property where a garage was located, or where waste could be collected by service vehicles.
Mårten Trotzigs gränd ("Alley of Mårten Trotzig") runs from Västerlånggatan and Järntorget up to Prästgatan and Tyska Stallplan, and part of it consists of 36 steps.
In Xicheng District, for example, nearly 200 hutongs out of the 820 it held in 1949 have disappeared.
Hutongs represent an important cultural element of the city of Beijing and the hutongs are residential neighborhoods which still form the heart of Old Beijing.
Some attractive historic alleys are found in older American and Canadian cities, like New York City, Philadelphia, Charleston, South Carolina, Boston, Annapolis, New Castle, Delaware, Quebec City, St John's, Newfoundland, and Victoria, British Columbia.
Most traboules are on private property, serving as entrances to local apartments.
Approximately 3,000, sponsored by the French government, arrived near the end of the Gold Rush in 1851.
It is sometimes called '''lilong''' (里弄); the latter name incorporates the ''-li'' suffix often used in the name of residential developments in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
In some older urban development in North America lanes at the rear of houses, to allow for deliveries and garbage collection, are called alleys.
When Annapolis, Maryland, was established as a city at the beginning of the 18th century, the streets were established in circles.
Other streets in Philadelphia which fit the general description of an alley, but are not named "alley", include Cuthbert Street, Filbert Street, Phillips Street, South American Street, Sansom Walk, St. James Place, and numerous others.
The mid-block crossing at 57th Street is equipped with a traffic light.
North of the centre of London, Camden Passage is a pedestrian passage off Upper Street in the London Borough of Islington, famous because of its many antiques shops, and an antique market on Wednesdays and Saturday mornings.
That isn’t exactly true, although they do have an Inspector of Steps.
The first steps were installed by residents of Mount Auburn in the 1830s in order to gain easier access to Findlay Market in Over-the-Rhine.
Boston also has many of the more seedy kind.
It is the narrowest alley in London and runs for , connecting St Martin's Lane with Bedfordbury in Covent Garden.
In the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn, Grace Court Alley is another converted mews, as is Dennett Place in the Carroll Gardens neighborhood.
Many hutongs, some several hundred years old, in the vicinity of the Bell Tower and Drum Tower and Shichahai Lake are preserved amongst recreated contemporary two- and three-storey versions.
These activities were the progenitor of the modern London Stock Exchange.
The stairway is bordered by greenery, that consists both backyards, and a border garden tended to and paid for by the residents of the "street", and runs down to an eastern stub of Filbert Street and the walkway through the plaza to The Embarcadero.
During the 19th-century the Lintgasse was called ''Stink-Linkgaß'', a because of its poor air quality.
Beginning in the late 20th century, they were seldom included in plans for new housing developments.
Seattle is a city of hills, bluffs, and canyons and many stairs.
The traboules grew up alongside their new homes, linking the streets that run parallel to the river Saône and going down to the river itself.
The Scottish author Ian Rankin's novel ''Fleshmarket Close'' was retitled ''Fleshmarket Alley'' for the American market.
The word hutong is also used to refer to such neighbourhoods.
Many of the alleys in the Back Bay and South End area are numbered (e.g.
Before the advent of the automobile a system of stairway alleys provided pedestrians important and convenient access to and from their hill top homes.
The streets can be less than a metre wide.
New life has also come to other alleys within downtown commercial districts of various cities throughout the world with the opening of businesses, such as coffee houses, shops, restaurants and bars.
A '''longtang''' (弄堂 ''lòngtáng'', Shanghainese: ''longdang'') is a laneway in Shanghai and, by extension, a community centred on a laneway or several interconnected laneways.
In the same neighbourhood Cecil Court has an entirely different character  than the two previous alleys, and is a spacious pedestrian street with Victorian shop-frontages that links Charing Cross Road with St. Martin's Lane, and it is sometimes used as a location by film companies.
The former is a ''cul-de-sac''.
This form of housing already exists in Vancouver, and revised regulations now encourage new developments as part of a plan to increase urban density in pre-existing neighbourhoods while retaining a single-family feel to the area.
Two notable alleys in the Greenwich Village neighborhood in Manhattan are MacDougal Alley and Washington Mews.
However, official, Shubert Alley consists only of the space between the two theatres and the lot line.
Another early settled American city, New Castle, Delaware has a number of interesting alleys, some of which are footpaths and others narrow, sometimes cobbled, lanes open to traffic.
The Lazenby Court was the scene of an attack on the famous poet and playwright John Dryden in 1679 by thugs hired by John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester, with whom he had a long-standing conflict.
A wynd is typically a narrow lane between houses, an open throughway, usually wide enough for a horse and cart.
Kolmätargränd (Coal Meter's Alley); Skeppar Karls Gränd (Skipper Karl's Alley); Skeppar Olofs Gränd (Skipper Olof's Alley); and Helga Lekamens Gränd (Alley of the Holy Body).
In 1761 a club of 150 brokers and jobbers was formed to trade stocks.
The traditional arrangement of hutongs was also affected.
Oh Lord, the steps!
Such alleys are generally roughly paved, but some may be dirt.
For almost four months the Mozart family lodged with barber John Couzin.
Since then it has developed as a drinking area, and at least some of the bars can trace their origins back to the 1960s.
According to some modern authorities, Mozart composed his first symphony while a resident of Cecil Court.
While they are found in other French cities including Villefranche-sur-Saône, Mâcon, Chambéry, Saint-Étienne, Louhans, Chalon sur Saône and Vienne (Isère), Lyon has many more; in all there are about 500.
According to sources from the late 16th century, he was dealing in first iron and later copper, by 1595 had sworn his burgher oath, and was later to become one of the richest merchants in Stockholm.
Also in San Francisco, '''Belden Place''' is a narrow pedestrian alley, bordered by restaurants, in the Financial District, referred to as San Francisco's '''French Quarter''' for its historic ties to early French immigrants, and its popular contemporary French restaurants and institutions.
A tradesman's route at its inception, it later acquired the nickname Flicker Alley because of the concentration of early film companies in the Court.
Possibly referred to as Trångsund ("Narrow strait") before Mårten Trotzig gave his name to the alley, it is mentioned in 1544 as ''Tronge trappe grenden'' ("Narrow Alley Stairs").
All the same alleys have for long been associated with various types of businesses, especially pubs and coffee houses.
The buildings are generally ramshackle, and the alleys are dimly lit, giving the area a very scruffy and run-down appearance.
During China’s dynastic period, emperors planned the city of Beijing and arranged the residential areas according to the social classes of the Zhou Dynasty (1027 – 256 BC).
Lintgasse is an alley () in the Old town of Cologne, Germany between the two squares of ''Alter Markt'' and ''Fischmarkt''.
Golden Gai is well known as a meeting place for musicians, artists, directors, writers, academics and actors, including many celebrities.
Over 200 tiny shanty-style bars, clubs and eateries are squeezed into this area.
'''Arcades''' are another kind of covered passageway and the simplest kind are no more than alleys to which a glass roof was added later, like, for example, Howey Place, Melbourne, Australia (see also Block Place, Melbourne).
The Filbert Street Steps descend the east slope of Telegraph Hill along the line where Filbert Street would be if the hill was not so steep.
However, most arcades differ from alleys in that they are architectural structures built with a commercial purpose and are a form of shopping mall.
The latter follow the line of rights-of way that existed before the railway was built.
The word derives from Old Norse ''venda'', implying a turning off a main street, without implying that it is curved.
'''6½ Avenue''' is a north-south pedestrian passageway in Midtown Manhattan, New York City, running from West 57th to West 51st Streets between Sixth and Seventh Avenues.
Several residential neighborhoods in Austin, Texas, have comprehensive alley systems.
In Beijing, hutongs are alleys formed by lines of ''siheyuan'', traditional courtyard residences.
Golden Gai was known for prostitution before 1958, when prostitution became illegal.
A '''medina quarter''' (  "the old city") is a distinct city section found in many North African cities.
The word traboule comes from the Latin ''trans ambulare'', meaning "to cross", and the first of them were possibly built as early as the 4th century.
Typical regulations require that the laneway home is built on the back half of a traditional lot in the space normally reserved for a garage.
On its own long (traditional Chinese 衖 or 弄, simplified Chinese 弄) is a Chinese term for "alley" or "lane", which is often left untranslated in Chinese addresses, but may also be translated as "lane", and "tang" is a parlor or hallway.
