For example, when Kerouac saw the first draft of "Howl" he disliked the fact that Ginsberg had made editorial changes in pencil (transposing "negro" and "angry" in the first line, for example).
He organized the New York City chapter of LeMar (Legalize Marijuana).Throughout the 1960s he took an active role in the demystification of LSD, and, with Timothy Leary, worked to promote its common use.
Ginsberg believed strongly that traditional formalist considerations were archaic and did not apply to reality.
Shortly after its 1956 publication by San Francisco's City Lights Bookstore, it was banned for obscenity.
Ginsberg believed that he had witnessed the interconnectedness of the universe.
He frequently included music in his poetry.
Many of Ginsberg's early long line experiments contain some sort of anaphora, repetition of a "fixed base" (for example "who" in "Howl", "America" in ''America'') and this has become a recognizable feature of Ginsberg's style.
Ginsberg and Shig Murao, the City Lights manager who was jailed for selling "Howl," became lifelong friends.
At the 1967 Human Be-In in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park, the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, and the 1970 Black Panther rally at Yale campus Allen chanted "Om" repeatedly over a sound system for hours on end.
In 1943, Ginsberg graduated from Eastside High School and briefly attended Montclair State College before entering Columbia University on a scholarship from the Young Men's Hebrew Association of Paterson.
Ginsberg's publisher was brought up on charges for publishing pornography, and the outcome led to a judge going on record dismissing charges because the poem carried "redeeming social importance", thus setting an important legal precedent.
In 1943, he discovered within himself "mountains of homosexuality."
Ginsberg's willingness to talk about taboo subjects made him a controversial figure during the conservative 1950s, and a significant figure in the 1960s.
They bonded because they saw in one another an excitement about the potential of American youth, a potential that existed outside the strict conformist confines of post–World War II, McCarthy-era America.
Ginsberg claimed that the anaphoric repetition of "Howl" and other poems was inspired by Christopher Smart in such poems as ''Jubilate Agno''.
In Ginsberg's freshman year at Columbia he met fellow undergraduate Lucien Carr, who introduced him to a number of future Beat writers, including Jack Kerouac, William S. Burroughs, and John Clellon Holmes.
Most of these early poems were rhymed and metered and included archaic pronouns like "thee."
In "Thoughts on NAMBLA", a 1994 essay published in the collection ''Deliberate Prose'', Ginsberg stated, "NAMBLA's a forum for reform of those laws on youthful sexuality which members deem oppressive, a discussion society not a sex club.
Ginsberg was an early proponent of freedom for gay people.
Ginsberg later admitted that the drive to write "Howl" was fueled by sympathy for his ailing mother, an issue which he was not yet ready to deal with directly.
Ginsberg and Carr talked excitedly about a "New Vision" (a phrase adapted from Yeats' "A Vision"), for literature and America.
Corso introduced them to a shabby lodging house above a bar at 9 rue Gît-le-Coeur that was to become known as the Beat Hotel.
At one point, Snyder chanted the Prajnaparamita which in Ginsberg's words "blew my mind."
In "Howl" and in his other poetry, Ginsberg drew inspiration from the epic, free verse style of the 19th-century American poet Walt Whitman.
Ginsberg introduced Bhaktivedanta Swami to some three thousand hippies in the audience and led the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra.
Also, in New York, Ginsberg met Gregory Corso in the Pony Stable Bar.
She was also an active member of the Communist Party and took Ginsberg and his brother Eugene to party meetings.
These letters and the absence of a facility to recite kaddish inspired Ginsberg to write "Kaddish" which makes references to many details from Naomi's life, Ginsberg's experiences with her, and the letter, including the lines "the key is in the light" and "the key is in the window".
Several of his earlier experiments with methods for formatting poems as a whole became regular aspects of his style in later poems.
He wrote and recorded music to accompany William Blake’s ''Songs of Innocence'' and ''Songs of Experience''.
Solomon wanted to commit suicide, but he thought a form of suicide appropriate to dadaism would be to go to a mental institution and demand a lobotomy.
), the term "Beat Generation" has become associated with many of the other poets Ginsberg met and became friends with in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
In 1986 he was awarded the Golden Wreath of the Struga Poetry Evenings  in Struga, Macedonia.
She also tried to kill herself by slitting her wrists and was soon taken to Greystone, a mental hospital; she would spend much of Ginsberg's youth in mental hospitals.
There, Ginsberg also met three budding poets and Zen enthusiasts who had become friends at Reed College: Gary Snyder, Philip Whalen, and Lew Welch.
At Trungpa's urging, Ginsberg and poet Anne Waldman started The Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics  there in 1974.
Ginsberg also made an intense study of haiku and the paintings of Paul Cézanne, from which he adapted a concept important to his work, which he called the ''Eyeball Kick''.
"Howl" and "Kaddish", arguably his two most important poems, are both organized as an inverted pyramid, with larger sections leading to smaller sections.
This madness was the “angry fix” that society needed to function—madness was its disease.
Ginsberg talked openly about his connections with communism and his admiration for past communist heroes and the labor movement at a time when the Red Scare and McCarthyism were still raging.
Ginsberg used phrases such as "cocksucker", "fucked in the ass", and "cunt" as part of the poem's depiction of different aspects of American culture.
Ginsberg also later claimed that at the core of "Howl" were his unresolved emotions about his schizophrenic mother.
But he abandoned the "stepped triadic" when he developed his long line although the stepped lines showed up later, most significantly in the travelogues of ''The Fall of America.''
Ginsberg claims he was immediately attracted to Corso, who was straight, but understanding of homosexuality after three years in prison.
Though "Kaddish" deals more explicitly with his mother, "Howl" in many ways is driven by the same emotions.
Ginsberg was a practicing Buddhist who studied Eastern religious disciplines extensively.
Allen wrote many essays and articles, researching and compiling evidence of the CIA's alleged involvement in drug trafficking, but it would take 10 years, and the publication of McCoy's book in 1972, before anyone took him seriously.
Ginsberg: So what do you think of Swami Bhaktivedanta pleading for the acceptance of Krishna in every direction?
I grew suspicious of both sides."
It was a productive, creative time for all of them.
Peter Whitehead documented the event on film and released it as ''Wholly Communion''.
After returning to the United States, a chance encounter on a New York City street with Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche (they both tried to catch the same cab), a Kagyu and Nyingma Tibetan Buddhist master, led to Trungpa becoming his friend and lifelong teacher.
In "America" (1956), Ginsberg writes: "America, I used to be a communist when I was a kid I'm not sorry".
After a spell in Morocco, he and Peter Orlovsky joined Gregory Corso in Paris.
Ginsberg later said that his mother "made up bedtime stories that all went something like: 'The good king rode forth from his castle, saw the suffering workers and healed them.'"
Corso, recently released from prison, was supported by the Pony Stable patrons and was writing poetry there the night of their meeting.
After attending a reading by Williams, Ginsberg sent the older poet several of his poems and wrote an introductory letter.
He was allegedly being prosecuted for harboring stolen goods in his dorm room.
Ginsberg never claimed to be the leader of a movement.
The Cubans sent him to Czechoslovakia, where one week after being named the ''Král majálesu'' ("King of May" – a students' festivity, celebrating spring and student life), Ginsberg was labelled an "immoral menace" by the Czechoslovak government because of his free expression of radical ideas, and was then deported on May 7, 1965 by order of the state security agency StB.
There the woman proposed sex with Corso, who was still very young and fled in fear.
In May 1965, Ginsberg arrived in London, and offered to read anywhere for free.
Soon after the bookshop reading, plans were hatched for the International Poetry Incarnation, which was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London on June 11, 1965.
The trip deeply disturbed Ginsberg – he mentioned it and other moments from his childhood in "Kaddish".
His admiration for the writing of Jack Kerouac inspired him to take poetry more seriously.
Ginsberg won a 1974 National Book Award for ''The Fall of America'' (split with Adrienne Rich, ''Diving Into the Wreck'').
He also struck a note for gay marriage by listing Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong companion, as his spouse in his Who's Who entry.
The phrases "eyeball kick" and "hydrogen jukebox" both show up in "Howl", as well as a direct quote from Cézanne: "Pater Omnipotens Aeterna Deus".
Ginsberg was also involved with Krishnaism.
He admired Castro and many other quasi-Marxist figures from the 20th century.
While at Barnard, Cowen earned the nickname "Beat Alice" as she had joined a small group of anti-establishment artists and visionaries known to outsiders as beatniks, and one of her first acquaintances at the college was the beat poet Joyce Johnson who later portrayed Cowen in her books, including "Minor Characters" and ''Come and Join the Dance'', which expressed the two women's experiences in the Barnard and Columbia Beat community.
Moloch is mentioned a few times in the Torah and references to Ginsberg's Jewish background are not infrequent in his work.
Though Ginsberg was never a member of the Communist Party, Kerouac named him "Carlo Marx" in ''On the Road''.
Early breakthrough poems include ''Bricklayer's Lunch Hour'' and ''Dream Record''.
McClatchy's barbed eulogies define the essential difference between Ginsberg ("a beat poet whose writing was ... journalism raised by combining the recycling genius with a generous mimic-empathy, to strike audience-accessible chords; always lyrical and sometimes truly poetic") and Kerouac ("a poet of singular brilliance, the brightest luminary of a 'beat generation' he came to symbolise in popular culture... though in reality he far surpassed his contemporaries.... Kerouac is an originating genius, exploring then answering - like Rimbaud a century earlier, by necessity more than by choice - the demands of authentic self-expression as applied to the evolving quicksilver mind of America's only literary virtuoso..."):
The ban became a cause célèbre among defenders of the First Amendment, and was later lifted, after Judge Clayton W. Horn declared the poem to possess redeeming artistic value.
Tom McGrath wrote: "This could well turn out to have been a very significant moment in the history of England – or at least in the history of English Poetry".
In 1993, the French Minister of Culture made him a Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres.
The experience lasted several days.
Consequently, Ginsberg often had to defend his choice to employ long, free verse lines, often citing Whitman's free verse used in ''Leaves of Grass'' as a precursor.
Much of the final section of the first part of "Howl" is a description of this.
J. D. McClatchy, editor of the ''Yale Review'', called Ginsberg "the best-known American poet of his generation, as much a social force as a literary phenomenon."
This is followed soon by the line "with mother finally ******."
In 1959, along with poets John Kelly, Bob Kaufman, A. D. Winans, and William Margolis, Ginsberg was one of the founders of the ''Beatitude'' poetry magazine.
Most of Ginsberg's very early poetry was written in formal rhyme and meter like that of his father and his idol William Blake.
Ginsberg used this technique in his poetry, putting together two starkly dissimilar images: something weak with something strong, an artifact of high culture with an artifact of low culture, something holy with something unholy.
Another example is Ginsberg's observation on Bob Dylan during Dylan's hectic and intense 1966 electric-guitar tour, fuelled by a cocktail of amphetamines, opiates, alcohol, and psychedelics, as a ''Dexedrine Clown''.
The personal aspects of "Howl" are perhaps as important as the political aspects.
He claimed that many of the writers with whom he had become friends in this period shared many of the same intentions and themes.
It featured some leading rock bands of the time: Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin, The Grateful Dead, and Moby Grape, who performed there along with the Hare Krishna founder Bhaktivedanta Swami and donated proceeds to the Krishna temple.
Ginsberg helped Trungpa (and New York poet Anne Waldman) in founding the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado.
His interest piqued, Ginsberg traveled to meet the Dalai Lama as well as the Karmapa at Rumtek Monastery.
Snyder had previously spent time in Kyoto to study at the First Zen Institute at Daitoku-ji Monastery.
The event was organized by Ginsberg's friend, the filmmaker Barbara Rubin.
Some of the phone calls, including one with Johnny Depp, were sad and interrupted by crying, while other were joyous and optimistic.
Though some critics, like Diana Trilling, have pointed to Ginsberg's occasional use of meter (for example the anapest of "who came back to Denver and waited in vain"), Ginsberg denied any intention toward meter and claimed instead that his idea of meter followed the "natural" poetic voice.
Ginsberg may have gotten the name from the Kenneth Rexroth poem "Thou Shalt Not Kill", a poem about the death of one of Ginsberg's heroes, Dylan Thomas.
His experiences with his mother's mental illness and her institutionalization are also frequently referred to in "Howl".
He expressed this desire openly and graphically in his poetry.
Ginsberg gave his last public reading at Booksmith, a bookstore in the Haight Ashbury neighborhood of San Francisco, a few months before his death.
In the first chapter of his 1957 novel ''On the Road'' Kerouac described the meeting between Ginsberg and Cassady.
At first, Ginsberg refused, but once he had written a rough draft of "Howl", he changed his "fucking mind", as he put it.
Ginsberg's principal work, "Howl", is well known for its opening line: "I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked...." "Howl" was considered scandalous at the time of its publication, because of the rawness of its language.
When somebody comes in from the Orient with a new religion which hasn't got any of horrible associations in our minds, all the words are new, all the rites are new, and yet, somehow it has feeling in it, and we can get with that, you see, and we can dig that!
Ginsberg had several political connections in India most notably Pupul Jayakar who helped him extend his stay in India when the authorities were eager to expel him.
Its subject was The Great Books and was taught by Lionel Trilling.
Ginsberg's mentor William Carlos Williams wrote an introductory letter to San Francisco Renaissance figurehead Kenneth Rexroth, who then introduced Ginsberg into the San Francisco poetry scene.
He believed literature should come from the soul without conscious restrictions.
He explained that this hallucination was not inspired by drug use, but said he sought to recapture that feeling later with various drugs.
Moloch, to whom the second section is addressed, is a Levantine god to whom children were sacrificed.
Ginsberg and Corso remained lifelong friends and collaborators.
As Cowen had felt a strong attraction to darker poetry most of the time, Beat poetry seemed to provide an allure to what suggests a shadowy side of her persona.
For example, "Pilgrim State, Rockland, and Grey Stone's foetid halls" is a reference to institutions frequented by his mother and Carl Solomon, ostensibly the subject of the poem: Pilgrim State Hospital and Rockland State Hospital in New York and Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in New Jersey.
Ginsberg claimed throughout his life that his biggest inspiration was Kerouac's concept of "spontaneous prose".
In 1957, it attracted widespread publicity when it became the subject of an obscenity trial, as it described heterosexual and homosexual sex at a time when sodomy laws made homosexual acts a crime in every U.S. state.
Ginsberg further brought mantras into the world of rock and roll when he recited the Heart Sutra in the song "Ghetto Defendant".
Later in his life, Ginsberg formed a bridge between the beat movement of the 1950s and the hippies of the 1960s, befriending, among others, Timothy Leary, Ken Kesey, and Bob Dylan.
Ginsberg said the image of Moloch was inspired by peyote visions he had of the Francis Drake Hotel in San Francisco which appeared to him as a skull; he took it as a symbol of the city (not specifically San Francisco, but all cities).
The event, in essence, brought together the East and West Coast factions of the Beat Generation.
Ginsberg later acknowledged in various publications and interviews that behind the visions of the Francis Drake Hotel were memories of the Moloch of Fritz Lang's film ''Metropolis'' (1927) and of the woodcut novels of Lynd Ward.
In the original draft of "Howl", each line is in a "stepped triadic" format reminiscent of William Carlos Williams.
In his poetry, Ginsberg also discussed the then-taboo topic of homosexuality.
Likewise, he discovered that the contrast of two seeming opposites was a common feature in haiku.
She would claim, for example, that the president had implanted listening devices in their home and that her mother-in-law was trying to kill her.
Ginsberg introduced Corso to Kerouac and Burroughs and they began to travel together.
I must say that I see little difference between the armed and violent governments both Communist and Capitalist that I have observed".
Some of these friends include: David Amram, Bob Kaufman; LeRoi Jones before he became Amiri Baraka, who, after reading "Howl", wrote a letter to Ginsberg on a sheet of toilet paper; Diane DiPrima; Jim Cohn; poets associated with the Black Mountain College such as Robert Creeley and Denise Levertov; poets associated with the New York School such as Frank O'Hara and Kenneth Koch.
In 1955, upon the advice of a psychiatrist, Ginsberg dropped out of the working world to devote his entire life to poetry.
Shortly after his arrival, he gave a reading at Better Books, which was described by Jeff Nuttall as "the first healing wind on a very parched collective mind".
He was present the night of the Tompkins Square Park Police Riot in 1988 and provided an eyewitness account to ''The New York Times''.
One of the most important events in Beat mythos, known simply as "The Six Gallery reading" took place on October 7, 1955.
Part of their dissatisfaction with the term came from the mistaken identification of Ginsberg as the leader.
The example Ginsberg most often used was "hydrogen jukebox" (which later became the title of a song cycle composed by Philip Glass with lyrics drawn from Ginsberg's poems).
Ginsberg was a supporter and member of North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), a pedophile and pederasty advocacy organization in the United States that works to abolish age-of-consent laws and legalize sexual relations between adults and children, saying that "Attacks on NAMBLA stink of politics, witchhunting for profit, humorlessness, vanity, anger and ignorance… I'm a member of NAMBLA because I love boys too—everybody does, who has a little humanity."
Philip Lamantia introduced him to other Surrealists and Surrealism continued to be an influence (for example, sections of "Kaddish" were inspired by André Breton's ''Free Union'').
"Howl" chronicles the development of many important friendships throughout Ginsberg’s life.
Also during this time, he formed friendships with some of the prominent young Bengali poets of the time including Shakti Chattopadhyay and Sunil Gangopadhyay.
McClatchy added that Ginsberg, like Whitman, "was a bard in the old manner – outsized, darkly prophetic, part exuberance, part prayer, part rant.
Subsequent gay writers saw his frank talk about homosexuality as an opening to speak more openly and honestly about something often before only hinted at or spoken of in metaphor.
In 1948 in an apartment in Harlem, Ginsberg had an auditory hallucination while reading the poetry of William Blake (later referred to as his "Blake vision").
Wally Hedrick — a painter and co-founder of the Six Gallery – approached Ginsberg in mid-1955 and asked him to organize a poetry reading at the Six Gallery.
In the mid-1950s, no reputable publishing company would even consider publishing "Howl".
Eliot, when she met Joyce Johnson and Leo Skir, among other Beat players.
From 1970–1996, Ginsberg had a long-term affiliation with  PEN American Center with efforts to defend free expression.
From Williams, Ginsberg learned to focus on strong visual images, in line with Williams' own motto "No ideas but in things."
Carr also introduced Ginsberg to Neal Cassady, for whom Ginsberg had a long infatuation.
He claimed that communist countries, such as China, welcomed him because they thought he was an enemy of capitalism, but often turned against him when they saw him as a trouble maker.
He also says of Solomon in section three, "I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother," once again showing the association between Solomon and his mother.
Solomon was a Dada and Surrealism enthusiast (he introduced Ginsberg to Artaud) who suffered bouts of clinical depression.
"Howl" is not only a biography of Ginsberg's experiences before 1955, but also a history of the Beat Generation.
Though he disliked these early poems, Williams loved the exuberance in Ginsberg's letter.
Numerous books that discussed sex were banned at the time, including ''Lady Chatterley’s Lover''.
Ginsberg is best known for his poem "Howl", in which he denounced what he saw as the destructive forces of capitalism and conformity in the United States.
Kerouac only wrote out his concepts of Spontaneous Prose at Ginsberg's insistence because Ginsberg wanted to learn how to apply the technique to his poetry.
"Howl" reflected Ginsberg's own homosexuality and his relationships with a number of men, including Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong partner.
Ginsberg took Corso over to their apartment.
He looked at lattice-work on the fire escape and realized some hand had crafted that; he then looked at the sky and intuited that some hand had crafted that also, or rather, that the sky was the hand that crafted itself.
He begins the poem with “I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness”, which sets the stage for Ginsberg to describe Cassady and Solomon, immortalizing them into American literature.
'', Metro Section, p. B1.
In 1945, he joined the Merchant Marines to earn money to continue his education at Columbia.
Ginsberg later admitted the deletion was the expletive "fucked."
Ginsberg: He feels it's the one uniting thing.
Amazingly, the woman happened to be Ginsberg's girlfriend that he was living with during one of his forays into heterosexuality.
Through his association with Elise Cowen, Ginsberg discovered that they shared a mutual friend, Carl Solomon, to whom he later dedicated his most famous poem "Howl".
Leary: Should be encouraged.
On the other hand, when Donald Manes, a New York City politician, publicly accused Ginsberg of being a member of the Communist Party, Ginsberg objected: "I am not, as a matter of fact, a member of the Communist party, nor am I dedicated to the overthrow of the U.S. government or any government by violence.
Instead, Ginsberg portrayed casual sex.
This was a source of strain in their relationship.
Ginsberg has stated that he considered the required freshman seminar to be his favorite course while at Columbia University.
He considered himself to have inherited the visionary poetic mantle handed down from the English poet and artist William Blake, the American poet Walt Whitman and the Spanish poet Federico Garcia Lorca.
Ginsberg received a letter from his mother after her death responding to a copy of "Howl" he had sent her.
Also in San Francisco, Ginsberg met members of the San Francisco Renaissance (James Broughton, Robert Duncan, Madeline Gleason and Kenneth Rexroth) and other poets who would later be associated with the Beat Generation in a broader sense.
I joined NAMBLA in defense of free speech."
The power of Ginsberg's verse, its searching, probing focus, its long and lilting lines, as well as its New World exuberance, all echo the continuity of inspiration that he claimed.
Ginsberg's spiritual journey began early on with his spontaneous visions, and continued with an early trip to India with Gary Snyder.
The yellow of the sunshine, also showed the key on the side of the window."
Kerouac saw them as the dark (Ginsberg) and light (Cassady) side of their "New Vision", a perception stemming partly from Ginsberg's association with communism, of which Kerouac had become increasingly distrustful.
He corresponded with William Carlos Williams, who was then in the middle of writing his epic poem Paterson about the industrial city near his home.
(With acceptance speech by Ginsberg and essay by John Murillo from the Awards 60-year anniversary blog.)
In 1956, "Howl" was seized by San Francisco police and US Customs.
The inspiration for "Howl" was Ginsberg's friend, Carl Solomon, and "Howl" is dedicated to him.
Friendship with Kerouac or Burroughs might also apply, but both writers later strove to disassociate themselves from the name "Beat Generation."
The explicit sexual language that filled "Howl" eventually led to an important trial on First Amendment issues.
He was survived by Orlovsky.
Both wrote passionately about the promise (and betrayal) of American democracy, the central importance of erotic experience, and the spiritual quest for the truth of everyday existence.
Ginsberg continued to broach controversial subjects throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.
He vigorously opposed militarism, economic materialism and sexual repression and was known as embodying various aspects of this counterculture, such as his views on drugs, hostility to bureaucracy and openness to Eastern religions.
Ginsberg used gritty descriptions and explicit sexual language, pointing out the man "who lounged hungry and lonesome through Houston seeking jazz or sex or soup."
A book featuring images from the film and some of the poems that were performed was also published under the same title by Lorrimer in the UK and Grove Press in US.
Ginsberg claimed he developed such a long line because he had long breaths.
In the poem, Ginsberg focused on “Carl Solomon!
He died surrounded by family and friends in his East Village loft in New York City, succumbing to liver cancer via complications of hepatitis.
In 1978 Ginsberg received a note from the chief editor of the ''New York Times'', apologizing for not taking his allegations seriously so many years previous.
Ginsberg was much more prone to revise than Kerouac.
His poem "September on Jessore Road," calling attention to the plight of Bangladeshi refugees, exemplifies what the literary critic Helen Vendler described as Ginsberg's tireless persistence in protesting against "imperial politics, and persecution of the powerless."
He was one of many influential American writers of his time known as the Beat Generation, which included famous writers such as Jack Kerouac and William S. Burroughs.
In their first meeting at the Pony Stable, Corso showed Ginsberg a poem about a woman who lived across the street from him and sunbathed naked in the window.
In 1994, Ginsberg appeared in a documentary on NAMBLA called ''Chicken Hawk: Men Who Love Boys'' (playing on the gay male slang term "Chickenhawk"), in which he read a "graphic ode to youth".
Though references in most of his poetry reveal much about his biography, his relationship to other members of the Beat Generation, and his own political views, "Howl", his most famous poem, is still perhaps the best place to start.
At Struga he met with the other Golden Wreath winners, Bulat Okudzhava and Andrei Voznesensky.
