Conversely, the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically, increasing in size without changing in proportion.
They also suggested that the architecture of the skull could have permitted the use of different strategies against different prey; the skull was light enough to allow attacks on smaller and more agile ornithopods, but strong enough for high-impact ambush attacks against larger prey like stegosaurids and sauropods.
Major publications using the name "Megalosauridae" instead of "Allosauridae" include Gilmore, 1920, von Huene, 1926, Romer, 1956 and 1966, Steel, 1970, and Walker, 1964.
In one published case, the gastralia show evidence of injury during life.
Regardless of the actual cause, the great quantity of well-preserved ''Allosaurus'' remains has allowed this genus to be known in detail, making it among the best-known theropods.
Medullary bone tissue (endosteally derived, ephemeral, mineralization located inside the medulla of the long bones in gravid female birds) has been reported in at least one ''Allosaurus'' specimen, a shin bone from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry.
Paleontologists accept ''Allosaurus'' as an active predator of large animals.
''Allosaurus'' coexisted with fellow large theropods ''Ceratosaurus'' and ''Torvosaurus'' in both the United States and Portugal.
Of the feet, 281 bones were studied and 17 found to have stress fractures.
The quarry is notable for the predominance of ''Allosaurus'' remains, the condition of the specimens, and the lack of scientific resolution on how it came to be.
Amputation of a chevron and foot bone, both possibly a result of bites.
Other remains formerly thought to pertain to ''Allosaurus'' were described from Australia, and Siberia, but these fossils have been reassessed as belonging to other dinosaurs.
''Allosaurus'' itself is based on YPM 1930, a small collection of fragmentary bones including parts of three vertebrae, a rib fragment, a tooth, a toe bone, and, most useful for later discussions, the shaft of the right humerus (upper arm).
The authors conclude that these fractures occurred during interaction with prey, like an allosaur trying to hold struggling prey with its feet.
The olfactory bulbs were large and seem to have been well suited for detecting odors, although the area for evaluating smells was relatively small.
The brain of ''Allosaurus'', as interpreted from spiral CT scanning of an endocast, was more consistent with crocodilian brains than those of the other living archosaurs, birds.
''Allosaurus'' was an allosaurid, a member of a family of large theropods within the larger group Carnosauria.
The discovery and early study of ''Allosaurus'' is complicated by the multiplicity of names coined during the Bone Wars of the late 19th century.
The skull and teeth of ''Allosaurus'' were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size.
The specimen was described by Breithaupt in 1996.
The horns were probably covered in a keratin sheath and may have had a variety of functions, including acting as sunshades for the eye, being used for display, and being used in combat against other members of the same species (although they were fragile).
The stress fractures in the foot bones "were distributed to the proximal phalanges" and occurred across all three weight-bearing toes in "statistically indistinguishable" numbers.
Typical theropods that were thought to be related to ''Allosaurus'' included ''Indosaurus'', ''Piatnitzkysaurus'', ''Piveteausaurus'', ''Yangchuanosaurus'', ''Acrocanthosaurus'', ''Chilantaisaurus'', ''Compsosuchus'', ''Stokesosaurus'', and ''Szechuanosaurus''.
"Extensive 'neoplastic' ankylosis of caudals," possibly due to physical trauma as well as the fusion of chevrons to centra.
When compared with ''Tyrannosaurus'' and the therizinosaurid ''Erlikosaurus'' in the same study, it was found that ''Allosaurus'' had a wider gape than either; the animal was capable of opening its jaws to a 79 degree angle.
The structure of the vestibular apparatus indicates that the skull was held nearly horizontal, as opposed to strongly tipped up or down.
As with crocodilians, this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks.
Another possibility is that it preferred to hunt juveniles instead of fully grown adults.
Distortion of joint surfaces in the foot possibly due to osteoarthritis or developmental issues.
Of the three fingers, the innermost (or thumb) was the largest, and diverged from the others.
The ilium, the main hip bone, was massive, and the pubic bone had a prominent foot that may have been used for both muscle attachment and as a prop for resting the body on the ground.
There were also lower paired ridges running along the top edges of the nasal bones that led into the horns.
The authors found that vertical strikes as proposed by Bakker and Rayfield are consistent with the animal's capabilities.
The roof of the braincase was thin, perhaps to improve thermoregulation for the brain.
Exostosis in a pedal phalanx possibly attributable to an infectious disease.
In their haste, Cope and Marsh did not always follow up on their discoveries (or, more commonly, those made by their subordinates).
The locals had identified such bones as "petrified horse hoofs".
Of the 47 hand bones the researchers studied, 3 were found to contain stress fractures.
Inside the lacrimal bones were depressions that may have held glands, such as salt glands.
The wealth of ''Allosaurus'' fossils, from nearly all ages of individuals, allows scientists to study how the animal grew and how long its lifespan may have been.
A new study on Allosaurus' skull and how it worked has deemed the hatchet jaw attack unlikely since the animal would be wasting great amounts of energy with each bite.
Distortions of the joint surfaces of the tail vertebrae possibly due to osetoarthritis or developmental issues.
Allosauridae is one of four families in Carnosauria; the other three are Neovenatoridae, Carcharodontosauridae and Sinraptoridae.
''Allosaurus'' was itself a potential food item to other carnivores, as illustrated by an ''Allosaurus'' pubic foot marked by the teeth of another theropod, probably ''Ceratosaurus'' or ''Torvosaurus''.
The discovery of a juvenile specimen with a nearly complete hindlimb shows that the legs were relatively longer in juveniles, and the lower segments of the leg (shin and foot) were relatively longer than the thigh.
europaeus'' was found in the Kimmeridgian-age Porto Novo Member of the Lourinhã Formation, but may be the same as ''A.
Because of this, several scientists have interpreted the type specimen as potentially dubious, and thus the genus ''Allosaurus'' itself or at least the species ''A.
The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains.
From the same analysis, its maximum growth appears to have been at age&nbsp;15, with an estimated growth rate of about 150&nbsp;kilograms (330&nbsp;lb) per year.
It is derived from the Greek /''allos'' ("different, other") and /''sauros'' ("lizard / generic reptile").
The rib cage was broad, giving it a barrel chest, especially in comparison to less derived theropods like ''Ceratosaurus''.
''Allosaurus'' is the official state fossil of Utah.
''Allosaurus'' is regarded as senior synonym of the genera ''Creosaurus'', ''Epanterias'', and ''Labrosaurus''.
These include Marsh's ''Creosaurus'' and ''Labrosaurus'', and Cope's ''Epanterias''.
"''Antrodemus''" has been used informally for convenience when distinguishing between the skull Gilmore restored and the composite skull restored by Madsen.
It seems more likely that Allosaurus hunted prey like any typical carnosaur by ripping great chunks of flesh from the animal and letting it bleed to death.
The family name Allosauridae was created for this genus in 1878 by Othniel Charles Marsh, but the term was largely unused until the 1970s in favor of Megalosauridae, another family of large theropods that eventually became a wastebasket taxon.
These differences suggest that younger ''Allosaurus'' were faster and had different hunting strategies than adults, perhaps chasing small prey as juveniles, then becoming ambush hunters of large prey upon adulthood.
Another genus, ''Epanterias'', is a potential valid member, but it and ''Saurophaganax'' may turn out to be large examples of ''Allosaurus''.
In the lower jaws, the bones of the front and back halves loosely articulated, permitting the jaws to bow outward and increasing the animal's gape.
Their interpretations were challenged by other researchers, who found no modern analogues to a hatchet attack and considered it more likely that the skull was strong to compensate for its open construction when absorbing the stresses from struggling prey.
''Allosaurus'' had nine vertebrae in the neck, 14 in the back, and five in the sacrum supporting the hips.
Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans, several species of pterosaur, numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts, multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts.
The closely related genus ''Saurophaganax'' (OMNH 1708) reached perhaps  in length, and its single species has sometimes been included in the genus ''Allosaurus'' as ''Allosaurus maximus'', though recent studies support it as a separate genus.
However, with the confirmation of medullary tissue indicating gender in a specimen of Tyrannosaurus, it may be possible to ascertain whether or not the Allosaurus in question was indeed female.
Nineteen of its bones were broken or showed signs of infection, which may have contributed to "Big Al's" death.
Each premaxilla (the bones that formed the tip of the snout), held five teeth with D-shaped cross-sections, and each maxilla (the main tooth-bearing bones in the upper jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth; the number of teeth does not exactly correspond to the size of the bone.
The shape of the skull of ''Allosaurus'' limited potential binocular vision to 20° of width, slightly less than that of modern crocodilians.
In addition, ''Allosaurus'' was able to "move its head and neck around relatively rapidly and with considerable control", at the cost of power.
However, as Gregory Paul noted in 1988, ''Allosaurus'' was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods, unless it hunted in packs, as it had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth, and was greatly outweighed by contemporaneous sauropods.
Research in the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century may have found other solutions to this question.
It was named 'different lizard' because its vertebrae were different from those of other dinosaurs known at the time of its discovery.
Recent reviews have kept the genus ''Saurophaganax'' and included ''Epanterias'' with ''Allosaurus''.
The completeness, preservation, and scientific importance of this skeleton gave "Big Al" its name; the individual itself was below the average size for ''Allosaurus fragilis'', and was a subadult estimated at only 87%&nbsp;grown.
It measured about 8&nbsp;meters (about 26&nbsp;ft) in length.
Most of the species that are regarded as synonyms of ''A.
Robert T. Bakker, comparing ''Allosaurus'' to Cenozoic sabre-toothed carnivorous mammals, found similar adaptations, such as a reduction of jaw muscles and increase in neck muscles, and the ability to open the jaws extremely wide.
This is the well-known mount poised over a partial ''Apatosaurus'' skeleton as if scavenging it, illustrated as such by Charles R. Knight.
Instead, they are typically territorial and will kill and cannibalize intruders of the same species, and will also do the same to smaller individuals that attempt to eat before they do when aggregated at feeding sites.
''Allosaurus fragilis'', the best-known species, had an average length of , with the largest definitive ''Allosaurus'' specimen (AMNH 680) estimated at  long, and an estimated weight of 2.3&nbsp;metric tons (2.5&nbsp;short tons).
For example, after the discovery by Benjamin Mudge of the type specimen of ''Allosaurus'' in Colorado, Marsh elected to concentrate work in Wyoming; when work resumed at Garden Park in 1883, M. P. Felch found an almost complete ''Allosaurus'' and several partial skeletons.
atrox''; however, subsequent analysis of specimens from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry, Como Bluff, and Dry Mesa Quarry showed that the differences seen in the Morrison Formation material could be attributed to individual variation.
''Allosaurus tendagurensis'' was found in Kimmeridgian-age rocks of Tendaguru, in Mtwara, Tanzania.
Such studies have covered topics including skeletal variation, growth, skull construction, hunting methods, the brain, and the possibility of gregarious living and parental care.
Allosauridae has at times been proposed as ancestral to the Tyrannosauridae (which would make it paraphyletic), one recent example being Gregory S. Paul's ''Predatory Dinosaurs of the World'', but this has been rejected, with tyrannosaurids identified as members of a separate branch of theropods, the Coelurosauria.
Semi-technical works used Allosauridae for a variety of large theropods, usually those that were larger and better-known than megalosaurids.
The abundance of stress fractures and avulsion injuries in ''Allosaurus'' provide evidence for "very active" predation-based rather than scavenging diets.
Nearly a dozen scientific papers have been written on the taphonomy of the site, suggesting numerous mutually exclusive explanations for how it may have formed.
Since the lower end of the third metatarsal would have contacted the ground first while an allosaur was running it would have borne the most stress.
''Allosaurus'' was a typical large theropod, having a massive skull on a short neck, a long tail and reduced forelimbs.
To address this situation, Gregory S. Paul and Kenneth Carpenter (2010) submitted a petition to the ICZN to have the name "''A.
Ceratosaurs and torvosaurs may have preferred to be active around waterways, and had lower, thinner bodies that would have given them an advantage in forest and underbrush terrains, whereas allosaurs were more compact, with longer legs, faster but less maneuverable, and seem to have preferred dry floodplains.
fragilis'', the as-yet not formally described "A. jimmadseni", and ''A.
Even at the time, authors such as Samuel Wendell Williston suggested that too many names had been coined.
The arms were powerful, and the forearm was somewhat shorter than the upper arm (1:1.2&nbsp;ulna/humerus ratio).
The phalangeal formula is 2-3-4-0-0, meaning that the innermost finger (phalange) has two bones, the next has three, and the third finger has four.
The majority of bones belong to the large theropod ''Allosaurus fragilis'' (it is estimated that the remains of at least 46&nbsp;''A.
There was also what is interpreted as the splint-like remnant of a fifth (outermost) metatarsal, perhaps used as a lever between the Achilles tendon and foot.
The name "''Allosaurus"'' means "different lizard".
An apparent subadult male ''Allosaurus fragilis'' was reported to have extensive pathologies, with a total of fourteen separate injuries.
Relative to the large and powerful hindlimbs, its three-fingered forelimbs were small, and the body was balanced by a long and heavily muscled tail.
''Allosaurus'' was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of Western American fossil-bearing rock known as the Morrison Formation, accounting for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens, and as such was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web.
Using the subadult specimen nicknamed "Big Al", researchers using computer modelling arrived at a best estimate of  for the individual, but by varying parameters they found a range from approximately  to approximately .
Othniel Charles Marsh gave these remains the formal name ''Allosaurus fragilis'' in 1877.
Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of conifers, tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the ''Araucaria''-like conifer ''Brachyphyllum''.
The bulk of ''Allosaurus'' remains have come from North America's Morrison Formation, with material also known from Portugal and possibly Tanzania.
The forelimbs of ''Allosaurus'' were short in comparison to the hindlimbs (only about 35% the length of the hindlimbs in adults) and had three fingers per hand, tipped with large, strongly curved and pointed claws.
The skull had a pair of horns above and in front of the eyes.
Other aspects of feeding include the eyes, arms, and legs.
Another possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like ''Allosaurus'' were "flesh grazers" which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods that were sufficient to sustain the predator so it would not have needed to expend the effort to kill the prey outright.
Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by the behavior of the animal than other kinds of injury.
Although sporadic work at what became known as the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County, Utah had taken place as early as 1927, and the fossil site itself described by William J. Stokes in 1945, major operations did not begin there until 1960.
John Foster, a specialist on the Morrison Formation, suggests that  is reasonable for large adults of ''A.
The study in question noted that cooperative hunting of prey much larger than an individual predator, as is commonly inferred for theropod dinosaurs, is rare among vertebrates in general, and modern diapsid carnivores (including lizards, crocodiles, and birds) very rarely cooperate to hunt in such a way.
"Extensive exostoses" in the first phalanx of the third toe.
Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope, who were in scientific competition, went on to coin several other genera based on similarly sparse material that would later figure in the taxonomy of ''Allosaurus''.
The ilium had "a large hole... caused by a blow from above".The near end of the first phalanx of the third toe was afflicted by an involucrum.
''Allosaurus'' had gastralia (belly ribs), but these are not common findings, and they may have ossified poorly.
However, other studies have called into question some cases of medullary bone in dinosaurs, including this ''Allosaurus'' individual.
The issue of synonyms is complicated by the type specimen of ''Allosaurus fragilis'' (catalog number YPM&nbsp;1930) being extremely fragmentary, consisting of a few incomplete vertebrae, limb bone fragments, rib fragments, and a tooth.
Several gigantic specimens have been attributed to ''Allosaurus'', but may in fact belong to other genera.
These horns were composed of extensions of the lacrimal bones, and varied in shape and size.
The original authors noted that ''Allosaurus'' itself has no modern equivalent, that the tooth row is well-suited to such an attack, and that articulations in the skull cited by their detractors as problematic actually helped protect the palate and lessen stress.
Other pathologies reported in ''Allosaurus'' include: Willow breaks in two ribs.
The structure of the inner ear was like that of a crocodilian, and so ''Allosaurus'' probably could have heard lower frequencies best, and would have had trouble with subtle sounds.
Each dentary (the tooth-bearing bone of the lower jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth, with an average count of 16.
Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods ''Ceratosaurus'', ''Ornitholestes'', and ''Torvosaurus'', the sauropods ''Apatosaurus'', ''Brachiosaurus'', ''Brontosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', and ''Diplodocus'', and the ornithischians ''Camptosaurus'', ''Dryosaurus'', and ''Stegosaurus''.
A more recent discovery is a partial skeleton from the Peterson Quarry in Morrison rocks of New Mexico; this large allosaurid may be another individual of ''Saurophaganax''.
According to this interpretation, the accumulation of remains of multiple ''Allosaurus'' individuals at the same site, e.g.
Another specimen had fractured ribs and fused vertebrae near the end of the tail.
By using jaw muscles only, it could produce a bite force of 805 to 2,148&nbsp;N, less than the values for alligators (13,000&nbsp;N), lions (4,167&nbsp;N), and leopards (2,268&nbsp;N), but the skull could withstand nearly 55,500&nbsp;N of vertical force against the tooth row.
In 2001, Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior.
Indeed, it has been a top feature in several films and documentaries about prehistoric life.
The arms, compared with those of other theropods, were suited for both grasping prey at a distance or clutching it close, and the articulation of the claws suggests that they could have been used to hook things.
A particular problem for the living animal was infection and trauma to the right foot that probably affected movement and may have also predisposed the other foot to injury because of a change in gait.
in the Cleveland–Lloyd Quarry, are not due to pack hunting, but to the fact that ''Allosaurus'' individuals were drawn together to feed on other disabled or dead allosaurs, and were sometimes killed in the process.
This request is currently pending review.
Its depiction in this series was based upon a specimen with a smashed lower jaw that was uncovered by paleontologist Thomas Holtz.
Later researchers suggested that the bone was pathologic, showing an injury to the living animal, and that part of the unusual form of the rear of the bone was due to plaster reconstruction.
There were hollow spaces in the neck and anterior back vertebrae.
A metacarpal with a round depressed fracture.
This type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey, with the goal of weakening the victim.
Although obscure, it was a large theropod, possibly around  long and 2.5&nbsp;metric tons (2.8&nbsp;short tons) in weight.
''Allosaurus'' was a large bipedal predator.
lucasi'' are all known from remains discovered in the Kimmeridgian–Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across the states of Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.
The Late Jurassic formations of Portugal where ''Allosaurus'' is present are interpreted as having been similar to the Morrison but with a stronger marine influence.
There are currently four valid and one undescribed species of ''Allosaurus'' (''A.
''Allosaurus'' was used as the starring dinosaur of the 1956 film ''The Beast of Hollow Mountain'', and the 1969 film ''The Valley of Gwangi'', two genre combinations of living dinosaurs with Westerns.
It is now regarded as an example of ''A.
Upon unpacking in 1903 (several years after Cope had died), it was found to be one of the most complete theropod specimens then known, and in 1908 the skeleton, now cataloged as AMNH 5753, was put on public view.
''Allosaurus'' was one of only two theropods examined in the study to exhibit a tendon avulsion, and in both cases the avulsion occurred on the forelimb.
Stress fractures and tendon avulsions occurring in the forelimb have special behavioral significance since while injuries to the feet could be caused by running or migration, resistant prey items are the most probable source of injuries to the hand.
The skull and lower jaws had joints that permitted motion within these units.
They were shed easily, and were replaced continually, making them common fossils.
Harryhausen sometimes confuses the two, stating in a DVD interview "They're both meat eaters, they're both tyrants... one was just a bit larger than the other."
A study of skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the lacrimal horns, and the proposed differentiation of "A. jimmadseni" based on the shape of the jugal.
The most influential early attempt to sort out the convoluted situation was produced by Charles W. Gilmore in 1920.
Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks (mainly ''Allosaurus'', ''Ceratosaurus'', ''Torvosaurus'', and ''Stegosaurus''), or have a close counterpart (''Brachiosaurus'' and ''Lusotitan'', ''Camptosaurus'' and ''Draconyx'').
According to their biomechanical analysis, the skull was very strong but had a relatively small bite force.
When the researchers looked for stress fractures, they found that ''Allosaurus'' had a significantly greater number of stress fractures than ''Albertosaurus'', ''Ornithomimus'' or ''Archaeornithomimus''.
All of the teeth had saw-like edges.
MOR 693 was excavated near Shell, Wyoming, by a joint Museum of the Rockies and University of Wyoming Geological Museum team.
This is compatible with other evidence that the forelimbs were strong and capable of restraining prey.
fragilis'', "A. jimmadseni", ''A.
Sauropods seem to be likely candidates as both live prey and as objects of scavenging, based on the presence of scrapings on sauropod bones fitting allosaur teeth well and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones.
Big Al Two is also known to have multiple injuries.
Under a cooperative effort involving nearly 40&nbsp;institutions, thousands of bones were recovered between 1960 and 1965.
Some paleontologists interpret ''Allosaurus'' as having had cooperative social behavior, and hunting in packs, while others believe individuals may have been aggressive toward each other, and that congregations of this genus are the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcasses.
from the University of Bristol also indicate ''Allosaurus'' could open its jaws quite wide and sustain considerable muscle force.
It is top predator in both Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 novel, ''The Lost World'', and its 1925 film adaptation, the first full-length motion picture to feature dinosaurs.
The location of the bone in the body (along the bottom margin of the torso and partially shielded by the legs), and the fact that it was among the most massive in the skeleton, indicates that the ''Allosaurus'' was being scavenged.
There is some evidence for cannibalism in ''Allosaurus'', including ''Allosaurus'' shed teeth found among rib fragments, possible tooth marks on a shoulder blade, and cannibalized allosaur skeletons among the bones at Bakker's lair sites.
Healed fractures in the humerus and radius.
fragilis'' would be a ''nomen dubium'' ("dubious name", based on a specimen too incomplete to compare to other specimens or to classify).
It was known for over half of the 20th century as ''Antrodemus'', but study of the copious remains from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry brought the name "''Allosaurus"'' back to prominence, and established it as one of the best-known dinosaurs.
Allosauridae is the smallest of the carnosaur families, with only ''Saurophaganax'' and a currently unnamed French allosauroid accepted as possible valid genera besides ''Allosaurus'' in the most recent review.
A specimen with a fractured rib was recovered from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry.
Similar conclusions were drawn by another study using finite element analysis on an ''Allosaurus'' skull.
The same interpretation applies to Bakker's lair sites.
Each foot had three weight-bearing toes and an inner dewclaw, which Madsen suggested could have been used for grasping in juveniles.
Data from extant birds suggested that the medullary bone in this ''Allosaurus'' individual may have been the result of a bone pathology instead.
fragilis'' have been found there, out of at minimum 73&nbsp;dinosaurs), and the fossils found there are disarticulated and well-mixed.
fragilis'' is regarded as the most common, known from the remains of at least sixty individuals.
''Allosaurus'' appeared in the second episode of the 1999 BBC television series ''Walking with Dinosaurs'' and the follow-up special ''The Ballad of Big Al'', which speculated on the life of the "Big Al" specimen, based on scientific evidence from the numerous injuries and pathologies in its skeleton.
Lesions similar to those caused by osteomyelitis in two scapulae.
In 1996 the same team discovered a second ''Allosaurus'', "Big Al Two", which is the best preserved skeleton of its kind to date.
''Allosaurus'' is commonly found at the same sites as ''Apatosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', ''Diplodocus'', and ''Stegosaurus''.
Skeletal remains from the quarry pertain to individuals of almost all ages and sizes, from less than  to  long, and the disarticulation is an advantage for describing bones usually found fused.
Allosaurus also appears in the 2011 BBC docu-mini-series ''Planet Dinosaur'' in the episode "Fight for Life".
fragilis'' as the short-snouted species, with the long-snouted taxon being ''A.
Based on histological analysis of limb bones, bone deposition appears to stop at around 22 to 28&nbsp;years, which is comparable to that of other large theropods like ''Tyrannosaurus''.
''Allosaurus'' also made an appearance in the Discovery Channel series ''Dinosaur Revolution''.
Some of the fractures were poorly healed and "formed pseudoarthroses."
This proposal has not attracted further attention, however.
Although ''Allosaurus'' did not have sabre teeth, Bakker suggested another mode of attack that would have used such neck and jaw adaptations: the short teeth in effect became small serrations on a saw-like cutting edge running the length of the upper jaw, which would have been driven into prey.
Such head-biting may have been a way to establish dominance in a pack or to settle territorial disputes.
The infection was long lived, perhaps up to 6 months.
Bone spurs in a premaxilla, ungual, and two metacarpals.
Hayden sent his specimen to Joseph Leidy, who identified it as half of a tail vertebra, and tentatively assigned it to the European dinosaur genus ''Poekilopleuron'' as ''Poicilopleuron''  ''valens''.
As the most abundant large predator in the Morrison Formation, ''Allosaurus'' was at the top of the food chain, probably preying on contemporaneous large herbivorous dinosaurs and perhaps even other predators.
