The  of the Alps covered by glaciers in 1876 had shrunk to  by 1973, resulting in decreased river run-off levels.
The knight reached the summit of Rocciamelone where he left a bronze triptych of three crosses, a feat which he conducted with the use of ladders to traverse the ice.
The Rhaetians continued to resist but were eventually conquered when the Romans turned northward to the Danube valley in Austria and defeated the Brigantes.
The Almabtrieb, Alpabzug, Alpabfahrt, Désalpes («coming down from the alps») is celebrated by decorating the cows with garlands and enormous cowbells while the farmers dress in traditional costumes.
In 1800 Napoleon crossed one of the mountain passes with an army of 40,000.
In the 17th century about 2500 people were killed by an avalanche in a village on the French-Italian border; in the 19th century 120 homes in a village near Zermatt were destroyed by an avalanche.
The Alps are a source of minerals that have been mined for thousands of years.
The most important passes are the Col de l'Iseran (the highest), the Brenner Pass, the Mont-Cenis, the Great St. Bernard Pass, the Col de Tende, the Gotthard Pass, the Semmering Pass, the Simplon Pass, and the Stelvio Pass.
Seven bear skulls from the cave may have been buried by the same prehistoric people.
The highest peaks of the Western Alps and Eastern Alps, respectively, are Mont Blanc, at  and Piz Bernina at .
Much of the Alpine culture is unchanged since the medieval period when skills that guaranteed survival in the mountain valleys and in the highest villages became mainstays, leading to strong traditions of carpentry, woodcarving, baking and pastry-making, and cheesemaking.
Haymaking is an important farming activity in mountain villages which has become somewhat mechanized in recent years, although the slopes are so steep that usually scythes are necessary to cut the grass.
In the medieval period hospices were established by religious orders at the summits of many of the main passes.
Now the pass has been supplanted by the Fréjus Road (opened 1980) and Rail Tunnel (opened 1871).
The lower regions and larger towns of the Alps are well-served by motorways and main roads, but higher mountain passes and byroads, which are amongst the highest in Europe, can be treacherous even in summer due to steep slopes.
The ibex live in caves and descend to eat the succulent alpine grasses.
Some of the valleys are quite arid such as the Aosta valley in Italy, the Maurienne in France, the Valais in Switzerland, and northern Tyrol.
By the mid-19th century scientists began to arrive en masse to study the geology and ecology of the region.
Although the Alpenrose prefers acidic soil, the plants are found throughout the region.
The formation of the Alps (the Alpine orogeny) was an episodic process that began about 300 million years ago.
The core regions of the Alpine orogenic belt have been folded and fractured in such a manner that erosion created the characteristic steep vertical peaks of the Swiss Alps that rise seemingly straight out of the foreland areas.
Golden eagles and bearded vultures are the largest birds to be found in the Alps; they nest high on rocky ledges and can be found at altitudes of .
The mean precipitation in the Alps ranges from a low of  per year to  per year, with the higher levels occurring at high altitudes.
Spiders, such as the large wolf spider, live above the snow line and can be seen as high as .
In 1930 the ''Lauberhorn Rennen'' (Lauberhorn Race), was run for the first time on the Lauberhorn above Wengen; the equally demanding Hahnenkamm was first run in the same year in Kitzbühl, Austria.
In Emosson in Valais, Switzerland, dinosaur tracks were found in the 1970s, dating probably from the Triassic Period.
Many passes are closed in winter.
For example, each year more water is diverted from rivers for snowmaking in the ski resorts, the effect of which is yet unknown.
The peaks in the easterly portion of the range, in Austria and Slovenia, are smaller than those in the central and western portions.
The traditional culture of farming, cheesemaking, and woodworking still exists in Alpine villages, although the tourist industry began to grow early in the 20th century and expanded greatly after World War II to become the dominant industry by the end of the century.
Chalets often face south or downhill, and are built of solid wood, with a steeply gabled roof to allow accumulated snow to slide off easily.
Rousseau's conception of alpine purity was later emphasized with the publication of Albrecht von Haller's poem ''Die Alpen'' that described the mountains as an area of mythical purity.
The bottom nappe structure is of continental European origin, above which are stacked marine sediment nappes, topped off by nappes derived from the African plate.
The formation of the Alps was a segment of this orogenic process, caused by the collision between the African and the Eurasian plates that began in the late Cretaceous Period.
The Mont Cenis pass has been a major commercial and military road between Western Europe and Italy.
In the Paleozoic Era the Pangaean supercontinent consisted of a single tectonic plate; it broke into separate plates during the Mesozoic Era and the Tethys sea developed between Laurasia and Gondwana during the Jurassic Period.
During these visits Shelley wrote the poem "Mont Blanc", Byron wrote "The Prisoner of Chillon" and the dramatic poem ''Manfred'', and Mary Shelley, who found the scenery overwhelming, conceived the idea for the novel ''Frankenstein'' in her villa on the shores of Lake Geneva in the midst of a thunderstorm.
Moraines, piles of rock picked up during the movement of the glacier, accumulate at edges, centre and the terminus of glaciers.
Coarse sediments from the continual uplift and erosion were later deposited in foreland areas as molasse.
The later indeed became very popular after the construction of a paved road ordered by Napoléon Bonaparte.
A railroad with a tunnel  long was built along the route of the pass in the mid-19th century.
Until this point Austria and Switzerland had been the traditional and more popular destinations for winter sports, but by the end of the 20th century and into the early 21st century, France, Italy and the Tyrol began to see increases in winter visitors.
The Inn valley is an example of a valley carved by glaciers during the ice ages with a typical terraced structure caused by erosion.
To the south it dips into northern Italy and to the north extends to the south border of Bavaria in Germany.
By the 6th century BC, the Celtic La Tène culture was well established.
Erzberg in Styria furnishes high-quality iron ore for the steel industry.
Many rodents such as voles live underground.
The Romans built settlements in the Alps; towns such as Aosta (named for Augustus) in Italy, Martigny and Lausanne in Switzerland, and Partenkirchen in Bavaria show remains of Roman baths, villas, arenas and temples.
Thus, Savoy built a series of fortifications in the Maurienne valley in order to protect the major alpine passes, such as the col du Mont-Cenis that was even crossed by Charlemagne and his father to defeat the Lombarts.
In the 20th century Robert Parker wrote a well-known work about the rock crystals of the Swiss Alps; at the same period a commission was established to control and standardize the naming of Alpine minerals.
The rock drawings in Valcamonica are more than 5000 years old; more than 200,000 drawings and etchings have been identified at the site.
It is the first tunnel, which transfers the Alps on ground level.
Peaks in France, Italy and Switzerland lie in the "Houillière zone", which consists of basement with sediments from the Mesozoic Era.
The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of temperature, often accompanied by precipitation in the form of snow or rain.
These do not reach exactly to the same elevation, nor are they often found growing together; but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the presence of wild herbaceous vegetation.
A rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere causes the temperature to decrease (see adiabatic lapse rate).
In mid-June cows are moved to the highest pastures close to the snowline, where they are watched by herdsmen who stay in the high altitudes often living in stone huts or wooden barns during the summers.
With the opening of the -long Gotthard Base Tunnel on 1 June 2016 it bypasses the Gotthard Tunnel built in the 19th century and realizes the first flat route through the Alps.
Farming had been a traditional occupation for centuries, although it became less dominant in the 20th century with the advent of tourism.
Gentians tend to "appear" repeatedly as the spring blooming takes place at progressively later dates, moving from the lower altitude to the higher altitude meadows where the snow melts much later than in the valleys.
Peaks such as Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and high peaks in the Pennine Alps, the Briançonnais, and Hohe Tauern consist of layers of rock from the various orogenies including exposures of basement rock.
In 1291 to protect themselves from incursions by the Habsburgs, four cantons in the middle of Switzerland drew up a charter that is considered to be a declaration of independence from neighbouring kingdoms.
The tourism industry began in the early 19th century when foreigners visited the Alps, travelled to the bases of the mountains to enjoy the scenery, and stayed at the spa-resorts.
In 1492 Antoine de Ville climbed Mont Aiguille, without reaching the summit, an experience he described as "horrifying and terrifying."
During this period winter sports were slowly introduced: in 1882 the first figure skating championship was held in St. Moritz, and downhill skiing became a popular sport with English visitors early in the 20th century, as the first ski-lift was installed in 1908 above Grindelwald.
98 years later followed Gotthard Road Tunnel ( long) connecting the A2 motorway in Göschenen on the German-Swiss side with Airolo on the Italian-Swiss side, exactly like the railway tunnel.
Climatic conditions show variances within the same zones; for example, weather conditions at the head of a mountain valley, extending directly from the peaks, are colder and more severe than those at the mouth of a valley which tend to be less severe and receive less snowfall.
The cinnabar deposits in Slovenia are a notable source of cinnabar pigments.
This was one of the most celebrated achievements of any military force in ancient warfare, although no evidence exists of the actual crossing or the place of crossing.
Hannibal famously crossed the Alps with a herd of elephants, and the Romans had settlements in the region.
Reptiles such as adders and vipers live up to the snow line; because they cannot bear the cold temperatures they hibernate underground and soak up the warmth on rocky ledges.
In the high villages people live in homes built according to medieval designs that withstand cold winters.
The Alpine orogeny occurred in ongoing cycles through to the Paleogene causing differences in nappe structures, with a late-stage orogeny causing the development of the Jura Mountains.
As the rising peaks underwent erosion, a layer of marine flysch sediments was deposited in the foreland basin, and the sediments became involved in younger nappes (folds) as the orogeny progressed.
During the post-World War I period ski-lifts were built in Swiss and Austrian towns to accommodate winter visitors, but summer tourism continued to be important; by the mid-20th century the popularity of downhill skiing increased greatly as it became more accessible and in the 1970s several new villages were built in France devoted almost exclusively to skiing, such as Les Menuires.
Water from the rivers is used in over 500 hydroelectricity power plants, generating as much as 2900 kilowatts of electricity.
His clothing and gear indicate that he lived in an alpine farming community, while the location and manner of his death - an arrowhead was discovered in his shoulder - suggests he was travelling from one place to another.
Elevations around the world that have cold climates similar to those of the polar regions have been called Alpine.
On the highest rocky ledges the spring flowers bloom in the summer.
Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain heads approximately east-northeast, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.
The areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff.
Above the forestry, there is often a band of short pine trees (''Pinus mugo''), which is in turn superseded by ''Alpenrosen'', dwarf shrubs, typically ''Rhododendron ferrugineum'' (on acid soils) or ''Rhododendron hirsutum'' (on alkaline soils).
Perhaps the best known of the alpine plants is Edelweiss which grows in rocky areas and can be found at altitudes as low as  and as high as .
Crossing routes by road, train or foot are known as ''passes'', and usually consist of depressions in the mountains in which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre-mountainous zones.
Furthermore, the decrease of glaciated areas combined with a succession of winters with lower-than-expected precipitation may have a future impact on the rivers in the Alps as well as an effect on the water availability to the lowlands.
Snow lines vary from , above which the snow is permanent and the temperatures hover around the freezing point even July and August.
Wildlife such as ibex live in the higher peaks to elevations of , and plants such as Edelweiss grow in rocky areas in lower elevations as well as in higher elevations.
Popularly gathered as food, the snails are now protected.
Mont Blanc spans the French–Italian border, and at  is the highest mountain in the Alps.
The range stretches from the Mediterranean Sea north above the Po basin, extending through France from Grenoble, eastward through mid and southern Switzerland.
Twelve species of beetles have habitats up to the snow line; the most beautiful and formerly collected for its colours but now protected is ''Rosalia alpina''.
Writing about the gentians in Switzerland D. H. Lawrence described them as "darkening the day-time, torch-like with the smoking blueness of Pluto's gloom."
At present the region is home to 14 million people and has 120 million annual visitors.
Austrian-born Adolf Hitler had a lifelong romantic fascination with the Alps and by the 1930s established a home in the Obersalzberg region outside of Berchtesgaden.
Dialects are common, and vary from valley to valley and region to region.
The Matterhorn is an example of the ongoing orogeny and shows evidence of great folding.
The region is serviced by  of roads used by 6 million vehicles.
In Roman times, "Albania" was a name for the eastern Caucasus, while in the English language "Albania" (or "Albany") was occasionally used as a name for Scotland.
A number of species of moths live in the Alps, some of which are believed to have evolved in the same habitat up to 120&nbsp;million years ago, long before the Alps were created.
The range continues toward Vienna in Austria, and east to the Adriatic Sea and into Slovenia.
According to geologist Stefan Schmid, because the Western Alps underwent a metamorphic event in the Cenozoic Era while the Austroalpine peaks underwent an event in the Cretaceous Period, the two areas show distinct differences in nappe formations.
The Alps are split into five climatic zones, each with different vegetation.
The inclination of the roof cannot exceed 40%, allowing the snow to stay on top, thereby functioning as insulation from the cold.
The Barrière de l'Esseillon is a serie of forts with heavy batteries, built on a cliff with a perfect view on the valley, a gorge on one side and steep mountains on the other side.
After a series of battles fought in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, more cantons joined the confederacy and by the 16th century Switzerland was well-established as a separate state.
Born in Geneva, Saussure was enamoured with the mountains from an early age; he left a law career to become a naturalist and spent many years trekking through the Bernese Oberland, the Savoy, the Piedmont and Valais, studying the glaciers and the geology, as he became an early proponent of the theory of rock upheaval.
Commonly made of Norway spruce, they are called "tavaillon".
The Benedictines had built monasteries in Lucerne, Switzerland, and Oberammergau; the Cistercians in the Tyrol and at Lake Constance; and the Augustinians had abbeys in the Savoy and one in the centre of Interlaken, Switzerland.
The new subclade has provisionally been named ''K1ö'' for ''Ötzi''.
Standing stones have been found in Alpine areas of France and Italy.
The term for the mountain peaks varies by nation and language: words such as ''Horn'', ''Kogel'', ''Kopf'', ''Gipfel'', ''Spitze'', ''Stock'', and ''Berg'' are used in German speaking regions; ''Mont'', ''Pic'', ''Tête'', ''Pointe'', ''Dent'', ''Roche'', and ''Aiguille'' in French speaking regions; and ''Monte'', ''Picco'', ''Corno'', ''Punta'', ''Pizzo'', or ''Cima'' in Italian speaking regions.
At the end of the war, a substantial amount of Nazi plunder was found stored in Austria, where Hitler had hoped to retreat as the war drew to a close.
High levels of precipitation cause the glaciers to descend to permafrost levels in some areas whereas in other, more arid regions, glaciers remain above about the  level.
On 2007 the new -long Lötschberg Base Tunnel has been opened, which circumvents the 100 years older Lötschberg Tunnel.
In modern languages the term ''alp'', ''alm'', ''albe'' or ''alpe'' refers to a grazing pastures in the alpine regions below the glaciers, not the peaks.
A series of tectonic events in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods caused different paleogeographic regions.
They hibernate in large groups to provide warmth, and can be found in all areas of the Alps, in large colonies they build beneath the alpine pastures.
The sequence of Tethyan marine sediments and their oceanic basement is sandwiched between rock derived from the African and European plates.
Crystals are found throughout much of the Alpine region such as cinnabar, amethyst, and quartz.
The plants that grow at the highest altitudes have adapted to conditions by specialization such as growing in rock screes that give protection from winds.
After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Alpine countries began to see an influx of poets, artists, and musicians, as visitors came to experience the sublime effects of monumental nature.
Alpine plants such the Alpine gentian grow in abundance in areas such as the meadows above the Lauterbrunnental.
The Raetians lived in the eastern regions, while the west was occupied by the Helvetii and the Allobrogi settled in the Rhone valley and in Savoy.
Numerous weather stations were placed in the mountains early in the early 20th century, providing continuous data for climatologists.
The alpine area fluctuates greatly because of regional fluctuations in tree lines.
At the end of World War II the US Army occupied Obersalzberg, to prevent Hitler from retreating with the Wehrmacht into the mountains.
The Rhine originates in a 30 square kilometre area in Switzerland and represents almost 60 percent of water exported from the country.
The Alps have been crossed for war and commerce, and by pilgrims, students and tourists.
In Switzerland, Château de Chillon is preserved as an example of medieval architecture.
By the 6th century BC the La Tène culture was well established in the region, and became known for high quality decorated weapons and jewellery.
Some of the French dialects spoken in the French, Swiss and Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Arpitan, while the southern part of the western range is related to Old Provençal; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages.
From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards, before turning to the northwest and then, near the Colle della Maddalena, to the north.
Albania, a name not native to the region known as the country of Albania, has been used as a name for a number of mountainous areas across Europe.
From Constantine I, Pepin the Short and Charlemagne to Henry IV, Napoléon and more recently the German Gebirgsjägers during World War II.
Above the tree line is the area defined as "alpine" where in the alpine meadow plants are found that have adapted well to harsh conditions of cold temperatures, aridity, and high altitudes.
Crossing the Italian-Austrian border, the Brenner Pass separates the Ötztal Alps and Zillertal Alps and has been in use as a trading route since the 14th century.
The variances in nomenclature in the region spanned by the Alps makes classification of the mountains and subregions difficult, but a general classification is that of the Eastern Alps and Western Alps with the divide between the two occurring in eastern Switzerland according to geologist Stefan Schmid, near the Splügen Pass.
''Eritrichium nanum'', commonly known as the King of the Alps, is the most elusive of the alpine flowers, growing on rocky ridges at .
In areas like Chiasso, Switzerland, and Allgäu, Bavaria, the demarcation between the mountain range and the flatlands are clear; in other places such as Geneva, the demarcation is less clear.
During the Napoleonic Wars in the late 18th century and early 19th century, Napoleon annexed territory formerly controlled by the Habsburgs and Savoys.
Charles VII of France ordered his chamberlain to climb Mont Aiguille in 1356.
The peaks, however, were mostly ignored except for a few notable examples, and long left to the exclusive attention of the people of the adjoining valleys.
Although the area is only about 11 percent of the surface area of Europe, the Alps provide up to 90 percent of water to lowland Europe, particularly to arid areas and during the summer months.
Radiocarbon dated charcoal placed around 50,000 years ago was found in the ''Drachloch'' (Dragon's Hole) cave above the village of Vattis in the canton of St. Gallen, proving that the high peaks were visited by prehistoric people.
Some high mountain villages, such as Avoriaz (in France), Wengen, and Zermatt (in Switzerland) are accessible only by cable car or cog-rail trains, and are car free.
Thirteen thousand species of plants have been identified in the Alpine regions.
The pass was crossed by many troops on their way to the Italian peninsula.
The lowest of the Alpine passes at , the Semmering crosses from Lower Austria to Styria; since the 12th century when a hospice was built there it has seen continuous use.
Christianity was established in the region by the Romans, and saw the establishment of monasteries and churches in the high regions.
Some meals are communal, such as fondue, where a pot is set in the middle of the table for each person to dip into.
Other villages in the Alps are considering becoming car free zones or limiting the number of cars for reasons of sustainability of the fragile Alpine terrain.
The secondary chain of the Alps follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, passing over many of the highest and most well-known peaks in the Alps.
High-water levels in streams and rivers peak in June and July when the snow is still melting at the higher altitudes.
The Saint Gotthard Pass crosses from Central Switzerland to Ticino; in 1882 the  long Saint Gotthard Railway Tunnel was opened connecting Lucerne in Switzerland, with Milan in Italy.
The highest portion of the range is divided by the glacial trough of the Rhone valley, with the Pennine Alps from Mont Blanc to the Matterhorn and Monte Rosa on the southern side, and the Bernese Alps on the northern.
Alpine crystals have been studied and collected for hundreds of years, and began to be classified in the 18th century.
About 10,000 years ago, when the ice melted after the last glacial period, late Palaeolithic communities were established along the lake shores and in cave systems.
The rivers form lakes, such as Lake Geneva, a crescent shaped lake crossing the Swiss border with Lausanne on the Swiss side and the town of Evian-les-Bains on the French side.
Other rivers such as the Danube have major tributaries flowing into them that originate in the Alps.
The population of the region is 14 million spread across eight countries.
Major European rivers flow from Switzerland, such as the Rhine, the Rhône, the Inn, the Ticino and the Po, all of which have headwaters in the Alps and flow into neighbouring countries, finally emptying into the North Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Adriatic Sea and the Black Sea.
Much of the Alpine region was gradually settled by Germanic tribes, (Lombards, Alemanni, Bavarii, and Franks) from the 6th to the 13th centuries mixing with the local Celtic tribes.
Extreme shortening  caused by the event resulted in marine sedimentary rocks rising by thrusting and folding into high mountain peaks such as Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn.
The highest pass in the alps is the col de l'Iseran in Savoy (France) at , followed by  the Stelvio Pass in northern Italy at ; the road was built in the 1820s.
The mountain peaks were seen as terrifying, the abode of dragons and demons, to the point that people blindfolded themselves to cross the Alpine passes.
During World War II the winter games were cancelled but after that time the Winter Games have been held in St. Moritz (1948), Cortina d'Ampezzo (1956), Innsbruck, Austria (1964 and 1976), Grenoble, France, (1968), Albertville, France, (1992), and Torino (2006).
The Frankish expansion of the Carolingian Empire and the Bavarian expansion in the eastern Alps introduced feudalism and the building of castles to support the growing number of dukedoms and kingdoms.
The Tethys was later squeezed between colliding plates causing the formation of mountain ranges called the Alpide belt, from Gibraltar through the Himalayas to Indonesia—a process that began at the end of the Mesozoic and continues into the present.
From his description of a "blue like that of a gentian" sky it is thought that he reached a significantly high altitude.
By 1940 the Third Reich had occupied many of the Alpine countries.
Maurus Servius Honoratus, an ancient commentator of Virgil, says in his commentary (''A.''
In the lower areas where the forests are widespread, wooden tiles are traditionally used.
The lowest zone is the colline zone, which exists between , depending on the location.
Furniture has been traditionally elaborately carved and in many Alpine countries carpentry skills are passed from generation to generation.
Leonhard Euler studied the shapes of crystals, and by the 19th century crystal hunting was common in Alpine regions.
The English word ''Alps'' derives from the Latin ''Alpes'' (through French).
Two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were Horace-Bénédict de Saussure (1740–1799) in the Pennine Alps, and the Benedictine monk of Disentis Placidus a Spescha (1752–1833).
The molasse regions in Switzerland and Bavaria were well-developed and saw further upthrusting of flysch.
Romansh, spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland, is an ancient Rhaeto-Romanic language derived from Latin, remnants of ancient Celtic languages and perhaps Etruscan.
His first visit to the area was in 1923 and he maintained a strong tie there until the end of his life.
At these higher altitudes, the plants tend to form isolated cushions.
The salt mines surrounding the Altaussee area, where American troops found 75 kilos of gold coins stored in a single mine, were used to store looted art, jewels, and currency; vast quantities of looted art were found and returned to the owners.
Other meals are still served in a traditional manner on carved wooden plates.
The Swiss commanders wired the infrastructure leading into the country, and threatening to destroy bridges, railway tunnels and passes in the event of a Nazi invasion, and then they retreated to the heart of the mountain peaks where conditions were harsher and a military invasion would involve difficult and protracted battles.
Cities such as Milan depend on 80 percent of water from Alpine runoff.
The Winter Olympic Games have been hosted in the Swiss, French, Italian, Austrian and German Alps.
From 11 December 2016 it will be part of the official railway timetable for 2017 and be used hourly as standard way to ride between Basel/Luzern/Zurich and Bellinzona/Lugano/Milano.
Alpine plants are grouped by habitat and soil type which can be limestone or non-calcareous.
Similarly the peaks in eastern Switzerland extending to western Austria (Helvetic nappes) consist of thin-skinned sedimentary folding that detached from former basement rock.
Forty percent of the glaciation in Austria has disappeared since 1850, and 30% of that in Switzerland.
The altitude and size of the range affects the climate in Europe; in the mountains precipitation levels vary greatly and climatic conditions consist of distinct zones.
The most common bird is the alpine chough which can be found scavenging at climber's huts or at the Jungfraujoch, a high altitude tourist destination.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau was the first of many to present the Alps as a place of allure and beauty, banishing the prevalent conception of the mountains as a hellish wasteland inhabited by demons.
Villagers celebrate the day the cows are herded up to the pastures and again when they return in mid-September.
Evidence of human habitation has been found in caves near Vercors, close to Grenoble; in Austria the Mondsee culture shows evidence of houses built on piles to keep them dry.
Gentians are named after the Illyrian king Gentius, and 40 species of the early-spring blooming flower grow in the Alps, in a range of .
The glaciers remained a mystery and many still believed the highest areas to be inhabited by dragons.
Large hotels were built during the Belle Époque; cog-railways, built early in the 20th century, brought tourists to ever higher elevations, with the Jungfraubahn terminating at the Jungfraujoch, well above the eternal snow-line, after going through a tunnel in Eiger.
The largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes are the alpine ibex, which have been sighted as high as .
Glacial valleys have characteristically steep walls (reliefs); valleys with lower reliefs and talus slopes are remnants of glacial troughs or previously infilled valleys.
