After 1918, French was the only language used in schools, and particularly primary schools.
Work on its second phase, which will further bring down this time to 1hour 50 minutes, is due to be completed in 2016.
The population was forced to speak German and 'French' family names were Germanized.
Like all regional languages in France, however, the transmission of Alsatian is on the decline.
The president of the Regional Council is Philippe Richert, a member of the Union for a Popular Movement, elected in the 2010 regional election.
With the decline of the Roman Empire, Alsace became the territory of the Germanic Alemanni.
This divergence in policy from the French majority is due to the region having been part of Imperial Germany when the 1905 law separating the French church and state was instituted (for a more comprehensive history, see: Alsace-Lorraine).
An additional natural disaster was the Rhine rift earthquake of 1356, one of Europe's worst which made ruins of Basel.
By 1500 BC, Celts began to settle in Alsace, clearing and cultivating the land.
The city is the seat of several international organizations and bodies.
It took up winter quarters, demanded the submission of Metz and Strasbourg and launched an attack on Basel.
Southern Alsace, also called the Sundgau, is characterized by ''carpe frite'' (that also exists in Yiddish tradition).
It was in Strasbourg that German was first used for the liturgy.
About 50 such "simultaneous churches" still exist in modern Alsace, though with the Catholic church's general lack of priests they tend to hold Catholic services only occasionally.
The political status of Alsace has been heavily influenced by historical decisions, wars, and strategic politics.
The rest was shared between Lothar's brothers Charles the Bald (ruler of the West Frankish realm) and Louis the German (ruler of the East Frankish realm).
Germanic traits remain in the more traditional, rural parts of the culture, such as the cuisine and architecture, whereas modern institutions are totally dominated by French culture.
The 1685 Edict of Fontainebleau, by which the French king ordered the suppression of French Protestantism, was not applied in Alsace.
Alsace has a semi-continental climate with cold and dry winters and hot summers.
Policies forbidding the use of German and requiring that of French were introduced.
Official tolerance grew during the French Revolution, with full emancipation in 1791.
"Alsatia", the Latin form of Alsace's name, has long ago entered the English language with the specialized meaning of "a lawless place" or "a place under no jurisdiction" - since Alsace was conceived by English people to be such.
* life sciences, as part of the trinational BioValley and
The town of Mulhouse joined the Swiss Confederation in 1515, where it was to remain until 1798.
Though the ban has long been lifted and street signs today are often bilingual, Alsace-Lorraine is today very French in language and culture.
It has, however, no real historical relevance.
In more recent years, Alsatian is again being promoted by local, national and European authorities as an element of the region's identity.
In 1792, Rouget de Lisle composed in Strasbourg the Revolutionary marching song "La Marseillaise" (as ''Marching song for the Army of the Rhine''), which later became the anthem of France.
Additionally, Alsace is known for its fruit juices and mineral waters.
It is one of just two ''régions'' in metropolitan France where the conservative right won the 2004 ''région'' elections and thus controls the Alsace Regional Council.
The Easter Bunny was first mentioned in Georg Franck von Franckenau's ''De ovis paschalibus'' (About Easter Eggs) in 1682 referring to an Alsace tradition of an Easter Hare bringing Easter Eggs.
Although the French government signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in 1992, it never ratified the treaty and therefore no legal basis exists for any of the regional languages in France.
The region, as part of Lorraine, was part of the Holy Roman Empire, and then was gradually annexed by France in the 17th century, and formalized as one of the provinces of France.
Alsatian is now taught in French high schools.
Multiconfessional villages appeared, particularly in the region of Alsace bossue.
Unlike the rest of France, the Local law in Alsace-Moselle still provides for to the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801 and the organic articles, which provides public subsidies to the Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and Calvinist churches, as well as to Jewish synagogues; religion classes in one of these faiths is compulsory in public schools.
Jews were subsequently forbidden to settle in the town.
With the education reforms of the 19th century, the middle classes began to speak and write French well.
The Rot-un-Wiss flag is still known as the real historical emblem of the region by most of the population and the departments' parliaments and has been widely used during protests against the creation of a new "super-region" gathering Champagne-Ardennes, Lorraine and Alsace, namely on Colmar's statue of liberty.
German is also taught as a foreign language in local kindergartens and schools.
68% of its jobs are in the services; 25% are in industry, making Alsace one of France's most industrialised ''régions''.
At the same time, some Alsatians were in opposition to the Jacobins and sympathetic to the invading forces of Austria and Prussia who sought to crush the nascent revolutionary republic.
However, half-timbering was found to increase the risk of fire, which is why from the 19th century, it began to be rendered.
Conservative leader Nicolas Sarkozy got his best score in Alsace (over 65%) in the second round of the French presidential elections of 2007.
* a tram-train system in Mulhouse (2011)
Frederick II designated the Bishop of Strasbourg to administer Alsace, but the authority of the bishop was challenged by Count Rudolf of Habsburg, who received his rights from Frederick II's son Conrad IV.
The opening is envisaged at the end of 2011, with an average usage of 41,000 vehicles a day.
This reform is still largely the basis of German teaching (but not Alsatian) in elementary schools today.
The part known as Lotharingia, or Lorraine, was given to Lothar's son.
However, local antisemitism also increased and Napoleon turned hostile in 1806, imposing a one-year moratorium on all debts owed to Jews.
The gastronomic symbol of the ''région'' is undoubtedly the Choucroute, a local variety of Sauerkraut.
Following the Second World War, the 1927 regulation was not reinstated and the teaching of German in primary schools was suspended by a provisional rectorial decree, which was supposed to enable French to regain lost ground.
France began an aggressive policy of expanding eastward, first to the rivers Rhône and Meuse, and when those borders were reached, aiming for the Rhine.
There is controversy around the recognition of the Alsacian flag.
In 1951, Article 10 of the Deixonne Law (''Loi Deixonne'') on the teaching of local languages and dialects made provision for Breton, Basque, Catalan and old Provençal, but not for Corsican, Dutch (West Flemish) or Alsatian in Alsace and Moselle.
In 1913, however, the Saverne Affair (French: Incident de Saverne) showed the limits of this new tolerance of the Alsatian identity.
This had grave effects on trade and the economy of the region since former overland trade routes were switched to newly opened Mediterranean and Atlantic seaports.
Alsatian is taught in schools (but not mandatory) as one of the regional languages of France.
* an interconnection with the German InterCityExpress, as far as Kehl (expected 2016)
Some settled in Illinois, many to farm or to seek success in commercial ventures: for example, the sailing ships ''Sully'' (in May 1843) and ''Iowa'' (in June 1844) brought families who set up homes in northern Illinois and northern Indiana.
This teaching of German, referred to as the Holderith Reform, was later extended to all pupils in the last two years of elementary school.
Paradoxically, this reversed the situation of the 1950s.
As of 2007, the word is still in use among the English and Australian judiciaries with the meaning of a place where the law cannot reach: "In setting up the Serious Organised Crime Agency, the state has set out to create an Alsatia - a region of executive action free of judicial oversight," Lord Justice Sedley in UMBS v SOCA 2007.
In 1843 and 1844, sailing ships bringing immigrant families from Alsace arrived at the port of New York.
Merger of Alsace into Germany in 1871–1918 lessened antisemitic violence.
The Kingdom of Lotharingia was short-lived, however, becoming the stem duchy of Lorraine in Eastern Francia after the Treaty of Ribemont in 880.
Some overzealous statesmen have called it a Nazi invention - while its origins date back to the XIth century and the Red and White banner of Gérard de Lorraine (aka.
This growth has even accelerated at the end of the 20th century.
The word Sauerkraut in Alsatian has the form ''sûrkrût'', same as in other southwestern German dialects, and means "sour cabbage" as its Standard German equivalent.
The towns of Alsace were the first to adopt German language as their official language, instead of Latin, during the Lutheran Reform.
Persons born abroad of French parents, such as Pieds-Noirs and children of French expatriates.An immigrant is by French definition a person born in a foreign country and who didn't have French citizenship at birth.
It has regularly increased over time, except in wartime, by both natural growth and migration.
Alsace formed part of the Middle Francia, which was ruled by the eldest grandson Lothar I. Lothar died early in 855 and his realm was divided into three parts.
The German language remained in use in local administration, in schools, and at the (Lutheran) University of Strasbourg, which continued to draw students from other German-speaking lands.
At about this time the surrounding areas experienced recurring fragmentation and reincorporations among a number of feudal secular and ecclesiastical lordships, a common process in the Holy Roman Empire.
Many Alsatians also began to sail to the United States, settling in many areas from 1820 to 1850.
Some Alsatian immigrants were noted for their roles in 19th-century American economic development.
INSEE estimates that its population will grow 12.9% to 19.5% between 1999 and 2030.
Alsace is an important wine-producing ''région''.
Jews were barred from most cities and instead lived in villages.
The idea was that such men would be more tractable and less likely to alienate the fief from the crown out of their own greed.
The Alemanni were agricultural people, and their Germanic language formed the basis of modern-day dialects spoken along the Upper Rhine (Alsatian, Alemannian, Swabian, Swiss).
Estimates of the French Works Commissioner however, raised some doubts over the interest of such a project, since it would pick up only about 10% of the traffic of the A35 at Strasbourg.
Sauerkraut can be served with poultry, pork, sausage or even fish.
Because the Vosges are surmountable only by the Col de Saverne and the Belfort Gap, it has been suggested that Alsace needs to open up and get closer to France in terms of its rail links.
After much argument and discussion and after many temporary measures, a memorandum was issued by Vice-Chancellor Pfister in 1927 and governed education in primary schools until 1939.
The end of the war led to the unification of Germany.
The teaching of German became a major issue, however, as early as 1946.
Prosperity returned to Alsace under Habsburg administration during the Renaissance.
In 1469, following the , Upper Alsace was sold by Archduke Sigismund of Austria to Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy.
It is first known in print in the title of ''The Squire of Alsatia'', a 1688 play written by Thomas Shadwell.
In 1707, the simultaneum forced many Reformed and Lutheran church buildings to also allow Catholic services.
Beset by enemies and seeking to gain a free hand in Hungary, the Habsburgs sold their Sundgau territory (mostly in Upper Alsace) to France in 1646, which had occupied it, for the sum of 1.2&nbsp;million Thalers.
The name "Alsace" can be traced to the Old High German ''Ali-saz'' or ''Elisaz'', meaning "foreign domain".
* viticulture (mostly along the ''Route des Vins d'Alsace'' between Marlenheim and Thann)
As it underlines the Germanic roots of the region, it was ''replaced'' in 1949 by a new "Union jack-like" flag representing the union of the two départements.
Frederick I set up Alsace as a province (a ''procuratio'', not a ''provincia'') to be ruled by ministeriales, a non-noble class of civil servants.
The Ministerial Memorandum of 21 June 1982, known as the Circulaire Savary, introduced financial support, over three years, for the teaching of regional languages in schools and universities.
These territorial changes were recognised in the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick that ended the War of the Grand Alliance.
However, visitors to Alsace can see indications of renewed political and cultural interest in the language – in Alsatian signs appearing in car-windows and on hoardings, and in new official bilingual street signs in Strasbourg and Mulhouse.
Clovis and the Franks defeated the Alemanni during the 5th century AD, culminating with the Battle of Tolbiac, and Alsace became part of the Kingdom of Austrasia.
It is perhaps mostly known for the region's wines and beers.
After the conclusion of the war, France was again free to pursue its desire to reach the Rhine and in 1444 a French army appeared in Lorraine and Alsace.
Increasingly, French is the only language used at home and at work, whereas a growing number of people have a good knowledge of standard German as a foreign language learned in school.
Neither Alsatian nor the Frankish dialects have any form of official status, as is customary for regional languages in France, although both are now recognized as languages of France and can be chosen as subjects in lycées.
The few that could escape fled to Switzerland or joined the resistance.
During a reannexation by Germany (1940–1945), High German was reinstated as the language of education.
While part of the Roman Empire, Alsace was part of Germania Superior.
* forestry development
Alsatian cuisine, somewhat based on Germanic culinary traditions, is marked by the use of pork in various forms.
Cities such as Colmar and Hagenau also began to grow in economic importance and gained a kind of autonomy within the "Decapole" or "Dekapolis", a federation of ten free towns.
Traditionally it is served with Strasbourg sausage or frankfurters, bacon, smoked pork or smoked Morteau or Montbéliard sausages, or a selection of other pork products.
Only in 1911 was Alsace-Lorraine granted some measure of autonomy, which was manifested also in a flag and an anthem (Elsässisches Fahnenlied).
On the other hand, Mömpelgard (Montbéliard) to the southwest of Alsace, belonging to the Counts of Württemberg since 1397, remained a Protestant enclave in France until 1793.
The city of Colmar has a sunny microclimate; it is the second driest city in France, with an annual precipitation of just 550&nbsp;mm, making it ideal for ''vin d'Alsace'' (''Alsatian wine'').
France seized Strasbourg in 1681 in an unprovoked action.
An alternative explanation is from a Germanic ''Ell-sass'', meaning "seated on the Ill", a river in Alsace.
At that time, the French trunk road left of the Rhine not been built, so that traffic would cross into Germany to use the Karlsruhe-Basel Autobahn.
With the purpose of "Frenchizing" the region, the Rot-un-Wiss has not been recognized by Paris.
They maintained their own customs, Yiddish language, and historic traditions within the tightly-knit ghettos; they adhered to Talmudic law enforced by their rabbis.
Hops are grown in Kochersberg and in northern Alsace.
The bird practically disappeared around 1970, but re-population efforts are continuing.
Strasbourg's arms are the colours of the shield of the Bishop of Strasbourg (a band of red on a white field, also considered an inversion of the arms of the diocese) at the end of a revolt of the burghers during the Middle Ages who took their independence from the teachings of the Bishop.
Antisemitic local riots occasionally occurred, especially during the Revolution of 1848.
The sailors returned home and tried to found a republic.
The year 1789 brought the French Revolution and with it the first division of Alsace into the départements of Haut- and Bas-Rhin.
However, the Constitution of France still requires that French be the only official language of the Republic.
Served alongside are often roasted or steamed potatoes or dumplings.
France continued to maintain its customs border along the Vosges mountains where it had been, leaving Alsace more economically oriented to neighbouring German-speaking lands.
Alsace is also the main beer-producing region of France, thanks primarily to breweries in and near Strasbourg.
Thus, it is not surprising that people left Alsace, not only for Paris – where the Alsatian community grew in numbers, with famous members such as Baron Haussmann – but also for more distant places like Russia and the Austrian Empire, to take advantage of the new opportunities offered there: Austria had conquered lands in Eastern Europe from the Ottoman Empire and offered generous terms to colonists as a way of consolidating its hold on the new territories.
Between 1870 and 1918, Alsace was annexed by the German Empire in the form of an imperial province or Reichsland, and the mandatory official language, especially in schools, became High German.
* the TGV Rhin-Rhône between Dijon and Mulhouse (opened in 2011)
Although Alsace has been part of France multiple times in the past, the region had no direct connection with the French state for several centuries.
The treaty stipulations regarding Alsace were complex; although the French king gained sovereignty, existing rights and customs of the inhabitants were largely preserved.
Since the 17th century, the region has passed between German and French control numerous times, resulting in a cultural blend.
As in much of Europe, the prosperity of Alsace came to an end in the 14th century by a series of harsh winters, bad harvests, and the Black Death.
Traditional dishes include ''baeckeoffe'', ''flammekueche'', ''choucroute'', and ''fleischnacka''.
''Heil den Völkern'' (Long live the Peoples)
Martin Bucer was a prominent Protestant reformer in the region.
Alsace became one of the French regions boasting a thriving Jewish community, and the only region with a noticeable Anabaptist population.
To discourage this, the region's authorities gave financial grants to the inhabitants to paint the rendering in various colours, in order to return to the original style and many inhabitants accepted (more for financial reasons than by firm belief).
The frequently changing status of the ''région'' throughout history has left its mark on modern day politics in terms of a particular interest in national identity issues.
His efforts were countered by the Roman Catholic Habsburgs who tried to eradicate heresy in Upper Alsace.
The schism of the Amish under the lead of Jacob Amman from the Mennonites occurred in 1693 in Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines.
Although Germany never formally annexed Alsace-Lorraine, it was incorporated into the Greater German Reich, which had been restructured into Reichsgaue.
This memorandum was, however, implemented in a fairly lax manner.
Alsace-Lorraine was occupied by Germany in 1940 during the Second World War.
Developments already under way or planned include:
Alsace is also one of the most pro-EU regions of France.
The German region Hesse uses a flag similar to the Rot-un-Wiss.
Alsace is the most well equipped region of France, with 2000 kilometres of cycle routes.
Controversy erupts periodically on the appropriateness of this legal disposition, as well as on the exclusion of other religions from this arrangement.
The enlargement plan of the Rhône–Rhine Canal, intended to link up the Mediterranean Sea and Central Europe (Rhine, Danube, North Sea and Baltic Sea) was abandoned in 1998 for reasons of expense and land erosion, notably in the Doubs valley.
Alsace is also well known for its foie gras made in the region since the 17th century.
The traditional language of the ''région'' is Alsatian, an Alemannic dialect of Upper German spoken on both sides of the Rhine and closely related to Swiss German.
A 1999 INSEE survey counted 548,000 adult speakers of Alsatian in France, making it the second most-spoken regional language in the country (after Occitan).
French troops entered Alsace less than two weeks later to quash the worker strikes and remove the newly established Soviets and revolutionaries from power.
It is one of the most developed rail networks in France, financially sustained partly by the French railroad SNCF, and partly by the ''région'' Alsace.
Alsatians played an active role in the French Revolution.
* hop harvesting and brewing (half of French beer is produced in Alsace, especially in the vicinity of Strasbourg, notably in Strasbourg-Cronenbourg, Schiltigheim and Obernai)
Many accepted without discrimination Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Jews and Anabaptists.
The French language never really managed, however, to win over the masses, the vast majority of whom continued to speak their German dialects and write in German (which we would now call "standard German").
France did endeavour to promote Catholicism; Strasbourg Cathedral, for example, which had been Lutheran from 1524 to 1681, was returned to the Catholic Church.
''Vins d'Alsace'' (Alsace wines) are mostly white.
Derived from the above, "Alsatia" was historically a cant term for the area near Whitefriars, London, which was for a long time a sanctuary.
Holy Roman Empire central power had begun to decline following years of imperial adventures in Italian lands, often ceding hegemony in Western Europe to France, which had long since centralized power.
They financed about a third of the mortgages in Alsace.
In the 1830-1870 era most Jews moved to the cities, where they integrated and acculturated, as antisemitism sharply declined.
When Napoleon imposed military conscription without religious exception, most emigrated to the American continent.
While Jacques Peirotes, at this time deputy at the ''Landrat Elsass-Lothringen'' and just elected mayor of Strasbourg, proclaimed the forfeiture of the German Empire and the advent of the French Republic, a self-proclaimed government of Alsace-Lorraine declared independence as the "Republic of Alsace-Lorraine".
In 1307, the town of Belfort was first chartered by the Counts of Montbéliard.
"La Marseillaise" was played for the first time in April of that year in front of the mayor of Strasbourg Philippe-Frédéric de Dietrich.
These include those of Fischer, Karlsbräu, Kronenbourg, and Heineken International.
''Freiheit Gleichheit Brüderlichk.
In 1972, the Inspector General of German, Georges Holderith, obtained authorization to reintroduce German into 33 intermediate classes on an experimental basis.
* automobile industry (Mulhouse and Molsheim, home town of Bugatti Automobiles)
This situation has spurred a movement to preserve the Alsatian language, which is perceived as endangered, a situation paralleled in other ''régions'' of France, such as Brittany or Occitania.
Port traffic of Alsace exceeds 15&nbsp;million tonnes, of which about three-quarters is centred on Strasbourg, which is the second busiest French fluvial harbour.
When the French Revolutionary Army of the Rhine was victorious, tens of thousands fled east before it.
Under Clovis' Merovingian successors the inhabitants were Christianized.
The Franco-Prussian War, which started in July 1870, saw France defeated in May 1871 by the Kingdom of Prussia and other German states.
However, in order not to antagonize the Alsatians, the region was not subjected to some legal changes that had occurred in the rest of France between 1871 and 1919, such as the 1905 French Law of Separation of Church and State.
Alsace historically was part of the Holy Roman Empire and the German realm of culture.
Alsace's population increased to 1,868,183 in 2013.
The population grew rapidly, from 800,000 in 1814 to 914,000 in 1830 and 1,067,000 in 1846.
On the other hand, persons born in France with foreign citizenship (the children of immigrants) are not listed as immigrants.Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria
Some of the most famous generals of the French Revolution also came from Alsace, notably Kellermann, the victor of Valmy, Kléber, who led the armies of the French Republic in Vendée and Westermann, who also fought in the Vendée.
At present, plans are being considered for building a new dual carriageway west of Strasbourg, which would reduce the buildup of traffic in that area by picking up north and southbound vehicles and getting rid of the buildup outside Strasbourg.
Few young people speak Alsatian today, although there do still exist one or two enclaves in the Sundgau region where some older inhabitants cannot speak French, and where Alsatian is still used as the mother tongue.
To add to the buildup of traffic, the neighbouring German state of Baden-Württemberg has imposed a tax on heavy-goods vehicles using their Autobahnen.
Thus, a proportion of the HGVs travelling from north Germany to Switzerland or southern Alsace bypasses the A5 on the Alsace-Baden-Württemberg border and uses the untolled, French A35 instead.
According to the ''Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques'' (INSEE), Alsace had a gross domestic product of 44.3&nbsp;billion euros in 2002.
Most of the Alsatian population is Roman Catholic, but, largely because of the region's German heritage, a significant Protestant community also exists: today, the EPCAAL (a Lutheran church) is France's second largest Protestant church, also forming an administrative union (UEPAL) with the much smaller Calvinist EPRAL.
Tod'' (Liberty Equality Fraternity or Death)
Some of the latter were involved in war crimes such as the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre.
To protect this highly valued industry, the Romans built fortifications and military camps that evolved into various communities which have been inhabited continuously to the present day.
In 1262, after a long struggle with the ruling bishops, its citizens gained the status of free imperial city.
Many of the residents of the Sundgau made "pilgrimages" to places like Mariastein Abbey, near Basel, in Switzerland, for baptisms and weddings.
Its network is articulated around the city of Strasbourg.
