Unlike the previous case, "backyard" altar worship was quickly eradicated.
In the earliest days of the Church, the Eucharist appears to have been celebrated on portable altars set up for the purpose.
In Reformed and Anabaptist churches, a table, often called a "communion table", serves an analogous function.
In Anglican practice, conformity to a given standard depends on the ecclesiastical province and/or the liturgical sensibilities of a given parish.
(See, for example, Qingming Festival and Ghost Festival.)
Also kept on the altar is the Gospel Book.
It is also the place where the presiding clergy stand at any service, even where no Eucharist is being celebrated and no offering is made other than prayer.
In addition to the higher clergy, subdeacons are permitted to touch the Table of Oblation, but no one of lesser rank may do so.
Nearly all forms of Chinese traditional religion involve ''baibai'' (拜拜)--bowing towards an altar, with a stick of incense in one's hand.
As many new Buddhist sects came into being, the butsudan was placed in many temples.
A possible use of the hörgr during a sacrifice would be to place upon it a bowl of the blood of an animal sacrificed to a Norse deity (e.g.
All Christian Churches see the altar on which the Eucharist is offered as the "table of the Lord" (''trapeza Kyriou'') of Saint Paul's .
Churches generally have a single altar, although in the West, as a result of the former abandonment of concelebration of Mass, so that priests always celebrated Mass individually, larger churches have had one or more side chapels, each with its own altar.
The liturgical norms state:
The Epitaphios and Cross are also placed on the Table of Oblation before the priest and deacon solemnly transfer them to the Holy Table.
When travelling, a priest could take one with him and place it on an ordinary table for saying Mass.
Nothing other than the sacred vessels, veils, etc.
Altars of East Syrian Rite are similar in appearance to Armenian altars only they are not placed on a stage.
Originating in ancient times, ''himorogi'' are temporarily erected sacred spaces or "altars" used as a locus of worship.
A war altar was a mobile altar on which Mass was celebrated before a battle.
In many churches it is the custom for a dust cover to be placed on the Holy Table between services.
In Buddhism, a ''butsudan'' is an altar found in temples or homes.
As time went on, people began installing butsudans into their homes.
The butsudan is a wooden cabinet with doors that enclose and protect a religious image of the Buddha or the Bodhisattvas (typically in the form of a statue) or a mandala scroll, installed in the highest place of honor and centered.
A butsudan usually contains subsidiary religious items—called ''butsugu''—such as candlesticks, incense burners, bells, and platforms for placing offerings such as fruit.
However, the following should be noted:
In Hinduism, altars generally contain pictures or statues of gods and goddesses.
It is away from the wall as in the Coptic tradition.
Some historians hold that, during the persecutions, the Eucharist was celebrated among the tombs in the Catacombs of Rome, using the sarcophagi (see sarcophagus) of martyrs as altars on which to celebrate.
In the ''Parson's Handbook'', an influential manual for priests popular in the early-to-mid-twentieth century, Percy Dearmer recommends that "All altars should be 3 ft. 3 in.
"Altar" has a meaning in the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches that varies with context.
Butsudan are extremely expensive.
Altars occupy a prominent place in the sanctuaries of all churches of the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Assyrian Church of the East, and the Ancient Church of the East, and in most Anglican and Lutheran churches.
In some temples, the front of the room is separated with walls and several altars are placed in the alcoves.
Another form of sacrifice involves the burning of Hell Bank Notes, on the assumption that images thus consumed by the fire will reappear—not as a mere image, but as the actual item—in the spirit world, and be available for the departed spirit to use.
Typically, these altars are made of wood, and may or may not have a solid front, which may or may not be ornamented.
This was variously interpreted over the years to mean the north side of the front of a fixed communion table, the north end of a fixed table (i.e., facing south), the north side of a free-standing table (presumably facing those intending to receive the Elements who would be sitting in the quire stalls opposite), or at the north  end of a free-standing table lengthwise in the chancel, facing a congregation seated in the nave.
The shape of the altar is usually rectangular, similar to Latin altars, but is unusual in that it will normally have several steps on top of the table, on which are placed the tabernacle, candles, ceremonial fans, a cross, and the Gospel Book.
The altar table itself may be referred to as either the ''Holy Table'' or the ''Throne'' (chu ''Prestól'').
This remains the official terminology, though common usage may call the communion table an altar.
:c) A reliquary must not be placed on the altar or in the table of the altar but beneath the table of the altar, as the design of the altar may allow.
Other historians dispute this, but it is thought to be the origin of the tradition of placing relics beneath the altar.
Altars in the Alexandrian (Coptic) tradition must have a square face upon which to offer the sacrifice.
A wide variety of altars exist in various Protestant denominations.
Altar stones were used by army chaplains of the Latin Church in the period leading up to the 20th century.
This section will describe the Holy Table, not the sanctuary.
The term "movable altar" or "portable altar" is now used of a full-scale structural altar, with or without an inserted altar stone, that can in fact be moved.
Altars in the Anglican Communion vary widely.
After the theophany on Mount Sinai, in the Tabernacle—and afterwards in the Temple—only two altars were used: the Altar of Burnt Offering, and the Altar of Incense.
The Pontificale Romanum contained a rite for blessing at the same time several of these altar stones.
or at most bring in a Communion table when needed.
In more elaborate cases, a ''himorogi'' may be constructed by placing a rough straw mat upon the ground, then erecting a ceremonial eight-legged stand (''hakkyaku an'') upon the mat and decorating the stand with a framework upon which are placed sacred border ropes and sacred border emblems.
They are usually made of wood and have tiled floors for statues to be placed upon.
Large, ornate shrines can be purchased in India and countries with large Hindu minorities, like Malaysia and Singapore.
If free-standing, they could be placed, as also in Eastern Christianity, within a ciborium (sometimes called a baldachin).
"When Christians in fourth-century Rome could first freely begin to build churches, they customarily located the sanctuary towards the west end of the building in imitation of the sanctuary of the Jerusalem Temple.
A movable altar may be of any noble solid material suitable for liturgical use.
Altars are often heavily decorated in the Indian tradition.
Altars (, '''''mizbe'ah''''', "a place of slaughter or sacrifice") in the Hebrew Bible were typically made of earth    or unwrought stone.
Some are constructed merely of rough-hewn or stacked stone, and some are made of fine wood or other finished material.
Often, where a celebrant chose to situate himself was meant to convey his churchmanship (that is, more Reformed or more Catholic).
Some South Indians also place a shrine with pictures of their departed relatives on the right side of the room, and make offerings to them before making offerings to the gods.
It is so named because the supplicants gather at the altar located at the front of the church (however, the invitation is referred to as an "altar call", despite the fact that most Protestant denominations which have this practice do not have altars or Communion tables).
The altar is often on a higher elevation than the rest of the church.
This may be done at home, or in a temple, or outdoors; by an ordinary person, or a professional (such as a ''Daoshi'' 道士); and the altar may feature any number of deities or ancestral tablets.
Above this first cover is a second ornamented altar cloth (''Indítia''), often in a brocade of a liturgical color that may change with the ecclesiastical season.
Those that come forward will usually be asked to recite a sinner's prayer, which, in the Protestant understanding, if truly heart-felt indicates that they are now "saved".
Sometimes it covers only the Gospel Book or the front half of the Holy Table, but it may be large enough to cover the entire Holy Table and everything on it, including candlesticks and the seven-branch candelabra.
For example, icons are usually blessed by laying them on the Holy Table for a period of time or for a certain number of Divine Liturgies before sprinkling them with holy water, and placing them where they will be venerated.
Many historical faiths also made use of them, including Greek and Norse religion.
In the Armenian Rite the altar is placed against the eastern wall of the church, often in an apse.
When not in use, the antimension is left in place in the center of the Holy Table and is not removed except for necessity.
The altar plays a central role in the celebration of the Eucharist, which takes place at the altar on which the bread and the wine for consecration are placed.
Since the altar is never seen uncovered thereafter, the table tends to be constructed more with sturdiness than aesthetics in mind.
After the sixth century the contrary orientation prevailed, with the entrance to the west and the altar at the east end.
When the Japanese finally welcomed Buddhism after many years of Shintoism, they took in the religion along with the butsudan.
It has five legs: one at each corner plus a central pillar for supporting the relics which are placed in it at its consecration (if, however, the consecration was not performed by a bishop, but by a priest whom he delegated for that purpose, relics are not placed in the Holy Table).
The practice of worship on these spots became frequent among the Hebrews, though after the temple was built it was forbidden.
The Latin Church distinguishes between fixed altars (those attached to the floor) and movable altars (those that can be displaced), and states: "It is desirable that in every church there be a fixed altar, since this more clearly and permanently signifies Christ Jesus, the Living Stone (; cf.
Each Hindu altar will have at least one oil lamp and may contain a tray with puja equipment as well.
The Table of Oblation is also blessed, sprinkled with holy water and vested at the consecration of a church, but there are no relics placed in it.
An '''altar''' is any structure upon which offerings such as sacrifices are made for religious purposes, and by extension the 'Holy table' of post-reformation Anglican churches.
When altars are placed away from the wall of the chancel allowing a westward orientation, only two candles are placed on either end of it, since six would obscure the liturgical action, undermining the intent of a westward orientation (i.e., that it be visible to the congregation).
Although in the days of the Jerusalem Temple the High Priest indeed faced east when sacrificing on Yom Kippur, the sanctuary within which he stood was located at the western end of the Temple.
There is usually a space to put the puja tray (tray with worship offerings).
This includes both the area behind the iconostasis, and the soleas (the elevated projection in front of the iconostasis), and the ambo.
Some evangelical churches practice what is referred to as an altar call, whereby those who wish to make a new spiritual commitment to Jesus Christ are invited to come forward publicly.
At the time of the Reformation, altars were fixed against the east end of the church, and the priests would celebrate the Mass standing at the front of the altar.
a goat for Thor, a sow for Freyja, a boar for Freyr), then dipping a bundle of fir twigs into it and sprinkling the participants with the blood.
Altar calls may also invite those who are already fully members of the Christian community to come forward for specific purposes other than conversion; for example, to pray for some need, to rededicate their lives after a lapse, or to receive a particular blessing (such as the Gifts of the Holy Spirit) or if they are called to certain tasks such as missionary work.
The linen covering symbolizes the winding sheet in which the body of Christ was wrapped when he was laid in the tomb.
"In building new churches, it is preferable for a single altar to be erected, one that in the gathering of the faithful will signify the one Christ and the one Eucharist of the Church.
For both Orthodox and Eastern Catholics, the Holy Table (altar) is normally free-standing, although in very small sanctuaries it might be placed flush against the back wall for reasons of space.
In that case, it was the altar stone that was considered liturgically to be the altar.
The Prothesis symbolizes the cave of Bethlehem and also the Anointing stone at which the Body of Christ was prepared after the Deposition from the Cross.
The first altar recorded in the Hebrew Bible is that erected by Noah.
In many Anglican parishes, the use of frontals has persisted.
The statues on the altars are usually in pairs, each god with his consort (Radha-Krishna, Sita-Rama, Shiva-Parvati).
In the Book of Common Prayer, the basis of doctrine and practice for the Church of England, there is no use of the word 'altar'; the item in question is called 'the Lord's Table' or 'Holy Table'.
When Buddhism came to China and Korea, statues of the Buddha were placed on pedestals or platforms.
Such a table is normally not consecrated or blessed in any manner, and may be temporary, being moved into place only when there is a Communion Service.
In order that the attention of the faithful not be distracted from the new altar the old altar should not be decorated in any special way."
Some hold that for the central part of the celebration the congregation faced the same way.
Since the revival of concelebration in the West, the Roman Missal recommends that in new churches there should be only one altar, "which in the gathering of the faithful will signify the one Christ and the one Eucharist of the Church."
This outer covering usually comes all the way to the floor and represents the glory of God's Throne.
The altar should be covered by at least one white cloth, and nothing else should be placed upon the altar table other than what is required for the liturgical celebration.
Hence, the table upon which the Eucharist is consecrated is called an altar.
This would consecrate the attendees to the ceremony, such as a wedding.
In some colloquial usage, the word "altar" is used to denote the altar rail also, although this usage is technically incorrect.
They could then safely offer their prayers, incense, etc.
The "Order of Common Worship" of the
Hindus with large houses will set aside one room as their puja room, with the altar at one end of it.
The main altar was also referred to as the "high altar".
The carroccio also served as the army standard.
As well as altars in the structural sense, it became customary in the West to have what in Latin were referred to as ''altaria portatilia'' (portable altars), more commonly referred to in English as "altar stones".
The altar, fixed or movable, should as a rule be separate from the wall so as to make it easy to walk around it and to celebrate Mass at it facing the people.
On the northern side of the sanctuary stands another, smaller altar, known as the Table of Oblation (''Prothesis'' or ''Zhértvennik'') at which the Liturgy of Preparation takes place.
Before there was a set temple and an established altar people built their own altars.
Beginning with the rubrics of the Second Prayer Book of Edward VI published in 1552, and through the 1662 Book of Common Prayer (which prevailed for almost 300 years), the priest is directed to stand "at the north syde of the Table."
The word for temple is ''mandir'' (san: मन्दिर), the altar (and that which contains it, even an alcove or a small cabinet) as hypostatised temple.
Having or not having a Communion table was a subject of dispute within Scottish Presbyterianism in the 17th century, with the Independents opposing its use.
to the statue or scroll without it falling and breaking.
He also recommends that the altar stand upon three steps for each of the three sacred ministers, and that it be decorated with a silk frontal in the seasonal colour.
File:Tel Be'er Sheva Altar 2007041.JPG|Horned altar at Tel Be'er Sheva, Israel.
The doors are opened to display the image during religious observances.
File:3217 - Athens - Sto… of Attalus Museum - Kylix - Photo by Giovanni Dall'Orto, Nov 9 2009.jpg|Ancient Greek kylix showing a hoplite offering a sacrifice before an altar, around 480 BC.
This last norm explicitly excludes the practice customary in recent centuries of inserting relics into a specially created cavity within the table of an altar or altar stone.
In others, there is considerably less strictness about the communion table.
Under the Gospel is kept the ''antimension'', a silken cloth imprinted with an icon of Christ being prepared for burial, which has a relic sewn into it and bears the signature of the bishop.
:a) Relics intended for deposition should be of such a size that they can be recognized as parts of human bodies.
Many of these groups make use of altars.
The Epitaphios on Good Friday, and the Cross on the Feasts of the Cross, are also placed on the Holy Table before they are taken to the center of the church to be venerated by the faithful.
When placed close to a wall or touching it, altars were often surmounted by a reredos or altarpiece.
The use of candles or tabernacles was banned by canon law, with the only appointed adornment being a white linen cloth.
Both Catholics and Protestants celebrate the Eucharist at such altars outside of churches and chapels, as outdoors or in an auditorium.
In Shinto, altars are found in shrines.
''Liturgy of the Druids''    (New Reformed Druids of North America) calls for a fire to be started "in or near the altar" and makes use of various objecs such as a chalice, staves, and a plant offering.
The sanctuary may be dominated only by a large, centralized pulpit or there may be no pulpit as in old Quaker meeting houses.
Movable altars include the free-standing wooden tables without altar stone, placed in the choir away from the east wall, favoured by churches that adhered to the Protestant Reformation.
In South Indian temples, often each god will have His or Her own shrine, each contained in a miniature house (specifically, a ''mandir'').
If no altar is used, the objects may be placed on the ground.
At certain dates, food may be set out as a sacrifice to the gods and/or spirits of the departed.
In Neopaganism there is a wide variety of ritual practice, running the gamut from a very eclectic Syncretism to strict Polytheistic reconstructionism.
Then the ministers and congregation all faced east during the whole celebration; and in Western Europe altars began, in the Middle Ages, to be permanently placed against the east wall of the chancel.
But most Western churches of an earlier period, whether Roman Catholic or Anglican, may have a high altar in the main body of the church, with one or more adjoining chapels, each with its own altar, at which the Eucharist may be celebrated on weekdays.
The Holy Table is used as the place of offering in the celebration of the Eucharist, where bread and wine are offered to God the Father and the Holy Spirit is invoked to make his Son Jesus Christ present in the Gifts.
In some parishes, the notion that the surface of the altar should only be touched by those in holy orders is maintained.
They were also inserted into the centre of structural altars especially those made of wood.
In Ethiopian tradition, an icon is placed upon but towards the rear of the altar.
Lutheran altars are commonly made out of granite, but other materials are also used.
They are also found in a minority of other Protestant worship places, though the term "communion table", which avoids the sacrificial connotations of an altar, is often preferred.
Atop the altar is the tabernacle (''Kovtchég''), a miniature shrine sometimes built in the form of a church, inside of which is a small ark containing the Reserved sacrament for use in communing the sick.
They may also be offered religious literature, counselling or other assistance.
Ritual items such as flowers or lamps may be placed on the altar.
Nonetheless, the continued popularity of communion rails in Anglican church construction suggests that a sense of the sanctity of the altar and its surrounding area persists.
Lutherans believe that the altar represents Christ and should only be used to consecrate and distribute the Eucharist.
The shrines have curtains hung over the entrances, and wooden doors which are shut when the Deities are sleeping.
This may include rice, slaughtered pigs and ducks, or fruit.
Architecturally, there are two types of altars: those that are attached to the eastern wall of the chancel, and those that are free-standing and can be walked around, for instance when incensing the altar.
Placing of relics even in the base of a movable altar is also excluded.
On it the bread and wine are prepared before the Divine Liturgy.
The Eastern Catholic Churches each follow their own traditions, which in general correspond to those of similar Eastern Orthodox or Oriental Orthodox Churches.
St Andrew's Anglican Cathedral in Sydney "wheels its altar in as if needed".
File:Cathedral Altar.JPG|Altar at Grace Cathedral, San Francisco
Altars are usually found at shrines, and they can be located in  temples, churches and other places of worship.
The Divine Liturgy must be served on an antimension even if the altar has been consecrated and contains relics.
Most Coptic altars are located under a baldachin.
File:StThomas'Bunyip.jpg|Altar in Bunyip, Victoria, Australia
When Christianity was legalized under Constantine the Great and Licinius, formal church buildings were built in great numbers, normally with free-standing altars in the middle of the sanctuary, which in all the earliest churches built in Rome was at the west end of the church.
The ultimate example is the carroccio of the medieval Italian city states, which was a four-wheeled mobile shrine pulled by oxen and sporting a flagpole and a bell.
In almost all cases, the eastward orientation for prayer was maintained, whether the altar was at the west end of the church, as in all the earliest churches in Rome, in which case the priest celebrating Mass faced the congregation and the church entrance, or whether it was at the east end of the church, in which case the priest faced the eastern apse and had his back to the congregation.
After the temple was built use of these altars was forbidden.
The altar is often located upon a kind of stage above a row of icons.
The exact dimensions may vary, but it is generally square in plan and in reasonable proportion to the size of the sanctuary.
In Catholic and Orthodox Christian theology, the Eucharist is a re-presentation, in the literal sense of the one sacrifice being made "present again".
Some buddhist sects place "ihai," memorial tablets for deceased relatives, within or near the butsudan.
The Japanese took the plain walls and doors of the mainland shrines and elaborately embellished them, and the butsudan became the focal point of every temple.
Though little is known of the specific religious beliefs and practices presided over by the ancient Druids, modern people who identify themselves as Druids are free to incorporate their imagination in developing ceremonies and the use of ritual objects in keeping with their belief system.
File:All Saints Bristol 07b altar ciborium.jpg|The altar with ciborium at All Saints Anglican church, Bristol, England
Some South Indian temples have one main altar, with several statues placed upon it.
Candlesticks and a crucifix, when required, can be either on the altar or near it, and it is desirable that the crucifix remain even outside of liturgical celebrations.
Altars were erected by Abraham, by Isaac, by Jacob, and by Moses, (''Adonai-nissi'').
Pictures may be hung on the walls of the shrine.
A smaller brocade cover is used on top of this if it is desired that the altar decoration reflect the liturgical season.
A physical area is demarcated with branches of green bamboo or ''sakaki'' at the four corners, between which are strung sacred border ropes (''shimenawa'').
Scrolls (''honzon'') or statues are placed in the butsudan and prayed to morning and evening.
This diversity was recognized in the rubrics of the  Roman Missal from the 1604 typical edition of Pope Clement VIII to the 1962 edition of Pope John XXIII: ''"Si altare sit ad orientem, versus populum&nbsp;..."''
Taoist altars may be erected in temples or in private homes.
It is better for an altar to be dedicated without relics than to have relics of doubtful credibility placed beneath it.
The statue of the God (murti) is placed on a stone pedestal in the shrine, and one or more lamps are hung in the shrine.
Prior to the conquest of Canaan by the Israelites in the 12th–11th century BC, the high places served as shrines of the Canaanite fertility deities, the Baals (Lords) and the Asherot (Semitic goddesses).
In Calvinist churches from Reformed, Baptist, Congregational, and Non-denominational backgrounds, it is very common for the altar-like table to have on it only an open Bible and a pair of candlesticks; it is not referred to as an "altar" because they do not see Communion as sacrificial in any way.
The rite of the Dedication of the Church   continued to presume that the officiating Bishop could circle the altar during the consecration of the church and its altar.
The rules indicated here are those of the Latin Church.
Taoist altars are erected to honor traditional deities and the spirits of ancestors.
In other places set aside for sacred celebrations, the altar may be movable."
But in orthodox Daoist practice, offerings should essentially be incense, candles and vegetarian offerings.
Such Communion Tables often bear the inscription: "Do This in Remembrance of Me",  which they believe indicates Holy Communion as being a memorial rather than a sacrament.
They may be dedictated to Thor, Odin, or other Nordic deities.
Butsudans are often decorated with flowers.
