This adaptation is not found in all plants.
After falling to Earth, atmospheric shielding drastically reduces 26Al production, and its decay can then be used to determine the meteorite's terrestrial age.
Aluminium chloride process can also be used for the co-production of titanium, depending on titanium contents in kaolinite.
Minimizing line currents for older technologies are typically 100 to 200 kiloamperes; state-of-the-art smelters operate at about 350 kA.
The non-electrolytic ''aluminium carbothermic'' process of aluminium production would theoretically be cheaper and consume less energy.
The vast majority of compounds, including all Al-containing minerals and all commercially significant aluminium compounds, feature aluminium in the oxidation state 3+.
Heating the hydroxides leads to formation of corundum.
In 1926, the American Chemical Society officially decided to use ''aluminum'' in its publications; American dictionaries typically label the spelling ''aluminium'' as "chiefly British".
Despite its prevalence in the environment, no known form of life uses aluminium salts metabolically, but aluminium is well tolerated by plants and animals.
The pilot plant with 6500 tons/year output was started in 1976 by Alcoa.
More thoroughly investigated are compounds of the formula R4Al2 which contain an Al-Al bond and where R is a large organic ligand.
The Australian deposits have some refining problems, some being high in silica, but have the advantage of being shallow and relatively easy to mine.
The first gene for aluminium tolerance has been identified in wheat.
It is a silvery-white, soft, nonmagnetic, ductile metal.
Nevertheless, element names ending in ''-um'' were not unknown at the time; for example, platinum (known to Europeans since the 16th century), molybdenum (discovered in 1778), and tantalum (discovered in 1802).
Aluminium is usually alloyed – it is used as pure metal only when corrosion resistance and/or workability is more important than strength or hardness.
* Coins in such countries as France, Italy, Poland, Finland, Romania, Israel, and the former Yugoslavia struck from aluminium or an aluminium-copper alloy.
The capstone, which was set in place on 6 December 1884 in an elaborate dedication ceremony, was the largest single piece of aluminium cast at the time.
The IUPAC periodic table now includes both spellings.
When aluminium and fluoride are together in aqueous solution, they readily form complex ions such as , , and .
One important structural limitation of aluminium alloys is their fatigue strength.
(2011) propose the theory that these deposits resulted from bacterial reduction of tetrahydroxoaluminate Al(OH)4−.
* Outer shells and cases for consumer electronics and photographic equipment.
Instead, it is found combined in over 270 different minerals.
Aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water.
The lower melting points of aluminium alloys make them more susceptible to distortions from thermally induced stress relief.
Nevertheless, some studies, such as those on the PAQUID cohort, cite aluminium exposure as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.
Other reports all refer back to the 2001 Spanish report and there is no supporting original research.
The process produces aluminium billets, together with a highly complex waste material.
The dross can undergo a further process to extract aluminium.
This process involves the electrolysis of molten aluminium with a sodium, barium and aluminium fluoride electrolyte.
The acetylide, Al2(C2)3, is made by passing acetylene over heated aluminium.
Aluminium and its alloys are vital to the aerospace industry and important in transportation and structures, such as building facades and window frames.
In 2005, the People's Republic of China was the top producer of aluminium with almost a one-fifth world share, followed by Russia, Canada, and the US, reports the British Geological Survey.
Aluminium is a relatively soft, durable, lightweight, ductile, and malleable metal with appearance ranging from silvery to dull gray, depending on the surface roughness.
Most are produced from ores by a variety of wet processes using acid and base.
* Musical instruments.
Another important use is extrusion.
Aluminium is a good thermal and electrical conductor, having 59% the conductivity of copper, both thermal and electrical, while having only 30% of copper's density.
A stable derivative of aluminium monoiodide is the cyclic adduct formed with triethylamine, .
Sapphire and ruby are impure corundum contaminated with trace amounts of other metals.
* MKM steel and Alnico magnets.
The US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recommended exposure limit is the same for respiratory exposure but is 10&nbsp;mg/m3 for total exposure, and 5&nbsp;mg/m3 for fumes and powder.
Sorghum is believed to have the same tolerance mechanism.
(Compare this to the heat of reaction, 31 MJ/kg, and the Gibbs free energy of reaction, 29 MJ/kg.)
Although it has a similar name, aluminium chlorohydrate has fewer and very different applications, particularly as a colloidal agent in water purification and an antiperspirant.
The resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99%.
Unlike the oxides, it features tetrahedral Al centers.
* Cooking utensils, because of its resistant to corrosion and light-weight.
Recycled aluminium is known as secondary aluminium, but maintains the same physical properties as primary aluminium.
The metal was first produced in 1825 in an impure form by Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian Ørsted.
Nonetheless, its occurrence in antiperspirants, dyes (such as aluminium lake), and food additives has caused concern.
The use of aluminium cookware has not been shown to lead to aluminium toxicity in general, however excessive consumption of antacids containing aluminium compounds and excessive use of aluminium-containing antiperspirants provide more significant exposure levels.
There are three trihydroxides: bayerite, gibbsite, and nordstrandite, which differ in their crystalline structure (polymorphs).
A fresh film of aluminium serves as a good reflector (approximately 92%) of visible light and an excellent reflector (as much as 98%) of medium and far infrared radiation.
The estrogen-like effects of these salts have led to their classification as metalloestrogens.
Consumption of acidic foods or liquids with aluminium enhances aluminium absorption, and maltol has been shown to increase the accumulation of aluminium in nerve and bone tissues.
In those without allergies, aluminium is not as toxic as heavy metals, but there is evidence of some toxicity if it is consumed in amounts greater than 40&nbsp;mg/day per kg of body mass.
The next major application is in the manufacture of paper.
Aluminium has about one-third the density and stiffness of steel.
Another alloy of some value is aluminium bronze (Cu-Al alloy).
Bauxite is mined from large deposits in Australia, Brazil, Guinea, and Jamaica; it is also mined  from lesser deposits in China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and Suriname.
With large organic groups, triorganoaluminium compounds exist as three-coordinate monomers, such as triisobutylaluminium.
There is also an obsolete variant ''alumium''.
Aluminium oxides are common catalysts for industrial processes; e.g.
The Cowles companies supplied aluminium alloy in quantity in the United States and England using smelters like the furnace of Carl Wilhelm Siemens by 1886.
It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, among others, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which spontaneously ignites on contact with air; contact with damp air results in the release of copious quantities of ammonia gas.
The ''-ium'' suffix followed the precedent set in other newly discovered elements of the time: potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium, and strontium (all of which Davy isolated himself).
There is little evidence that aluminium in antiperspirants causes skin irritation.
Very simple Al(II) compounds are invoked or observed in the reactions of Al metal with oxidants.
Recycling involves melting the scrap, a process that requires only 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore, though a significant part (up to 15% of the input material) is lost as dross (ash-like oxide).
Meteoroid fragments, after departure from their parent bodies, are exposed to intense cosmic-ray bombardment during their travel through space, causing substantial 26Al production.
Secondary aluminium is produced in a wide range of formats and is employed in 80% of alloy injections.
In the Earths mantle, which is only 2% aluminium by mass, these aluminium silicate minerals are largely replaced by silica and magnesium oxides.
Aluminium isotopes are useful in dating marine sediments, manganese nodules, glacial ice, quartz in rock exposures, and meteorites.
* Street lighting poles, sailing ship masts, walking poles.
* Electrical transmission lines for power distribution ("creep" and oxidation are not issues in this application as the terminations are usually multi-sided "crimps" which enclose all sides of the conductor with a gas-tight seal).
: 4 LiH + AlCl3 → LiAlH4 + 3 LiCl
Europe has achieved high rates of aluminium recycling ranging from 42% of beverage cans, 85% of construction materials, and 95% of transport vehicles.
Wöhler is therefore generally credited with isolating aluminium (Latin ''alumen'', alum).
Another important property of aluminium alloys is sensitivity to heat.
All four trihalides are well known.
Some brain plaques have been found to contain increased levels of the metal.
It is an intermediate in the production of aluminium metal.
One major use is to absorb water where it is viewed as a contaminant or impurity.
However, because of its general resistance to corrosion, aluminium is one of the few metals that retains silvery reflectance in finely powdered form, making it an important component of silver-colored paints.
Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates.
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted ''aluminium'' as the standard international name for the element in 1990 but, three years later, recognized ''aluminum'' as an acceptable variant.
Such materials quickly disproportionate to the starting materials.
The octahedral coordination environment for AlF3 is related to the compactness of the fluoride ion, six of which can fit around the small Al3+ center.
Over the last 50 years, Australia has become the world's top producer of bauxite ore and a major producer and exporter of alumina (before being overtaken by China in 2007).
Some of the many uses for aluminium metal are in:
Some smelters achieve approximately 12.8&nbsp;kW·h/kg (46.1 MJ/kg).
Aluminium also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel, and turquoise.
In modern smelters, the gas is filtered through alumina to remove fluorine compounds and return aluminium fluoride to the electrolytic cells.
This waste is difficult to manage.
In the mid-1880s, aluminium metal was exceedingly difficult to produce, which made pure aluminium more valuable than gold.
The high energy consumption of Hall–Héroult process motivated the development of the electrolytic process based on aluminium chloride.
Few analogues exist between organoaluminium and organoboron compounds other than large organic groups.
With heavier halides, the coordination numbers are lower.
Aluminium has a stacking-fault energy of approximately 200 mJ/m2.
The world's largest smelters of alumina are located in the People's Republic of China, Russia and the provinces of Quebec and British Columbia in Canada.
Cosmogenic 26Al was first applied in studies of the Moon and meteorites.
Aluminium is still used in electrical services with specially designed wire termination hardware.
Trials have been reported with 500 kA cells.
The main alloying agents are copper, zinc, magnesium, manganese, and silicon (e.g., duralumin) with the levels of other metals in a few percent by weight.
As described in his 1859 book, aluminium trichloride could be reduced by sodium, which was more convenient and less expensive than potassium, which Wöhler had used.
He conducted a similar experiment in 1827 by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and produced aluminium.
It can be made from the elements at .
* Construction (windows, doors, siding, building wire, sheathing, roofing, etc.
Aluminium increases estrogen-related gene expression in human breast cancer cells cultured in the laboratory.
The Earth's crust has a greater abundance of aluminium than the rest of the planet, primarily in aluminium silicates.
Davy settled on ''aluminum'' by the time he published his 1812 book ''Chemical Philosophy'': "This substance appears to contain a peculiar metal, but as yet Aluminum has not been obtained in a perfectly free state, though alloys of it with other metalline substances have been procured sufficiently distinct to indicate the probable nature of alumina."
Héroult's process was in production by 1889 in Switzerland at Aluminium Industrie, now Alcan, and at British Aluminium, now Luxfer Group and Alcoa, by 1896 in Scotland.
In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant (8.3% by mass) metallic element and the third most abundant of all elements (after oxygen and silicon).
In 2013, about 10% of the domestic shipments in the United States were used for other applications.
Despite these difficulties, the waste is used as a filler in asphalt and concrete.
Charles Martin Hall of Ohio in the U.S. and Paul Héroult of France independently developed the Hall-Héroult electrolytic process that facilitated large-scale production of metallic aluminium.
Kramer Guitars and Travis Bean are both known for having produced guitars with necks made of aluminium, which gives the instrument a very distinctive sound.
It is air-stable material with a usefully high thermal conductivity.
The United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a permissible exposure limit of 15&nbsp;mg/m3 time weighted average (TWA) for total exposure and 5&nbsp;mg/m3 TWA for respiratory exposure.
The ratio of 26Al to 10Be has been used to study transport, deposition, sediment storage, burial times, and erosion on 105 to 106 year time scales.
It is also used as a mordant, in fire extinguishers, in fireproofing, as a food additive (E number E173), and in leather tanning.
Such compounds are widely used in industrial chemistry, despite the fact that they are often highly pyrophoric.
Much of this is in more-developed countries ( per capita) rather than less-developed countries ( per capita).
However, these life forms do not directly attack or consume the aluminium; rather, the metal is corroded by microbe waste products.
The oxides and sulfates are the most useful compounds of aluminium.
Primarily because it is corroded by dissolved chlorides, such as common sodium chloride, household plumbing is never made from aluminium.
Being a very hard material (Mohs hardness 9), alumina is widely used as an abrasive; being extraordinarily chemically inert, it is useful in highly reactive environments such as high pressure sodium lamps.
Aluminium wire was once widely used for domestic electrical wiring in the United States, and a number of fires resulted from creep and corrosion-induced failures at junctions and terminations; additional and preventable factors in the failures have been identified.
The presence of aluminium can be detected in qualitative analysis using aluminon.
Stress can be relieved and controlled during manufacturing by heat-treating the parts in an oven, followed by gradual cooling—in effect annealing the stresses.
Acidification of the oxides or hydroxides affords hydrates.
He reacted anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin.
Manual blow torch operations require additional skill and experience.
The low melting point of aluminium alloys has not precluded use in rocketry, even in combustion chambers where gases can reach 3500&nbsp;K. The Agena upper stage engine used regeneratively cooled aluminium in some parts of the nozzle, including the thermally critical throat region.
The other trihalides are dimeric or polymeric with tetrahedral Al centers.
Aluminium forms one stable oxide, known by its mineral name corundum.
In case of suspected sudden intake of a large amount of aluminium, deferoxamine mesylate may be given to help eliminate it from the body by chelation.
Although the great majority of aluminium compounds feature Al3+ centers, compounds with lower oxidation states are known and sometime of significance as precursors to the Al3+ species.
IUPAC internal publications use the two spelling with nearly equal frequency.
Almost all metallic aluminium is produced from the ore bauxite (AlO''x''(OH)3–2''x'').
Al2O is made by heating the normal oxide, Al2O3, with silicon at  in a vacuum.
A Spanish scientific report from 2001 claimed that the fungus ''Geotrichum candidum'' consumes the aluminium in compact discs.
According to the Alzheimer's Society, the medical and scientific opinion is that studies have not convincingly demonstrated a causal relationship between aluminium and Alzheimer's disease.
Most acid soils are saturated with aluminium rather than hydrogen ions.
The pale yellow crystals consist of tetrahedral aluminium centers.
27Al has a natural abundance above 99.9%.
Several sulfates of aluminium have industrial and commercial application.
An aluminium stack melter produces significantly less dross, with values reported below 1%.
* Light reflective surfaces and paint.
Because of its strong affinity for oxygen, aluminium is almost never found in the elemental state; instead it is found in oxides or silicates.
In aqueous solution, the halides often form mixtures, generally containing six-coordinate Al centers that feature both halide and aquo ligands.
The yield strength of pure aluminium is 7–11 MPa, while aluminium alloys have yield strengths ranging from 200 MPa to 600 MPa.
Further, Pierre Berthier discovered aluminium in bauxite ore. Henri Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville improved Wöhler's method in 1846.
These materials are of central importance to the production of aluminium and are themselves extremely useful.
: AlP + 3 H2O → Al(OH)3 + PH3
About half of the production is consumed in water treatment.
But the same year, an anonymous contributor to the ''Quarterly Review,'' a British political-literary journal, in a review of Davy's book, objected to ''aluminum'' and proposed the name ''aluminium'', "for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound."
However, it has been in the experimental phase for decades because the high operating temperature creates difficulties in material technology that have not yet been solved.
26Al is produced from argon in the atmosphere by spallation caused by cosmic-ray protons.
AlF3 sublimes (with cracking) at .
* Transportation (automobiles, aircraft, trucks, railway cars, marine vessels, bicycles, spacecraft, etc.)
In highly acidic solutions, aluminium reacts with water to form hydrogen, and in highly alkaline ones to form aluminates— protective passivation under these conditions is negligible.
Aluminium is oxidized by water at temperatures below 280&nbsp;°C to produce hydrogen, aluminium hydroxide and heat:
The acidity of the soil is therefore, a result of hydrolysis of aluminium compounds.
Aluminium salts are remarkably nontoxic, aluminium sulfate having an LD50 of 6207&nbsp;mg/kg (oral, mouse), which corresponds to 500&nbsp;grams for an  person.
The earliest citation given in the Oxford English Dictionary for any word used as a name for this element is ''alumium'', which British chemist and inventor Humphry Davy employed in 1808 for the metal he was trying to isolate electrolytically from the mineral ''alumina''.
It was shown that sorghum's aluminium tolerance is controlled by a single gene, as for wheat.
Knowing the per capita stocks and their approximate lifespans is important for planning recycling.
These materials are prepared by treating aluminium metal with the halogen, although other methods exist.
Aluminium has many known isotopes, with mass numbers range from 21 to 42; however, only 27Al (stable) and 26Al (radioactive, t1⁄2&nbsp;= 7.2×105 years) occur naturally.
Fine aluminium powder can ignite or explode, posing another workplace hazard.
In the United States and Canada, the ending "-um" predominates.
Aluminium was selected as the material to use for the  capstone of the Washington Monument in 1884, a time when one ounce (30&nbsp;grams) cost the daily wage of a common worker on the project (in 1884 about $1 for 10 hours of labor; today, a construction worker in the US working on such a project might earn $25–$35 per hour and therefore around $300 in an equivalent single 10-hour day).
Bauxite occurs as a weathering product of low iron and silica bedrock in tropical climatic conditions.
Unlike steels, aluminium alloys have no well-defined fatigue limit, meaning that fatigue failure eventually occurs, under even very small cyclic loadings.
Although aluminium is a common and widespread element, not all aluminium minerals are economically viable sources of the metal.
Native aluminium metal can only be found as a minor phase in low oxygen fugacity environments, such as the interiors of certain volcanoes.
* Pyrotechnics, solid rocket fuels, and thermite.
the Claus process to convert hydrogen sulfide to sulfur in refineries and to alkylate amines.
A small percentage of people are allergic to aluminium and experience contact dermatitis, digestive disorders, vomiting or other symptoms upon contact or ingestion of products containing aluminium, such as antiperspirants and antacids.
Aluminium is theoretically 100% recyclable without any loss of its natural qualities.
This conversion is of interest for the production of hydrogen.
Overall, the Earth is about 1.4% aluminium by mass (eighth in abundance by mass).
Many industrial catalysts are "supported" by alumina, meaning that the expensive catalyst material (e.g., platinum) is dispersed over a surface of the inert alumina.
Aluminium electrolysis with the Hall–Héroult process consumes a lot of energy.
Aluminium is capable of superconductivity, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2 kelvin and a critical magnetic field of about 100 gauss (10 milliteslas).
Forecast for 2012 was 42–45 million tonnes, driven by rising Chinese output.
Impurities in Al2O3, such as chromium and iron, yield the gemstones ruby and sapphire, respectively.
Aluminium atoms are arranged in a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure.
Friedrich Wöhler was aware of these experiments and cited them, but after repeating Ørsted's experiments, he concluded that this metal was pure potassium.
The extremely low acute toxicity notwithstanding, the health effects of aluminium are of interest in view of the widespread occurrence of the element in the environment and in commerce.
Engineers must assess applications and design for a fixed and finite life of the structure, rather than infinite life.
Research in this area has been inconclusive; aluminium accumulation may be a consequence of the disease rather than a causal agent.
Because of their abundance, the potential for a biological role is of continuing interest and studies continue.
The concept of "corrected lime potential" is now used to define the degree of base saturation in soil testing to determine the "lime requirement".
The ''-um'' suffix is consistent with the universal spelling alumina for the oxide (as opposed to aluminia), as lanthana is the oxide of lanthanum, and magnesia, ceria, and thoria are the oxides of magnesium, cerium, and thorium respectively.
Aluminium metal is so chemically reactive that native specimens are rare and limited to extreme reducing environments.
Aluminium is the most widely used non-ferrous metal.
