Behavioural and neuropsychiatric changes become more prevalent.
People who eat a healthy, Japanese, or Mediterranean diet have a lower risk of AD.
Reported adverse events with memantine are infrequent and mild, including hallucinations, confusion, dizziness, headache and fatigue.
Whilst apolipoproteins enhance the breakdown of beta amyloid, some isoforms are not very effective at this task (such as APOE4), leading to excess amyloid buildup in the brain.
Regarding economic problems, family caregivers often give up time from work to spend 47&nbsp;hours per week on average with the person with AD, while the costs of caring for them are high.
Home care is usually preferred by people with AD and their families.
This includes vitamin A, C, E, selenium, zinc, and folic acid with or without vitamin B12.
In 2010, dementia resulted in about 486,000 deaths.
Neurological examination in early AD will usually provide normal results, except for obvious cognitive impairment, which may not differ from that resulting from other diseases processes, including other causes of dementia.
AD-associated costs include direct medical costs such as nursing home care, direct nonmedical costs such as in-home day care, and indirect costs such as lost productivity of both patient and caregiver.
This option also delays or eliminates the need for more professional and costly levels of care.
One such test involves the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid for beta-amyloid or tau proteins, both total tau protein and phosphorylated tau181P protein concentrations.
Various inflammatory processes and cytokines may also have a role in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease.
A probable diagnosis is based on the history of the illness and cognitive testing with medical imaging and blood tests to rule out other possible causes.
Fewer than 3% of people live more than fourteen years.
The role of the main caregiver is often taken by the spouse or a close relative.
People with Alzheimer's disease (and other forms of dementia) often develop problems with eating, due to difficulties in swallowing, reduced appetite or the inability to recognise food.
When swallowing difficulties arise, the use of feeding tubes may be required.
The cellular homeostasis of biometals such as ionic copper, iron, and zinc is disrupted in AD, though it remains unclear whether this is produced by or causes the changes in proteins.
The most common side effects are nausea and vomiting, both of which are linked to cholinergic excess.
N-APP triggers the self-destruct pathway by binding to a neuronal receptor called death receptor 6 (DR6, also known as TNFRSF21).
Stopping antipsychotic use in this group of people appears to be safe.
Reality orientation consists in the presentation of information about time, place or person to ease the understanding of the person about its surroundings and his or her place in them.
As the disease progresses, people with AD can often continue to perform many tasks independently, but may need assistance or supervision with the most cognitively demanding activities.
They do not appear to be useful as a treatment.
There is a lack of high quality data on the effectiveness of these techniques in other behaviour problems such as wandering.
It affects about 6% of people 65 years and older.
Advancing age is a primary risk factor for the disease and incidence rates are not equal for all ages: every five years after the age of 65, the risk of acquiring the disease approximately doubles, increasing from 3 to as much as 69 per thousand person years.
Education delays the onset of AD syndrome, but is not related to earlier death after diagnosis.
Plaques are dense, mostly insoluble deposits of beta-amyloid peptide and cellular material outside and around neurons.
This is compatible with the cognitive reserve theory, which states that some life experiences result in more efficient neural functioning providing the individual a cognitive reserve that delays the onset of dementia manifestations.
The disease course is divided into four stages, with a progressive pattern of cognitive and functional impairment.
Cognitive behavioural therapy and the teaching of coping strategies either individually or in group have demonstrated their efficacy in improving caregivers' psychological health.
Further neurological examinations are crucial in the differential diagnosis of AD and other diseases.
The herpes simplex virus HSV-1 has been found in the same areas as amyloid plaques.
Studies using MRI and PET have documented reductions in the size of specific brain regions in people with AD as they progressed from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease, and in comparison with similar images from healthy older adults.
The diagnosis can be confirmed with very high accuracy post-mortem when brain material is available and can be examined histologically.
Systemic markers of the innate immune system are risk factors for late-onset AD.
The benefit from their use is small.
Five medications are currently used to treat the cognitive problems of AD: four are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (tacrine, rivastigmine, galantamine and donepezil) and the other (memantine) is an NMDA receptor antagonist.
Pneumonia and dehydration are the most frequent immediate causes of death brought by AD, while cancer is a less frequent cause of death than in the general population.
Treatment of behavioural problems or psychosis due to dementia with antipsychotics is common but not usually recommended due to there often being little benefit and an increased risk of early death.
People who engage in intellectual activities such as reading, playing board games, completing crossword puzzles, playing musical instruments, or regular social interaction show a reduced risk for Alzheimer's disease.
These microtubules act like tracks, guiding nutrients and molecules from the body of the cell to the ends of the axon and back.
Only donepezil is approved for treatment of advanced AD dementia.
This loss results in gross atrophy of the affected regions, including degeneration in the temporal lobe and parietal lobe, and parts of the frontal cortex and cingulate gyrus.
These side effects arise in approximately 10–20% of users, are mild to moderate in severity, and can be managed by slowly adjusting medication doses.
Although aggressiveness can still be present, extreme apathy and exhaustion are much more common symptoms.
In the United States, Alzheimer prevalence was estimated to be 1.6% in 2000 both overall and in the 65–74 age group, with the rate increasing to 19% in the 75–84 group and to 42% in the greater than 84 group.
DR6 is highly expressed in the human brain regions most affected by Alzheimer's, so it is possible that the N-APP/DR6 pathway might be hijacked in the ageing brain to cause damage.
Reminiscence therapy (RT) involves the discussion of past experiences individually or in group, many times with the aid of photographs, household items, music and sound recordings, or other familiar items from the past.
Language is reduced to simple phrases or even single words, eventually leading to complete loss of speech.
The quality of some of these studies has been criticised, and the link remains controversial.
No prevention trial has been completed.
Documentaries on Alzheimer's disease include ''Malcolm and Barbara: A Love Story'' (1999) and ''Malcolm and Barbara: Love's Farewell'' (2007), both featuring Malcolm Pointon.
The presence of characteristic neurological and neuropsychological features and the absence of alternative conditions is supportive.
If eating becomes problematic, food will need to be prepared in smaller pieces or even pureed.
Lewy bodies are not rare in the brains of people with AD.
Another similar agent is bapineuzumab, an antibody designed as identical to the naturally induced anti-amyloid antibody.
The use of physical restraints is rarely indicated in any stage of the disease, although there are situations when they are necessary to prevent harm to the person with AD or their caregivers.
These domains are equivalent to the NINCDS-ADRDA Alzheimer's Criteria as listed in the ''Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders'' (DSM-IV-TR) published by the American Psychiatric Association.
Speech difficulties become evident due to an inability to recall vocabulary, which leads to frequent incorrect word substitutions (paraphasias).
A new stabilised formulation, as the prodrug LMTX, is in phase-III trials (in 2014).
Factors associated with greater psychosocial problems of the primary caregivers include having an affected person at home, the carer being a spouse, demanding behaviours of the cared person such as depression, behavioural disturbances, hallucinations, sleep problems or walking disruptions and social isolation.
Stimulation-oriented treatments include art, music and pet therapies, exercise, and any other kind of recreational activities.
Exercise programmes are beneficial with respect to activities of daily living and can potentially improve outcomes.
During the final stages of the disease, treatment is centred on relieving discomfort until death, often with the help of hospice.
There is inconsistent and unconvincing evidence that ginkgo has any positive effect on cognitive impairment and dementia.
A number of biochemical tests have been developed to attempt earlier detection.
Inflammation is a general marker of tissue damage in any disease, and may be either secondary to tissue damage in AD or a marker of an immunological response.
Physical activity is also associated with a reduced risk of AD.
Psychological tests for depression are employed, since depression can either be concurrent with AD (see Depression of Alzheimer disease), an early sign of cognitive impairment, or even the cause.
For most of the 20th century, the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease was reserved for individuals between the ages of 45 and 65 who developed symptoms of dementia.
Economic evaluations of current treatments have shown positive results.
Other cases include the retired footballer Ferenc Puskás, former Prime Ministers Harold Wilson (United Kingdom) and Adolfo Suárez (Spain), Indian politician George Fernandes, actress Rita Hayworth, actor Charlton Heston, actor-director Robert Loggia, actor-writer Gene Wilder, the author Harnett Kane, Nobel laureate Charles K. Kao, novelist Terry Pratchett, director Jacques Rivette,
'''Alzheimer's disease''' ('''AD'''), also known as just '''Alzheimer's''', is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that usually starts slowly and gets worse over time.
A Mediterranean diet may improve outcomes in those with the disease.
In this model, beta-amyloid plays a complementary role, by depressing synaptic function.
AD has been portrayed in films such as: ''Iris'' (2001), based on John Bayley's memoir of his wife Iris Murdoch; ''The Notebook'' (2004), based on Nicholas Sparks' 1996 novel of the same name; ''A Moment to Remember'' (2004);''Thanmathra'' (2005); ''Memories of Tomorrow (Ashita no Kioku)'' (2006), based on Hiroshi Ogiwara's novel of the same name; ''Away from Her'' (2006), based on Alice Munro's short story "The Bear Came over the Mountain"; ''Still Alice'' (2014), about a Harvard professor who has early onset Alzheimer's disease, based on Lisa Genova's 2007 novel of the same name and featuring Julianne Moore in the title role.
In those already affected with AD adding docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an omega-3 fatty acid, to the diet has not been found to slow decline.
Work with methylthioninium chloride showed that bioavailability of methylthioninium from the gut was affected by feeding and by stomach acidity, leading to unexpectedly variable dosing.
Studies of antivirals in cell cultures have shown promising results.
Aβ is a fragment from the larger amyloid precursor protein (APP).
Both amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are clearly visible by microscopy in brains of those afflicted by AD.
There is evidence for the efficacy of these medications in mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease, and some evidence for their use in the advanced stage.
Stimulation has modest support for improving behaviour, mood, and, to a lesser extent, function.
lead, mercury) and anaemia.
These criteria require that the presence of cognitive impairment, and a suspected dementia syndrome, be confirmed by neuropsychological testing for a clinical diagnosis of possible or probable AD.
The majority of researchers do not support a causal connection with aluminium.
In developed countries, AD is one of the most financially costly diseases.
The term ''senile dementia of the Alzheimer type'' (SDAT) was used for a time to describe the condition in those over 65, with classical Alzheimer's disease being used to describe those who were younger.
Immunotherapy or vaccination for the amyloid protein is one treatment modality under study.
In people with AD, the increasing impairment of learning and memory eventually leads to a definitive diagnosis.
Long-term usage of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is associated with a reduced likelihood of developing AD.
Subtle problems with the executive functions of attentiveness, planning, flexibility, and abstract thinking, or impairments in semantic memory (memory of meanings, and concept relationships) can also be symptomatic of the early stages of AD.
Those who eat a diet high in saturated fats and simple carbohydrates (mono- and disaccharide) have a higher risk.
During the next five years, eleven similar cases were reported in the medical literature, some of them already using the term Alzheimer's disease.
These genes include: CASS4, CELF1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB5, INPP5D, MEF2C, NME8, PTK2B, SORL1, ZCWPW1, SlC24A4, CLU, PICALM, CR1, BIN1, MS4A, ABCA7, EPHA1, and CD2AP.
One area of clinical research is focused on treating the underlying disease pathology.
Gradually, bodily functions are lost, ultimately leading to death.
Also, a specific isoform of apolipoprotein, APOE4, is a major genetic risk factor for AD.
Eight cognitive domains are most commonly impaired in AD—memory, language, perceptual skills, attention, constructive abilities, orientation, problem solving and functional abilities.
Alzheimer's disease has been identified as a protein misfolding disease (proteopathy), caused by plaque accumulation of abnormally folded amyloid beta protein, and tau protein in the brain.
On the other hand, cognitive retraining tries to improve impaired capacities by exercitation of mental abilities.
Other studies have reached similar conclusions.
During the early and moderate stages, modifications to the living environment and lifestyle can increase patient safety and reduce caretaker burden.
Most cases of Alzheimer's disease do not exhibit autosomal-dominant inheritance and are termed sporadic AD, in which environmental and genetic differences may act as risk factors.
Because Alzheimer's disease is common, many notable people have developed it.
Simulated presence therapy (SPT) is based on attachment theories and involves playing a recording with voices of the closest relatives of the person with Alzheimer's disease.
Dementia caregivers are subject to high rates of physical and mental disorders.
When used in the long-term, they have been shown to associate with increased mortality.
In AD, tau undergoes chemical changes, becoming hyperphosphorylated; it then begins to pair with other threads, creating neurofibrillary tangles and disintegrating the neuron's transport system.
There is limited evidence that light to moderate use of alcohol, particularly red wine, is associated with lower risk of AD.
The risk of dying from Alzheimer's disease is 26% higher among the non-Hispanic white population than among the non-Hispanic black population, whereas the Hispanic population has a 30% lower risk than the non-Hispanic white population.
The greatest origin of costs for society is the long-term care by health care professionals and particularly institutionalisation, which corresponds to 2/3 of the total costs for society.
Therefore, any treatment that slows cognitive decline, delays institutionalisation or reduces caregivers' hours will have economic benefits.
Nevertheless, as important as these effects are, the main support for the use of stimulation therapies is the change in the person's routine.
Examples of such modifications are the adherence to simplified routines, the placing of safety locks, the labelling of household items to cue the person with the disease or the use of modified daily life objects.
One of these fragments gives rise to fibrils of amyloid beta, which then form clumps that deposit outside neurons in dense formations known as senile plaques.
In 2015, there were approximately 48 million people worldwide with AD.
AD is also considered a tauopathy due to abnormal aggregation of the tau protein.
During this phase, memory problems worsen, and the person may fail to recognise close relatives.
These toxic oligomers, also referred to as amyloid-derived diffusible ligands (ADDLs), bind to a surface receptor on neurons and change the structure of the synapse, thereby disrupting neuronal communication.
AD does not affect all memory capacities equally.
The ancient Greek and Roman philosophers and physicians associated old age with increasing dementia.
Volumetric MRI can detect changes in the size of brain regions.
Affected people increasingly rely on others for assistance, often placing a burden on the caregiver; the pressures can include social, psychological, physical, and economic elements.
Learning a second language even later in life seems to delay getting Alzheimer disease.
Prevalence of AD in populations is dependent upon different factors including incidence and survival.
An experimental vaccine was found to clear the amyloid plaques in early human trials, but it did not have any significant effect on dementia.
Urinary incontinence can develop.
Trials examining folic acid (B9) and other B vitamins failed to show any significant association with cognitive decline.
It may prove less expensive than other imaging methods currently under study.
The disease was first described as a distinctive disease by Emil Kraepelin after suppressing some of the clinical (delusions and hallucinations) and pathological features (arteriosclerotic changes) contained in the original report of Auguste D. He included ''Alzheimer's disease'', also named ''presenile'' dementia by Kraepelin, as a subtype of ''senile dementia'' in the eighth edition of his ''Textbook of Psychiatry'', published on  1910.
There are also sex differences in the incidence rates, women having a higher risk of developing AD particularly in the population older than 85.
In a small percentage, difficulties with language, executive functions, perception (agnosia), or execution of movements (apraxia) are more prominent than memory problems.
It was not until 1901 that German psychiatrist Alois Alzheimer identified the first case of what became known as Alzheimer's disease, named after him, in a fifty-year-old woman he called Auguste D. He followed her case until she died in 1906, when he first reported publicly on it.
Interviews with family members are also utilised in the assessment of the disease.
There is no evidence to support the usefulness of these therapies.
The imaging agent can help to detect Alzheimer's brain plaques, but will require additional clinical research before it can be made available commercially.
There is increasing evidence of a strong interaction between the neurons and the immunological mechanisms in the brain.
One receptor for Aβ oligomers may be the prion protein, the same protein that has been linked to mad cow disease and the related human condition, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, thus potentially linking the underlying mechanism of these neurodegenerative disorders with that of Alzheimer's disease.
Early attempts to screen up to 400 candidate genes for association with late-onset sporadic AD (LOAD) resulted in a low yield.
The use of these drugs in mild cognitive impairment has not shown any effect in a delay of the onset of AD.
As the disease progresses, different medical issues can appear, such as oral and dental disease, pressure ulcers, malnutrition, hygiene problems, or respiratory, skin, or eye infections.
Long-term memory, which was previously intact, becomes impaired.
There is tentative evidence that caffeine may be protective.
A TNFα receptor-blocking fusion protein, etanercept has showed encouraging results.
Moreover, it may predict conversion from prodromal stages (mild cognitive impairment) to Alzheimer's disease.
Degeneration is also present in brainstem nuclei like the locus coeruleus.
Emphasis in Alzheimer's research has been placed on diagnosing the condition before symptoms begin.
Amyloid imaging is likely to be used in conjunction with other markers rather than as an alternative.
While the earlier the age at onset the higher the total survival years, life expectancy is particularly reduced when compared to the healthy population among those who are younger.
Finally, validation therapy is based on acceptance of the reality and personal truth of another's experience, while sensory integration is based on exercises aimed to stimulate senses.
Reviews on the use of vitamins and minerals have not found enough consistent evidence to recommend them.
While performing fine motor tasks such as writing, drawing or dressing, certain movement coordination and planning difficulties (apraxia) may be present, but they are commonly unnoticed.
APP is a transmembrane protein that penetrates through the neuron's membrane.
Careful management can prevent them, while professional treatment is needed when they do arise.
It is common to perform thyroid function tests, assess B12, rule out syphilis, rule out metabolic problems (including tests for kidney function, electrolyte levels and for diabetes), assess levels of heavy metals (e.g.
Some of the mutations merely alter the ratio between Aβ42 and the other major forms—particularly Aβ40—without increasing Aβ42 levels.
These costs will probably increase with the ageing of society, becoming an important social problem.
Common manifestations are wandering, irritability and labile affect, leading to crying, outbursts of unpremeditated aggression, or resistance to caregiving.
Rare cases of possible transmission between people are being studied, e.g.
Nevertheless, two-thirds of nursing home residents have dementias.
Mutations in the TREM2 gene have been associated with a 3 to 5 times higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Costs increase with dementia severity and the presence of behavioural disturbances, and are related to the increased caregiving time required for the provision of physical care.
Supportive psychotherapy has received little or no formal scientific study, but some clinicians find it useful in helping mildly impaired people adjust to their illness.
This suggests that presenilin mutations can cause disease even if they lower the total amount of Aβ produced and may point to other roles of presenilin or a role for alterations in the function of APP and/or its fragments other than Aβ.
No treatments stop or reverse its progression, though some may temporarily improve symptoms.
Glutamate is a useful excitatory neurotransmitter of the nervous system, although excessive amounts in the brain can lead to cell death through a process called excitotoxicity which consists of the overstimulation of glutamate receptors.
In 2008, two separate clinical trials showed positive results in modifying the course of disease in mild to moderate AD with methylthioninium chloride, a drug that inhibits tau aggregation, and dimebon, an antihistamine.
Life expectancy of the population with the disease is reduced.
Blood tests can identify other causes for dementia than AD—causes which may, in rare cases, be reversible.
In such cases, the medical efficacy and ethics of continuing feeding is an important consideration of the caregivers and family members.
The National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS) and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (ADRDA, now known as the Alzheimer's Association) established the most commonly used NINCDS-ADRDA Alzheimer's Criteria for diagnosis in 1984, extensively updated in 2007.
One study found possible evidence of human to human transmission.
The cause of death is usually an external factor, such as infection of pressure ulcers or pneumonia, not the disease itself.
Evidence also support the notion that NSAIDs can reduce inflammation related to amyloid plaques.
Between 40 and 80% of people with AD possess at least one APOEε4 allele.
The cholinergic hypothesis has not maintained widespread support, largely because medications intended to treat acetylcholine deficiency have not been very effective.
Many times, families also have difficulties in the detection of initial dementia symptoms and may not communicate accurate information to a physician.
Other cholinergic effects have also been proposed, for example, initiation of large-scale aggregation of amyloid, leading to generalised neuroinflammation.
The early stages of Alzheimer's disease are difficult to diagnose.
The most noticeable deficit is short term memory loss, which shows up as difficulty in remembering recently learned facts and inability to acquire new information.
These symptoms create stress for relatives and carers, which can be reduced by moving the person from home care to other long-term care facilities.
The combination of memantine and donepezil has been shown to be "of statistically significant but clinically marginal effectiveness".
Eventually, the term Alzheimer's disease was formally adopted in medical nomenclature to describe individuals of all ages with a characteristic common symptom pattern, disease course, and neuropathology.
Their carers and families often request they have some form of feeding tube.
Additionally vitamin E is associated with health risks.
Retrogenesis is a medical hypothesis about the development and progress of Alzheimer's disease proposed by Barry Reisberg in the 1980s.
The disease process is associated with plaques and tangles in the brain.
The Mediterranean diet's beneficial cardiovascular effect has been proposed as the mechanism of action.
There is partial evidence indicating that SPT may reduce challenging behaviours.
The mean life expectancy following diagnosis is approximately six years.
Prevalence rates in less developed regions are lower.
Unlike preventative vaccination, the putative therapy would be used to treat people already diagnosed.
This form of the disease is known as early onset familial Alzheimer's disease.
Less common secondary effects include muscle cramps, decreased heart rate (bradycardia), decreased appetite and weight, and increased gastric acid production.
It is the cause of  60% to 70% of cases of dementia.
Despite the loss of verbal language abilities, people can often understand and return emotional signals.
