In 1971, Vedic scholar John Brough from Cambridge University rejected Wasson's theory and noted that the language was too vague to determine a description of Soma.
muscaria'' for catching flies in Slovenia have shown that the release of ibotenic acid and muscimol did not depend on the solvent (milk or water) and that thermal and mechanical processing led to faster extraction of ibotenic acid and muscimol.
Modern fungal taxonomists have classified ''Amanita muscaria'' and its allies this way based on gross morphology and spore inamyloidy.
With modern medical treatment the prognosis is typically good following supportive treatment.
'''''Amanita muscaria''''', commonly known as the '''fly agaric''' or '''fly amanita''', is a mushroom and psychoactive basidiomycete fungus, one of many in the genus ''Amanita''.
Recent DNA sequencing suggests this may be a separate species which may require naming.
The professor also reported that the Lithuanians used to export ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' to the Lapps in the Far North for use in shamanic rituals.
In this case, the mushroom, after parboiling, and soaking in vinegar, is made into a mushroom sauce for steak.
''Amanita muscaria'' var.
Although classified as poisonous, reports of human deaths resulting from its ingestion are extremely rare.
There has been much speculation on possible traditional use of this mushroom as an intoxicant in other places such as the Middle East, Eurasia, North America, and Scandinavia.
Fully grown, the bright red cap is usually around 8–20&nbsp;cm (3–8&nbsp;in) in diameter, although larger specimens have been found.
Rodham Tulloss uses this name to describe all "typical" ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' from indigenous New World populations.
After parboiling—which weakens its toxicity and breaks down the mushroom's psychoactive substances—it is eaten in parts of Europe, Asia, and North America.
Fly agaric shamanism is also explored in the 2003 novel ''Thursbitch'' by Alan Garner.
One line described men urinating ''Soma''; this recalled the practice of recycling urine in Siberia.
''Amanita muscaria'' poisoning has occurred in young children and in people who ingested the mushrooms for a hallucinogenic experience.
By extension, it is also the type species of ''Amanita'' subgenus ''Amanita'', as well as section ''Amanita'' within this subgenus.
After experiencing the power of the ''wapaq'', Raven was so exhilarated that he told it to grow forever on earth so his children, the people, could learn from it.
As the fungus grows, the red colour appears through the broken veil and the warts become less prominent; they do not change in size, but are reduced relative to the expanding skin area.
Indian scholars Santosh Kumar Dash and Sachinanda Padhy pointed out that both eating of mushrooms and drinking of urine were proscribed, using as a source the ''Manusmṛti''.
Almost no muscimol is excreted when pure ibotenic acid is eaten, but muscimol is detectable in the urine after eating ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'', which contains both ibotenic acid and muscimol.
A recent molecular study proposes that it had an ancestral origin in the Siberian–Beringian region in the Tertiary period, before radiating outwards across Asia, Europe and North America.
Most are detected in the cap of the fruit, a moderate amount in the base, with the smallest amount in the stalk.
A benzodiazepine such as diazepam or lorazepam can be used to control combativeness, agitation, muscular overactivity, and seizures.
It appears to be spreading northwards, with recent reports placing it near Port Macquarie on the New South Wales north coast.
It is illegal to produce, supply, or import this drug under the Psychoactive Substance Act, which came into effect on May 26th, 2016.
Tulloss) recognise them as a distinct variety.
There are also unconfirmed reports of religious use of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' among two Subarctic Native American tribes.
Soma is mentioned as coming "from the mountains", which Wasson interpreted as the mushroom having been brought in with the Aryan invaders from the north.
Professor Marija Gimbutas, a renowned Lithuanian historian, reported to R. Gordon Wasson on the use of this mushroom in Lithuania.
Muscarine binds with muscarinic acetylcholine receptors leading to the excitation of neurons bearing these receptors.
Symptoms typically appear after around 30 to 90 minutes and peak within three hours, but certain effects can last for several days.
Muscimol is generally a mild relaxant, but it can create a range of different reactions within a group of people.
Fly agarics have been featured in paintings since the Renaissance, albeit in a subtle manner.
Jenkins) treat these populations as ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' var.
This species is often found in similar locations to ''Boletus edulis'', and may appear in fairy rings.
In ''The Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy'', German mycologist Rolf Singer listed three subspecies, though without description: ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' ssp.
It appears to be distinctive, and some authorities (cf.
Muscimol is the product of the decarboxylation (usually by drying) of ibotenic acid.
He described it in volume two of his ''Species Plantarum'' in 1753, giving it the name ''Agaricus muscarius'', the specific epithet deriving from Latin ''musca'' meaning "fly".
The notion that Vikings used ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' to produce their berserker rages was first suggested by the Swedish professor Samuel Ödmann in 1784.
Deaths from this fungus ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' have been reported in historical journal articles and newspaper reports, but with modern medical treatment, fatal poisoning from ingesting this mushroom is extremely rare.
These are remnants of the universal veil, a membrane that encloses the entire mushroom when it is still very young.
''guessowii''), and var.
The authors state that the widespread descriptions in field guides of this mushroom as poisonous is a reflection of cultural bias, as several other popular edible species, notably morels, are toxic unless properly cooked.
This iconic toadstool is a large white-gilled, white-spotted, usually red mushroom, and is one of the most recognisable and widely encountered in popular culture.
One compound isolated from the fungus is 1,3-diolein ( 1,3-Di(cis-9-octadecenoyl)glycerol), which attracts insects.
The Koryak of eastern Siberia have a story about the fly agaric (''wapaq'') which enabled Big Raven to carry a whale to its home.
Christian author John C. King wrote a detailed rebuttal of Allegro's theory in the 1970 book ''A Christian View of the Mushroom Myth;'' he notes that neither fly agarics nor their host trees are found in the Middle East, even though cedars and pines are found there, and highlights the tenuous nature of the links between biblical and Sumerian names coined by Allegro.
Dissecting the mushroom at this stage will reveal a characteristic yellowish layer of skin under the veil; this is helpful in identification.
In his 1976 survey, ''Hallucinogens and Culture'', anthropologist Peter T. Furst evaluated the evidence for and against the identification of the fly agaric mushroom as the Vedic Soma, concluding cautiously in its favour.
Perceptual phenomena such as macropsia and micropsia may occur, which may have been the inspiration for the effect of mushroom-consumption in Lewis Carroll's ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'', although "no evidence has ever been found that linked Carroll to recreational drug use".
It has been hypothesised that the flies intentionally seek out the fly agaric for its intoxicating properties.
The levels of muscarine in ''Amanita muscaria'' are minute when compared with other poisonous fungi such as ''Inocybe erubescens'', the small white ''Clitocybe'' species ''C.
He concludes that if the theory was true, the use of the mushroom must have been "the best kept secret in the world" as it was so well concealed for two thousand years.
The study also looked at four named varieties of the species: var.
''flavivolvata'', var.
''Amanita'' subgenus ''Amanita'' includes all ''Amanita'' with inamyloid spores.
An account of the journeys of Philip von Strahlenberg to Siberia and his descriptions of the use of the ''mukhomor'' there was published in English in 1736.
The effect is highly variable between individuals, with similar doses potentially causing quite different reactions.
Recently, an analysis of nine different methods for preparing ''A.
Ibotenic acid and muscimol act like these neurotransmitters, muscimol being a potent GABAA agonist, while ibotenic acid is an agonist of NMDA glutamate receptors and certain metabotropic glutamate receptors which are involved in the control of neuronal activity.
Among the Koryaks, one report said that the poor would consume the urine of the wealthy, who could afford to buy the mushrooms.
Garden ornaments and children's picture books depicting gnomes and fairies, such as the Smurfs, often show fly agarics used as seats, or homes.
Two of the most famous uses of the mushroom are in the video game series ''Super Mario Bros.'' (specifically two of the power-up items and the platforms in several stages), and the dancing mushroom sequence in the 1940 Disney film ''Fantasia''.
muscaria'' and as such is its namesake, muscimol does not have action, either as an agonist or antagonist, at the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor site, and therefore atropine or physostigmine as an antidote is not recommended.
In the story, the deity ''Vahiyinin'' ("Existence") spat onto earth, and his spittle became the ''wapaq'', and his saliva becomes the warts.
A local dialect name in Fribourg in Switzerland is ''tsapi de diablhou'', which translates as "Devil's hat".
However, following the outlawing of psilocybin mushrooms in the United Kingdom in 2006, the sale of the still legal ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' began increasing.
Quite rapidly, between 20 and 90 minutes after ingestion, a substantial fraction of ibotenic acid is excreted unmetabolised in the urine of the consumer.
If a patient is delirious or agitated, this can usually be treated by reassurance and, if necessary, physical restraints.
The drinking of urine of those who had consumed the mushroom was commented on by Anglo-Irish writer Oliver Goldsmith in his widely read 1762 novel, ''Citizen of the World''.
Medical attention should be sought in cases of suspected poisoning.
Fly agaric fruiting bodies emerge from the soil looking like white eggs.
Vanadium is present in fruit-bodies as an organometallic compound called amavadine.
Recurrent vomiting is rare, but if present may lead to fluid and electrolyte imbalances; intravenous rehydration or electrolyte replacement may be required.
It gained its current name in 1783, when placed in the genus ''Amanita'' by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, a name sanctioned in 1821 by the "father of mycology", Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries.
Muscarine, discovered in 1869, was long thought to be the active hallucinogenic agent in ''A.&nbsp;muscaria''.
Furthermore, the stem, gills and ring of ''A.
Several regional names appear to be linked with this connotation, meaning the "mad" or "fool's" version of the highly regarded edible mushroom ''Amanita caesarea''.
Jenkins) use the name for all ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' which fit this description worldwide, others (cf.
It is also consumed as a food in parts of Japan.
Its use was known among almost all of the Uralic-speaking peoples of western Siberia and the Paleosiberian-speaking peoples of the Russian Far East.
It is these interactions which are thought to cause the psychoactive effects found in intoxication.
A Schedule 9 substance is a substance which may be abused or misused, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except when required for medical or scientific research, or for analytical, teaching or training purposes with approval of Commonwealth and/or State or Territory Health Authorities.
A 2008 paper by food historian William Rubel and mycologist David Arora gives a history of consumption of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' as a food and describes detoxification methods.
has a yellow to orange-yellow cap with yellowish warts and stem (which may be tan).
According to some sources, once detoxified, the mushroom becomes edible.
Gastric lavage can be considered if the patient presents within one hour of ingestion.
Contemporary authorities recognise up to seven varieties:
The season for fruiting varies in different climates: fruiting occurs in summer and autumn across most of North America, but later in autumn and early winter on the Pacific coast.
There, it is primarily salted and pickled.
''Amanita'' section ''Amanita'' consists of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' and its close relatives, including ''A.&nbsp;pantherina'' (the panther cap), ''A.&nbsp;gemmata'', ''A.&nbsp;farinosa'', and ''A.&nbsp;xanthocephala''.
These toxins are not distributed uniformly in the mushroom.
Researchers in England, Japan, and Switzerland showed that the effects produced were due mainly to ibotenic acid and muscimol, not muscarine.
In the majority of cases recovery is complete within 12 to 24&nbsp;hours.
Muscimol is the agent responsible for the majority of the psychoactivity.
It can be quite wide and flaccid with age.
muscaria'' in his 1970 book ''The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross'', but his theory has found little support by scholars outside the field of ethnomycology.
French mycologist Pierre Bulliard reported having tried without success to replicate its fly-killing properties in his work '''' (1784), and proposed a new binomial name ''Agaricus pseudo-aurantiacus'' because of this.
Many older books list ''Amanita muscaria'' as "deadly", but this is an error that implies the mushroom is more toxic than it is.
The species is also invading a rainforest in Australia, where it may be displacing the native species.
It is possible that it could make a person angry, or cause them to be "very jolly or sad, jump about, dance, sing or give way to great fright".
A hallucinogenic "scarlet toadstool" from Lappland is featured as a plot element in Charles Kingsley's 1866 novel ''Hereward the Wake'' based on the medieval figure of the same name.
In eastern Siberia, the shaman would take the mushrooms, and others would drink his urine.
After emerging from the ground, the cap is covered with numerous small white to yellow pyramid-shaped warts.
Conveyed with pine seedlings, it has been widely transported into the southern hemisphere, including Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and South America, where it can be found in the southern Brazilian states of Paraná and Rio Grande do Sul.
Although its consumption as a food has never been widespread, the consumption of detoxified ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' has been practiced in some parts of Europe (notably by Russian settlers in Siberia) since at least the 19th century, and likely earlier.
The Finnish historian T. I. Itkonen mentions that ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' was once used among the Sami people: sorcerers in Inari would consume fly agarics with seven spots.
is liver-brown and has yellow warts.
''Amanita'' section ''Amanita'' includes the species which have very patchy universal veil remnants, including a volva that is reduced to a series of concentric rings and the veil remnants on the cap to a series of patches or warts.
Seizures and coma may also occur in severe poisonings.
In eastern Siberia, ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' was used by both shamans and laypeople alike, and was used recreationally as well as religiously.
This urine, still containing psychoactive elements, may be more potent than the ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' mushrooms with fewer negative effects such as sweating and twitching, suggesting that the initial user may act as a screening filter for other components in the mushroom.
Possession of amounts larger than 0.5&nbsp;g dried or 5&nbsp;g fresh lead to a criminal charge.
Muscimol and ibotenic acid were discovered in the mid-20th century.
The white spots sometimes wash away during heavy rain and the mushrooms then may appear to be the edible ''A.&nbsp;caesarea''.
The 16th-century Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius traced the practice of sprinkling it into milk to Frankfurt in Germany, while Carl Linnaeus, the "father of taxonomy", reported it from Småland in southern Sweden, where he had lived as a child.
There is also one account of a Euro-American who claims to have been initiated into traditional Tlicho use of ''Amanita muscaria''.
Genetic studies published in 2006 and 2008 show several sharply delineated clades that may represent separate species.
''Amanita muscaria'' varies considerably in its morphology, and many authorities recognise several subspecies or varieties within the species.
This practice has been recorded from Germanic-  and Slavic-speaking parts of Europe, as well as the Vosges region and pockets elsewhere in France, and Romania.
At the base is a bulb that bears universal veil remnants in the form of two to four distinct rings or ruffs.
Muscimol found within ''Amanita muscaria'' is considered a Schedule 9 prohibited substance in Australia under the Poisons Standard (October 2015).
Retrograde amnesia and somnolence can result following recovery.
The Lithuanian festivities are the only report that Wasson received of ingestion of fly agaric for religious use in Eastern Europe.
Hemodialysis can remove the toxins, although this intervention is generally considered unnecessary.
There is generally no associated smell other than a mild earthiness.
The starting date for all the mycota had been set by general agreement as January 1, 1821, the date of Fries's work, and so the full name was then ''Amanita muscaria'' (L.:Fr.)
The 1987 edition of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature changed the rules on the starting date and primary work for names of fungi, and names can now be considered valid as far back as May 1, 1753, the date of publication of Linnaeus's work.
The English mycologist John Ramsbottom reported that ''Amanita muscaria'' was used for getting rid of bugs in England and Sweden, and ''bug agaric'' was an old alternate name for the species.
''Amanita muscaria'' is the type species of the genus.
pinkish to orangish, sometimes called "melon"-coloured, with poorly formed, or at times absent remnants of universal veil on the stem and vassal bulb; it is known from the southeastern coastal areas of the United States, and was described in 1977.
The book was roundly discredited by academics and theologians, including Sir Godfrey Driver, Emeritus Professor of Semitic Philology at Oxford University, and Henry Chadwick, the Dean of Christ Church, Oxford.
Thomas Pynchon's 1973 novel ''Gravity's Rainbow'' describes the fungus as a "relative of the poisonous Destroying Angel" and presents a detailed description of a character preparing a cookie bake mixture from harvested ''Amanita muscaria''.
dealbata'' and ''C.
This information was enthusiastically received by Wasson, although evidence from other sources was lacking.
Commonly seen under introduced trees, ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' is the fungal equivalent of a weed in New Zealand, Tasmania and Victoria, forming new associations with southern beech (''Nothofagus'').
Native throughout the temperate and boreal regions of the Northern Hemisphere, ''Amanita muscaria'' has been unintentionally introduced to many countries in the Southern Hemisphere, generally as a symbiont with pine and birch plantations, and is now a true cosmopolitan species.
''Amanita muscaria'' var.
an uncommon fungus, has a white to a silvery white cap that has white warts but is similar to the usual form of mushroom.
Some authorities (cf.
''Amanita muscaria'' was widely used as an entheogen by many of the indigenous peoples of Siberia.
''Amanita muscaria'' is noted for its hallucinogenic properties, with its main psychoactive constituent being the compound muscimol.
He noted that descriptions of ''Soma'' omitted any description of roots, stems or seeds, which suggested a mushroom, and used the adjective ''hári'' "dazzling" or "flaming" which the author interprets as meaning red.
Serious cases may develop loss of consciousness or coma, and may need intubation and artificial ventilation.
All four varieties were found within both the Eurasian and North American clades, evidence that these morphological forms are polymorphisms rather than distinct subspecies or varieties.
In Australia, the introduced fly agaric may be confused with the native vermilion grisette (''Amanita xanthocephala''), which grows in association with eucalypts.
''regalis'' from both areas.
It associates with various deciduous and coniferous trees.
The name of the mushroom in many European languages is thought to be derived from its use as an insecticide when sprinkled in milk.
Although very distinctive in appearance, the fly agaric has been mistaken for other yellow to red mushroom species in the Americas, such as ''Armillaria'' cf.
There are only isolated reports of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' use among the Tungusic and Turkic peoples of central Siberia and it is believed that on the whole entheogenic use of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' was not practised by these peoples.
''Amanita muscaria'' is a cosmopolitan mushroom, native to conifer and deciduous woodlands throughout the temperate and boreal regions of the Northern Hemisphere, including higher elevations of warmer latitudes in regions such as Hindu Kush, the Mediterranean and also Central America.
''muscaria'', ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' ssp.
Amanita muscaria and Amanita pantherina are illegal to buy, sell, or possess since December 2008.
Poison control centres in the U.S. and Canada have become aware that ''amarill'' (Spanish for 'yellow') is a common name for the ''A.&nbsp;caesarea''-like species in Mexico.
If the delay between ingestion and treatment is less than four hours, activated charcoal is given.
Tulloss) treat it as a separate species, while others (cf.
In the late 19th century, the French physician Félix Archimède Pouchet was a populariser and advocate of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' consumption, comparing it to manioc, an important food source in tropical South America that must be detoxified before consumption.
The most well-known current use as an edible mushroom is in Nagano Prefecture, Japan.
This observation is thought to have formed the basis of the effects of eating the mushroom in the 1865 popular story ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland''.
The toxins in ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' are water-soluble.
Further molecular study by Geml and colleagues published in 2008 show that these three genetic groups, plus a fourth associated with oak–hickory–pine forest in the southeastern United States and two more on Santa Cruz Island in California, are delineated from each other enough genetically to be considered separate species; thus ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' as it stands currently is evidently a species complex.
caesarea'' are bright yellow, not white.
The mushroom had been identified as the fly agaric by this time.
''Amanita muscaria'' var.
When sliced thinly, or finely diced and boiled in plentiful water until thoroughly cooked, it seems to be detoxified.
Two recent molecular phylogenetic studies have confirmed this classification as natural.
Occasionally it has been ingested in error, because immature button forms resemble puffballs.
The latter species generally lacks the white warts of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' and bears no ring.
Hence, Linnaeus and Lamarck are now taken as the namers of ''Amanita muscaria'' (L.) Lam..
A 2006 molecular phylogenetic study of different regional populations of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' by mycologist József Geml and colleagues found three distinct clades within this species representing, roughly, Eurasian, Eurasian "subalpine", and North American populations.
''Amanita caesarea'' can be distinguished by its entirely orange to red cap which lacks the numerous white warty spots of the fly agaric.
In 1968, R. Gordon Wasson proposed that ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' was the ''Soma'' talked about in the Rig Veda of India, a claim which received widespread publicity and popular support at the time.
Most species in this group also have a bulbous base.
Philologist, archeologist, and Dead Sea Scrolls scholar John Marco Allegro postulated that early Christian theology was derived from a fertility cult revolving around the entheogenic consumption of ''A.
''Amanita muscaria'' contains several biologically active agents, at least one of which, muscimol, is known to be psychoactive.
The active constituents of this species are water-soluble, and boiling and then discarding the cooking water at least partly detoxifies ''A.&nbsp;muscaria''.
Both of these last two are found with ''Eucalyptus'' and ''Cistus'' trees, and it is unclear whether they are native or introduced from Australia.
''Amanita muscaria'' and related species are known as effective bioaccumulators of vanadium; some species concentrate vanadium to levels of up to 400 times those typically found in plants.
Ectomycorrhizal, ''Amanita muscaria'' forms symbiotic relationships with many trees, including pine, spruce, fir, birch, and cedar.
Drying may increase potency, as the process facilitates the conversion of ibotenic acid to the more potent muscimol.
The major toxins involved in ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' poisoning are muscimol (3-hydroxy-5-aminomethyl-1-isoxazole, an unsaturated cyclic hydroxamic acid) and the related amino acid ibotenic acid.
The biological importance of the accumulation process is unknown.
Between the basal universal veil remnants and gills are remnants of the partial veil (which covers the gills during development) in the form of a white ring.
Tulloss) restrict its use to Eurasian populations.
The volva is a distinct white bag, not broken into scales.
The cap changes from globose to hemispherical, and finally to plate-like and flat in mature specimens.
It is a product of the breakdown of ibotenic acid by ultra-violet radiation.
Hence there is '''' "mad oriol" in Catalan, ''mujolo folo'' from Toulouse, '''' from the Aveyron department in Southern France, '''' from Trentino in Italy.
Muscazone is of minor pharmacological activity compared with the other agents.
''mellea'' and the edible ''Amanita basii''—a Mexican species similar to ''A.&nbsp;caesarea'' of Europe.
The free gills are white, as is the spore print.
In western Siberia, the use of ''A.&nbsp;muscaria'' was restricted to shamans, who used it as an alternative method of achieving a trance state.
An alternative derivation proposes that the term ''fly-'' refers not to insects as such but rather the delirium resulting from consumption of the fungus.
The stipe is white, 5–20&nbsp;cm high (2–8&nbsp;in) by 1–2&nbsp;cm (0.4–0.8&nbsp;in) wide, and has the slightly brittle, fibrous texture typical of many large mushrooms.
The German physician and naturalist Georg Heinrich von Langsdorff wrote the earliest published account on how to detoxify this mushroom in 1823.
Some authorities (cf.
