The Amazon basin, the largest in the world, covers about 40% of South America, an area of approximately .
Unlike the Hamza, the 153&nbsp;km-long underground river in Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula and the 8.2&nbsp;km-long Cabayugan River in the Puerto Princesa Subterranean River National Park in the Philippines have come into being thanks to the karst topography.
While debate as to whether the Amazon or the Nile is the world's longest river has gone on for many years, the historic consensus of geographic authorities has been to regard the Amazon as the second longest river in the world, with the Nile being the longest.
Water at such depths would normally escape upwards but the unusual conditions that exist along the eastern Pacific Rim allow the moisture to remain intact.
These pre-Columbian settlements created highly developed civilizations.
A 2014 study by Americans James Contos and Nicolas Tripcevich in ''Area'', a peer-reviewed journal of the Royal Geographic Society, however, identifies the most distant source of the Amazon as actually being in the Río Mantaro drainage.
There is ample evidence that the areas surrounding the Amazon River were home to complex and large-scale indigenous societies, mainly chiefdoms who developed large towns and cities.
The dolphins use echolocation to navigate and hunt in the river's tricky depths.
Smaller ocean vessels of 3,000 tons or 9,000 tons and  draft can reach as far as Iquitos, Peru,  from the sea.
With a population of 1.9 million people in 2014, Manaus is the largest city on the Amazon.
Based on intelligence received from a captive native chief named Delicola, they expected to find food within a few days downriver by ascending another river to the north.
The plume is about  long and between  wide.
While the Amazon is  to  wide, the Hamza is  to  in width.
There are approximately 30 to 60 species of piranha.
The Brazilian decree took effect on 7 September 1867.
The ''boto'' is the subject of a legend in Brazil about a dolphin that turns into a man and seduces maidens by the riverside.
Gonzalo Pizarro set off in 1541 to explore east of Quito into the South American interior in search of El Dorado, the "city of gold" and La Canela, the "valley of cinnamon".
5,600 species are currently known, and approximately fifty new species are discovered each year.
This was the first step in opening up the vast interior.
In addition to the thousands of species of fish, the river supports crabs, algae, and turtles.
Then distances from Lago Junín to several potential source points in the uppermost Mantaro river were measured, which enabled them to determine that the Cordillera Rumi Cruz was the most distant source of water in the Mantaro basin (and therefore in the entire Amazon basin).
Contos continued downstream to the ocean and finished the first complete descent of the Amazon river from its newly identified source (finishing November 2012), a journey repeated by two groups after the news spread.
Its most remote sources are found on the inter-Andean plateau, just a short distance from the Pacific Ocean.
It is a mammal and a herbivore.
On the south bank, above the Xingu, a line of low bluffs bordering the floodplain extends nearly to Santarém in a series of gentle curves before they bend to the southwest, and, abutting upon the lower Tapajós, merge into the bluffs which form the terrace margin of the Tapajós river valley.
In that same period, the Amazonas Company was increasing its fleet.
The river pushes a vast plume of fresh water into the ocean.
In an average dry season,  of land are water-covered, while in the wet season, the flooded area of the Amazon basin rises to .
The most obvious ones are their width and flow speed.
The Amazon proper runs mostly through Brazil and Peru, and is part of the border between Colombia and Perú.
Meanwhile, private individuals were building and running small steam craft of their own on the main river as well as on many of its tributaries.
It has a series of major tributaries in Colombia, Ecuador and Peru, some of which flow into the Marañón and Ucayali, and others directly into the Amazon proper.
It is classified as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
It later became known as the ''Rio Amazonas'', the name by which it is still known in both Spanish and Portuguese.
Orellana offered and was ordered to follow the Napo River, then known as ''Río de la Canela'' ("Cinnamon River") and return with food for the party.
Also present in large numbers is the notorious piranha, an omnivorous fish that congregates in large schools and may attack livestock and even humans.
Because of habitat destruction and hunting, its population has dramatically decreased.
The most accurate measurement method was direct GPS measurement obtained by kayak descent of each of the rivers from their source points to their confluence (performed by Contos).
The rise of the Rio Negro starts in February or March and begins to recede in June.
During Ice Ages, sea levels dropped and the great Amazon lake rapidly drained and became a river, which would eventually become the world's largest, draining the most extensive expanse of rainforest on the planet.
The Brazilian Amazon's principal commercial city, Pará (now Belém), had from 10,000 to 12,000 inhabitants, including slaves.
Historians are uncertain whether the river he descended was the Amazon or the Orinoco River, which runs more or less parallel to the Amazon further north.
In the 1860s, approximately 3,000 tons of rubber was being exported annually, and by 1911 annual exports had grown to 44,000 tons, representing 9.3% of Peru's exports.
At some points the river divides into anabranches, or multiple channels, often very long, with inland and lateral channels, all connected by a complicated system of natural canals, cutting the low, flat ''igapó'' lands, which are never more than  above low river, into many islands.
There are over 3,000 species of fish currently recognized in the Amazon basin, with more being discovered every year.
It is a member of the weasel family and is the largest of its kind.
He arrived in Quito in 1637, and then returned via the same route.
By the turn of the 20th century, the exports of the Amazon basin were India-rubber, cacao beans, Brazil nuts and a few other products of minor importance, such as pelts and exotic forest produce (resins, barks, woven hammocks, prized bird feathers, live animals) and extracted goods, such as lumber and gold.
Other related cinnamon-containing plants (of the family ''Lauraceae'') are fairly common in that part of the Amazon and Pizarro probably saw some of these.
From the town of Canaria at the great bend of the Amazon to the Negro, vast areas of land are submerged at high water, above which only the upper part of the trees of the sombre forests appear.
Water in these places has dissolved the carbonate rock to form  extensive underground river systems.
The electric eel (''Electrophorus electricus'') and more than 100 species of electric fishes (Gymnotiformes) inhabit the Amazon basin.
The expedition reached the mouth of the Amazon on 24 August 1542, demonstrating the practical navigability of the Great River.
Along with the Orinoco, the Amazon is one of the main habitats of the ''boto'', also known as the Amazon river dolphin (''Inia geoffrensis'').
Belém is the major city and port at the mouth of the river at the Atlantic Ocean.
The rise of the Andes and the linkage of the Brazilian and Guyana bedrock shields, blocked the river and caused the Amazon to become a vast inland sea.
In the lower reaches of the river, the north bank consists of a series of steep, table-topped hills extending for about  from opposite the mouth of the Xingu as far as Monte Alegre.
In order to achieve this level of development, the Native Americans of the Amazon rain forest altered the forest’s  ecology by selective cultivation and the use of fire.
The river was initially known as the ''Marañón'' (the name by which the Peruvian part of the river is still known today) or ''Rio de Orellana''.
The Amazon and its tributaries are the main habitat of the giant otter (''Pteronura brasiliensis'').
Foreign companies settled in Iquitos, from whence they controlled the extraction of rubber.
The name Amazonas came from the natives warriors that attacked this expedition, mostly women, that reminded Orellana of the woman warriors the Amazons from the Hellenic culture.
The Amazon basin is the largest drainage basin in the world, with an area of approximately .
Such studies continued to be published even recently, such as in 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2008, where various authors identified the snowcapped  Nevado Mismi peak, located roughly  west of Lake Titicaca and  southeast of Lima, as the most distant source of the river.
The Atlantic has sufficient wave and tidal energy to carry most of the Amazon's sediments out to sea, thus the Amazon does not form a true delta.
Further research has hypothesized that this practice began around 11,000 years ago.
Brazilians call this section of the river the Solimões above its confluence with the Rio Negro to form what Brazilians call the Amazon at the Meeting of Waters () at Manaus, the river's largest city.
After about , the Apurímac then joins Río Mantaro to form the Ene, which joins the Perene to form the Tambo, which joins the Urubamba to form the Ucayali.
#  – Huallaga, Peru (tributary of Marañón)
The large deep aquifer formed when the plate carrying the Pacific Ocean bottom was dragged and ends up under the continental plate.
It is the largest species of river dolphin, and it can grow to lengths of up to .
All the remaining villages, as far up as Tabatinga, on the Brazilian frontier of Peru, were relatively small.
It drains from west to east, from Iquitos in Peru, across Brazil to the Atlantic.
Ten to eleven million years ago, waters worked through the sandstone from the west and the Amazon began to flow eastward, leading to the emergence of the Amazon rainforest.
The Amazon River and its tributaries are characterized by extensive forested areas that become flooded every rainy season.
He was accompanied by his second-in-command Francisco de Orellana.
The Casiquiare is a river distributary of the upper Orinoco, which flows southward into the Rio Negro, which in turn flows into the Amazon.
In 1960 the construction of the new capital city of Brasília in the interior also contributed to the opening up of the Amazon basin.
Although the Amazon river remains largely undammed, around 412 dams are in operation in the Amazon’s tributary rivers.
His men threatened to mutiny if he followed his orders and the expedition turned back to join Pizarro's larger party.
They made it possible by measuring the Amazon downstream to the beginning of the tidal estuary of ''Canal do Sul'' and then, after a sharp turn back, following tidal canals surrounding the isle of Marajó and finally including the marine waters of the ''Río Pará'' bay in its entire length.
Smaller riverboats can reach  higher as far as Achual Point.
During the rubber boom it is estimated that diseases brought by immigrants, such as typhus and malaria, killed 40,000 native Amazonians.
The Amazonian manatee (''Trichechus inunguis''), also known as "seacow", is found in the northern Amazon River Basin and its tributaries.
It is the richest tropical forest in the world in terms of biodiversity.
The Amazon is responsible for about 20% of the Earth's fresh water entering the ocean.
Often it is said to be "about"  long.
The Amazon once flowed west as part of a proto-Amazon-Congo river system, from the interior of present-day Africa when the continents were joined as western Gondwana.
Beyond that, small boats frequently ascend to the Pongo de Manseriche, just above Achual Point.
Guido Gelli, director of science at the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), told the Brazilian TV network Globo in June 2007 that it could be considered as a fact that the Amazon was the longest river in the world.
Not all of the Amazon's tributaries flood at the same time of the year.
Seven men died at that village.
River stingrays (Potamotrygonidae) are also known.
More than one-third of all known species in the world live in the Amazon rainforest, a giant tropical forest and river basin with an area that stretches more than .
After witnessing the negative effects of environmental degradation, sedimentation, navigation and flood control caused by the Three Gorges Dam in the Yangtze River, scientists are worried that constructing more dams in the Amazon will harm its biodiversity in the same way by “blocking-fish spawning runs, reducing the flows of vital oil nutrients and clearing forests”.
For centuries ships have reported fresh water near the Amazon's mouth yet well out of sight of land in what otherwise seemed to be the open ocean.
The bull shark (''Carcharhinus leucas'') has been reported  up the Amazon River at Iquitos in Peru.
The arapaima, known in Brazil as the ''pirarucu'', is a South American tropical freshwater fish, one of the largest freshwater fish in the world, with a length of up to .
Ultimately, they determined that the most distant point in the Mantaro drainage is nearly 80&nbsp;km farther upstream compared to Mt.
He accepted to change the purpose of the expedition to discover new lands in the name of the King of Spain, and the men built a larger boat in which to navigate downstream.
The length of both the Amazon and the Nile remains open to interpretation and continued debate.
The portion of the river's drainage basin in Brazil alone is larger than any other river's basin.
However, Orellana apparently missed the confluence (probably with the Aguarico) where he was to look for food.
The color of its skin changes with age; young animals are gray, but become pink and then white as they mature.
In March 1500 Spanish conquistador Vicente Yáñez Pinzón was the first documented European to sail into the river.
There are many factors that can affect these measurements.
The quantity of water released by the Amazon to the Atlantic Ocean is enormous: up to  in the rainy season, with an average of  from 1973 to 1990.
The Amazonian fish fauna is the center of diversity for neotropical fishes.
Gradually this inland sea became a massive swampy, freshwater lake and the marine inhabitants adapted to life in freshwater.
The anaconda is found in shallow waters in the Amazon basin.
The Mantaro and Apurímac confluence, and with other tributaries form the Ucayali, which in turn confluences with the River Marañón upstream of Iquitos, Peru, to form what countries other than Brazil consider to be the main stem of the Amazon.
The fresh water, being lighter, flows on top of the seawater, diluting the salinity and altering the color of the ocean surface over an area up to  in extent.
In the case of the Hamza, the porous and permeable sedimentary rocks behave as conduits for the water to sink to greater depths.
Many settlements grew along the road from Brasília to Belém, but rainforest soil proved difficult to cultivate.
The great deltas of the world are all in relatively protected bodies of water, while the Amazon empties directly into the turbulent Atlantic.
The depth of the Amazon between Manacapuru and Óbidos has been calculated as between .
For instance, pre-Columbian indigenous people on the island of Marajó may have developed social stratification and supported a population of 100,000 people.
Its population is limited to fresh water habitats, and, unlike other manatees, it does not venture into salt water.
In this case, the width of the mouth of the river is usually measured from Cabo Norte, the cape located straight east of Pracuúba in the Brazilian state of Amapá, to Ponta da Tijoca near the town of Curuçá, in the state of Pará.
Obtaining these measurements was difficult given the class IV–V nature of each of these rivers, especially in their lower "Abyss" sections.
The caiman, which is related to alligators and other crocodilians, also inhabits the Amazon as do varieties of turtles.
The locals often refer to it as "El Jefe Negro", referring to an ancient god of fertility.
Using the same techniques, they calculated the length of the Nile as , which is longer than previous estimates but still shorter than the Amazon.
After a journey of 600&nbsp;km down the Napo River they reached a further major confluence, at a point near modern Iquitos, and then followed the upper Amazon, now known as the Solimões, for a further 1,200&nbsp;km to its confluence with the Rio Negro (near modern Manaus), which they reached on 3 June 1542.
If the impermeable rocks stop the vertical flow, the west to east gradient of the topography directs it to flow towards the Atlantic Ocean.
The first direct foreign trade with Manaus commenced around 1874.
In 1851 Iquitos had a population of 200, and by 1900 its population reached 20,000.
The plume generated by the river's discharge covers up to 1.3 million square kilometers and is responsible for muddy bottoms influencing a wide area of the tropical North Atlantic in terms of salinity, pH, light penetration, and sedimentation.
Large portions of the Trans-Amazonian and its accessory roads, such as BR-319 (Manaus-Porto Velho), are derelict and impassable in the rainy season.
Local trade along the river was carried on by the English successors to the Amazonas Company—the Amazon Steam Navigation Company—as well as numerous small steamboats, belonging to companies and firms engaged in the rubber trade, navigating the Negro, Madeira, Purús and many other tributaries, such as the Marañón, to ports as distant as Nauta, Peru.
After the confluence of Apurímac and Ucayali, the river leaves Andean terrain and is surrounded by floodplain.
The discovery was made public in August 2011 meeting of the Brazilian Geophysical Society in Rio de Janeiro.
From that point, Quebrada Carhuasanta emerges from Nevado Mismi, joins Quebrada Apacheta and soon forms Río Lloqueta which becomes Río Hornillos and eventually joins the Río Apurímac.
At Manacapuru, the Amazon's water level is only about  above mean sea level.
They continued downriver through an uninhabited area, where they could not find food.
Archeologists estimate that by the time the Spanish conquistador Orellana journeyed across the Amazon in 1541, more than 3 million Indians lived around the Amazon.
The success of the venture called attention to the opportunities for economic exploitation of the Amazon, and a second company soon opened commerce on the Madeira, Purús and Negro; a third established a line between Pará and Manaus; and a fourth found it profitable to navigate some of the smaller streams.
Scientists have discovered the longest underground "river" (actually a saline water aquifer) in the world, in Brazil.
Mismi in the Apurímac drainage, and thus the maximal length of the Amazon river is about 80&nbsp;km longer than previously thought.
Pinzón called the river flow ''Río Santa María del Mar Dulce'', later shortened to ''Mar Dulce'' (literally, ''sweet sea'', because of its fresh water pushing out into the ocean).
For example, over 20 species of stingray, most closely related to those found in the Pacific Ocean, can be found today in the freshwaters of the Amazon.
Annual flooding occurs in late winter at high tide when the incoming waters of the Atlantic are funnelled into the Amazon delta.
A study by Brazilian scientists concluded that the Amazon is actually longer than the Nile.
The tucuxi (''Sotalia fluviatilis''), also a dolphin species, is found both in the rivers of the Amazon basin and in the coastal waters of South America.
More than half of the water in the Amazon downstream of Manacapuru is below sea level.
Manaus alone makes up approximately 50% of the population of the largest Brazilian state of Amazonas.
Many branches begin flooding in November and may continue to rise until June.
Portuguese explorer Pedro Teixeira was the first European to travel up the entire river.
The total population of the Brazilian portion of the Amazon basin in 1850 was perhaps 300,000, of whom about two-thirds were Europeans and slaves, the slaves amounting to about 25,000.
Except for the flow direction, the Amazon and the Hamza have very different characteristics.
The low river banks are interrupted by only a few hills, and the river enters the enormous Amazon rainforest.
On 6 September 1850 Emperor Pedro II of Brazil sanctioned a law authorizing steam navigation on the Amazon and gave the Viscount of Mauá (Irineu Evangelista de Sousa) the task of putting it into effect.
By the time he and his men reached another village many of them were sick from hunger and eating "noxious plants", and near death.
From this point to the confluence of the Ucayali and the Marañón, some , the forested banks are just above the water and are inundated long before the river attains its maximum flood stage.
The most distant source of the Amazon was thought to be in the Apurímac river drainage for nearly a century.
The candirú, native to the Amazon River, is a species of parasitic fresh water catfish in the family Trichomycteridae, just one of more that 1200 species of catfish in the Amazon basin.
Small towns and villages are scattered across the forest, and because its vegetation is so dense, some remote areas are still unexplored.
In what is currently Brazil, Ecuador, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela, a number of colonial and religious settlements were established along the banks of primary rivers and tributaries for the purpose of trade, slaving and evangelization among the indigenous peoples of the vast rainforest, such as the Urarina.
It is often said to be "at least"  long.
Another Spanish explorer, Francisco de Orellana, was the first European man to travel from the founts situated in the Andes to the end of the river.
In fact, true cinnamon (''Cinnamomum verum'') is not native to South America.
At an average discharge of about  — approximately , greater than the next seven largest independent rivers combined — the Amazon represents 20% of the global riverine discharge to the ocean.
If only the river's main channel is considered, between the islands of Curuá (state of Amapá) and Jurupari (state of Pará), the width falls to about .
The Nile is reported to be anywhere from .
The town of Manáos, now Manaus, at the mouth of the Rio Negro, had a population between 1,000 and 1,500.
The resulting undular tidal bore is called the ''pororoca'', with a leading wave that can be up to  high and travel up to  inland.
The Amazon's flooded forests are the most extensive example of this habitat type in the world.
A variety of methods were used to compare the lengths of the Mantaro river vs. the Apurímac river from their most distant source points to their confluence, showing the longer length of the Mantaro.
This created dark soil areas known as terra preta de índio (Indian Dark Earth).
The main river is navigable for large ocean steamers to Manaus,  upriver from the mouth.
Several geological factors have played a vital role in the formation and existence of these subterranean water bodies.
Because of the terra preta, indigenous communities were able to make land fertile and thus sustainable for the large-scale agriculture needed to support their large populations and complex social structures.
On the Nhamunda River, a tributary of the Amazon downstream from Manaus, Orellana's party had a fierce battle with warriors who, they reported, were led by fierce female warriors who beat the men to death with clubs if they tried to retreat.
Recently, metagenomics has provided answers to what kind of microbes inhabit the river.
It flows from the Andean foothills to the Atlantic coast in a nearly west-to-east direction like the Amazon River.
After 170&nbsp;km, the Coca River joined the Napo River (at a point now known as Puerto Francisco de Orellana); the party stopped for a few weeks to build a boat just upriver from this confluence.
The Tocantins River enters the southern portion of the Amazon delta.
In 1560 another Spanish conquistador, Lope de Aguirre, may have made the second descent of the Amazon.
Regarding the initial mission of finding cinnamon, Pizarro reported to the King that they had found cinnamon trees, but that they could not be profitably harvested.
A large-scale colonization program saw families from northeastern Brazil relocated to the forests, encouraged by promises of cheap land.
The Madeira River rises and falls two months earlier than most of the rest of the Amazon.
On 31 July 1867 the government of Brazil, constantly pressed by the maritime powers and by the countries encircling the upper Amazon basin, especially Peru, decreed the opening of the Amazon to all countries, but they limited this to certain defined points: Tabatinga – on the Amazon; Cametá – on the Tocantins; Santarém – on the Tapajós; Borba – on the Madeira, and Manaus – on the Rio Negro.
Near the mouth of the Rio Negro to Serpa, nearly opposite the river Madeira, the banks of the Amazon are low, until approaching Manaus, they rise to become rolling hills.
In this travel, Orellana baptized some of the affluents of the amazonas like Rio Negro, Napo or Jurua.
The most important microbes in the Amazon River are Actinobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria and Crenarchaeota.
Thanks in part to the mercantile development associated with steamboat navigation coupled with the internationally driven demand for natural rubber, the Peruvian city of Iquitos became a thriving, cosmopolitan center of commerce.
Using Nevado Mismi, which in 2001 was labeled by the National Geographic Society as the Amazon's source, these scientists made new calculations of the Amazon's length.
But the flow speed is   in the Amazon and less than  speed in the Hamza.
Since only four percent of the Amazon’s hydropower potential has been developed in countries like Brazil, more damming projects are underway and hundreds more are planned.
Water in the aquifer flows a distance of  at a depth of nearly .
James Stuart Olson wrote: "The Munduruku expansion dislocated and displaced the Kawahíb, breaking the tribe down into much smaller groups&nbsp;... Munduruku first came to the attention of Europeans in 1770 when they began a series of widespread attacks on Brazilian settlements along the Amazon River."
These hills are cut down to a kind of terrace which lies between them and the river.
At first, navigation was principally confined to the main river; and even in 1857 a modification of the government contract only obliged the company to a monthly service between Pará and Manaus, with steamers of 200 tons cargo capacity, a second line to make six round voyages a year between Manaus and Tabatinga, and a third, two trips a month between Pará and Cametá.
The definition of where exactly the mouth of the Amazon is located, and how wide it is, is a matter of dispute, because of the area's peculiar geography.
Many indigenous tribes engaged in constant warfare.
A combination of seismic data and anomalous temperature variation with depth measured in 241 inactive oil wells helped locate the aquifer.
The Amazon enters Brazil with only one-fifth of the flow it finally discharges into the Atlantic Ocean, yet already has a greater flow at this point than the discharge of any other river.
These include rivers Putumayo, Caquetá, Vaupés, Guainía, Morona, Pastaza, Nucuray, Urituyacu, Chambira, Tigre, Nanay, Napo, and Huallaga.
Freshwater microbes are generally not very well known, even less so for a pristine ecosystem like the Amazon.
He organized the "Companhia de Navegação e Comércio do Amazonas" in Rio de Janeiro in 1852; in the following year it commenced operations with four small steamers, the ''Monarca'' ('Monarch'), the ''Cametá'', the ''Marajó'' and the ''Rio Negro''.
