Earhart referred to her marriage as a "partnership" with "dual control."
Shortly after her return, piloting Avian ''7083'', she set off on her first long solo flight which occurred just as her name was coming into the national spotlight.
During the takeoff run, Earhart ground-looped, circumstances of which remain controversial.
The ''Itasca'' then searched the area to the immediate NE of the island, corresponding to the area, yet wider than the area searched to the NW.
'''Amelia Mary Earhart''' (; July 24, 1897 – disappeared July 2, 1937) was an American aviation pioneer and author.
During World War II, US Coast Guard LORAN Unit 92, a radio navigation station built in the summer and fall of 1944, and operational from mid-November 1944 until mid-May 1945, was located on Gardner Island's southeast end.
Billings claims that the serial numbers written on the map, "600H/P S3HI C/N1055", represent:
On March 17, 1937, Earhart and her crew flew the first leg from Oakland, California to Honolulu, Hawaii.
The evidence remains circumstantial, but Earhart's surviving stepson, George Putnam Jr., has expressed support for TIGHAR's research.
She received the U.S.
Although there had been some missteps in his career up to that point, in 1907 Edwin Earhart's job as a claims officer for the Rock Island Railroad led to a transfer to Des Moines, Iowa.
The search locations were derived from the line of position (157–337) broadcast by Earhart on July 2, 1937.
By 1940, it had become Northeast Airlines.
He subsequently spent 28 years with the State Department's Federal Aviation Authority, participating in diplomatic and, occasionally, covert assignments.
They also found that Gardner's shape and size as recorded on charts were wholly inaccurate.
Ultimately, the Electra ended up at the United States Navy's Luke Field on Ford Island in Pearl Harbor.
*'''Greater Miami Aviation Association Amelia Earhart Award''' for outstanding achievement (2006); first recipient: noted flyer Patricia "Patty" Wagstaff.
Since most of the flight was on "instruments" and Earhart had no training for this type of flying, she did not pilot the aircraft.
Amelia was the second child of the marriage, after an infant stillborn in August 1896.
She later described the biplane as "a thing of rusty wire and wood and not at all interesting."
The celebrity endorsements helped Earhart finance her flying.
Putnam handled publicity for the school which primarily taught instrument flying using Link Trainers.
Earhart was the first female aviator to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean.
Purported photographs of Earhart during her captivity have been identified as either fraudulent or having been taken before her final flight.
Although Earhart and Putnam had no children, he had two sons by his previous marriage to Dorothy Binney (1888–1982), a chemical heiress whose father's company, Binney & Smith, invented Crayola crayons: the explorer and writer David Binney Putnam (1913–1992) and George Palmer Putnam, Jr. (1921–2013).
Earhart graduated from Hyde Park High School in 1916.
All of these added to the confusion and doubtfulness of the authenticity of the reports."
Her shyly charismatic appeal, independence, persistence, coolness under pressure, courage and goal-oriented career along with the circumstances of her disappearance at a comparatively early age have driven her lasting fame in popular culture.
When the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic reached Toronto, Earhart was engaged in arduous nursing duties including night shifts at the Spadina Military Hospital.
Hundreds of articles and scores of books have been written about her life which is often cited as a motivational tale, especially for girls.
Her concept of simple, natural lines matched with wrinkle-proof, washable materials was the embodiment of a sleek, purposeful but feminine "A.E."
To complete her image transformation, she also cropped her hair short in the style of other female flyers.
Another theory purports that Amelia Earhart was captured by Japanese forces.
It was at this point that the radio operators on the ''Itasca'' realized that their RDF system could not tune in the aircraft's 3015&nbsp;kHz frequency; radioman Leo Bellarts later commented that he "was sitting there sweating blood because I couldn't do a darn thing about it."
*Member of National Aviation Hall of Fame (1968).
Will you teach me?"
Earhart's commitment to flying required her to accept the frequently hard work and rudimentary conditions that accompanied early aviation training.
Her duties included preparing food in the kitchen for patients with special diets and handing out prescribed medication in the hospital's dispensary.
In the hospital, in the pre-antibiotic era, she had painful minor operations to wash out the affected maxillary sinus, but these procedures were not successful and Earhart subsequently suffered from worsening headache attacks.
Further, a review of sonar data concluded it was most like a coral ridge.
She passed the time by reading poetry, learning to play the banjo and studying mechanics.
At 7:42&nbsp;am Earhart radioed "We must be on you, but cannot see you—but gas is running low.
One of the highlights of the day was a flying exhibition put on by a World War I ace.
Angwin, who was a corporal in the 11th Battalion at the time, reported that he and other members of a forward patrol on Japanese-occupied New Britain had found a wrecked twin-engined, unpainted all-metal aircraft.
She was a Vice President of National Airways, which conducted the flying operations of the Boston-Maine Airways and several other airlines in the northeast.
The bones themselves were misplaced in Fiji long ago and have not been found.
Subsequent DNA testing at the University of Oklahoma proved inconclusive as to whether the bone fragments were from a human or from a sea turtle.
In 1909, when the family was finally reunited in Des Moines, the Earhart children were enrolled in public school for the first time with Amelia Earhart entering the seventh grade at the age of 12 years.
Stan Herd created the  landscape mural in 1997 from permanent plantings and stone to celebrate the 100th anniversary of Earhart's birth.
Other Navy search efforts were again directed north, west and southwest of Howland Island, based on a possibility the Electra had ditched in the ocean, was afloat, or that the aviators were in an emergency raft.
When Earhart was at cruising altitude and midway between Lae and Howland (over  from each) neither station heard her scheduled transmission at 0815 GCT.
As a result, Earhart was declared legally dead on January 5, 1939.
This claim had originally been raised in the book ''Amelia Earhart Lives'' (1970) by author Joe Klaas, based on the research of Major Joseph Gervais.
*'''Amelia Earhart Pioneering Achievement Award''', Atchison, Kansas: Since 1996, the Cloud L. Cray Foundation provides a $10,000 women's scholarship to the educational institution of the honoree's choice.
Distinguished Flying Cross for this record.
The project coordinators (including book publisher and publicist George P. Putnam) interviewed Earhart and asked her to accompany pilot Wilmer Stultz and copilot/mechanic Louis Gordon on the flight, nominally as a passenger, but with the added duty of keeping the flight log.
Kevin Richlin, a professional criminal forensic expert hired by ''National Geographic'', studied photographs of both women and cited many measurable facial differences between Earhart and Bolam.
Throughout her troubled childhood, she had continued to aspire to a future career; she kept a scrapbook of newspaper clippings about successful women in predominantly male-oriented fields, including film direction and production, law, advertising, management and mechanical engineering.
For a number of years she had sewn her own clothes, but the "active living" lines that were sold in 50 stores such as Macy's in metropolitan areas were an expression of a new Earhart image.
In 2013, Amelia Rose Earhart, a pilot and reporter from Denver Colorado, announced that she would be recreating the 1937 flight during the Summer of 2014 in a single engine Pilatus PC-12NG.
The USCGC ''Itasca'' was on station at Howland, assigned to communicate with Earhart's Electra and guide them to the island once they arrived in the vicinity.
In her final hours, she even relaxed and listened to "the broadcast of the Metropolitan Opera from New York."
9 on their list of the "51 Heroes of Aviation".
Due to lubrication and galling problems with the propeller hubs' variable pitch mechanisms, the aircraft needed servicing in Hawaii.
If transmissions were received from the Electra, most if not all were weak and hopelessly garbled.
Gillespie wrote that the  distance from Earhart's last known position to New Britain was impossible for the aircraft to fly, requiring more than 13 hours of flight when there were only 4 hours of fuel remaining.
The two friends communicated frequently throughout their lives.
*The '''Purdue University Amelia Earhart Scholarship''', first awarded in 1940, is based on academic merit and leadership and is open to juniors and seniors enrolled in any school at the West Lafayette campus.
In part, we remember her because she's our favorite missing person."
Countless other tributes and memorials have been made in Amelia Earhart's name, including a 2012 tribute from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, speaking at a State Department event celebrating the ties of Earhart and the United States to its Pacific neighbors, noting: "Earhart ... created a legacy that resonates today for anyone, girls and boys, who dreams of the stars."
Earhart is generally regarded as a feminist icon.
*Member of Motorsports Hall of Fame of America (1992).
While in Japan to assist in reviving its aviation industry, Keyzer-Andre uncovered information, documented in this book, that led him to conclude that Amelia Earhart, whose plane vanished somewhere in the Pacific in 1937, was shot down by the Japanese.
As the first woman to fly solo nonstop across the Atlantic, Earhart received the Distinguished Flying Cross from Congress, the Cross of Knight of the Legion of Honor from the French Government and the Gold Medal of the National Geographic Society from President Herbert Hoover.
While speaking in California in late 1934, Earhart had contacted Hollywood "stunt" pilot Paul Mantz in order to improve her flying, focusing especially on long-distance flying in her Vega and wanted to move closer to him.
The Otis house, and all of its contents, was auctioned; Earhart was heartbroken and later described it as the end of her childhood.
The group included engineers, technical experts, archaeologists, anthropologists, and researchers.
"I did not understand it at the time," she said, "but I believe that little red airplane said something to me as it swished by."
Earhart's ideas on marriage were liberal for the time as she believed in equal responsibilities for both "breadwinners" and pointedly kept her own name rather than being referred to as Mrs. Putnam.
While the family's finances seemingly improved with the acquisition of a new house and even the hiring of two servants, it soon became apparent Edwin was an alcoholic.
The book's publisher, McGraw-Hill, withdrew the book from the market shortly after it was released and court records indicate that they made an out-of-court settlement with her.
The luggage line that she promoted (marketed as Modernaire Earhart Luggage) also bore her unmistakable stamp.
Immediately after Earhart and Noonan's disappearance, the U.S. Navy, Paul Mantz, and Earhart's mother (who convinced G.P.
The two sisters, Amelia and Muriel (she went by her middle name from her teens on), remained with their grandparents in Atchison, while their parents moved into new, smaller quarters in Des Moines.
She later recounted that she was "exceedingly fond of reading" and spent countless hours in the large family library.
Some of the sonar images suggested a possible wreckage site, although Ric Gillespie, executive director of TIGHAR, cautioned that most of the Electra's parts would likely have disintegrated after 75 years in sea water.
In 1990, Donald Angwin, a veteran of the Australian Army's World War II campaign in New Britain, contacted researchers to suggest that a wrecked aircraft he had witnessed in jungle about  southwest of Rabaul, on April 17, 1945, may have been Earhart's Electra.
The original plans were for Noonan to navigate from Hawaii to Howland Island, a particularly difficult portion of the flight; then Manning would continue with Earhart to Australia and she would proceed on her own for the remainder of the project.
The site now is the home of a small museum, the ''Amelia Earhart Centre.''
Nichols' aircraft hit a tractor at the start of the runway and flipped over, forcing her out of the race.
After all contact was lost with Howland Island, attempts were made to reach the flyers with both voice and Morse code transmissions.
The team departed Trepassey Harbor, Newfoundland in a Fokker F.VIIb/3m on June 17, 1928, landing at Pwll near Burry Port, South Wales, exactly 20 hours and 40 minutes later.
At the second last stop at Columbus, her friend Ruth Nichols, who was coming third, had an accident while on a test flight before the race recommenced.
Edwin applied for a transfer to Springfield, Missouri, in 1915 but the current claims officer reconsidered his retirement and demanded his job back, leaving the elder Earhart with nowhere to go.
Their last known position report was near the Nukumanu Islands, about 800 miles (1,300&nbsp;km) into the flight.
Setting off on May 8, her flight was uneventful although the large crowds that greeted her at Newark, New Jersey, were a concern as she had to be careful not to taxi into the throng.
Earhart's transmissions seemed to indicate she and Noonan believed they had reached Howland's charted position, which was incorrect by about five nautical miles (10&nbsp;km).
Her father tried to interest her and her sister in taking a flight.
This transmission was reported by the ''Itasca'' as the loudest possible signal, indicating Earhart and Noonan were in the immediate area.
*'''Earhart Foundation''', located in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
The lagoon at Gardner looked sufficiently deep and certainly large enough so that a seaplane or even an airboat could have landed or takenoff  in any direction with little if any difficulty.
William L. Polhemous, the navigator on Ann Pellegreno's 1967 flight which followed Earhart and Noonan's original flight path, studied navigational tables for July 2, 1937, and thought Noonan may have miscalculated the "single line approach" intended to "hit" Howland.
Some witnesses at Luke Field including the Associated Press journalist on the scene said they saw a tire blow.
Consequently, with no immediate prospects for recouping her investment in flying, Earhart sold the "Canary" as well as a second Kinner and bought a yellow Kissel "Speedster" two-passenger automobile, which she named the "Yellow Peril."
During the same period, Earhart and George P. Putnam had spent a great deal of time together, leading to intimacy.
Five years later (in 1914), he was forced to retire and although he attempted to rehabilitate himself through treatment, he was never reinstated at the Rock Island Railroad.
The loop antenna was equipped with a tuneable loading coil that changed the effective length of the antenna to allow it to work efficiently at different wavelengths.
The two were close enough for settings 1, 2 and 3, but the higher frequency settings, 4 and 5, were entirely different.
Although this transoceanic flight had been attempted by many others, notably by the unfortunate participants in the 1927 Dole Air Race which had reversed the route, her trailblazing flight had been mainly routine, with no mechanical breakdowns.
*On December 6, 2006, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Earhart into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
She chose a leather jacket, but aware that other aviators would be judging her, she slept in it for three nights to give the jacket a "worn" look.
Roosevelt shared many of Earhart's interests and passions, especially women's causes.
David Jourdan, a former Navy submariner and ocean engineer specializing in deep-sea recoveries, has claimed any transmissions attributed to Gardner Island were false.
Her first choice as navigator was Captain Harry Manning, who had been the captain of the , the ship that had brought Earhart back from Europe in 1928.
A card displaying the band settings of the antenna was mounted so it was not visible.
He had vast experience in both marine (he was a licensed ship's captain) and flight navigation.
No independent confirmation or support has ever emerged for any of these claims.
During an attempt to make a circumnavigational flight of the globe in 1937 in a Purdue-funded Lockheed Model 10 Electra, Earhart disappeared over the central Pacific Ocean near Howland Island.
The United States Navy soon joined the search and over a period of about three days sent available resources to the search area in the vicinity of Howland Island.
Their upbringing was unconventional since Amy Earhart did not believe in molding her children into "nice little girls."
In 1935 Earhart became a visiting faculty member at Purdue University as an advisor to aeronautical engineering and a career counselor to women students.
The subsequent report on Gardner read: "Here signs of recent habitation were clearly visible but repeated circling and zooming failed to elicit any answering wave from possible inhabitants and it was finally taken for granted that none were there... At the western end of the island a tramp steamer (of about 4000 tons)... lay high and almost dry head onto the coral beach with her back broken in two places.
She became a patient herself, suffering from pneumonia and maxillary sinusitis.
She was also a member of the National Woman's Party and an early supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment.
In addition to Earhart and Noonan, Harry Manning and Mantz (who was acting as Earhart's technical advisor) were on board.
In this action-packed memoir, he vividly describes trips to Siberia and China, as well as WW II missions transporting refugees across war zones.
After deciding the trip was too perilous for her to undertake, she offered to sponsor the project, suggesting they find "another girl with the right image."
Meanwhile, Putnam had undertaken to heavily promote her in a campaign including publishing a book she authored, a series of new lecture tours and using pictures of her in mass market endorsements for products including luggage, Lucky Strike cigarettes (this caused image problems for her, with ''McCall's'' magazine retracting an offer) and women's clothing and sportswear.
Between 1930 and 1935, Earhart had set seven women's speed and distance aviation records in a variety of aircraft including the Kinner Airster, Lockheed Vega, and Pitcairn Autogiro.
Operators across the Pacific and the United States may have heard signals from the downed Electra but these were unintelligible or weak.
The girls kept "worms, moths, katydids and a tree toad" in a growing collection gathered in their outings.
Earhart joined the faculty of Purdue University in 1935 as a visiting faculty member to counsel women on careers and as a technical advisor to the Department of Aeronautics.
Facing another calamitous move, Amy Earhart took her children to Chicago, where they lived with friends.
In probate court in Los Angeles, Putnam requested to have the "declared death ''in absentia''" seven-year waiting period waived so that he could manage Earhart's finances.
I was just baggage, like a sack of potatoes."
*'''Amelia Earhart Hotel''', located in Wiesbaden, Germany, originally used as a hotel for women, then as temporary military housing is now operated as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Europe District Headquarters with offices for the Army Contracting Agency and the Defense Contract Management Agency.
While Angwin died in 2001, David Billings, an Australian aircraft engineer, has continued to investigate his theory.
Official reporting of the search effort was influenced by individuals wary about how their roles in looking for an American hero might be reported by the press.
Many researchers believe the Electra ran out of fuel and that Earhart and Noonan ditched at sea.
In 2016 ''The Times'' reported the TIGHAR story, alleging "compelling evidence" for this theory.
Earhart was especially fond of David who frequently visited his father at their family home in Rye, New York.
At Cleveland, Earhart was placed third in the heavy division.
*'''USNS ''Amelia Earhart'' (T-AKE-6)''' was named in her honor in May 2007.
These would be consistent with a Lockheed Electra 10E, such as that flown by Earhart, although they do not contain enough information to identify the wreck in question as NR16020.
With the aircraft severely damaged, the flight was called off and the aircraft was shipped by sea to the Lockheed Burbank facility for repairs.
They found artifacts of uncertain origin on the weather-ravaged atoll, including bronze bearings which may have belonged to Earhart's aircraft and a zipper pull which might have come from her flight suit.
Earhart replied, "From America."
Nevertheless, Elgen Long's interpretations have led Jourdan to conclude, "The analysis of all the data we have – the fuel analysis, the radio calls, other things – tells me she went into the water off Howland."
Earhart acknowledged receiving these but said she was unable to determine their direction.
*Member of National Women's Hall of Fame (1973).
Recently rediscovered photos of Earhart's Electra just before departure in Miami show an aluminum panel over a window on the right side.
The flight resumed three days later from Luke Field with Earhart, Noonan and Manning on board.
GP also learned quite soon that he would be called "Mr.
She flew the Avro Avian 594 Avian III, SN: R3/AV/101 owned by Lady Mary Heath and later purchased the aircraft and had it shipped back to the United States (where it was assigned "unlicensed aircraft identification mark" 7083).
George had contracted polio shortly after his parents' separation and was unable to visit as often.
Earhart was named, according to family custom, after her two grandmothers (Amelia Josephine Harres and Mary Wells Patton).
Her technical advisor for the flight was famed Norwegian American aviator Bernt Balchen who helped prepare her aircraft.
TIGHAR's research has produced a range of documented archaeological and anecdotal evidence supporting this hypothesis.
She set many other records, wrote best-selling books about her flying experiences and was instrumental in the formation of The Ninety-Nines, an organization for female pilots.
Jackie Cochran, another pioneering aviator and one of Earhart's friends, made a postwar search of numerous files in Japan and was convinced the Japanese were not involved in Earhart's disappearance.
Amelia Mary Earhart, daughter of Samuel "Edwin" Stanton Earhart (1867-1930) and Amelia "Amy" (nee Otis) (1869–1962), was born in Atchison, Kansas, in the home of her maternal grandfather, Alfred Gideon Otis (1827–1912), a former federal judge, president of the Atchison Savings Bank and a leading citizen in the town.
*'''Amelia Earhart Earthwork''' in Warnock Lake Park, Atchison, Kansas.
Earhart's stepson George Palmer Putnam Jr. has been quoted as saying he believes "the plane just ran out of gas".
In 1929, Earhart was among the first aviators to promote commercial air travel through the development of a passenger airline service; along with Charles Lindbergh, she represented Transcontinental Air Transport (TAT, later TWA) and invested time and money in setting up the first regional shuttle service between New York and Washington, DC., the Ludington Airline.
In 2013, ''Flying'' magazine ranked Earhart No.
While the map was located in the possession of another veteran in 1993, subsequent searches of the area indicated failed to find a wreck.
Two possibilities concerning the flyers' fate have prevailed among researchers and historians.
Beginning approximately one hour after Earhart's last recorded message, the USCGC ''Itasca'' undertook an ultimately unsuccessful search north and west of Howland Island based on initial assumptions about transmissions from the aircraft.
Her 7:58&nbsp;am transmission said she couldn't hear the ''Itasca'' and asked them to send voice signals so she could try to take a radio bearing.
Earhart arrived with her father and a singular request, "I want to fly.
According to several biographies of Earhart, Putnam investigated this rumor personally but after listening to many recordings of numerous Tokyo Roses, he did not recognize her voice among them.
Given a chance, it is believed that Miss Earhart could have landed her aircraft in this lagoon and swum or waded ashore."
A spirit of adventure seemed to abide in the Earhart children with the pair setting off daily to explore their neighborhood.
Both girls continued to answer to their childhood nicknames well into adulthood.
In July 2012, TIGHAR conducted an underwater expedition off the northwest reef of Nikumaroro, using sonar mapping.
Alfred Otis had not initially favored the marriage and was not satisfied with Edwin's progress as a lawyer.
Earhart began whistling into the microphone to provide a continual signal for them to home in on.
While Earhart was away on a speaking tour in late November 1934, a fire broke out at the Putnam residence in Rye destroying many family treasures and Earhart's personal mementos.
Earhart and Putnam would not move in immediately, however, as they decided to very considerably remodel and enlarge the existing small structure to meet their needs, thus delaying their occupation of their new home for some months.
The official search efforts lasted until July 19, 1937.
Earhart again participated in long-distance air racing, placing fifth in the 1935 Bendix Trophy Race, the best result she could manage considering that her stock Lockheed Vega topping out at  was outclassed by purpose-built air racers which reached more than .
The ''Itasca'' used her oil-fired boilers to generate smoke for a period of time but the fliers apparently did not see it.
Through contacts in the Los Angeles aviation community, Fred Noonan was subsequently chosen as a second navigator because there were significant additional factors which had to be dealt with while using celestial navigation for aircraft.
He was ordered to send the remains to Fiji, where in 1941, British colonial authorities took detailed measurements of the bones and concluded they were from a male about 5&nbsp;ft 5 in tall.
Earhart's only training on the system was a brief introduction by Joe Gurr at the Lockheed factory, and the topic had not come up.
*'''Amelia Earhart Bridge''' (1997), located in Atchison, Kansas.
For the new venture, she would need a new aircraft.
The tuner on the antenna was also marked with five settings, 1 to 5, but, critically, these were not the same frequency bands as the corresponding bands on the radio.
Her sinus-related symptoms were pain and pressure around one eye and copious mucus drainage via the nostrils and throat.
"By the time I had got two or three hundred feet 60&ndash;90&nbsp;m off the ground," she said, "I knew I had to fly."
By 1949, both the United Press and U.S. Army Intelligence had concluded this rumor was groundless.
In 2010, the research group said it had found bones that appeared to be part of a human finger.
By 1935, recognizing the limitations of her "lovely red Vega" in long, transoceanic flights, Earhart contemplated, in her own words, a new "prize... one flight which I most wanted to attempt – a circumnavigation of the globe as near its waistline as could be."
Although Earhart had gained fame for her transatlantic flight, she endeavored to set an "untarnished" record of her own.
As Putnam had already sold his interest in the New York based publishing company to his cousin, Palmer, following the fire the couple decided to move to the West Coast where Putnam took up his new position as head of the editorial board of Paramount Pictures in North Hollywood.
She intended to fly to Paris in her single engine Lockheed Vega 5B to emulate Charles Lindbergh's solo flight.
For a while Earhart was engaged to Samuel Chapman, a chemical engineer from Boston, breaking off her engagement on November 23, 1928.
Many ideas emerged after the disappearance of Earhart and Noonan.
She rejected the high school nearest her home when she complained that the chemistry lab was "just like a kitchen sink."
Rather than simply endorsing the products, Earhart actively became involved in the promotions, especially in women's fashions.
