It set up temporary headquarters in New York City and began its relief, employment, and Americanism programs.
The American Legion argued that this committee was important to the process of matching military certifications with their corresponding civilian ones, smoothing that transition for veterans, and that the committee provided much needed expertise on these matters to the VA.
Butler believed the American Legion was controlled by banking interests.
No charges were ever filed in connection with the lynching.
After 1920 the National Legislative Committee was expanded to consist of one member from each state, with additional effort made at the state level to exert pressure upon various state legislatures.
The selection of these individuals had been made by Roosevelt.
Its programs were rejuvenated by increased membership after World War II, and in its 1950 convention called for members of the American Communist Party to be tried for treason.
The Committee on Constitution reported with a report containing the draft of a Preamble for the organization, specifying organizational objectives.
A department officer or department executive committee representative is distinguished by a white garrison cap with gold piping.
Congress granted the American Legion a national charter in September 1919.
In November 1934, Butler told the New York ''Evening Post'' and a congressional subcommittee that representatives of powerful industrial interests and the American Legion were trying to induce him to lead the Legion in a campaign to preserve the gold standard and to engineer a coup against President Roosevelt with Butler's aid in marshaling the support of veterans.
The Legion also owns a building in Washington D.C. that contains many of the operation offices such as Economics, Legislative, Veterans Affairs, Foreign Relations, National Security, and Media Relations.
Everest was taken alive, kicked and beaten, and a belt wrapped around his neck as he was dragged back to the town to be lynched.
Just as the door gave way, shots were fired from within at the intruders.
A flurry of lobbying by the Legion's National Legislative Committee in conjunction with cables sent to Congressional leaders by National Commander Franklin D'Olier helped achieve passage of this legislation by the end of 1919.
Parade Marshal Adrian Cormier rode up on horseback and, according to some witnesses, blew a whistle giving the signal to the Legionnaires to charge the IWW headquarters building.
They held a preparedness parade in New York City and made a film ''America Prepare''  Officers included Theodore Roosevelt, Arthur S. Hoffman, William Howard Taft, Elihu Root Jacob M. Dickinson, Henry L. Stimson and Luke E. Wright, George von L. Meyer, Truman H. Newberry and Charles J. Bonaparte.
In a report issued in 1921, the ACLU documented 50 instances of what it described as illegal acts of violence by Legionnaires.
Also in 2014, Verna L. Jones was appointed as the first female executive director of the American Legion.
Consequently, for nearly two decades the American Legion maintained a largely isolationist perspective, best expressed in three resolutions passed by the Minneapolis founding convention:
After long discussion, Roosevelt suggested the establishment at once of a new servicemen's organization including all members of the AEF, as well as those soldiers who remained stateside as members of the army, navy, and Marine Corps during the war without having been shipped abroad.
In a letter to U.S. President Bill Clinton in May 1999, the American Legion urged the immediate withdrawal of U.S. troops from Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia.
Although a mob milled around the jail all night, terrorizing the occupants, no further acts of extra-legal retribution were taken.
Its officers were at 10 Bridge Street, New York City.
The Legion's efforts to promote Americanism during the 1920s included urging its members to report on the publication materials perceived to be subversive, left-wing, or reflective of radical foreign political views, and established a National Americanism Commission to oversee its actions related to subversive activities.
The Post is used for formal business such as meetings and a coordination point for community service projects.
Joined by 19 other founding members, the group soon found itself inundated with requests for information about the new group.
Cautionary voices were raised about an apparent correlation between disaffected and discharged troops and the Bolshevik uprisings taking place in Russia, Finland, Germany, and Hungary.
The American Legion was instrumental in the creation of the U.S. Veterans' Bureau, now known as the Department of Veterans Affairs.
A January 1920 trial resulted in the conviction of six defendants on charges of second degree murder.
The Legion concentrated its lobbying effort in 1919 on passage of legislation increasing payment for total disability suffered in the war to $80 a month—a sum roughly sufficient in dollars of the day to provide a living wage.
... desiring to perpetuate the principles of Justice, Freedom, and Democracy for which we have fought, to inculcate the duty and obligation of the citizen to the State; to preserve the history and incidents of our participation in the war; and to cement the ties of comradeship formed in service, do propose to found and establish an Association for the furtherance of the foregoing purposes.
A provisional executive committee of four people emerged from the February 15 "Roosevelt dinner": Roosevelt in the first place, who was to return to the United States and obtain his military discharge when able, and then to gather assistants and promote the idea of the new veterans' organization among demobilized troops there; George White, who was to travel France touring the camps of the AEF explaining the idea in person; Secretary of the group was veteran wartime administrator Eric Fisher Wood, together with former Ohio Congressman Ralph D. Cole, Wood was to establish a central office and to maintain contact by mail and telegram with the various combat divisions and headquarters staffs, as well as to publicize activities to the press.
At the Legion's 1951 convention at Miami, Florida, it formally endorsed its "Back to God" movement.
After the Korean War, there were 2.5 million Legionnaires.
The Legion formed the Citizens' Flag Honor Guard and it later became the Citizens Flag Alliance.
In 2006, the Chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, Steve Buyer (R-Ind.
In 1952, the Legion asked for a congressional investigation into the ACLU to determine if it was a communist or communist front organization.
The main Department of France consists of 29 posts located in 10 European counties, the Department of Mexico consists of 22 posts located in Central America, and the Department of Philippines covers Asia and the Pacific Islands.
The 10:00 am scheduled start was delayed due to various logistical problems, with a beginning finally made shortly after 2:45 pm.
Merchant seamen from receiving benefits under the G.I.
The Economy Act of 1933 cut disability pensions and established strict new guidelines for proving disabilities.
The conclave was slated to begin on March 15.
Taken by surprise by the armed defense of IWW headquarters, many Legionnaires rushed home to arm themselves, while others broke into local hardware stores to steal guns and ammunition.
Those partially disabled by their wounds were to receive lesser payments.
Having immediately received a blizzard of acceptances to attend the opening of the "Liberty League Caucus", as he had begun to refer to it, Temporary Secretary Eric Fisher Wood began to search for use of a room of sufficient size to contain the gathering.
Preparations for a convention in Paris began apace.
), announced that he planned to eliminate the annual congressional hearings for Veterans Service Organizations that was established by President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Francis E. Drake as the Commander of The Department of France;  on February 7, 1921, in  the National Executive Committee meeting held at Washington D.C.,  the Department of France was created with Posts in Belgium, France, Germany, Poland, and Turkey.
1, was chartered in Shanghai.
The main purpose of these "larger" groups (Districts—Divisions) is to allow one or two delegates to represent an area at conferences, conventions, and other gatherings, where large numbers of Legionnaires may not be able to attend.
The organization was formally non-partisan, endorsing candidates of no political party.
With the war at an end, hundreds of thousands of impatient draftees found themselves trapped in France and pining for home, certain only that untold weeks or months lay ahead of them before their return would be logistically possible.
Divisions are even larger groups of about four or more Districts.
They lobbied government to strengthen the military.
Now armed, a furious mob reassembled and charged the IWW Hall again, capturing six IWW members inside.
This was, however, largely a failed formality, as states lacked sufficient time to organize themselves and properly elect delegates to St. Louis.
Also in 1993, two members of Garden City, Michigan American Legion Post 396 shared an idea that would bond motorcycle enthusiasts in the Legion from the idea of Chuck Dare and post commander Bill Kaledas, creating the American Legion Riders.
It promoted the passage of state bills requiring loyalty oaths of school teachers, and supported the activities of anti-Communist newspaper publishers, including William Randolph Hearst, in identifying Communist sympathizers in academic institutions.
Instead, they chose to expand their number with a large preliminary meeting which would consist of an equal number of elected delegates to represent both enlisted men and commissioned officers.
There Lt. Col. Roosevelt told them his proposal for a new veterans' society.
It also supported legislation restricting immigration and seditious speech, and used its influence in an effort to deny public forums to speakers whose views it opposed.
Nevertheless, Butler's charges, elaborated by articles in the Communist newspaper ''New Masses'', gave birth to an enduring conspiracy theory, known as the Business Plot, that powerful business interests in alliance with the Legion planned to overthrow the federal government.
During  the lead up to World War II, members assisted retired US Army Captain Claire Lee Chennault in formation of the American "Flying Tigers" and the Republic of China Air Force.
Additional resolutions passed by the founding convention emphasized the need for military preparedness, albeit maintained through a citizens' army of reservists and National Guardsmen rather than through the costly and undemocratic structure of a vast standing army led by a professional military caste.
National safety with freedom from militarism is best assured by a national citizen army and navy based on the democratic principles of equality of obligation and opportunity for all.2.
At the state level, the American Legion is organized into "departments", which run annual civic training events for high school juniors called Boys State.
The American Legion vigorously campaigned for the G.I.
It was noted in passing during the course of debate on the topic that Teddy Roosevelt, Jr. had been responsible for an earlier organization called "The American Legion" in 1914, a "preparedness" society with a claimed membership of 35,000 which had been absorbed into the Council of National Defense in 1916.
Former Union Army soldiers of  the American Civil War of 1861–65 established a fraternal organization called the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR), while their Southern brethren would join together in the United Confederate Veterans (UCV).
This list was whittled down to five ranked choices for the consideration of the Caucus, with "The American Legion" the preferred option.
After a VFW convention heard speeches denouncing FDR's programs, the American Legion invited Roosevelt to speak and he won the convention's support.
As such the American Legion states that it "is leading a nationwide effort to combat the secular cleansing of our American heritage", stating that the phrase "separation of church and state" is nowhere mentioned in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution The American Legion released a document titled "In The Footsteps Of The Founders – A Guide To Defending American Values" to be available to the citizens of The United States of America.
The first post of the American Legion, General John Joseph Pershing Post Number 1 in Washington, D.C., was organized on March 7, 1919, and obtained the first charter issued to any post of the Legion on May 19, 1919.
In December 1933, retired General Smedley Butler, a popular and colorful speaker, toured the country on behalf of the VFW, calling on veterans to organize politically to win their benefits.
They argued that the legislation would "benefit service members, as well as those who eventually employ veterans in civilian work-force easing the placement of qualified veterans in civilian careers, and matching civilian employers with skilled veteran employees."
On 9 November 1919  the National Headquarters of the American Legion accredited Lt.Col.
The post was named after Ferdinand Branstetter, a Van Tassell resident who died in World War I.
Its primary political activity is lobbying on behalf of the interests of veterans and service members, including support for veterans benefits such as pensions and the Veterans Affairs hospital system.
Membership peaked for the Legion right after World War II, when enrollments doubled from 1.7 million to 3.3 million.
The first Boys Nation program was held in 1946.
The St. Louis caucus that same year decided that Legion posts should not be named after living persons, and the first post changed its name to George Washington Post 1.
In 1935, the first Boys' State convened in Springfield, Illinois.
However, membership has slowly been decreasing since then.
A District Commander is distinguished by a navy blue garrison cap with a white crown and gold piping.
At the time of the end of World War I, American law stated that soldiers who suffered total disability were to receive only the base pay of a Private—$30 per month.
The Legion's charter was changed to allow veterans of World War II to join.
Participants at the St. Louis Caucus were enthusiastic although the session was not a productive one.
This pneumonia killed 34 people at the convention and later became known as Legionnaires' disease (''Legionellosis'').
As night fell Everest's body was hauled back to town, the rope still around his neck, where it was refused by local undertakers and left on the floor of the jail in sight of the prisoners all night.
Most payments were scheduled to be paid in 1945.
Twelve IWW members were ultimately indicted by a grand jury for first degree murder in connection with the killing of the four Legionnaires and a local left wing lawyer was charged as an accessory to the crime.
A County Commander is distinguished by a navy blue garrison cap with white piping.
Both organizations emerged as powerful political entities, with the GAR serving as a mainstay of the Republican Party, which controlled the Presidency from the Civil War through Theodore Roosevelt's administration except for the two terms of office of Grover Cleveland.
That a large standing army is uneconomic and un-American.
General John J. Pershing issued orders to a group of 20 non-career officers to report to the YMCA headquarters in Paris on February 15, 1919.
Along with the Veterans of Foreign Wars, it maintained files on supposed Communist sympathizers, and it shared the fruits of its research with government investigators.
Throughout the 1940s, the American Legion was active in providing support for veterans and soldiers who fought in World War II.
The Paris Caucus in March was by its nature limited to soldiers of the AEF who remained in Europe; a parallel organizational meeting for those who had returned to the American preparatory to a formal organizational convention was deemed necessary.
The County Commander performs annual inspections of the Posts within their jurisdiction and reports the findings to both the District and the Department level.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1969.
In 1923, American Legion Commander Alvin Owsley cited Italian Fascism as a model for defending the nation against the forces of the left.
The head department for each state is located in that states capital.
The American Legion wrote the original draft of the Veterans Readjustment Act, which became known as the *GI Bill.
The mob proceeded to destroy the front porch of the hall and a large bonfire was built, upon which were torched the local Wobblies' official records, books, newspapers, and mattresses.
According to the American Legion, the ACLU has used the threat of attorney fees to intimidate cities, counties, school boards and other locally elected bodies into surrendering to its demands to remove religion from the public square.
Follow-up cables by Roosevelt and Wood encouraged the organization of state conventions to select delegates.
The departments located overseas are intended to allow active duty military stationed and veterans living overseas to be actively involved with the American Legion similar to as if they were back in the United States.
It was also influential in the creation of state-level legislative investigations into communist or un-American activities, and staged a mock Communist takeover of Mosinee, Wisconsin that garnered national headlines.
This document stated that the group
Local posts picketed films they perceived as anti-American, and the national organization was formally involved in Hollywood's efforts to clear films of such influence.
In 1936 the publication's name and volume numbering system changed again, this time to ''American Legion Magazine.''
The size of the regular army was comparatively small and its representation in the League in its earliest days was even more limited.
This publication switched its frequency and renamed itself ''The American Legion Monthly'' in 1926.
In his keynote opening remarks Wood recommended to the delegates of the so-called Paris Caucus that they do three things: first, set up an apparatus to conduct a formal founding conference in the United States sometime in the winter; second, the body should draft a tentative name for the organization; and finally, the body should compose a provisional constitution to be submitted to the founding convention for its acceptance or rejection.
This followed Merchant seamen being granted limited veterans status by the United States Secretary of the Air Force on January 19, 1988.
A rope was attached to Everest's neck and he was pushed off the bridge, but the lynching attempt was bungled and Everest's neck was not snapped by the fall.
The session of reserve and regular officers was instructed to provide a set of laws to curb the problem of declining morale.
This was a conclave dominated by the presence of Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., who called the convention to order amidst mass chanting akin to that of a Presidential nominating convention—"We Want Ted-dy!
In addition to the personal invitations distributed, the published announcement indicated that "any officer or enlisted man not invited who is in Paris at the time of the meeting is invited to be present and to have a voice in the meeting."
Delegates began to assemble from all over France.
One of those chasing the fleeing IWW man was hit in the chest several times with bullets and was killed, running the death count of Legionnaires to four.
The American Legion generally supported the FDR administration and the Act, while the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) was loudly opposed.
That we favor universal military training and the administration of such a policy should be removed from the complete control of any exclusively military organization or caste.3.
Everyone implicated denied involvement and the press gave the story little credence.
Commander Travers D. Carmen awarded Charles Lindbergh its "Distinguished Service Medal", the medal's first recipient, on July 22, 1927.
The majority report of the Committee on Convention recommended that 11 am on November 11, 1919—one year to the hour after the termination of hostilities in World War I—be selected as the date and time for the convocation of a national convention.
Local police intervened, however, and Everest was taken to jail, where he was thrown down on the concrete floor.
At 7:30 pm, on cue, all city lights in town went out for 15 minutes and Legionnaires stopped cars and forced them to turn out their headlights.
The main American Legion Headquarters is located on the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza in Indianapolis.
It was unsuccessful in applying pressure to the movie studios when the blacklist began to crumble in the late 1950s.
This nationalist isolationism would remain in place until the very eve of American entry into the Second World War.
Fully two days were invested choosing ceremonial officers and selecting Minneapolis as the site for the organization's formal Founding Convention in the fall.
A National Officer or National Executive Committee Representative is distinguished by a red garrison cap with gold piping.
A major part of this was drum and bugle corps competition in which approximately 14,000 members took part.
The veteran's organization has done this to curtail religious-establishment cases against the Boy Scouts and the official display of the Ten Commandments and other religious symbols on public property, in coordination with other Christian Dominionists.
The VFW then campaigned for a "Bonus Bill" that would immediately pay World War I veterans what they were due in 1945 under the 1924 World War Adjusted Compensation Act.
It commissioned the development of textbooks that promoted American patriotism, worked with members of the National Education Association to promote the teaching of history from an American perspective, and sought the removal of textbooks it saw as "un-American".
The need for an organization for former members of the AEF was pressing and immediate.
Eliminating annual hearings before a joint session of the Veterans Affairs Committees will lead to continued budgetary shortfalls for VA resulting in veterans being underserved."
The Legion also created its own American Legion Baseball Program, hosting national tournaments annually from 1926.
Everest's body was cut down the next morning, falling into the riverbed below, where it remained all day.
As the parade turned onto Tower Avenue and crossed Second Street, it passed IWW Hall on its left.
One day in January 1919, Roosevelt had a discussion at General Headquarters with a mobilized National Guard officer named George A.
Its agenda was in addition carefully prepared by a 49-member "Advance Committee", which included at least one delegate from each fledgling state organization and which drew up a draft program for the organization in advance of the convention's opening.
The Legion is active in issue-oriented U.S. politics.
As "Temporary Chairman" Teddy Roosevelt, Jr. had already departed for America, the session was gaveled to order by Eric Wood, who briefly recounted Roosevelt's idea and the story of the 20 AEF officers who had jointly helped to give the new organization form.
The Post is the basic unit of the Legion and usually represents a small geographic area such as a single town or part of a county.
Convention rules were decided upon and four 15-member committees were chosen.
The Post has been operating in exile since 1948 — presently in Fate, Texas.
Over 1100 participants competed to gain the floor to speechify, leading one historian to describe the scene as a "melee" in which "disorder reigned supreme."
The Committee on Name reported back that they had considered a dozen potential names, including Veterans of the Great War, Liberty League, American Comrades of the Great War, Legion of the Great War, and the American Legion, among others.
The organization's official publication in its initial phase was a magazine called ''The American Legion Weekly,'' launched on July 4, 1919.
Consequently, passage of the program by the gathering was largely a pro forma exercise, rushed through during the session's last day, with the actual decision-making process involving such matters as the constitution and publications of the organization being done in committee at night.
The original draft is preserved at the Legion's National Headquarters.
The American Legion said that "there is a definite need to resume this independent body with expertise in matters relating to licensing and credentialing which can present new solutions to VA's senior leadership and congressional members as well as other stakeholders."
This provided the signal to other armed IWW members, who were stationed across the street to set up a crossfire against potential invaders and they also began firing on the Legionnaires.
If ever needed, the American Legion stands ready to protect our country's institutions and ideals as the Fascisti dealt with the destructionists who menaced Italy!...
One local Wobbly named Wesley Everest escaped through a back door when he saw the mob approaching the hall.
American Legion China Post One, formed in 1919 one year after the "great war" and chartered by the American Legion on April 20, 1920, was originally named the General Frederick Townsend Ward Post No.
There is a total of 55 lodges; one for each of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, France, Mexico, and the Philippines.
On April 20, 1920, American Legion China Post One, originally  formed in 1919 and  named  General Frederick Townsend Ward Post No.
On April 10, 1919, Temporary Secretary Eric Fisher Wood mailed a letter to the Governor of every state, informing them of the forthcoming gathering and making note of the non-partisan and patriotic nature of the League.
The list of names and organizations the Legion provided to movie studios formed the basis for the Hollywood blacklist, and supported the work of the House Un-American Activities Committee and its predecessors before and during the Cold War.
In addition to Boys State, the American Legion features numerous programs including American Legion Baseball, Scouting, Oratorical Contests, Junior Shooting Sports, Youth Alumni, Sons of the American Legion, American Legion Riders, and Scholarships at every level of the organization.
Each District oversees several Posts, generally about 20, to help each smaller group have a larger voice.
In 1924, the Legion and other veterans organizations won their battle for additional compensation for World War I veterans with the passage of the World War Adjusted Compensation Act.
The lynch mob then shined their car headlights on the hanging form of Everest and shot him for good measure.
The structure housing the post has since been demolished.
As a source of information  a website was set up, and it continues to be a source of information worldwide.
He fled into nearby woods, exchanging gunshots with his pursuers.
The Cirque de Paris had been retained, a large, multisided amphitheater sufficient to accommodate a crowd of about 2,000.
Marchers included Boy Scouts, members of the local Elks Lodge, active-duty sailors and marines, with about 80 members of the newly established Centralia and Chehalis American Legion posts bringing up the rear.
The American Legion was very active in the 1920s.
Each Department is divided into Divisions and/or Districts.
Bill, they allowed Merchant seamen to join the American Legion.
It is the primary office for the National Commander and also houses the historical  archives, library, Membership, Internal Affairs, Public Relations, and the Magazine editorial offices.
By 2009, the American Legion Riders program had grown to over 1,000 chapters and 100,000 members in the United States and overseas.
The work of the St. Louis Caucus was largely shaped by the fundamental decisions made by the earlier Paris Caucus.
A group of marchers rushed the hall, smashing the front plate glass window and attempting to kick in the door.
The Legion's political activities were opposed from an early date by organizations like the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), which characterized them as a danger to political and civil rights.
In addition to organizing commemorative events, volunteer veterans operating through the Legion support activities and provide assistance at Veterans Administration hospitals and clinics.
The National Executive Committee of the American Legion met and adopted a resolution unanimously that stated, in part, that they would only support military operations if "Guidelines be established for the mission, including a clear exit strategy" and "That there be support of the mission by the U.S. Congress and the American people."
That we are strongly opposed to compulsory military service in time of peace.
When launching the program in 1953 with a national television broadcast that included speeches by President Eisenhower and Vice-President Nixon, the Legion's National Commander Lewis K. Gough said it promoted "regular church attendance, daily family prayer, and the religious training of children."
The officers decided to make all of their actions provisional until an elected convention of delegates could be convened and did not predetermine a program for the unnamed veterans organization.
The Legion also took a McCarthyist stance on film, threatening to boycott any theater that screened director Edward Dmytryk's ''Salt to the Devil'' (also known as ''Give Us This Day'') (1949) because of Dmytryk's involvement with the blacklist.
In October 2011, National Commander Jimmie L Foster objected to courts allowing homosexuals to serve openly in the military.
In 1927, the ACLU reported that the Legion "had replaced the Ku Klux Klan|Ku Klux Klan as the most active agent of intolerance and repression in the country.
After a 1989 U.S. Supreme Court decision (Texas v. Johnson), the American Legion launched and funded an unsuccessful campaign to win a constitutional amendment against harming the flag of the United States.
Two members from each Boys State are selected for Boys Nation.
No location was specified.
Each U.S. county comprises several Posts and oversees their operations, led by a County Council of elected officers.
Nevertheless, the Legion's stance was unpopular with its membership and membership plummeted in 1933 by 20% as 160,000 failed to renew their memberships.
American Legion national convention was held in Paris, France in September 1927.
As baby boomers joined, membership increased to 3.1 million in 1992.
In 1976, an outbreak of bacterial pneumonia occurred in a convention of the American Legion at The Bellevue Stratford Hotel in Philadelphia.
In 1917, when was declared the legion had 23,000 members skilled in 77 professions pledged to fight.
The American Legion Auxiliary runs Girls State and Girls Nation.
In less than a minute the firing was over, with three AL members left dead or dying and others wounded.
