The goal was to seize the Lake Champlain and Hudson River corridor, effectively isolating New England from the rest of the American colonies.
The British government retaliated by closing the port of Boston and taking away self-government.
Grimaldi told Lee that "You have considered your own situation, and not ours.
Most Native Americans east of the Mississippi River were affected by the war, and many communities were divided over the question of how to respond to the conflict.
Their defeat resulted in a splintering of the Cherokee towns and people, and was directly responsible for the rise of the Chickamauga Cherokee, bitter enemies of the Colonials who carried on a frontier war for decades following the end of hostilities with Britain.
At least 5,000 black soldiers fought for the Revolutionary cause.
John Paul Jones became the first great American naval hero, capturing HMS ''Drake'' on April 24, 1778, the first victory for any American military vessel in British waters.
Ambitious plans for an invasion of Great Britain in 1779 had to be abandoned.
Ironically, shortly after North resigned the British won the Battle of the Saintes, putting an end to the French threat in the West Indies, and they successfully relieved Gibraltar.
Distance was also a major problem for the British.
A part of Howe's army was then split off to reduce rebel forts blocking his communications up the Delaware River.
The French spent 1.3 billion livres (about £56 million).
King George III issued a Proclamation of Rebellion in August 1775, and addressed Parliament on October 26, 1775.
The war against France and Spain continued, with the British defeating the Great Siege of Gibraltar, and inflicting several defeats on the French in 1782.
Arnold fell back to Fort Ticonderoga, where the invasion had begun.
He led the last British attack in the north, a devastating raid against New London in September 1781.
When Washington's army arrived outside Yorktown, Cornwallis prematurely abandoned his outer position, hastening his subsequent defeat.
Although France lost St. Lucia early in the war, its navy dominated the West Indies, capturing Dominica, Grenada, Saint Vincent, Montserrat, Tobago, St. Kitts and the Turks and Caicos between 1778 and 1782.
In the succeeding months news arrived of other reverses, however.
During the battle Howe declined to attack Washington's highly vulnerable main force, instead attacking a hill that was of no strategic significance.
When a second relief expedition approached, this time led by Benedict Arnold, St. Leger's Indian support abandoned him, forcing him to break off the siege and return to Quebec.
The capture of the French-controlled port of Mahé on India's west coast motivated Mysore's ruler, Hyder Ali (who was already upset at other British actions, and benefited from trade through the port), to open the Second Anglo-Mysore War in 1780.
Militarily, the weak British response to the rebellion in 1775 and early 1776 around Boston was a losing cause; the British lost control of every colony.
Nobody was punished for the "Boston Tea Party" and in 1774 Parliament ordered Boston Harbor closed until the destroyed tea was paid for.
The Continental Army's strength dwindled to such an extent that the British decided to mount two probing attacks against New Jersey in June 1780.
Montgomery's force joined Arnold's, and they attacked Quebec City on December 31, but were defeated by Carleton in a battle that ended with Montgomery dead, Arnold wounded, and over 400 Americans taken prisoner.
Meanwhile, the British were mustering forces to suppress the revolt.
Parliament voted to restrict all colonial trade to Britain, prevent them from using the Newfoundland fisheries, and to increase the size of the army and navy by 6,000.
Washington entered winter quarters at Morristown, New Jersey, having given a morale boost to the American cause.
Battles such as the Battle of Bennington, the Battles of Saratoga and even defeats such as the Battle of Germantown proved decisive in gaining the attention and support of powerful European nations such as France and Spain, who moved from covertly supplying the Americans with weapons and supplies, to overtly supporting them militarily, moving the war to a global stage.
Howe submitted his resignation in October 1777; until it was accepted he spent his time in Philadelphia preparing his arguments for an expected parliamentary inquiry.
It then passed the Massachusetts Government Act to punish the rebellious colony.
The siege was not broken, and Gage was soon replaced by Howe as the British commander-in-chief.
By 1778, the army was pardoning criminals for military service and had extended the age range for service to be from 16 to 50.
Burgoyne's army had been reduced to about 6,000 men by the loss at Bennington and the need to garrison Ticonderoga, and he was running short on supplies.
Washington positioned his 11,000 men in a strong position along the Brandywine River, between the British and Philadelphia, but Howe outflanked and defeated him on September 11, 1777.
On April 14, he received orders to disarm the rebels and arrest their leaders.
It was not unusual for the Americans to suffer a string of defeats, only to have the British retreat because they could not occupy the captured land.
The Whigs felt that the Tory policies were pushing Americans to rebel, while the Tories thought Whig leniency (such as repealing the Stamp Act) was doing the same.
Arsenals were raided and some manufacturing was attempted; 90% of the supply (2 million pounds) was imported by the end of 1776, mostly from France.
With the British invasion of the state in 1781, Virginia was mired in class division as its native son, George Washington, made desperate appeals for troops.
Washington then moved most of the Continental Army to fortify New York City.
At the onset of war, the British had a significant force only in Boston, though this force would evacuate by the signing of the Declaration of Independence in 1776.
What is more important, the victory encouraged France to make an open alliance with the Americans, after two years of semi-secret support.
As the British retreated to Boston, thousands of militiamen attacked them along the roads, inflicting many casualties before timely British reinforcements prevented a total disaster.
France made some gains over its nemesis, Great Britain, but its material gains were minimal and its financial losses huge.
After Saratoga, France formally entered the war in 1778.
About 171,000 sailors served in the Royal Navy during the war; about a quarter had been pressed into service.
It was the largest force the British had ever sent outside of Europe at that time.
It was already in financial trouble and its borrowing to pay for the war used up all its credit and created the financial disasters that marked the 1780s.
The Spanish colonial leaders, in turn, could not completely eliminate British influences along the Mosquito Coast.
Ellis's point is that the strategic and tactical decisions of the Howes were fatally flawed because they underestimated the challenges posed by the Patriots.
The Earl of Effingham publicly resigned his commission when his 22nd Regiment of foot was posted to America, and William Howe and John Burgoyne were members of parliament who opposed military solutions to the American rebellion.
In 1777 Howe's army launched a campaign against the national capital at Philadelphia, failing to aid Burgoyne's separate invasion force from Canada.
Initially, several German principalities offered military support to Great Britain but these offers were rejected.
Historians continue to debate whether the odds for American victory were long or short.
The war in the north then bogged down into a stalemate, with neither side capable of attacking the other in any decisive manner.
Parliament threatened to try Massachusetts residents for treason in England.
In early September, French naval forces defeated the British fleet at the Battle of the Chesapeake, cutting off Cornwallis' escape.
Although both armies were back where they had been two years earlier, the nature of the war had now changed as the British had to withdraw troops from North America to counter the French threats elsewhere.
It was the last major battle in the north.
In the '''Gulf Coast campaign''', Count Bernardo de Gálvez, the Spanish governor of Louisiana, quickly removed the British from their outposts on the lower Mississippi River in 1779 in actions at Manchac and Baton Rouge in British West Florida.
A small body acting in one spot will not avail, you must have large armies making diversions on different sides, to divide their force.
Revolutionary confidence and determination, suffering from Howe's successful occupation of Philadelphia, was renewed.
The Americans fell back, but British losses totaled over 1,000 men.
The King's speech was endorsed by both Houses of Parliament; a motion in the House of Commons to oppose coercive measures was defeated 278–108.
West of the Appalachian Mountains and along the border with Quebec, the American Revolutionary War was an "Indian War".
Although the Congress lacked any legal authority, it ordered the creation of Patriot committees who would enforce a boycott of British goods starting on December 1, 1774.
French opposition was led in 1782 and 1783 by Admiral the Baillie de Suffren, who recaptured Trincomalee from the British and fought five celebrated, but largely inconclusive, naval engagements against British Admiral Sir Edward Hughes.
Arnold was reinforced with additional troops from New York in March, and his army was joined with that of Cornwallis in May.
The Continental Congress again abandoned Philadelphia, and on September 26, Howe finally outmaneuvered Washington and marched into the city unopposed.
Following news of the surrender at Saratoga and concern over French intervention, the British decided to completely accept the original demands made by the American Patriots.
Like the Iroquois Confederacy, tribes such as the Shawnee split into factions, and the Chickamauga split off from the rest of the Cherokee over differences regarding peace with the Americans.
There were violent protests, many cases of evasion, and large-scale desertion, so that Virginia's contributions came at embarrassingly low levels.
With the Battles of Lexington and Concord, the war had begun.
It was also difficult for Great Britain to transport troops across the Atlantic and they depended on local supplies that the Patriots tried to cut off.
The British took along some 12,000 at the end of the war; of these 8000 remained in slavery.
In early March 1776, heavy cannons that the patriots had captured at Fort Ticonderoga were brought to Boston by Colonel Henry Knox, and placed on Dorchester Heights.
This would safeguard the taxing rights of the colonies from future infringement while enabling them to contribute to maintenance of the empire.
News of the surrender at Yorktown arrived in Britain in November 1781.
Had the North government held out for a few more months they would have been considerably strengthened and could have continued the war in spite of Yorktown.
Ellis concludes that once the Howe brothers failed, the opportunity for a British victory "would never come again."
More than 3,000 of them were freedmen and most of these were resettled in Nova Scotia; other blacks were sold in the West Indies.
This greatly disrupted plantation production during and after the war.
In the key Battle of Guilford Court House, Cornwallis drove Greene's much larger army off the battlefield, but in doing so suffered casualties amounting to one-fourth of his army.
On the night of April 18, 1775, General Gage sent 700 men to seize munitions stored by the colonial militia at Concord, Massachusetts.
Altogether, the British evacuated nearly 20,000 blacks at the end of the war.
These operations, the King felt, would inspire the Loyalists; would splinter the Congress; and "would keep the rebels harassed, anxious, and poor, until the day when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disappointment were converted into penitence and remorse" and they would beg to return to his authority.
:These people show a spirit and conduct against us they never showed against the French….They are now spirited up by a rage and enthusiasm as great as ever people were possessed of and you must proceed in earnest or give the business up.
In spite of this, Cornwallis decided to proceed, gambling that he would receive substantial Loyalist support.
Britain declared war on the Dutch Republic in 1780.
Ali, and later his son Tipu Sultan, almost drove the British from southern India but was frustrated by weak French support, and the war ended ''status quo ante bellum'' with the 1784 Treaty of Mangalore.
The United States spent $37 million at the national level plus $114 million by the states.
The British instead attempted to wear out American resolve by launching various raiding expeditions such as Tryon's raid against Connecticut in July 1779.
The population of Great Britain and Ireland in 1780 was approximately 12.6 million while the population of the thirteen colonies for the same year has been estimated at 2.8 million including over 500,000 slaves.
The Americans held the British prisoners taken at Saratoga until the end of the war, in direct violation of the agreed surrender terms, which specified they would be repatriated immediately.
Similarly, Admiral Augustus Keppel turned down a command, saying "I cannot draw the sword in such a cause."
He then loaded his troops onto transports and slowly sailed to the northern end of the Chesapeake Bay, landing 15,000 troops on August 25 at the head of the Elk River.
France and Spain had begun providing the colonists with weapons, ammunition, and other supplies in April 1776.
"These are the times that try men's souls," wrote Thomas Paine, who was with the army on the retreat.
Britain entered the war with confidence; it had the world's most powerful navy, a well-trained professional army, a sound financial system that could pay the costs, a stable government, and experienced leadership.
Royal governors and officials found themselves powerless to stop the rebellion and in many places were forced to flee.
In March 1782, Pennsylvania militiamen killed about a hundred neutral Native Americans in the Gnadenhütten massacre.
Two Quebec-bound expeditions were undertaken.
Throughout the winter New Jersey militia continued to harass British and Hessian forces near their three remaining posts along the Raritan River.
At the Battle of the Saintes in April 1782, a victory by Rodney's fleet over the French Admiral de Grasse frustrated the hopes of France and Spain to take Jamaica and other colonies from the British.
Meanwhile, in September 1774 representatives of the other colonies convened the First Continental Congress in order to respond to the crisis.
Congress supervised the war, giving Washington command of the new Continental Army; he also coordinated state militia units.
Gálvez' actions led to the Spanish acquisition of East and West Florida in the peace settlement, denied the British the opportunity of encircling the American forces from the south, and kept open a vital conduit for supplies to the American frontier.
Their units served for only a few weeks or months at a time, were reluctant to travel far from home and thus were unavailable for extended operations, and lacked the training and discipline of soldiers with more experience.
The inexperience of its officers was compensated for in part by its senior officers; officers such as George Washington, Horatio Gates, Charles Lee, Richard Montgomery and Francis Marion all had military experience with the British Army during the French and Indian War.
Conscription outside of naval impressment did not exist in Britain at that time, and the proportion of Americans willing to serve in their own country's defense was believed to be considerably larger than the proportion of Britons willing to serve overseas.
Small armies cannot afford such losses, especially when the advantage gained tends to do little more than the gaining of a post.
Civil resistance prevented the Act from being enforced, and organized boycotts of British goods were instituted.
He denounced "the authors and promoters of this desperate conspiracy" who had "labored to inflame my people in America&nbsp;... and to infuse into their minds a system of opinions repugnant to the true constitution of the Colonies, and to their subordinate relation to Great Britain&nbsp;..." He detailed measures taken to suppress the revolt, including "friendly offers of foreign assistance".
When they withdrew their forces from Savannah and Charleston, the British also evacuated 10,000 slaves belonging to Loyalists.
Congress moved inland and abandoned Philadelphia in despair, although popular resistance to British occupation was growing in the countryside.
Patriots overwhelmed Loyalists in the Snow Campaign in South Carolina in late 1775.
Early in 1775, the British Army consisted of about 36,000 men worldwide, but wartime recruitment steadily increased this number.
General Gage wrote to the Secretary at War in London:
On October 12 the British made an attempt to encircle the Americans, which failed because of Howe's decision to land on an island that was easily cut off from the mainland.
The result was that, although Lord North's Tory government usually had a Parliamentary majority, a large Whig minority opposed it and constantly criticized its policies.
Joint Iroquois-Loyalist attacks in the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania and at Cherry Valley in New York in 1778 provoked Washington to send the Sullivan Expedition into western New York during the summer of 1779.
By March, Greene's army had grown to the point where he felt that he could face Cornwallis directly.
The Dutch Republic signed a friendship and trade agreement with the United States in 1782, becoming the second country to formally recognize the United States.
The British also hired German mercenaries to do much of their fighting.
One notable success took place on February 5, 1782, when Spanish and French forces captured Minorca, which Spain retained after the war.
General Lord Cornwallis continued to chase Washington's army through New Jersey, but Howe ordered him to halt and Washington escaped across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania on December 7.
Parliament repealed the Stamp Act as inexpedient, but also passed the Declaratory Act, which stated, "the said colonies and plantations in America have been, are, and of right ought to be, subordinate unto, and dependent upon the imperial crown and parliament of Great Britain."
In 1776, the Count of Aranda met in representation of Spain with the first U.S. Commission composed by Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, and Arthur Lee.
The other Allies had mixed-to-poor results.
There was no positive reply.
In July 1780 the American cause received a boost when a 5,500 strong French expeditionary force arrived at Newport, Rhode Island.
Led by Count Rochambeau and Washington, a combined Franco-American army launched a siege at Yorktown and captured more than 8,000 British troops in October.
Town meetings resulted in the Suffolk Resolves, a declaration not to cooperate with the royal authorities.
However, the resulting surge of Loyalist support was far weaker than expected.
In many places the Patriots were energetic and were backed by angry mobs while the Loyalists were too intimidated or poorly organized to be effective without the British army.
Two small regiments of Canadiens were recruited during the operation, and they were with the army on its retreat back to Ticonderoga.
During the Illinois Campaign of 1778, the Virginia frontiersman George Rogers Clark attempted to neutralize British influence among the Ohio valley tribes by capturing the colonial outposts of Kaskaskia and Cahokia and Vincennes, in the Illinois Country.
Carleton then launched his own invasion and defeated Arnold at the Battle of Valcour Island in October.
Admiral Howe and his brother General Howe, "missed several opportunities to destroy the Continental Army....Chance, luck, and even the vagaries of the weather played crucial roles."
Russia refused to rent out soldiers.
The last British troops left New York City on November 25, 1783, and the United States Congress of the Confederation ratified the Paris treaty on January 14, 1784.
Because of manpower shortages, George Washington lifted the ban on black enlistment in the Continental Army in January 1776.
The Assembly balanced the competing demands of elite slave-owning planters, the middling yeomen (some owning a few slaves), and landless indentured servants, among other groups.
On September 21 a devastating fire broke out in the city which the Patriots were widely blamed for, although no proof ever existed.
During the first three years of the American Revolutionary War, the primary military encounters were in the north, although some attempts to organize Loyalists were defeated, a British attempt at Charleston, South Carolina failed, and a variety of efforts to attack British forces in East Florida failed.
The American colonists had no ships of the line, and relied extensively on privateering to harass British shipping.
The Americans had a large prosperous population that depended not on imports but on local production for food and most supplies, while the British were mostly shipped in from across the ocean.
In European conflicts, the capture of a capital city often meant the end of the war; however in America, when the British seized key cities such as New York, Philadelphia or Boston—or Washington D.C. in the War of 1812 thirty years later—the war continued unabated.
However, he was overruled by José Moñino, 1st Count of Floridablanca who opted for a more discreet approach.
Upon his arrival at Williamsburg in June, Cornwallis received orders from Clinton to establish a fortified naval base and a request to send several thousand troops to New York to counter a possible Franco-American attack.
McDonnell (2006) shows a grave complication in Virginia's mobilization of troops was the conflicting interests of distinct social classes, which tended to undercut a unified commitment to the Patriot cause.
The British advanced Lord North's "fixed contribution" formula of the preceding year and indicated that other laws could be revised or repealed so long as the authority of Britain was acknowledged.
Britain responded by recalling its ambassador, although Franco-British hostilities did not actually break out until June 17, 1778.
For instance, in South Carolina, nearly 25,000 slaves (30% of the enslaved population) fled, migrated or died during the disruption of the war.
Tens of thousands of slaves escaped during the war and joined British lines; others simply moved off in the chaos.
In light of this, Parliament on February 27, 1782 voted to cease all offensive operations in America and seek peace.
An attempt by French and American forces to retake Savannah failed on October 9, 1779.
John E. Ferling says the odds were so long that the American victory was  "Almost A Miracle."
On land, Loyalist forces fought alongside the British in most battles in North America.
The Spanish government had been providing assistance to the revolutionaries since the very beginning of the war, but it did not recognize the United States officially.
Washington was finding it extremely difficult to keep his army together, even without any major fighting against the British.
About 1,240 were killed in battle, while 18,500 died from disease (figures from 1776–1780 only).
The early Test Laws were followed by more repressive measures.
Thousands served in the Royal Navy.
Howe's force arrived off of Staten Island across the harbor from Manhattan on June 30, 1776, and his army captured it without resistance.
Separately, the Irish Parliament pledged its loyalty and agreed to the withdrawal of troops from Ireland to suppress the rebellion in America.
The Continental Congress authorized the creation of a small Continental Navy in October 1775, which was primarily used for commerce raiding.
It imposed duties on various British goods exported to the colonies.
Realizing his army's desperate shortage of gunpowder, Washington asked for new sources.
When the British began to plan operations for 1777, they had two main armies in North America: an army in Quebec (later under the command of John Burgoyne), and Howe's army in New York.
On the whole, historians conclude the Revolution's effect on patriarchy and inheritance patterns favored egalitarianism.
Expeditions against San Fernando de Omoa in 1779 and San Juan in 1780 (the latter famously led by a young Horatio Nelson) met with only temporary success before being abandoned due to disease.
Thousands of Creeks, Chickasaws, and Choctaws fought in or near major battles such as the Battle of Fort Charlotte, the Battle of Mobile, and the Siege of Pensacola.
In 1778, a force of 800 Creeks destroyed American settlements along the Broad River in Georgia.
The Dutch Republic, which also had assisted the colonists since 1776, declared war on Britain at the end of 1780, and did recognize the United States diplomatically.
Spain joined the war in 1779 as an ally of France under the Pacte de Famille.
Aranda invited the commission to his house in Paris, where he was acting as Spanish ambassador and he became an active supporter of the struggle of the fledgling Colonies, recommending an early and open Spanish commitment to the Colonies.
Some of the men promised freedom were sent back to their masters, after the war was over, out of political convenience.
Britain responded to this decision by declaring war on the Dutch in December 1780, sparking the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War.
Clinton's army went to New York City in July, arriving just before a French fleet under Admiral d'Estaing arrived off the American coast.
Spain entered the war as a French ally with the goal of recapturing Gibraltar and Minorca, which had been captured by an Anglo-Dutch force in 1704.
Washington decided to take the offensive, stealthily crossing the Delaware on the night of December&nbsp;25–26, and capturing nearly 1,000 surprised and unfortified Hessians at the Battle of Trenton.
Washington's army returned to White Plains, New York, north of New York City.
There were no further major military activities in North America, although the British still had 30,000 garrison troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah.
From the spring of 1776, France and Spain had informally been involved in the American Revolutionary War, with French admiral Latouche Tréville having provided supplies, ammunition and guns from France to the United States after Thomas Jefferson encouraged a French alliance.
The Assembly used deferments, taxes, military service substitute, and conscription to resolve the tensions.
This left him completely incapable of assisting Burgoyne.
Parliament repealed the remaining tax on tea and declared that no taxes would ever be imposed on colonies without their consent (except for custom duties, the revenues of which would be returned to the colonies).
Preliminary peace articles were signed in Paris at the end of November 1782; the formal end of the war did not occur until the Treaty of Paris (for the U.S.) and the Treaties of Versailles (for the other Allies) were signed on September 3, 1783.
Germans made up about one-third of the British troop strength in North America.
The powerful Iroquois Confederacy was shattered as a result of the conflict; although the Confederacy did not take sides, the Seneca, Onondaga, and Cayuga nations sided with the British.
Historians link those disasters to the coming of the French Revolution.
At least 25,000 Loyalists fought on the side of the British.
They were on their home ground, had a smoothly functioning, well organized system of local and state governments, newspapers and printers, and internal lines of communications.
In that year the Americans won two morale-enhancing victories by capturing posts at Stony Point and Paulus Hook, although the British quickly retook them.
The invasion cost the Americans their base of support in British public opinion, "So that the violent measures towards America are freely adopted and countenanced by a majority of individuals of all ranks, professions, or occupations, in this country."
Burgoyne set off in June, and recaptured Fort Ticonderoga in early July.
The British mounted a costly frontal attack.
