Surveys taken from 35 states in the early 1990s indicate that black bears are either stable or increasing, except in Idaho and New Mexico.
See  Revelstoke Bear Aware for more information.
White to cream colored black bears occur in coastal islands and the adjacent mainland of south-western British Columbia.
Canadian black bear hunts take place in the fall and spring, and both male and female bears can be legally taken, though some provinces prohibit the hunting of females with cubs, or yearling specimens.
Haida Gwaii/Queen Charlotte Islands and Alaska
The hibernating American black bear does not display the same rate of muscle and bone atrophy relative to other nonhibernatory animals that are subject to long periods of inactivity, due to ailment or old age.
Numbers unknown in Mexico, but presumed very low.
Throughout their range, habitats preferred by American black bears have a few shared characteristics.
The American black bear lived during the same period as short-faced bears (''Arctodus simus'' and ''A.
Threatened (federal list).
Mountain ranges of southern California, north through the Central Valley to southern Oregon
Another exceptional, spree-like attack occurred in August 1997 in Liard River Hot Springs Provincial Park in Canada, when an emaciated black bear attacked a child and mother, killing the mother as well as an adult man who tried to intervene.
Revelstoke, British Columbia is a community that demonstrates the success of this approach.
Black bears feature prominently in the stories of some of America's indigenous peoples.
Half of bear species are habitually arboreal (the most arboreal species, the American and Asian black bears and the sun bear, being fairly closely related).
Meat from the neck, front legs and shoulders is usually ground into minced meat or used for stews and casseroles.
Many of the physiological changes a bear exhibits during hibernation are retained slightly post-hibernation.
General Wade Hampton was known to have been present at 500 successful black bear hunts, two thirds of which he killed personally.
Remarkably, a study of black bears in Nevada found that the amount of annual mortality of a population of bears in wilderness areas was 0%, whereas in developed areas in the state this figure rose to 83%.
Men, older voters, and those living in rural areas were more likely to approve of a bear-hunting season in New Jersey than women, younger voters, and those living in more developed parts of the state.
Bears have been known to frighten livestock herds over cliffs, causing injuries and death to many animals; whether or not this is intentional is not known.
The body temperature of the American black bear does not drop significantly, like other mammalian hibernators (staying around 35&nbsp;degrees Celsius) and they remain somewhat alert and active.
The metabolic rate of a hibernating bear will remain at a reduced level for up to 21 days after hibernation.
The hind legs are relatively longer than those of Asiatic black bears.
Black bears can do extensive damage in some areas of the northwestern United States by stripping the bark from trees and feeding on the cambium.
In Great Smoky Mountains National Park, adult males averaged  and adult females averaged  per one study.
''Ursus americanus cinnamomum''
Vancouver Island, British Columbia
In 1859, a black bear and a Eurasian brown bear were bred together in the London Zoological Gardens, but the three cubs died before they reached maturity.
Sows tend to be short tempered with their mates after copulating.
Bears living near human habitations tend to be more extensively nocturnal and bears living near brown bears tend to be more extensively diurnal.
Individual coat colors can range from white, blond, cinnamon, or light brown to dark chocolate brown or to jet black, with many intermediate variations existing.
They are also capable of rapidly learning to distinguish different shapes, such as small triangles, circles and squares.
In 1992, untanned, fleshed and salted black bear hides were sold for an average of $165.
Unlike wolves and coyotes, black bears rarely scatter the remains of their kills.
Washington (inland)
However, at abundant food sources (i.e.
After these prehistoric ursids became extinct during the last glacial period 10,000&nbsp;years ago, black bears were probably the only bear present in much of North America until the migration of brown bears to the rest of the continent.
The Kutchin typically hunted black bears during their hibernation cycle.
Colorado, Idaho, western Montana, and Wyoming, eastern Washington and Oregon, northeastern Utah
A limitation of food sources in early spring and wild berry and nut crop failures during summer months may be contributing factors to black bears regularly feeding from commercial human-based food sources.
California black bear
Known predators of bear cubs have included bobcats, coyotes, cougars, wolves, brown bears and other bears of their own species.
Has brown or red-brown fur, reminiscent of cinnamon.
It is not recommended to use unleashed dogs as a deterrent from bear attacks.
Although black bears do not often engage in active predation of other large animals for much of the year, the species will also regularly prey on mule and white-tailed deer fawns in spring given the opportunity.
They reach sexual maturity at the age of three years, and attain their full growth at 5&nbsp;years.
''Ursus americanus carlottae''
Understanding the physiology of bears in the wild is vital to the bear's success in captivity.
The record-sized bear from New Jersey was shot in Morris County December 2011 and scaled .
The fur is soft, with dense underfur and long, coarse, thick guard hairs.
Although Wolverton and Lyman still consider ''U.
One tale tells of how the black bear was a creation of the Great Spirit, while the grizzly was created by the Evil Spirit.
When initially emerging from hibernation, they will seek to feed on carrion from winter-killed animals and newborn ungulates.
Small numbers may feature a cinnamon brown fur.
Over much of their range, black bears are assured scavengers that can intimidate, using their large size and considerable strength, and if necessary dominate other predators in confrontations over carcasses.
Grizzly (and other types of brown) bears can be distinguished by their shoulder hump, larger size and broader, more concave skull.
Another notably outsized wild black bear, weighing in at  in total, was the cattle-killer shot in December 1921 on the Moqui Reservation in Arizona.
Yosemite National Park
The skin of large prey is stripped back and turned inside out with the skeleton usually left largely intact.
This is believed to be due to a paucity of edible plant life in this sub-Arctic region and a local lack of competing large carnivores (including other bear species).
Black bears rarely attack when confronted by humans, and usually limit themselves to making mock charges, emitting blowing noises and swatting the ground with their forepaws.
Historically, black bears were hunted by both Native Americans and European settlers.
In the southernmost areas (i.e.
The number of black bear attacks on humans is higher than those of the brown bear in North America, though this is largely because the black species considerably outnumbers the brown rather than greater aggressiveness.
Prior to that time, they can put on up to  of body fat to get them through the several months during which they fast.
The soles of the feet are black or brownish, and are naked, leathery and deeply wrinkled.
Despite the black bear being more powerful on a one to one basis, packs of wolves have been recorded to kill black bears on numerous occasions without eating them.
In areas where human development is relatively low, such as stretches of Canada and Alaska, American black bears tend to be found more regularly in lowland regions.
The skulls of American black bears are broad, with narrow muzzles and large jaw hinges.
Louisiana black bear
Black bear interactions with wolves are much rarer than with brown bears, due to differences in habitat preferences.
West Mexico black bear
Another study found that bears visited 48% of cougar kills in summer in Colorado, and 77% of kills in California.
The footpads peel off while they sleep, making room for new tissue.
Both sexes are promiscuous.
The fur is not as shaggy or coarse as that of brown bears.
In addition they have been recorded similarly preying on elk calves in Idaho and moose calves in Alaska.
Haida Gwaii black bear, Queen Charlotte black bear
The American black bear is the world's most common bear species.
From the Holocene to present, American black bears seem to have shrunk in size, but this has been disputed because of problems with dating these fossil specimens.
Survival in sub-adults is generally less assured.
Hard masts become the most important part of the black bear's diet in autumn and may even partially dictate the species distribution.
A bear in pursuit of a pet dog has the potential to threaten both canid and human lives.
Black bears are also fond of honey, and will gnaw through trees if hives are too deeply set into the trunks for them to reach them with their paws.
During hibernation bears retain all excretory waste, and a special hormone, leptin is released into the black bear's systems, to suppress appetite.The retention of waste during hibernation (specifically in minerals such as calcium) may play a role in the bear’s resistance to atrophy.
In Minnesota, 99% of wintering adult bears were able to survive the hibernation cycle in one study.
In New York state, the two sexes reportedly average  and , respectively.
Black Bear Woman's children, in turn, killed Grizzly Bear Woman's own cubs.
Morris Michtom, the creator of the teddy bear, was inspired to make the toy when he came across a cartoon of Theodore Roosevelt refusing to shoot a black bear cub tied to a tree.
''Ursus americanus californiensis''
Black bear meat had historically been held in high esteem among North America's indigenous people and colonists.
Overall over 481,500 black bear hunting licences are sold per year.
Even larger, the most massive black bear recorded in Pennsylvania (one of six weighing over  shot in the last 15 years in the state) weighed in at  and was shot in November 2010 in Pike County.
Favored masts such as hazelnuts, oak acorns and whitebark pine nuts may be consumed by the hundreds each day by a single black bear during fall.
Black bears have been reported stealing deer and other animals from human hunters.
American black bears tend to be territorial and non-gregarious in nature.
Flooding of dens after birth may also occasionally kill newborn cubs.
A small primitive bear called ''Ursus abstrusus'' is the oldest known North American fossil member of the genus ''Ursus'', dated to 4.95 mya.
Black bears were the only bear species the Kutchin hunted for their meat, though this constituted only a small part of their diet.
At the age of six weeks, they attain , by 8&nbsp;weeks they reach  and by the age of 6&nbsp;months they weigh .
A white chest patch is also common.
Generally bigger than its mainland relatives, ranging in size from  and averaging .
Adult black bears in Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge in east-central Alaska were found to average  in males and  in females, whereas on Kuiu Island in southeast Alaska (where nutritious salmon are readily available) adult bears averaged an estimated .
They typically live in largely forested areas, but do leave forests in search of food.
However, in current times, American black bears fatalities are overwhelmingly attributable to human activities.
There is a single record of a golden eagle snatching a yearling cub.
Compared to brown bear attacks, aggressive encounters with black bears rarely lead to serious injury.
''Ursus americanus machetes''
During the fall period, American black bears may also habitually raid the nut caches of tree squirrels.
American black bear skins can be distinguished from those of Asiatic black bears by the lack of a white mark on the chin and hairier footpads.
The biggest wild American black bear ever recorded was a male from New Brunswick, shot in November 1972, that weighed  after it had been dressed, meaning it weighed an estimated  in life, and measured  long.
The worst recorded fatality incident occurred in May 1978, in which a black bear killed three teenagers who were fishing in Algonquin Park in Canada.
Bluish tinged black bears occur along a portion of coastal Alaska and British Columbia.
Females also give birth in February and nurture their cubs until the snow melts.
Bear-hunting had been banned in New Jersey for five years.
Tobacco smoke would be wafted into the disembodied head's nostrils by the hunter that dealt the killing blow, who would compliment the animal for its courage.
Black bears in the southern Appalachian Mountains survive in predominantly oak-hickory and mixed mesophytic forests.
On Long Island off the coast of Washington, ranges average , whereas on the Ungava Peninsula in Canada ranges can average up to , with some male bears traveling as far as  in times of food shortages.
A black bear shot in autumn 1986 in Michigan was thought by some to be a black bear/grizzly bear hybrid, due to its unusually large size and its proportionately larger braincase and skull.
Like brown bears, they will sometimes steal kills from cougars.
Eastern Texas, Louisiana, southern Mississippi.
The spruce-fir forest dominates much of the range of the black bear in the Rockies.
Reductions in metabolic rate and heart rate do not appear to decrease the bear's ability to heal injuries during hibernation.
With the exception of the rare confrontation with an adult brown bear or gray wolf pack, adult black bears are not usually subject to natural predation.
Though black bears have the capacity to (and occasionally do) hunt adult cattle and horses, they seem to prefer smaller, more easily overwhelmed prey such as sheep, goats, calves, and pigs.
Currently, 28 of the USA's states have black bear hunting seasons.
Despite this, black bears in those areas seems to have expanded their range during the last decade, such as with recent sightings in Ohio and southern Indiana, though these probably do not represent stable breeding populations yet.
They have been known to turn over flat-shaped rocks weighing  by flipping them over with a single foreleg.
Sows living in more developed areas tend to get pregnant at younger ages.
Black bears have good eyesight, and have been proven experimentally to be able to learn visual discrimination tasks based on color faster than chimpanzees and as fast as dogs.
Other fish including suckers, trout and catfish are readily caught when possible.
The breeding period lasts for 2–3&nbsp;months.
Ted, the male, weighed  in the fall of 2006.
North-central Mexico
Unlike brown bears, black bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills.
However it becomes increasingly fragmented or absent in other regions.
Average annual survival rates for adult bears is variable, ranging from 86% in Florida to 73% in Virginia and North Carolina.
99% black, 1% brown or blonde
The majority of black bear encounters with wolves occur in the species′ northern range, with no interactions being recorded in Mexico.
Claws from both hind and front legs are almost identical in length, though the foreclaws tend to be more sharply curved.
At birth, cubs weigh , and measure  in length.
For bears living in the American Southwest and Mexico, habitat usually consists of stands of chaparral and pinyon juniper woods.
Vancouver Island black bear
The breeding period usually occurs in the June–July period, though it can extend to August in the species' northern range.
Black bears may be active at any time of the day or night, although mainly forage by night.
Auto-collisions also may claim many black bear lives annually.
The American black bear is the mascot of The University of Maine and Baylor University, where the university houses two live black bears on campus.
Although found in the largest numbers in wild, undisturbed areas and rural regions, black bears can adapt to surviving in some numbers in peri-urban regions as long as they contain easily accessible foods and some vegetative coverage.
Alexander Archipelago, Alaska
In the state of Maine, there are an estimated 30,000 black bears, making it the largest black bear population in the Contiguous United States.
They also have great physical strength.
Black bear cubs tend to be more vulnerable to predation than adults.
The gestation period lasts 235&nbsp;days, and litters are usually born in late January to early February.
Sounds expressing aggression include growls, woofs, snorts, bellows and roars.
The main premise of these programs is to teach humans to manage foods that attract bears.
Albino specimens have also been recorded.
Females tend to have more slender and pointed faces than males.
Unlike grizzlies, female black bears do not display the same level of protectiveness to their cubs, and seldom attack humans in their vicinity.
In parts of northeastern Canada, especially Labrador, black bears have adapted exclusively to semi-open areas that are more typical habitat in North America for brown bears (likely due to the absence here of brown and polar bears as well as other large carnivore species).
However, the majority of black bear attacks tend to be motivated by hunger rather than territoriality, and thus victims have a higher probability of surviving by fighting back rather than submitting.
In mountainous areas, they seek southerly slopes at lower elevations for forage and move to northerly and easterly slopes at higher elevations as summer progresses.
Black bear fat was once valued as a cosmetic article that promoted hair growth and gloss.
Color variations of black bears by location
The overall population of black bears in the United States has been estimated to range between 339,000 and 465,000, though this excludes populations from Alaska, Idaho, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming, whose population sizes are unknown.
''Ursus americanus perniger''
The other 90% appear as normal-colored black bears.
Surplus killing of sheep and goats are common.
Across the range, the estimated amount of cubs who survive past their first year is 60%.
Annual ranges held by mature male black bears tend to be very large but there is some variation.
During winter, black bears consume 25–40% of their body weight.
Sometimes they become attracted to human communities because of the immediate availability of food.
According to Jack Hanna's ''Monkeys on the Interstate'', a bear captured in Sanford, Florida, was thought to have been the offspring of an escaped female Asian black bear and a male American black bear.
The American black bear then split from the Asian black bear 4.08 mya.
Black bears do compete with cougars over carcasses.
Once the hive is breached, black bears will scrape the honeycombs together with their paws and eat them, regardless of stings from the bees.
A Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll found that 53% of New Jersey voters approved of the new season if scientists concluded black bears were leaving their usual habitats and destroying private property.
Out of 1,028&nbsp;incidents of black bears acting aggressively toward people, 107 resulted in injury, were recorded from 1964 to 1976 in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and occurred mainly in tourist hotspots where people regularly fed the bears handouts.
Even cougars will be displaced by an angry mother bear if they are discovered stalking the cubs.
The majority of the black bear's animal diet consists of insects such as bees, yellow jackets, ants and their larvae.
Has relatively long, narrow, and flat skull, and proportionately large molars Prefers hardwood bottom forests and bayous as habitat
As of 1993, known Mexican black bear populations existed in four areas, though knowledge on the distributions of populations outside those areas have not been updated since 1959.
In the reports published since this date three species have produced young (hybrids in one case),&nbsp;...
According to the second volume of ''Frank Forester's field sports of the United States, and British provinces, of North America'':
''Ursus americanus vancouveri''
The bear’s bone mass does not change in geometry or mineral composition during hibernation, this implies that the bear’s conservation of bone mass during hibernation is due to a biological mechanism.
spawning salmon or garbage dumps) black bears may congregate and dominance hierarchies form, with the largest, most powerful males dominating the most fruitful feeding spots.
In this region, bears occasionally move to more open areas to feed on prickly pear cactus.
In 1822, 3,000 skins were exported from the Hudson's Bay Company.
On October 27, 2009, Canadian wildlife experts and managers for Cape Breton Highlands National Park thought Taylor Mitchell's suspect of her predatory attack on the Skyline Trail was a black bear at first, but they soon realized it was a pack of coyotes.
In the western states, where there are large black populations, there are spring and year-round seasons.
The Navajo believed that the Big Black Bear was chief among the bears of the four directions surrounding Sun's house, and would pray to it in order to be granted its protection during raids.
Violent interactions resulting in the deaths of black bears have been recorded in Yellowstone National Park.
Before the community had an education program, an average of 27 bears were killed in Revelstoke each year; after the program began, the average mortality has dropped to just 7 bears per year.
Approximately 10% of the population of this subspecies have white or cream-colored coats due to a recessive gene and are called "kermodes" or "spirit bears".
Over the years, the sand covered them up, creating a huge sand dune.
Once a deer fawn is captured, it is frequently torn apart alive while feeding.
It is the continent's smallest and most widely distributed bear species.
Cubs are dependent on their mother's milk for 30&nbsp;weeks, and will reach independence at 16–18&nbsp;months.
They typically open their eyes after 28–40&nbsp;days, and begin walking after 5&nbsp;weeks.
