Others sailed with the British to England or were resettled as freedmen in the West Indies of the Caribbean.
By contrast, Patriots by number tended to be yeomen farmers, especially in the frontier areas of New York and the backcountry of Pennsylvania, Virginia and down the Appalachian mountains.
The British tax system collected about 12 percent of the GDP in taxes during the 1770s.
* Property qualifications for voting and even more substantial requirements for elected positions (though New York and Maryland lowered property qualifications)
In response, Massachusetts patriots issued the Suffolk Resolves and formed an alternative shadow government known as the "Provincial Congress" which began training militia outside British-occupied Boston.
The Revolution, along with the Dutch Revolt (end of the 16th century) and the 17th century English Civil War, was among the examples of overthrowing an old regime for many Europeans who later were active during the era of the French Revolution, such as Marquis de Lafayette.
It may have left standing a host of inequalities that have troubled us ever since.
One soldier was clubbed and fell.
The new states were all committed to republicanism, with no inherited offices.
Many Loyalists realized that independence was bound to come eventually, but they were fearful that revolution might lead to anarchy, tyranny or mob rule.
The revolution could  divide families.
A British army was captured at the Battle of Saratoga in late 1777 after a failed patriot invasion of Canada, following which the French openly entered the war as allies of the United States.
Following the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775, the Patriots had control of Massachusetts outside the Boston city limits, and the Loyalists suddenly found themselves on the defensive with no protection from the British army.
The Americans, however, argued against the constitutionality of the act because its purpose was to raise revenue and not regulate trade.
That goal was one of the causes of the War of 1812.
Benjamin Franklin testified in Parliament in 1766 that Americans already contributed heavily to the defense of the Empire.
Labaree also wrote that Loyalists were pessimists who lacked the confidence in the future displayed by the Patriots.
The population of the 13 Colonies was far from homogeneous, particularly in their political views and attitudes.
Loyalists were alienated when the Patriots resorted to violence, such as burning houses and tarring and feathering.
The traditional constraints gave way to more liberal conditions for women.
Some Indians tried to remain neutral, seeing little value in joining a European conflict and fearing reprisals from whichever side they opposed.
Mark Lender explores why ordinary folk became insurgents against the British even though they were unfamiliar with the ideological rationales being offered.
Under the leadership of Henry Grattan, the so-called "Patriots" forced the reversal of mercantilist prohibitions against trade with other British colonies.
But it generated the egalitarian view of human society that makes them troubling and makes our world so different from the own in which the revolutionists had grown up.
She says that specific battles are not central (as they are for the Civil War) but rather certain events and people have been celebrated as icons of certain virtues (or vices).
On February 6, 1778, a Treaty of Amity and Commerce and a Treaty of Alliance were signed between the United States and France.
They declared that they were states now, not colonies.
On January 5, 1776, New Hampshire ratified the first state constitution.
In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened, consisting of representatives from each of the colonies, to serve as a vehicle for deliberation and collective action.
Women contributed to the American Revolution in many ways, and were involved on both sides.
When the First Continental Congress decided to boycott British products, the colonial and local Committees took charge, examining merchant records and publishing the names of merchants who attempted to defy the boycott by importing British goods.
They participated by boycotting British goods, spying on the British, following armies as they marched, washing, cooking, and tending for soldiers, delivering secret messages, and in a few cases like Deborah Samson, fighting disguised as men.
In late eighteenth-century America, belief was still widespread in "equality by creation" and "rights by creation".
On the other hand, Joseph Ellis says that the odds favored the Americans, and asks whether there ever was any realistic chance for the British to win.
Behind them, much of the territory that they had already captured dissolved into a chaotic guerrilla war, fought predominantly between bands of Loyalist and American militia, which negated many of the gains that the British had previously made.
The British resettled them there after the war, providing land grants as compensation for some of their losses.
They still had 26,000 troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, together with a powerful fleet.
* prohibition against individuals holding multiple government posts
Loyalists were excluded.
The resulting constitutions in states such as Maryland, Virginia, Delaware, New York, and Massachusetts featured:
"Depend upon it, sir, it is dangerous to open so fruitful a source of controversy and altercation, as would be opened by attempting to alter the qualifications of voters.
In the mid-20th century, historian Leonard Woods Labaree identified eight characteristics of the Loyalists that made them essentially conservative; traits to those characteristic of the Patriots.
There were also other debts that consisted of promissory notes issued during the Revolutionary War to soldiers, merchants, and farmers who accepted these payments on the premise that the new Constitution would create a government that would pay these debts eventually.
Some, such as Samuel Seabury, became prominent American leaders.
A crisis of political loyalties could disrupt the fabric of colonial America women's social worlds: whether a man did or did not renounce his allegiance to the King could dissolve ties of class, family, and friendship, isolating women from former connections.
British Prime Minister Lord Shelburne was in full charge of the British negotiations.
A significant victory at the Battle of Camden meant that royal forces soon controlled most of Georgia and South Carolina.
John Adams wrote to Mercy Otis Warren in 1776, agreeing with some classical Greek and Roman thinkers in that "Public Virtue cannot exist without private, and public Virtue is the only Foundation of Republics."
In 1776 Cherokee war parties attacked American colonists all along the southern frontier of the uplands throughout the Washington District, North Carolina (now Tennessee) and the Kentucky wilderness area.
In January 1769, Parliament responded to the unrest by reactivating the Treason Act 1543 which called for subjects outside the realm to face trials for treason in England.
They killed many settlers on the frontier, especially in Pennsylvania and New York's Mohawk Valley.
The Treaty of Paris in 1783 formally ended the conflict, confirming the new nation's complete separation from the British Empire.
Not enough Loyalists turned out, however, and the British had to fight their way north into North Carolina and Virginia, with a severely weakened army.
For instance, South Carolina was estimated to lose about 25,000 slaves, or one third of its slave population, to flight, migration or death.
The Second Continental Congress approved a new constitution, the "Articles of Confederation," for ratification by the states on November 15, 1777, and immediately began operating under their terms.
There was more permissiveness in child-rearing.
A woman's loyalty to her husband, once a private commitment, could become a political act, especially for women in America committed to men who remained loyal to the King.
In 1765, the Sons of Liberty formed.
Loyalists wanted to take a centrist position and resisted the Patriots' demand to declare their opposition to the Crown.
Most Native Americans rejected pleas that they remain neutral and supported the British Crown, both because of trading relationships and Britain's effort to establish an Indian reserve and prohibit colonial settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains.
The British maltreated the prisoners whom they held, resulting in more deaths to American sailors and soldiers than from combat operations.
Beginning in 1777, Congress repeatedly asked the states to provide money.
There still were many Loyalists, but they were no longer in control anywhere by July 1776, and all of the Royal officials had fled.
British commander Sir Henry Clinton evacuated Philadelphia to reinforce New York City because of the alliance with France and the deteriorating military situation.
In 1769, the women of Boston produced 40,000 skeins of yarn, and 180 women in Middletown, Massachusetts wove  of cloth.
The radical provisions of Pennsylvania's constitution lasted only 14 years.
It was a British victory—but at a great cost: about 1,000 British casualties from a garrison of about 6,000, as compared to 500 American casualties from a much larger force.
They blockaded the ports and captured other cities for brief periods, but failed to defeat Washington's forces.
From 1770 to 1790, the black proportion of the population (mostly slaves) in South Carolina dropped from 60.5 percent to 43.8 percent; and in Georgia from 45.2 percent to 36.1 percent.
Nearly all black loyalists left for Nova Scotia, Florida, or England, where they could remain free.
The greatest challenge to the old order in Europe was the challenge to inherited political power and the democratic idea that government rests on the consent of the governed.
The conflict then developed into a global war, during which the Patriots (and later their French, Spanish, and Dutch allies) fought the British and Loyalists in what became known as the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783).
Beginning in late December 1778, the British captured Savannah and controlled the Georgia coastline.
At the time, revolutionaries were called "Patriots", "Whigs", "Congress-men", or "Americans".
The colonists associated it with luxury, and especially with inherited aristocracy, which they condemned.
On 26 May 1776, John Adams wrote James Sullivan from Philadelphia:
Morris used a French loan in 1782 to set up the private Bank of North America to finance the war.
Congress used four main methods to cover the cost of the war, which cost about 66 million dollars in specie (gold and silver).
The fourth Act was the Quartering Act of 1774, which allowed royal governors to house British troops in the homes of citizens without requiring permission of the owner.
It gained fishing rights off Canadian coasts, and agreed to allow British merchants and Loyalists to try to recover their property.
Patriarchy faded as an ideal; young people had more freedom to choose their spouses and more often used birth control to regulate the size of their families.
In 1764, Parliament passed the Currency Act to restrain the use of paper money which British merchants saw as a means to evade debt payments.
In sharp contrast, Congress and the American states had no end of difficulty financing the war.
In 1767, the Parliament passed the Townshend Acts which placed duties on a number of essential goods, including paper, glass, and tea, and established a Board of Customs in Boston to more rigorously execute trade regulations.
In August 1775, George III declared Americans in arms against royal authority to be traitors to the Crown.
Stationing a standing army in Great Britain during peacetime was politically unacceptable.
Out of the Enlightenment Natural Law and Natural Rights were defined.
Although Lord Germain took a hard line, the British generals on the scene never held treason trials; they treated captured enemy soldiers as prisoners of war.
General Richard Montgomery captured Montreal but a joint attack on Quebec was a total failure; many Americans were captured or died of smallpox.
The Treasury borrowed 40% of the money that it needed.
The Parliament at Westminster saw itself as the supreme lawmaking authority throughout all British possessions and thus entitled to levy any tax without colonial approval.
Britain wanted to develop the frontier of Upper Canada on a British colonial model.
Kidd argues that religious disestablishment, belief in a God as the source of human rights, and shared convictions about sin, virtue, and divine providence worked together to unite rationalists and evangelicals and thus encouraged American defiance of the Empire.
In 1779 the Continentals retaliated with an American army under John Sullivan, which raided and destroyed 40 empty Iroquois villages in central and western New York.
They "transferred" control to the United States of all the land east of the Mississippi and north of Florida.
Though the majority of Quakers attempted to remain neutral, a sizable number of Quakers in the American Revolution nevertheless participated to some degree.
The British made the situation much worse by imposing a tight blockade on every American port, which cut off almost all imports and exports.
Lord North advanced a compromise proposal, in which Parliament would not tax so long as the colonies made fixed contributions for defense and to support civil government.
Also, Mercy Otis Warren held meetings in her house and cleverly attacked Loyalists with her creative plays and histories.
The British army under Cornwallis marched to Yorktown, Virginia where they expected to be rescued by a British fleet.
The revolutionaries were now in full control of all 13 colonies and were ready to declare independence.
The concept of republican motherhood was inspired by this period and reflects the importance of Republicanism as the dominant American ideology.
This, in turn, began a downward spiral in the relationship between Britain and the Province of Massachusetts.
One partial solution was to rely on volunteer support from militiamen and donations from patriotic citizens.
Except for warriors and bands associated with four of the Iroquois nations in New York and Pennsylvania, which allied with the British, most Native Americans did not participate directly in the war.
Historians conclude that loss of the American colonies enabled Britain to deal with the French Revolution with more unity and better organization than would otherwise have been the case.
Thomas Paine's pamphlet ''Common Sense'' appeared in January 1776, after the Revolution had started.
The British, however, were massing forces at their naval base at Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Benjamin Franklin countered by criticizing the British self-congratulation about "the freeing of one Negro" (Somersett) while they continued to permit the Slave Trade.
The Enlightenment (circa 1650–1800), also known as the "Age of Enlightenment" and the "Age of Reason", began in France and spread to the rest of Europe.
Therefore, he was "Nature's God."
Seeking greater efficiency, Morris reduced the civil list, saved money by using competitive bidding for contracts, tightened accounting procedures, and demanded the national government's full share of money and supplies from the confederated states.
These were demonstrated by a leadership and government that espoused protection of natural rights, and a system of laws chosen by the people.
In most instances, the consignees were forced to resign and the tea was turned back, but Massachusetts governor Hutchinson refused to allow Boston merchants to give in to pressure.
Losing the war and the 13 colonies was a shock to Britain.
Facing starvation and homeless for the winter, the Iroquois fled to the Niagara Falls area and to Canada, mostly to what became Ontario.
Everyone received face value for wartime certificates, so that the national honor would be sustained and the national credit established.
Contemporary participants referred to the events as "the revolution".
The British government responded by passing several Acts which came to be known as the Intolerable Acts, which further darkened colonial opinion towards the British.
Amendments to the Constitution were spearheaded in Congress by James Madison as assurances to those who were cautious about federal power, guaranteeing many of the inalienable rights that formed a foundation for the revolution.
The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, particularly Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Paine, George Washington, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton, which required men to put civic duty ahead of their personal desires.
Whatever gains they had made, however, women still found themselves subordinated, legally and socially, to their husbands, disfranchised and usually with only the role of mother open to them.
Britain's war against the Americans, French, and Spanish cost about £100 million.
The treasury was empty, and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive, almost to the point of mutiny or possible ''coup d'état''.
and "Why can't the king's authority and decisions be challenged?"
The bonds were in fact redeemed in 1791 at face value, but the scheme raised little money because Americans had little specie, and many of the rich merchants were supporters of the Crown.
The Revolution had a strong, immediate influence in Great Britain, Ireland, the Netherlands, and France.
As Patriots declared independence, the Quakers, who continued to do business with the British, were attacked as supporters of British rule, "contrivers and authors of seditious publications" critical of the revolutionary cause.
In addition, many women contributed to the war effort through fundraising and running family businesses in the absence of husbands.
In the last 50&nbsp;years, historians have largely abandoned that interpretation, emphasizing instead the high level of ideological unity.
The peace in 1783 left France financially prostrate, while the British economy boomed thanks to the return of American business.
London decided that they could overawe the Americans by sending a large military and naval force, forcing them to be loyal again:
The British retaliated by confining all trade of the New England colonies to Britain and excluding them from the Newfoundland fisheries.
* Strong governors with veto power over the legislature and substantial appointment authority
They hit 11 people; three civilians died at the scene of the shooting, and two died after the incident.
The colonists accused the British of encouraging slave revolts.
The remainder, known as United Empire Loyalists, received land and subsidies for resettlement in British colonies in North America, especially Quebec (concentrating in the Eastern Townships), Prince Edward Island, and Nova Scotia.
The defeat heightened dissension and escalated political antagonism to the King's ministers.
Out of Natural Law and Natural Rights was born the governance doctrine known as "Consent of the Governed".
In 1772, it became known that the Crown intended to pay fixed salaries to the governors and judges in Massachusetts.
In 1775, there was at most 12 million dollars in gold in the colonies, not nearly enough to cover current transactions, let alone finance a major war.
Locke's Two Treatises of Government published in 1689 were especially influential; Locke in turn was influenced by Protestant theology.
On December 16, 1773, a group of men, led by Samuel Adams and dressed to evoke the appearance of American Indians, boarded the ships of the British East India Company and dumped £10,000 worth of tea from their holds (approximately £636,000 in 2008) into Boston Harbor.
The Loyalists never controlled territory unless the British Army occupied it.
By 1780, Congress was making requisitions for specific supplies of corn, beef, pork, and other necessities—an inefficient system that kept the army barely alive.
In May 1776, Congress voted to suppress all forms of crown authority, to be replaced by locally created authority.
The masses began to ask questions like, "Why is the king the king?"
When Loyalists left the South in 1783, they took thousands of their slaves with them to be slaves in the British West Indies.
This European Enlightenment developed concurrently with the American Enlightenment and/or crossed the ocean and was incorporated into the American Enlightenment.
But, the changes also engendered a backlash that set back the cause of women's rights and led to a greater rigidity that marginalized women from political life.
Both sides offered freedom and re-settlement to slaves who were willing to fight for them, recruiting slaves whose owners supported the opposing cause.
The British were forced out of Boston in 1776, but then captured and held New York City for the duration of the war.
The Seneca, Onondaga and Cayuga of the Iroquois Confederacy also allied with the British against the Americans.
Thus she points out the Revolution produced a Moses-like leader (George Washington), prophets (Thomas Jefferson, Tom Paine), disciples (Alexander Hamilton, James Madison) and martyrs (Boston Massacre, Nathan Hale), as well as devils (Benedict Arnold), sacred places (Valley Forge, Bunker Hill), rituals (Boston Tea Party), emblems (the new flag), sacred holidays (Independence Day), and a holy scripture whose every sentence is carefully studied and applied in current law cases (The Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights).
Religious motivation for fighting tyranny transcended socioeconomic lines to encompass rich and poor, men and women, frontiersmen and townsmen, farmers and merchants.
During negotiations in Paris, the American delegation discovered that France would support independence, but no territorial gains.
Spain did not officially recognize the U.S. but became an informal ally when it declared war on Britain on June 21, 1779.
It was widely distributed and loaned, and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to spreading the ideas of republicanism and liberalism together, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Great Britain, and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army.
It did give to ordinary people a pride and power, not to say an arrogance, that have continued to shock visitors from less favored lands.
It assumed that a successful republic rested upon the virtue of its citizens.
Decades later, this event became known as the Boston Tea Party and remains a significant part of American patriotic lore.
The Battle of Bunker Hill followed on June 17, 1775.
They evacuated and resettled more than 3,000 "Black Loyalists" from New York to Nova Scotia, Upper and Lower Canada.
Historian Bernard Bailyn argues that the evangelicalism of the era challenged traditional notions of natural hierarchy by preaching that the Bible taught that all men are equal, so that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior, not his class.
While the Cherokee launched raids numbering a couple hundred warriors, as seen in the Cherokee–American wars, they could not mobilize enough forces to fight a major invasion of colonial areas without the help of allies, most often the Creek.
The Declaration of Independence was drafted largely by Thomas Jefferson and presented by the committee; it was slightly revised and unanimously adopted by the entire Congress on July 4, marking the formation of a new sovereign nation which called itself the United States of America.
A new ministry under Lord North came to power in 1770, and Parliament withdrew all taxes except the tax on tea, giving up its efforts to raise revenue while maintaining the right to tax.
Loyalties and allegiances varied widely within regions and communities and even within families, and sometimes shifted during the course of the Revolution.
Most yeomen farmers, craftsmen, and small merchants joined the Patriot cause to demand more political equality.
Many British and Irish Whigs spoke in favor of the American cause.
The Patriots included many prominent men of the planter class from Virginia and South Carolina, for instance, who became leaders during the Revolution, and formed the new government at the national and state levels.
The first was the $12 million owed to foreigners, mostly money borrowed from France.
The first was the Massachusetts Government Act which altered the Massachusetts charter and restricted town meetings.
But slaves who were carried to the Caribbean under control of Loyalist masters generally remained slaves until British abolition in its colonies in 1834.
They made New York their main political and military base of operations in North America, holding it until November 1783.
Numerous slaveholders who freed their slaves cited revolutionary ideals in their documents; others freed slaves as a reward for service.
Britain seemed to threaten the established liberties that Americans enjoyed.
Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific and later Africa with subsequent exploration leading to the rise of the Second British Empire.
The new government under President George Washington took office in New York in March 1789.
There will be no end of it.
The event quickly came to be called the Boston Massacre.
It did displace the deference, the patronage, the social divisions that had determined the way people viewed one another for centuries and still view one another in much of the world.
The Patriot leadership professed the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism to reject monarchy and aristocracy, and proclaimed that all men are created equal.
Older and better established men, Loyalists tended to resist innovation.
But, some women earned livelihoods as midwives and in other roles in the community, which were not originally recognized as significant by men.
The colonists did not object that the taxes were high (they were low), but because they had no representation in the Parliament.
The French army and navy departed, so the Americans were on their own in 1782–83.
In 1777, the British sent an invasion force from Canada to seal off New England as part of a grand strategy to end the war, which the British perceived as the primary source of agitators.
The American theater thus became only one front in Britain's war.
The Dutch Republic, also at war with Britain, was the next country to sign a treaty with the United States, on October 8, 1782.
In 1780, they launched a fresh invasion and took Charleston, as well.
The new Constitution established a relatively strong federal national government that included an executive, a national judiciary, and a bicameral Congress that represented states in the Senate and population in the House of Representatives.
Prime Minister Shelburne foresaw highly profitable two-way trade between Britain and the rapidly growing United States, as indeed came to pass.
The greatest threat to liberty was depicted as corruption—not just in London but at home, as well.
Historians such as Bernard Bailyn, Gordon Wood, and Edmund Morgan accept the contemporary view of the participants that the American Revolution was a unique and radical event that produced deep changes and had a profound effect on world affairs, based  on an increasing belief in the principles of the Enlightenment, as reflected in how liberalism was understood during the period, and republicanism.
Massachusetts was declared in a state of rebellion in February 1775 and the British garrison received orders to disarm the rebels and arrest their leaders, leading to the Battles of Lexington and Concord on 19 April 1775.
The British army in New York City went to Philadelphia in a major case of mis-coordination, capturing it from Washington.
Women will demand a vote.
In Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New Hampshire, the resulting constitutions embodied:
The American Revolution was the first wave of the Atlantic Revolutions: the French Revolution, the Haitian Revolution, and the Latin American wars of independence.
