This population may be declining as European otter numbers increase.
The kits begin hunting after eight weeks of age, but stay close to their mother until autumn, when they become independent.
The largest subspecies, it resembles ''N.
In winter, males weigh  and females  Maximum heaviness occurs in autumn.
In the Cape Horn Biosphere Reserve, mammals, including both native and exotic rodents, are the American mink's main prey throughout the year, though birds are of equal importance during their summer nesting periods.
In the Caucasus region, American minks were released into North Ossetia.
'''Southern mink'''''N.
Mink scarves and stoles are also manufactured.
The skull is similar to that of the European mink, but is more massive, narrower, and less elongated, with more strongly developed projections and a wider, shorter cranium.
A 1985 outbreak of TME in Stetsonville, Wisconsin resulted in a 60% mortality rate for the minks.
On the other hand, A.R.
v. vison'', it has similar colouration.
Among the rodents killed by the American mink in its native range are rats and mice of the genera ''Hesperomys'', ''Microtus'', ''Sigmodon'', and ''Neotoma''.
It is warm, dry and lined with straw and feathers.
American minks have been implicated in the decline of the water vole in the United Kingdom and linked to the decline of waterfowl across their range in Europe.
In the past, some mink farms successfully provided pools of water for the mink to swim; however, this practice is unheard-of in modern mink production.
Also known as "black cross", this variety has white or cream-coloured fur fibre with a sprinkling of blackish guard hairs throughout the body, with the greatest concentrations being on the back and shoulders.
The diets of the American mink and European otter overlap to a great extent.
Mink inhabiting the prairie sloughs primarily target frogs, tadpoles, and mice.
v.mink'', but is paler and smaller, with light brown, rich and lustrous fur which darkens at the end of the tail.
The baculum is well-developed, being triangular in cross section and curved at the tip.
European rabbits are the most commonly taken prey in areas where they are common, especially in summer.
'''Island mink'''''N.
When a domestic mink survives long enough to reproduce, it may cause problems for the wild mink populations.
Until 1963, more minks were introduced in various quantities in the Voronezh and Arkhangelsk Oblasts, Karelia, in Kalininsk, Gorkovsk, Volgograd and Chelyabinsk Oblasts, and into Tatarstan and Bashkir, as well as the Lithuanian and Byelorussian SSRs.
Flea species known to infest minks include ''Palaeopsylla minor'', ''Malaraeus penicilliger'', ''Ctenopthalmus noblis'', ''Megabothris walkeri'', ''Typhloceras poppei'', and ''Nosopsyllus fasciatus''.
Interior of Canada from Great Bear Lake and the western shores of Hudson Bay south through Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba to southern North Dakota
The total mink population in Great Britain is estimated at 110,000 (England; 46,750, Scotland; 52,250, Wales; 9,750).
The first specimens were imported to Europe in 1920 for fur-farming purposes.
The Stetsonville outbreak may have been due to the animals being fed the carcasses of other infected animals.
It kills vertebrate prey by biting the back of the head or neck, leaving canine puncture marks  apart.
Females are receptive for seven- to 10-day intervals during the three-week breeding season, and can mate with multiple males.
v. melampeplus'' and ''N.
The most valuable peltries come from eastern Canada which, although the smallest, are the silkiest and darkest.
Originally, captive-bred minks were used, but wild specimens were later released to facilitate the species' acclimatisation within Soviet territories.
They may also occur on estuaries, rivers and canals near urban areas.
Minks are motivated to access swimming water, and the absence of water is a source of frustration on modern farms.
Domestic mink are larger than wild mink, which may cause problems with the ecosystem when they escape.
Though intelligent, minks are not quick to learn tricks taught to them by their owners.
Eastern United States, from the coast of New England south to North Carolina and in the interior to central Georgia and Alabama; westward through southern Pennsylvania and Ohio to Missouri and northeastern Texas
When stressed, the American mink can expel the contents of its anal glands at a distance of .
Because of their fondness for bathing, captive American minks may enter kettles or other open water-containing vessels.
The decline of European mink populations seems to coincide with the spread of the American mink.
Its fossil range corresponds with the species' current natural range.
It generally has eight nipples, with one pair of inguinal teats and three pairs of abdominal teats.
American minks are easily kept in captivity, and breed readily.
The thick underfur and oily guard hairs render the pelage water-resistant, with the length of the guard hairs being intermediate between those of otters and polecats, thus indicating the American mink is incompletely adapted to an aquatic life.
Further testing revealed this agent is transmissible between mink, cattle, and sheep.
'''Common mink'''''N.
In modern times, the American mink occupies all of the Norwegian mainland, but is absent on some islands.
The upper molars are larger and more massive than those of the European mink.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
The species has been present in Iceland since the 1930s, and has become well established, despite it being heavily hunted since 1939.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
Endoparasites include ''Skrjabingylus nasicola'' and ''Troglotrema acutum''.
Scent glands may also be located on the throat and chest.
Although superficially similar to the European mink, studies indicate the American mink's closest relative is the Siberian weasel (''kolonok'') of Asia.
A medium-sized subspecies, it has a pale, russet to clay or reddish-brown coat.
Bluish grey fur fibre and guard hairs which are sometimes white-tipped, giving a silvery blue tone, pelts of this type with a brownish cast are less valuable.
The American mink differs from members of the genus ''Mustela'' (stoats and weasels) by its larger size and stouter form, which closely approach those of martens.
The American mink relies heavily on sight when foraging.
The American mink is a carnivore which feeds on rodents, fish, crustaceans, frogs, and birds.
However, the U.S. Fur Commission claims "mink are truly domesticated animals", based on the number of years they have been kept on fur farms.
When an albino mink is born, it is standard procedure in fur farms to breed it to other colour mutations to produce grey and light-brown pastel shades.
Minks were legally trapped from early November to early April, when their pelts were prime.
'''Hudson Bay mink'''''N.
The species' natural range encompasses North America from Alaska and Canada through the United States except Arizona and the more arid areas of California, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico, and West Texas.
European hares are occasionally attacked.
Its eyesight is clearer on land than underwater.
By 1950, feral mink reached central Norway, with further populations occurring in the northern counties of Nordland and Troms.
Although difficult to catch, the American mink, prior to being commercially farmed, was among the most frequently trapped furbearers as, unlike other furbearing mammals, it did not hibernate in winter, and could thus be caught on a nightly basis even in the far north.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
The American mink is a promiscuous animal, which does not form pair bonds.
In its introduced range in Europe it has been classified as an invasive species linked to declines in European mink, Pyrenean desman, and water vole populations.
The American mink's winter fur is denser, longer, softer, and more close-fitting than that of the European mink.
Feral mink colonised eastern Norway in 1930 and had become established in most southeastern counties in the early 1940s.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length
The following graph is a simplification of the main colour strains:
Since the extinction of the sea mink, the American mink is the only extant member of the genus ''Neovison''.
American mink territories are held by individual animals with minimal intrasex overlap, but with extensive overlap between animals of the opposite sex.
Coast of Louisiana and Mississippi
In 2005, the U.S. ranked fourth in production behind Denmark, China and the Netherlands.
The adding of weaker domestic mink genes into wild mink populations is believed by some to have contributed to the decline of mink populations in Canada.
Minks in Britain prey on several bird species, with ducks, moorhens, and coots being most frequently targeted on lakes and rivers, while gulls are taken in coastal habitats.
Fossil records of the American mink go back as far as the Irvingtonian, though the species is uncommon among Pleistocene animals.
When diving, it undergoes a state of rapid bradycardia, which is likely an adaptation to conserve oxygen.
Pale brown and beige fur with darker guard hairs of various hues
In the British Isles, dietary composition varies seasonally and regionally.
In Tartaria, the American mink's most important food items are voles, fish, crustaceans, frogs, and aquatic insects.
Within the Altai Mountains, the American mink feeds predominantly on mammals such as rodents, shrews, and moles, as well as birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish.
The kits are dependent on their mother's milk, which contains 3.8% lipids, 6.2% protein, 4.6% lactose and 10.66% mineral salts.
When minks of wild stock are confined with tame ones, the latter invariably dominate the former.
This delayed implantation allows pregnant minks to keep track of environmental conditions and select an ideal time and place for parturition.
Although inferior to the North American river otter in hunting fish, Audubon and Bachman once reported seeing a mink carrying a foot-long trout.
One Native American method involved using a bait (usually a slit open chicken carcass filled with fish oil and oysters) tied to a rope and dragged around an area laden with traps.
'''Mississippi Valley mink'''''N.
Darker than ''energumenos'', it has dark chocolate-coloured fur with slightly paler underparts and a white spot on the chin.
In the late 19th century, tame American minks were often reared for ratting, much as ferrets were used in Europe.
Tick species known to infest minks include ''Ixodes hexagonus'', ''Ixodes canisuga'', ''Ixodes ricinus'', and ''Ixodes acuminatus''.
The American mink often kills birds, including larger species like seagulls and cormorants, by drowning.
On the American prairies, only the steel trap was used, because of the lack of timber.
During swimming, the mink propels itself primarily through undulating movements of the trunk.
Northern Wisconsin and northern South Dakota south to northern Illinois, northern Missouri, and southern Kansas
Transmissible mink encephalopathy (TME) is a prion disease of mink, similar to BSE in cattle and scrapie in sheep.
Should this be unsuccessful, fights may result, with injuries to the head and neck.
It is the most frequently farmed animal for its fur, exceeding the silver fox, sable, marten, and skunk in economic importance.
'''Florida mink'''''N.
Males measure  in total length and  in tail length.
The American mink's dens are characterized by a large number of entrances and twisting passages.
The fur is Van Dyke brown, lighter on the cheeks and sides and darker on the tail.
Among the 11 different bird species preyed upon by minks in Altai are dippers and pine grosbeaks.
The young are born either in April or June, with litters consisting of four kits on average.
''lutreocephala'' (Harlan, 1825)
The American mink may nest in burrows dug previously by muskrats, badgers and skunks, and may also dig dens in old ant hills.
Unlike the stoat, which often engages in surplus killing, the mink usually limits itself to killing and eating one fowl during each attack.
The American minks of the Pleistocene did not differ much in size or morphology from modern populations, though a slight trend toward increased size is apparent from the Irvingtonian through to the Illinoian and Wisconsinan periods.
Animals were tested on their ability to recognize objects, learn their valences and make object selections from memory.
Northern, western and central Alaska; northern Yukon and northwestern Mackenzie; south to the Alaska Peninsula and to Fort Good Hope
Its sense of smell is comparatively weak.
The tail measures  in males and  in females.
The smell produced by these scent glands was described by Clinton Hart Merriam as more unbearable than that produced by skunks, and added it was "one of the few substances, of animal, vegetable, or mineral origin, that has, on land or sea, rendered me aware of the existence of the abominable sensation called nausea".
Same as above, but with a bluish cast
Pale brown fur fibre interspersed with dark brown guard hair, sprinkled with white guard hairs
They are now considered vermin in much of Europe and are hunted for the purpose of wildlife management.
Exceptionally large litters of 11 kits have been recorded in Tartaria and 16 in the United States.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
Selective breeding has produced a number of different colour shades in mink peltries, ranging from pure white, through beiges, browns, and greys, to a brown that is almost black.
v. energumenos'', but is lighter in colour.
The American mink replaces and sometimes kills the European mink wherever their ranges overlap.
Males measure  in body length and  in tail length.
Minks caught in traps cling to life with great tenacity, having been known to break their teeth in trying to extricate themselves from steel traps.
Ernest Thompson Seton reported hearing minks growl and snarl when confronting a threat.
It shares with martens a uniformly enlarged, bushy and somewhat tapering tail, rather than a slenderly terete tail with an enlarged bushy tip, as is the case in stoats.
Captive individuals tend to develop irregular white patches on the lower surface of their bodies, though escaped individuals from Tartaria gradually lost these patches.
The first feral mink populations arose in 1930, establishing territories in southwestern Norway.
Jackets and capes are mostly made from small to medium-sized specimens, usually females and young males, while trimming, scarves and stoles are made from adult males.
On land, the American mink moves by a bounding gait, with speeds of up to .
They have also been known to dominate cats in confrontations.
v. ingens'' subspecies.
The ideal diet for farm-bred minks consists of four to five ounces of horse meat and a quarter-pint of milk once daily.
Trematode ''Metorchis conjunctus'' can also infect American minks.
Kits squeak repeatedly when separated from their mothers.
Farmers vaccinate the young kits for botulism, distemper, enteritis, and, if needed, pneumonia.
A range of small rodents and insectivores are preyed upon, but to a lesser degree.
Weights vary with sex and season, with males being heavier than females.
''rufa'' (Hamilton-Smith, 1858)
Because of range expansion, the American mink is classed as a least-concern species by the IUCN.
The authors suggest this is due to the rapid behavioural adaptation of the animals.
In the Sverdlovsk and Irkutsk Oblasts, mouse-like rodents are their most important foods, followed by birds, fish and insects.
It typically catches fish after five- to 20-second chases.
The '''American mink''' (''Neovison vison'') is a semiaquatic species of mustelid native to North America, though human intervention has expanded its range to many parts of Europe and South America.
Another Danish study reported a significant majority of the “wild” mink were mink which had escaped from fur farms.
The sounds they emit include piercing shrieks and hisses when threatened and muffled chuckling sounds when mating.
The two standard strains are brown and "black cross" which, when paired, produce numerous colour variations.
Also known as "sapphire", this variety has bluish-grey fur fibre with mauve, blue-grey guard hair, with the greatest depth of colour being on the back.
However, its population underwent a 42% decline during the years 2002–2006, which coincided with a decline in sandeel populations resulting in a drop in the seabird populations on which the minks feed.
v. energumenos'', it has rather dark fur.
Minks were found to outperform ferrets, skunks, and cats in this task, but this letter (short paper) fails to account for a possible conflation of a cognitive ability (decision making, associative learning) with a largely perceptual ability (invariant object recognition).
A 2006 study in Denmark concluded, due to frequent escapes from existing mink farms, “Closing mink farms may result in a crash of the free-ranging population, or alternatively it may result in the establishment of a better-adapted, truly feral population that may ultimately outnumber the population that was present before farm closures.” The study reported more information would be necessary to determine the outcome.
In Ireland, the American mink was not farmed until the early 1950s, thus feral populations established themselves there much later.
In Central Asia they were released in the Tien Shan region.
The American mink is similar in build to the European mink, but the tail is longer (constituting 38–51% of its body length).
Its two anal glands are used for scent marking, either through defecation or by rubbing the anal region on the ground.
It has a light brown coat with white spots on the chin, throat and breast.
The animals escaped or were released from farms in Chubut Province and now occur in the Chubut and Río Negro Provinces and Tierra del Fuego.
In the Russian Far East, where crustaceans are scarce, the American mink feeds extensively on amphipods.
During aggressive interactions, this mink asserts its dominance by arching its back, puffing up, and lashing its tail, stamping and scraping the ground with its feet, and opening its mouth in a threat-gape.
Because of numerous incidents of domestic mink escaping from fur farms and establishing themselves in the wild, concern has arisen among conservationists of the possible repercussions such escapes may have on natural wild mink populations.
Though domestic minks have been bred in captivity for almost a century, they have not been bred to be tame.
The first mink farm in Norway was built in 1927, with escapees establishing wild populations within 30 years of its establishment.
In times of overpopulation, they control their own numbers by either killing each other through direct conflict or by causing weaker minks to be driven from territory until starvation sets in.
In its natural range, fish are their primary prey.
In its introduced range, the American mink breeds one month earlier than the European mink.
Kenai Peninsula and Cook Inlet
It does not turn white in winter.
There are no estimates for the mink population in Ireland, but it is thought to be low, because of Ireland's strong otter population.
It generally dives to depths of  for 10 seconds, though depths of 3 m lasting 60 seconds have been recorded.
'''Kenai mink'''''N.
Intermediate in size between ''N.
When hundreds or thousands of released domestic minks flood an ecosystem, it causes a great disturbance for the wild minks, resulting in the deaths of the majority of the released mink and many of the wild ones from starvation or injuries incurred fighting over territory.
The kits are blind at birth, weighing six grams and possessing a short coat of fine, silver-white hairs.
The feet are broad, with webbed digits.
It has dark chocolate-brown fur above with white on the chin and irregularly distributed on the breast and between the hind legs.
The number of exits vary from one to eight.
The mating process is violent, with the male typically biting the female on the nape of the neck and pinning her with his forefeet.
Attracted by the scent of food and a female, the mink would get caught in the trap and drown.
Wild minks can be tamed if caught young, but can be difficult to handle and are usually not handled bare-handed.
Its streamlined shape helps it to reduce water resistance whilst swimming.
During the post-World War II period until 1965, mink had colonised most of the country.
The gestation period lasts from 40–75 days, with actual embryonic development taking place after 30–32 days, thus indicating delayed implantation can last from eight to 45 days.
Among fish, small species predominate in the diet of minks in Altai, and include; minnows, gudgeons, and wide-headed sculpins.
The mating season begins from February in its southern range to April in the north.
The majority of these populations do not appear to be self-sufficient, though minks in the Monti Prenestini and Simbruini in Lazio have reproduced successfully.
The dental formula is:
The burrows they dig themselves are typically about four inches in diameter and may continue along for  at a depth of .
Escapees of fur farming farms established a self-sustaining and expanding population in the Iberian peninsula by the second half of the 20th century.
Domestic mink, which are bred in fur farms, have 19.6% smaller brains, 8.1% smaller hearts, and 28.2% smaller spleens than wild mink.
Although considerable areas were occupied by the American mink by the early 1960s, the species' Soviet range was never continuous, as most released populations were isolated from one another.
Mating lasts from 10 minutes to four hours.
