Speaking directly to "the Southern States," he reaffirmed, "I have no purpose, directly or indirectly to interfere with the institution of slavery in the United States where it exists.
President Johnson officially declared a virtual end to the insurrection on May 9, 1865; President Jefferson Davis was captured the following day.
In September 1862, the Battle of Antietam provided this opportunity, and the subsequent War Governors' Conference added support for the proclamation.
Grant and the Union won a decisive victory – the first battle with the high casualty rates that would repeat over and over.
Southern leaders feared that Lincoln would stop the expansion of slavery and put it on a course toward extinction.
The election of Lincoln caused the legislature of South Carolina to call a state convention to consider secession.
At first, Lincoln reversed attempts at emancipation by Secretary of War Simon Cameron and Generals John C. Frémont (in Missouri) and David Hunter (in South Carolina, Georgia and Florida) to keep the loyalty of the border states and the War Democrats.
Northern states, which had heavily invested in their still-nascent manufacturing, could not compete with the full-fledged industries of Europe in offering high prices for cotton imported from the South and low prices for manufactured exports in return.
European government leaders welcomed the fragmentation of the ascendant American Republic."
Union army dead, amounting to 15 percent of the over two million who served, was broken down as follows:
Lincoln responded by establishing martial law, and unilaterally suspending habeas corpus, in Maryland, along with sending in militia units from the North.
The Emancipation Proclamation over time would reinforce the political liability of supporting the Confederacy.
In Missouri, an elected convention on secession voted decisively to remain within the Union.
While in the Western Theater the Union made significant permanent gains, in the Eastern Theater, battle was inconclusive in 1861–62.
Losses can be viewed as high considering that the defeat of Mexico in 1846–48 resulted in fewer than 2,000 soldiers killed in battle, and roughly 13,000 killed overall.
The fall of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, guaranteed the reelection of Lincoln as president.
The Crittenden Compromise of 1860 was an expression of this view.
Western successes led to Ulysses S. Grant's command of all Union armies in 1864.
In addition, the European aristocracy (the dominant factor in every major country) was "absolutely gleeful in pronouncing the American debacle as proof that the entire experiment in popular government had failed.
With the conquest of northern Mexico west to California in 1848, slaveholding interests looked forward to expanding into these lands and perhaps Cuba and Central America as well.
By one estimate, the war claimed the lives of 10 percent of all Northern males 20–45 years old, and 30 percent of all Southern white males aged 18–40.
Subsequent writers on the American Civil War looked to several factors explaining the geographic divide, including sectionalism, protectionism, and state's rights.
On April 26, 1865, General Joseph E. Johnston surrendered nearly 90,000 men of the Army of Tennessee to Major General William T. Sherman at the Bennett Place near present-day Durham, North Carolina.
Indeed, the ferocious combat itself was passed over as merely an ephemeral event.
Including Confederate estimates of battle losses where no records exist would bring the Confederate death toll to 94,000 killed and died of wounds.
Perceived insults to Southern collective honor included the enormous popularity of ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' (1852) and the actions of abolitionist John Brown in trying to incite a slave rebellion in 1859.
Slaves in the border states and those located in some former Confederate territory occupied before the Emancipation Proclamation were freed by state action or (on December 6, 1865) by the Thirteenth Amendment.
The Battle of New Market was the Confederacy's last major victory of the war.
Lincoln laid the groundwork for public support in an open letter published letter to abolitionist Horace Greeley's newspaper.
In the 1840s and 50s, the issue of accepting slavery (in the guise of rejecting slave-owning bishops and missionaries) split the nation's largest religious denominations (the Methodist, Baptist and Presbyterian churches) into separate Northern and Southern denominations.
This would break down to approximately 350,000 Confederate and 411,000 Union military deaths, going by the proportion of Union to Confederate battle losses.
C. Vann Woodward said of the latter group,
The rebel government soon went into exile and never controlled Kentucky.
However, at least four states – South Carolina, Mississippi, Georgia, and Texas – also passed lengthy and detailed explanations of their causes for secession, all of which laid the blame squarely on the movement to abolish slavery and that movement's influence over the politics of the northern states.
The Democrats in Congress, controlled by Southerners, wrote the tariff laws in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s, and kept reducing rates so that the 1857 rates were the lowest since 1816.
Ken Burns produced a notable PBS series on television titled ''The Civil War'' (1990).
A voter turnout of 34 percent approved the statehood bill (96 percent approving).
* 24,866 died in Confederate prison camps
It proved to be the largest surrender of Confederate forces, effectively bringing the war to an end.
During the Civil War, sentiment concerning slaves, enslavement and emancipation in the United States was divided.
This often happened only a few days or weeks later.
West Virginia provided about 20,000–22,000 soldiers to both the Confederacy and the Union.
Though the Confederacy hoped that Britain and France would join them against the Union, this was never likely, and so they instead tried to bring Britain and France in as mediators.
These battles resulted in heavy losses on both sides, and forced Lee's Confederates to fall back repeatedly.
* 199,790 died of disease (75 percent was due to the war, the remainder would have occurred in civilian life anyway)
Despite their loss of slaves and wealth, with starvation looming, Sherman continued, "yet I see no sign of let up – some few deserters – plenty tired of war, but the masses determined to fight it out."
It argued for states' rights for slave owners in the South, but contained a complaint about states' rights in the North in the form of opposition to the Fugitive Slave Act, claiming that Northern states were not fulfilling their federal obligations under the Constitution.
Southern white preachers said:
However, Northern governors had begun to mobilize their militias.
Congress admitted West Virginia to the Union on June 20, 1863.
Confederate records compiled by historian William F. Fox list 74,524 killed and died of wounds and 59,292 died of disease.
With the scale of the rebellion apparently small so far, Lincoln called for only 75,000 volunteers for 90&nbsp;days.
In April 1861, Lincoln announced the Union blockade of all Southern ports; commercial ships could not get insurance and regular traffic ended.
In both the North and South, the draft laws were highly unpopular.
After Lincoln won without carrying a single Southern state, many Southern whites felt that disunion had become their only option, because they thought that they were losing representation, which would hamper their ability to promote pro-slavery acts and policies.
Men selected in the draft could provide substitutes or, until mid-1864, pay commutation money.
President Lincoln was determined to hold all remaining Union-occupied forts in the Confederacy, Fort Monroe in Virginia, in Florida, Fort Pickens, Fort Jefferson, and Fort Taylor, and in the cockpit of secession, Charleston, South Carolina's Fort Sumter.
On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln was sworn in as President.
Lincoln issued his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation on September 22, 1862, and his final Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863.
Southern whites believed that the emancipation of slaves would destroy the South's economy because of the alleged laziness of blacks under free labor.
Lincoln was not a military dictator, and could only continue to fight the war as long as the American public supported a continuation of the war.
He reached the Atlantic Ocean at Savannah, Georgia in December 1864.
Many scholars argue that the Union held an insurmountable long-term advantage over the Confederacy in industrial strength and population.
Lee's army, thinned by desertion and casualties, was now much smaller than Grant's.
The ships were so small that only a small amount of cotton went out.
They ran a presidential ticket in 1872 but were decisively defeated.
But the states admitted following California were all free: Minnesota (1858), Oregon (1859) and Kansas (1861).
Grant was tenacious and kept pressing Lee's Army of Northern Virginia back to Richmond.
While the Confederate forces had numerous successes in the Eastern Theater, they were defeated many times in the West.
Since the Emancipation Proclamation was based on the President's war powers, it only included territory held by Confederates at the time.
The inclusion of 24 secessionist counties in the state and the ensuing guerrilla war engaged about 40,000 Federal troops for much of the war.
McPherson argues that the North's advantage in population and resources made Northern victory likely but not guaranteed.
At least 100,000 Southerners deserted, or about 10 percent.
With the withdrawal of federal troops, however, whites retook control of every Southern legislature; the Jim Crow period of disenfranchisement and legal segregation was about to begin.
Radical Republicans demanded proof that Confederate nationalism was dead and that the slaves were truly free.
The last significant battles raged around the Siege of Petersburg.
Historian Allan Nevins says:
Income per person in the South dropped to less than 40 percent of that of the North, a condition that lasted until well into the 20th century.
Before Lincoln took office in March 1861, seven slave states had declared their secession and joined to form the Confederacy.
After redoubling his efforts, Sheridan defeated Maj. Gen. Jubal A.
In the resulting vacuum, the convention on secession reconvened and took power as the Unionist provisional government of Missouri.
An estimated 60,000 men lost limbs in the war.
While the South moved toward a Southern nationalism, leaders in the North were also becoming more nationally minded, and rejected any notion of splitting the Union.
Between 1803 and 1854, the United States achieved a vast expansion of territory through purchase, negotiation, and conquest.
Worse, Europe developed other cotton suppliers, which they found superior, hindering the South's recovery after the war.
Notably, their mortality rate was significantly higher than white soldiers:
In the East, the Navy supplied and moved army forces about, and occasionally shelled Confederate installations.
Meanwhile, the war created employment for arms makers, ironworkers, and British ships to transport weapons.
Francis Amasa Walker, Superintendent of the 1870 Census, used census and Surgeon General data to estimate a minimum of 500,000 Union military deaths and 350,000 Confederate military deaths, for a total death toll of 850,000 soldiers.
Sheridan then proceeded to destroy the agricultural base of the Shenandoah Valley, a strategy similar to the tactics Sherman later employed in Georgia.
Early in a series of battles, including a final decisive defeat at the Battle of Cedar Creek.
Generals George Meade and Benjamin Butler were ordered to move against Lee near Richmond, General Franz Sigel (and later Philip Sheridan) were to attack the Shenandoah Valley, General Sherman was to capture Atlanta and march to the sea (the Atlantic Ocean), Generals George Crook and William W. Averell were to operate against railroad supply lines in West Virginia, and Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks was to capture Mobile, Alabama.
British investors built small, fast, steam-driven blockade runners that traded arms and luxuries brought in from Britain through Bermuda, Cuba, and the Bahamas in return for high-priced cotton.
Naval forces assisted Grant in his long, complex campaign that resulted in the surrender of Vicksburg in July 1863, and full Union control of the Mississippi soon after.
It comprised multiple complex methods to resolve the outstanding issues of the war's aftermath, the most important of which were the three "Reconstruction Amendments" to the Constitution, which remain in effect to the present time: the 13th (1865), the 14th (1868) and the 15th (1870).
However, the same ships were reflagged with European flags and continued unmolested.
The Civil War was a contest marked by the ferocity and frequency of battle.
Union men mainly believed the war was to emancipate the slaves.
By 1864, these violent activities harmed the nationwide anti-war movement organizing against the re-election of Lincoln.
To the west, by summer 1862 the Union destroyed the Confederate river navy, then much of their western armies, and seized New Orleans.
In the southern states the question of the territorial expansion of slavery westward again became explosive.
Lincoln's foreign policy was deficient in 1861 in terms of appealing to European public opinion.
At that point, Lincoln had secured the support of the Republicans, War Democrats, the border states, emancipated slaves, and the neutrality of Britain and France.
Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which made ending slavery a war goal.
From the anti-slavery perspective, the issue was primarily about whether the system of slavery was an anachronistic evil that was incompatible with Republicanism in the United States.
General Lee led 45,000 men of the Army of Northern Virginia across the Potomac River into Maryland on September 5.
On June 23, Cherokee leader Stand Watie became the last Confederate General to surrender his forces.
Antietam is considered a Union victory because it halted Lee's invasion of the North and provided an opportunity for Lincoln to announce his Emancipation Proclamation.
It was fading in the border states and in Southern cities, but was expanding in the highly profitable cotton districts of the South and Southwest.
The abundance of European cotton and Britain's hostility to the institution of slavery, along with Lincoln's Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico naval blockades, severely decreased any chance that either Britain or France would enter the war.
The slave states, which had already become a minority in the House of Representatives, were now facing a future as a perpetual minority in the Senate and Electoral College against an increasingly powerful North.
Each battle resulted in setbacks for the Union that mirrored what they had suffered under prior generals, though unlike those prior generals, Grant fought on rather than retreat.
Over four years, 237 named battles were fought, as were many more minor actions and skirmishes, which were often characterized by their bitter intensity and high casualties.
The Confederate capital fell to the Union XXV Corps, composed of black troops.
James M. McPherson, after reading thousands of letters written by Confederate soldiers, found strong patriotism that continued to the end; they truly believed they were fighting for freedom and liberty.
The southern states believed slaveholding was a constitutional right because of the Fugitive slave clause of the Constitution.
In the world of 19th century self-made Americans, growing in prosperity, population and expanding westward, "freedom" could mean personal liberty or property rights.
Gen. Hooker was replaced by Maj. Gen. George Meade during Lee's second invasion of the North, in June.
The Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 legislated this doctrine.
In 1861, Southerners voluntarily embargoed cotton shipments, hoping to start an economic depression in Europe that would force Britain to enter the war to get cotton, but this did not work.
The states that remained loyal including border states where slavery was legal, were known as the ''Union'' or the ''North''.
* 110,070 killed in action (67,000) or died of wounds (43,000).
On December 18, 1860, the Crittenden Compromise was proposed to re-establish the Missouri Compromise line by constitutionally banning slavery in territories to the north of the line while guaranteeing it to the south.
The Wilmot Proviso announced this position in 1846.
The South ignored the warnings: Southerners did not realize how ardently the North would fight to hold the Union together.
The American Civil War was one of the earliest true industrial wars.
'''Railroad miles'''
Rejecting the arguments for federal authority or self-government, state sovereignty would empower states to promote the expansion of slavery as part of the Federal Union under the U.S. Constitution.
War loomed in late 1861 between the U.S. and Britain over the ''Trent'' affair, involving the U.S. Navy's boarding of the British mail steamer ''Trent'' to seize two Confederate diplomats.
Had Northerners realized that most Southerners really did favor secession, they might have hesitated at attempting the enormous task of conquering a united South.
The autumn 1862 Confederate campaigns into Maryland and Kentucky failed, dissuading British intervention.
After 1863, the Polish revolt against Russia further distracted the European powers, and ensured that they would remain neutral.
Practically every major figure in the war, both North and South, has had a serious biographical study.
Grant marched to the relief of Rosecrans and defeated Bragg at the Third Battle of Chattanooga, driving Confederate forces out of Tennessee and opening a route to Atlanta and the heart of the Confederacy.
The rest make no mention of the slavery issue, and are often brief announcements of the dissolution of ties by the legislatures.
He also argues that if the Confederacy had fought using unconventional tactics, they would have more easily been able to hold out long enough to exhaust the Union.
10 and New Madrid, Missouri, and then Memphis, Tennessee.
The memory includes the home front, military affairs, the treatment of soldiers, both living and dead, in the war's aftermath, depictions of the war in literature and art, evaluations of heroes and villains, and considerations of the moral and political lessons of the war.
Where popular conditions did not allow peaceful enforcement of Federal law, U.S.
Many were equipped with ram bows, creating "ram fever" among Union squadrons wherever they threatened.
When Confederate forces entered the state in September 1861, neutrality ended and the state reaffirmed its Union status, while trying to maintain slavery.
In ''Texas v. White'',   the United States Supreme Court ruled that Texas had remained a state ever since it first joined the Union, despite claims that it joined the Confederate States; the court further held that the Constitution did not permit states to unilaterally secede from the United States, and that the ordinances of secession, and all the acts of the legislatures within seceding states intended to give effect to such ordinances, were "absolutely null", under the constitution.
Pickett's Charge on July 3 is often considered the high-water mark of the Confederacy because it signaled the collapse of serious Confederate threats of victory.
Hood left the Atlanta area to swing around and menace Sherman's supply lines and invade Tennessee in the Franklin-Nashville Campaign.
The increases were only enacted in 1861 after Southerners resigned their seats in Congress.
Marshals and Judges would be withdrawn.
Practically, the entire Confederate cotton crop was useless (although it was sold to Union traders), costing the Confederacy its main source of income.
The war accounted for more American deaths than in all other U.S. wars combined.
Families used the substitute provision to select which man should go into the army and which should stay home.
The "cotton states" of Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas followed suit, seceding in January and February 1861.
Congress tightened the law in March 1863.
Hooker, too, proved unable to defeat Lee's army; despite outnumbering the Confederates by more than two to one, he was humiliated in the Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863.
While Walker's estimates were originally dismissed because of the 1870 Census's undercounting, it was later found that the census was only off by 6.5%, and that the data Walker used would be roughly accurate.
The Republicans proposed an alternative compromise to not interfere with slavery where it existed but the South regarded it as insufficient.
Emboldened by Second Bull Run, the Confederacy made its first invasion of the North.
This was total war not in killing civilians but rather in taking provisions and forage and destroying homes, farms, and railroads, that Grant said "would otherwise have gone to the support of secession and rebellion.
Eight remaining slave states continued to reject calls for secession.
The attack on Fort Sumter rallied the North to the defense of American nationalism.
All were held without trial, ignoring a ruling by the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Roger Taney, a Maryland native, that only Congress (and not the president) could suspend habeas corpus (Ex parte Merryman).
The Union in turn did not directly engage him.
The Beards themselves abandoned their interpretation by the 1940s and it became defunct among historians in the 1950s, when scholars shifted to an emphasis on slavery.
European observers at the time dismissed them as amateur and unprofessional, but British historian John Keegan's assessment is that each outmatched the French, Prussian and Russian armies of the time, and but for the Atlantic, would have threatened any of them with defeat.
Buchanan said that the Dred Scott decision was proof that the South had no reason for secession, and that the Union "...&nbsp;was intended to be perpetual," but that, "The power by force of arms to compel a State to remain in the Union," was not among the "...&nbsp;enumerated powers granted to Congress."
U.S. minister to Britain Charles Francis Adams proved particularly adept and convinced Britain not to boldly challenge the blockade.
Leonidas Polk's invasion of Columbus, Kentucky ended Kentucky's policy of neutrality and turned that state against the Confederacy.
(''See also: Missouri secession'').
He had no intent to invade Southern states, nor did he intend to end slavery where it existed, but said that he would use force to maintain possession of Federal property.
Lincoln's naval blockade was 95 percent effective at stopping trade goods; as a result, imports and exports to the South declined significantly.
Only the fortress city of Vicksburg, Mississippi, prevented Union control of the entire river.
Most scholars, such as James McPherson, argue that Confederate victory was at least possible.
McClellan resisted General-in-Chief Halleck's orders to send reinforcements to John Pope's Union Army of Virginia, which made it easier for Lee's Confederates to defeat twice the number of combined enemy troops.
Previous regional independence movements such as the Greek revolt in the Ottoman Empire, division and redivision in the Latin American political map, and the British-French Crimean triumph leading to an interest in redrawing Europe along cultural differences, all conspired to make for a time of upheaval and uncertainty about the basis of the nation-state.
* 359,528 total dead
"States' rights" was an ideology formulated and applied as a means of advancing slave state interests through federal authority.
The full restoration of the Union was the work of a highly contentious postwar era known as Reconstruction.
The two important political legacies that flowed from the adoption of the Lost Cause analysis were that it facilitated the reunification of the North and the South, and it excused the "virulent racism" of the 19th century, sacrificing African-American progress to a white man's reunification.
The Civil War is one of the central events in American collective memory.
Four years of intense combat left 620,000 to 750,000 soldiers dead, a higher number than the American military deaths of World War I and World War II combined, and destroyed much of the South's infrastructure.
There was much evasion and overt resistance to the draft, especially in Catholic areas.
The wealth amassed in slaves and slavery for the Confederacy's 3.5 million blacks effectively ended when Union armies arrived; they were nearly all freed by the Emancipation Proclamation.
The Whigs and Republicans complained because they favored high tariffs to stimulate industrial growth, and Republicans called for an increase in tariffs in the 1860 election.
Binghamton University historian J. David Hacker believes the number of soldier deaths was approximately 750,000, 20 percent higher than traditionally estimated, and possibly as high as 850,000.
Ulysses Grant used river transport and Andrew Foote's gunboats of the Western Flotilla to threaten the Confederacy's "Gibraltar of the West" at Columbus, Kentucky.
Most historians agree that the blockade was a major factor in ruining the Confederate economy, however, Wise argues that the blockade runners provided just enough of a lifeline to allow Lee to continue fighting for additional months, thanks to fresh supplies of 400,000 rifles, lead, blankets, and boots that the homefront economy could no longer supply.
The Compromise of 1850 over California balanced a free soil state with stronger fugitive slave laws for a political settlement after four years of strife in the 1840s.
It increased steadily between 1800 and 1860 as the North, which phased slavery out of existence, industrialized, urbanized, and built prosperous farms, while the deep South concentrated on plantation agriculture based on slave labor, together with subsistence farming for poor freedmen.
The Battle of the Ironclads was a draw, but it marks the worldwide transition to ironclad warships.
At the beginning of 1864, Lincoln made Grant commander of all Union armies.
The Confederate government failed in its attempt to get Europe involved in the war militarily, particularly Britain and France.
The one clear Confederate victory in the West was the Battle of Chickamauga.
Based on 1860 census figures, 8 percent of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6 percent in the North and 18 percent in the South.
From 1861 to 1865, it has been traditionally estimated that about 620,000 died but recent scholarship argues that 750,000 soldiers died, along with an undetermined number of civilians.
Lacking the technology to build effective warships, the Confederacy attempted to obtain warships from Britain.
By late 1864, Lincoln was playing a leading role in getting Congress to vote for the Thirteenth Amendment, which made emancipation universal and permanent.
However, this excludes the 30,000 deaths of Confederate troops in prisons, which would raise the minimum number of deaths to 290,000.
On April 14, 1865, President Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth, a Southern sympathizer.
Lincoln rapidly took control of Maryland and the District of Columbia, by seizing many prominent figures, including arresting 1/3 of the members of the Maryland General Assembly on the day it reconvened.
Abraham Lincoln consistently made preserving the Union the central goal of the war, though he increasingly saw slavery as a crucial issue and made ending it an additional goal.
On May 3, 1861, Lincoln called for an additional 42,000 volunteers for a period of three years.
Meanwhile, they were held in camps run by their own army where they were paid but not allowed to perform any military duties.
