A forward pass can only be legally attempted if the passer is behind the line of scrimmage.
The AFL became a significant rival in 1964 before signing a five-year, US$36 million television deal with NBC.
Meanwhile, the AFL introduced many new features to Professional Football in the United States: official time on the scoreboard clock, rather than on a watch in the referee's pocket, as the NFL did; optional two-point conversions by pass or run after touchdowns; names on the jerseys of players; and several others, including expansion of the role of minority players, actively recruited by the league in contrast to the NFL.
The field was also reduced to  long, but two 10-yard-long end zones were created, and teams were given four downs instead of three to advance the ball .
An earlier league, the All-America Football Conference, was in play from 1946 to 1949.
The most common types of injuries are strains, sprains, bruises, fractures, dislocations, and concussions.
Once the ball has been kicked from a scrimmage kick, it can be advanced by the kicking team only if it is caught or recovered behind the line of scrimmage.
Safeties are themselves divided into free safeties (FS) and strong safeties (SS).
He stands lateral to the referee, the same way the umpire does in the NFL.
In its second and final season the WFL attempted to establish a stable credit rating, but the league disbanded before its second season could be completed.
The positions specific to punt plays are the punter (P), long snapper, and gunner.
American football federations are also present in Asia, Oceania, and Pan America, and a total of 64 national football federations exist as of July 2012.
During the latter half of the 1870s, colleges playing association football switched to the Rugby Union code, which allowed carrying the ball.
Other rule changes introduced that year included the reduction of the time of play from 70 to 60 minutes and the increase of the distance required for a first down from .
This new league's stated goals included an end to bidding wars over players, prevention of the use of college players, and abolition of the practice of paying players to leave another team.
The term "football" was officially established in the rulebook for the 1876 college football season, when the sport first shifted from soccer-style rules to rugby-style rules; although it could easily have been called "rugby" at this point, Harvard, one of the primary proponents of the rugby-style game, compromised and did not request the name of the sport be changed to "rugby".
Each team held the ball, gaining no ground, for an entire half, resulting in a 0-0 tie.
Like in arena football, teams in indoor football leagues play in arenas, but games are only attended by a small number of fans, and most players are semi-professional athletes.
If a down is in progress when a quarter ends, play continues until the down is completed.
In the United Kingdom in the 1980s, the sport was fairly popular, with the 1986 Super Bowl being watched by over 4 million people (about 1 out of every 14 Britons).
Players can temporarily line up in a position whose eligibility is different from what their number permits as long as they immediately report the change to the referee, who then informs the defensive team of the change.
Yale player Walter Camp, now regarded as the "Father of American Football,"  secured rule changes in 1880 that reduced the size of each team from 15 to 11 players and instituted the snap to replace the chaotic and inconsistent scrum.
In general, the extra point is almost always successful in professional play and is only slightly less successful at amateur levels, while the two-point conversion is a much riskier play with a higher probability of failure; accordingly, extra point attempts are far more common than two-point conversion attempts.
Concussions are often caused by helmet-to-helmet or upper-body contact between opposing players, although helmets have prevented more serious injuries such as skull fractures.
Implicit rules such as playing through pain and sacrificing for the better of the team are promoted in football culture.
The ''Los Angeles Times'' notes that the NFL claims over 16 million fans in Mexico, which places the country third behind the US and Canada.
The game, a 23–17 overtime victory by the Colts, was seen by millions of television viewers and had a major impact on the popularity of the sport.
A rule change was necessary to prevent this strategy from taking hold, and a reversion to the scrum was considered.
American football evolved in the United States, originating from the sports of association football and rugby football.
Fullbacks tend to be larger than halfbacks and function primarily as blockers, but they are sometimes used as runners in short-yardage situations and often are not used in passing situations.
Most injuries occur during training sessions, particularly ones that involve contact between players.
A set of rule changes drawn up from 1880 onward by Walter Camp, the "Father of American Football", established the snap, eleven-player teams, and the concept of downs; later rule changes legalized the forward pass, created the neutral zone, and specified the size and shape of the football.
On field goal and extra point attempts, he is positioned lateral to the umpire.
He positions himself to the passing arm side of the quarterback.
*The '''referee''' is positioned behind and to the side of the offensive backs.
Nonetheless, the sport has retained a following in the United Kingdom; the NFL operates a media network in the country, and since 2007 has hosted the NFL International Series in London.
The main goal of the wide receiver is to catch passes thrown by the quarterback, but they may also function as decoys or as blockers during running plays.
The roughing-the-passer penalty was implemented in 1914, and eligible players were first allowed to catch the ball anywhere on the field in 1918.
NFL Europa, the developmental league of the NFL, operated from 1991 to 1992 and then from 1995 to 2007.
If the clock malfunctions or becomes inoperable, the line judge becomes the official timekeeper.
A football game is played between two teams of 11 players each.
Collegiate play continued for several years in which matches were played using the rules of the host school.
On either side of the center are the guards (G), while tackles (T) line up outside of the guards.
Safeties are worth two points, which are awarded to the defense.
The primary role of the halfback, also known as the tailback, is to carry the ball on running plays.
This prohibits the defense from blocking into or tackling the receiver, but the play ends as soon as the ball is caught and the ball may not be advanced.
Below the Arena Football League are what ''New York Times'' writer Mike Tanier described as the "most minor of minor leagues:" indoor football leagues.
Rutgers won the game 6 goals to 4.
Professional football is most popular among those who live in the eastern United States and rural areas, while college football is most popular in the southern United States and among people with graduate and post-graduate degrees.
At the time of its closure, NFL Europa had five teams based in Germany and one in the Netherlands.
The long snapper's job is to snap the football to the holder, who will catch and position it for the placekicker.
Harvard abstained from the conference, as they favored a rugby-style game that allowed running with the ball.
The sport's popularity faded over the 1990s, coinciding with the establishment of the Premier League.
Three positions are specific to the field goal and PAT (point-after-touchdown)  unit: the placekicker (K or PK), holder (H) and long snapper (LS).
The player on the receiving team who catches the ball is known as the kickoff returner (KR).
Goalposts are located at the center of the plane of each of the two end lines.
In most situations, if the offense reaches their fourth down they will punt the ball to the other team, which forces them to begin their drive from further down the field; if they are in field goal range, they might also attempt to score a field goal.
A one yard wide is placed at each end of the field; this line is marked at the center of the two-yard line in professional play and at the three-yard line in college play.
The United Football League (UFL) began in 2009, but folded after suspending its 2012 season, due to financial issues.
Other attempts to start rival leagues have been far less successful.
Another variant, touch football, simply requires the ballcarrier to be touched to be considered downed.
The bidding war for players ended in 1966, when NFL owners approached the AFL regarding a merger, and the two leagues agreed on one that would take full effect in 1970.
The rival American Football League arose in 1960 and challenged the NFL's dominance.
Large overhead nets deflect forward passes and kicks that hit them, and deflected kicks are live balls that may be recovered by either team.
Football is also linked to other holidays; New Year's Day is traditionally the date for several college football bowl games, including the Rose Bowl.
NCAA and NFHS teams are "strongly advised" to number their offensive players according to a league-suggested numbering scheme.
This is the first recorded instance of a player being paid to participate in a game of American football, although many athletic clubs in the 1880s offered indirect benefits, such as helping players attain employment, giving out trophies or watches that players could pawn for money, or paying double in expense money.
Their diverse roles include defending the run, pressuring the quarterback, and guarding backs, wide receivers and tight ends in the passing game.
However, Camp successfully proposed a rule in 1882 that limited each team to three downs, or tackles, to advance the ball five yards.
Other major rule changes included a reduction of the field size to , and the adoption of a scoring system that awarded four points for a touchdown, two for a safety and a goal following a touchdown, and five for a goal from field; additionally, tackling below the waist was legalized.
Most teams choose to receive or defer, because choosing to kick the ball to start the game would allow the other team to choose which goal to defend.
This, along with the innovations introduced by the new American Football League (AFL) in the early 1960s, helped football to become the most popular sport in the United States by the mid-1960s.
, nearly 1.1 million high school athletes and 70,000 college athletes play the sport in the United States annually.
According to BBC America, there is a "social stigma" surrounding American football in the UK, with many Brits feeling the sport has no right to call itself 'football' due to the small emphasis on kicking.
If a place kick is chosen, the ball can be placed on the ground or on a tee, and a holder may be used in either case.
They are divided into two types: middle linebackers (MLB) and outside linebackers (OLB).
An 1875 Harvard-Yale game played under rugby-style rules was observed by two impressed Princeton athletes.
Steve Deace of ''USA Today'' wrote that Americans are passionate about football "because it embodies everything we love about American exceptionalism.
Most injuries occur in the lower extremities, particularly in the knee, but a significant number also affect the upper extremities.
The two halves are separated by a halftime period, and the first and third quarters are also followed by a short break.
The place kick is the standard method used to score points, because the pointy shape of the football makes it difficult to reliably drop kick.
The visiting team is allowed to call 'heads' or 'tails'; the winner of the toss is allowed to decide from between choosing whether to receive or kick off the ball or choosing which goal they want to defend, but they can also defer their choice until the second half.
American football also has a long history in Mexico, which was introduced to the sport in 1896.
The touchdown (TD), worth six points, is the most valuable scoring play in American football.
Weighted pylons are placed on the inside corner of the intersections of the goal lines and end lines.
American football leagues exist throughout the world, but the game has yet to achieve the international success and popularity of baseball and basketball.
The football itself is an oval ball, similar to the balls used in rugby or Australian rules football.
Arena football has eight-player teams and uses an indoor field  in length, excluding end zones, and  wide.
What is considered to be the first American football game was played on November 6, 1869 between Rutgers and Princeton, two college teams.
The AFL's existence forced the conservative NFL to expand to Dallas and Minnesota in an attempt to destroy the new league.
A greater emphasis on the passing game helped professional football to further distinguish itself from the college game during the late 1930s.
*The '''side judge''' is positioned twenty yards downfield of the head linesman.
The most successful rival league was the American Football League (AFL), which existed from 1960 to 1969.
If the offense advances ten or more yards in the four downs, they are awarded a new set of four downs.
Football is a full-contact sport, and injuries are relatively common.
Division I football is further divided into two subdivisions: the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) and the Football Championship Subdivision (FCS).
The main backfield positions are the quarterback (QB), halfback/tailback (HB/TB) and fullback (FB).
Prior to the start of the game, the referee and team captains for each team meet at midfield for a coin toss.
In 1881, both teams in a game between Yale-Princeton used this strategy to maintain their undefeated records.
The National Football League (NFL) and the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) are the most popular football leagues in the United States.
If scored by a placekick or dropkick through the goal posts, it is worth one point, and is typically called the extra point.
The last, and arguably most important innovation, which would at last make American football uniquely "American", was the legalization of interference, or blocking, a tactic which was highly illegal under the rugby-style rules.
High school football games are 48 minutes in length with two halves of 24 minutes and four quarters of 12 minutes.
Neither team's players, with the exception of the snapper, are allowed to line up in or cross the neutral zone until the ball is snapped.
Time in a football game is measured by the game clock.
Quarterbacks typically inform the rest of the offense of the play in the huddle before the team lines up.
In a 2014 poll conducted by Harris Interactive, professional football ranked as the most popular sport, and college football ranked third behind only professional football and baseball; 46% of participants ranked some form of the game as their favorite sport.
On television, a yellow line is electronically superimposed on the field to show the first down line to the viewing audience.
The NFL championship game is called the Super Bowl, and is among the biggest events in club sports worldwide.
Only place kicks and drop kicks can score points.
Repeated concussions can increase a person's risk in later life for chronic traumatic encephalopathy and mental health issues such as dementia, Parkinson's disease, and depression.
The crossbar of these posts is ten feet (3 meters) above the ground, with vertical uprights at the end of the crossbar  apart for professional and collegiate play and  apart for high school play.
Inbound lines, or hash marks, are short parallel lines that mark off  increments.
Japan was introduced to the sport in 1934 by Paul Rusch, a teacher and Christian missionary who helped establish football teams at three universities in Tokyo.
If the play clock expires before the ball has been snapped or free-kicked, a delay of game foul is called on the offense.
Representatives of Yale, Columbia, Princeton and Rutgers met on October 19, 1873 to create a standard set of rules for all schools to adhere to.
Football is also the most-played sport by high school and college athletes in the United States.
College football is the third-most popular sport in the United States, behind professional baseball and professional football.
AFL teams began to sign NFL players to contracts, and the league's popularity grew to challenge that of the NFL.
The leader of the offensive line is the center (C), who is responsible for snapping the ball to the quarterback, blocking, and for making sure that the other linemen do their jobs during the play.
Other EFAF tournaments include the EFAF Cup, played between the top teams from national leagues in a similar manner to the UEFA Cup, the Atlantic Cup, played between teams from the Atlantic region of Europe, and the Challenge Cup, played between teams from newer federations that are not eligible to play in the EFL or EFAF Cup.
He mainly duplicates the functions of the field judge.
This arrangement was profitable, but it tended to prevent the two top-ranked teams from meeting in a true national championship game, as they would normally be committed to the bowl games of their respective conferences.
The offense is given a series of four plays, known as downs.
Large team sizes are an additional difficulty, due to the Olympics' set limit of 10,500 athletes and coaches.
American football also has the issue of global visibility.
This "block game" proved extremely unpopular with the spectators and fans of both teams.
All of these countries rank far below the United States, which is dominant at the international level.
Games last longer than their defined length due to play stoppages – the average NFL game lasts slightly over three hours.
The BCS arrangement proved to be controversial, and was replaced in 2014 by the College Football Playoff (CFP).
Prior to the snap, the strategy had been to punt if a scrum resulted in bad field position.
At all levels of play, the football is inflated to  to  pounds per square inch (psi) and weighs 14 to 15 ounces (397 to 425 grams); beyond that, the exact dimensions vary slightly.
The International Federation of American Football (IFAF), an international body composed of American football federations, runs tournaments such as the IFAF World Championship, which is held every four years since 1999, the IFAF Women's World Championship, the IFAF U-19 World Championship and the Flag Football World Championship.
American football is played in Mexico both professionally and as part of the college sports system.
Defensive ends line up on the ends of the line, while defensive tackles line up inside, between the defensive ends.
Officials are responsible for enforcing game rules and monitoring the clock.
Once the merger was completed, it was no longer a championship game between two leagues, and reverted to the NFL championship game, which came to be known as the Super Bowl.
Punting is illegal, and kickoffs are attempted from the goal line.
There are two main ways that the offense can advance the ball: running and passing.
Play was halted during World War II, but began to grow in popularity again after the war.
For the 2015 season, the NFL adopted a rule on extra points that stated the placekick must be kicked at the 15 yard line, however for a two-point conversion teams were still eligible to scrimmage from the two-yard line.
However, a group of Princeton players realized that, as the snap was uncontested, they now could hold the ball indefinitely to prevent their opponent from scoring.
The NCAA, the largest collegiate organization, is divided into three Divisions: Division I, Division II and Division III.
People of various beliefs and backgrounds — a melting pot, if you will — must unify for a common goal for the team to be successful".
USA Football is the governing body for youth and amateur football, and Pop Warner Little Scholars is the largest organization for youth football.
It is played between the champions of the National Football Conference (NFC) and the American Football Conference (AFC), and its winner is awarded the Vince Lombardi Trophy.
The National Football League, the most popular American football league, has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world; its championship game, the Super Bowl, ranks among the most-watched club sporting events in the world, and the league has an annual revenue of around US$10 billion.
That game began play at the end of the 1966 season.
The primary responsibilities of defensive ends and defensive tackles is to stop running plays on the outside and inside, respectively, to pressure the quarterback on passing plays, and to occupy the line so that the linebackers can break through.
These schools formed the Intercollegiate Football Association, although Yale did not join until 1879.
The chain crew stays on the sidelines during the game, but if requested by the officials they will briefly bring the chains on to the field to measure.
In Canada, the game has a significant following — according to a 2013 poll, 21% of respondents said they followed the NFL "very closely" or "fairly closely", making it the third-most followed league behind the National Hockey League (NHL) and Canadian Football League (CFL).
The champions of each level of play are determined through NCAA-sanctioned playoff systems; while the champion of Division I-FBS was historically determined by various polls and ranking systems, the subdivision adopted a four-team playoff system in 2014.
However, if New Year's Day is on a Sunday, the bowl games are moved to another date to not conflict with the typical NFL Sunday schedule.
In order to solve these concerns, major effort has been put into promoting flag football, a modified version of American football, at the international level.
Either he or a coach calls the plays.
The offensive line (OL) consists of several players whose primary function is to block members of the defensive line from tackling the ball carrier on running plays or sacking the quarterback on passing plays.
Super Bowl viewership has also rebounded, with over 4.4 million Britons watching Super Bowl XLVI.
Any member of the receiving team may catch or advance the ball, and the ball may be recovered by the kicking team once it has gone at least ten yards and has touched the ground or has been touched by any member of the receiving team.
If it is scored by what would normally be a touchdown, it is called the two-point conversion and is worth two points.
A separate clock, the play clock, is used to determine if a delay of game infraction has been committed.
Each bowl game would be associated with a particular conference, and earning a spot in a bowl game was the reward for winning a conference.
Football in general became increasingly popular following the 1958 NFL Championship game, a match between the Baltimore Colts and the New York Giants that is still referred to as the "Greatest Game Ever Played".
No points are awarded on a failed extra point or two-point conversion attempt.
NFL teams are required to number their players by a league-approved numbering system, and any exceptions must be approved by the Commissioner.
The United States Football League (USFL) operated for three seasons from 1983 to 1985 but collapsed due to poor business decisions and monetary problems.
Thanksgiving football is an American tradition, hosting many high school, college, and professional games.
The ball may be drop-kicked or place-kicked.
Various programs are aiming to reduce concussions by reducing the frequency of helmet-to-helmet hits; USA Football's "Heads Up Football" program is aiming to reduce concussions in youth football by teaching coaches and players about the signs of a concussion, the proper way to wear football equipment and ensure it fits, and proper tackling methods that avoid helmet-to-helmet contact.
The introduction of the snap resulted in unexpected consequences.
Despite television contracts with NBC and UPN and high expectations, the XFL suffered from poor television ratings and a low quality of play.
The chain crew system has been used for over 100 years and is considered to be an accurate measure of distance, rarely subject to criticism from either side.
He is charged with oversight and control of the game and is the authority on the score, the down number, and any and all rule interpretations in discussions between the other officials.
The league's championship game is the Eurobowl.
The head linesman also rules on out-of-bounds calls that happen on his side of the field, oversees the chain crew and marks the forward progress of a runner when a play has been whistled dead.
This change effectively made American football a separate sport from rugby, and the resulting five-yard lines added to the field to measure distances made it resemble a gridiron in appearance.
A PAT is most commonly attempted from the two- or three-yard line, depending on the level of play.
He announces all penalties and discusses the infraction with the offending team's captain, monitors for illegal hits against the quarterback, makes requests for first-down measurements, and notifies the head coach whenever a player is ejected.
These players introduced the sport to Princeton, a feat the Professional Football Researchers Association compared to "selling refrigerators to Eskimos."
This agreement provided for a common draft that would take place each year, and it instituted an annual World Championship game to be played between the champions of each league.
The offense, the team with control of the oval-shaped football, attempts to advance down the field by running with or passing the ball, while the team without control of the ball, the defense, aims to stop their advance and take control of the ball for themselves.
The European Football League (EFL), run by the European Federation of American Football (EFAF), is an annual invitational tournament between the champions or co-champions of competitions run by EFAF members.
'''American football''', referred to as '''football''' in the United States and Canada, and also known as '''gridiron''', is a sport played by two teams of eleven players on a rectangular field with goalposts at each end.
It could, however, be kicked or batted with the feet, hands, head or sides, with the ultimate goal being to advance it into the opponent's goal.
In addition, the team that conceded the safety must kick the ball to the scoring team via a free kick.
On November 12, 1892, when William "Pudge" Heffelfinger was paid $500 to play a game for the Allegheny Athletic Association in a match against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club.
A group of officials, the chain crew, keeps track of both the downs and the distance measurements.
Linebackers line up behind the defensive line but in front of the defensive backfield.
Halfbacks may also serve as receivers.
However, a study in the Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine found that Heads Up Football was ineffective.
The National Football League (NFL), a group of professional teams that was originally established in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association, aimed to solve these problems.
A major variant of football is arena football, played by the Arena Football League (AFL).
This was replaced in 1995 by the Bowl Alliance, which gave way in 1997 to the Bowl Championship Series (BCS).
The first game of American football was played on November 6, 1869, between two college teams, Rutgers and Princeton, under rules based on the association football rules of the time.
The legal forward pass was introduced in 1906, although its impact was initially limited due to the restrictions placed on its use.
The seven officials on the field are each tasked with a different set of responsibilities:
The Indoor Football League, Southern Indoor Football League, Ultimate Indoor Football League, Continental Indoor Football League and American Professional Football League are examples of prominent indoor leagues.
Yard lines, which run the width of the field, are marked every  .
Professional football has ranked as the most popular sport in the poll since 1985, when it surpassed baseball for the first time.
The scoring team then attempts a try or conversion, more commonly known as the point(s)-after-touchdown (PAT), which is a single scoring opportunity.
