It is capped by a blue mosaic dome beneath which 3,000 Muslims may offer prayer.
The Tobiads fought the Arab Nabateans for twenty years until they lost the city to them.
Ptolemy II Philadelphus, the Macedonian ruler of Egypt, who occupied and rebuilt the city, named it "Philadelphia", which means "brotherly love" in Greek.
There are eight circles, or roundabouts, that span and connect west Amman.
During the 2004 Amman Message conference, edicts from various clergy-members afforded the following schools of thought as garnering collective recognition: Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki, Shafi'i, Ja'fari, Zahiri, Zaydi, Ibadi, tassawuf-related Sufism, Muwahhidism and Salafism.
Around the end of November is the period in which winter usually starts and continues from early to mid March.
Amman's importance declined by the mid-8th century after damage caused by several earthquakes rendered it uninhabitable.
Aside from mainstream Arabic pop, there is a growing independent music scene in the city which includes many bands that have sizable audiences across the Arab world.
The largest museum in Jordan is The Jordan Museum.
Souk Jara is a Jordanian annual weekly flea market event that occurs every Friday throughout the summer.
Amman is introducing itself as a business hub.
The Umayyads were overthrown by the Abbasids three years later.
The municipality began construction on a bus rapid transit (BRT) system as a solution in 2015.
*Al-Ahliyya Amman University
Amman's position on the mountains near the Mediterranean climate zone places it under the semi-arid climate classification (Köppen climate: BSk).
Excavations by archaeologists near Amman Civil Airport uncovered a temple, which included an altar containing many human bone fragments.
Large shopping malls were built during the 2000s in Amman, including the Mecca Mall, Abdoun Mall, City Mall, Al-Baraka Mall, Taj Mall, Zara Shopping Center, Avenue Mall, and Abdali Mall in Al Abdali (under construction).
The name was given as an adulation to his own nickname, Philadelphus.
Most English language stations play pop music targeted towards young audiences.
Amman received many refugees during wartime events in nearby countries, beginning with the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.
Sweifieh is considered to be the unofficial red-light district of Amman as it holds most of the city's nightclubs, bars, strip-clubs, massage parlors, and other adult entertainment venues.
Rain averages about  a year and periodic droughts are common, where most rain fall between October and April.
Despite the unrest and economic difficulties in the Arab world resulting from the Arab Spring uprisings, Jordan's banking sector maintained its growth in 2014.
*Arab Open University
File:Aerial photograph of Amman (3).JPG|Aerial view
Temperatures are usually near or below , with snow occasionally falling once or twice a year.
Jordan's main airport, Queen Alia International Airport, is located south of Amman and is the hub for the country's national carrier Royal Jordanian, a major airline in the region.
Ammonites worshiped an ancient deity called Moloch.
The site was discovered in 1974 as construction workers were working on a road crossing the area.
On 9 November 2005, Al-Qaeda under Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's leadership launched coordinated explosions in three hotel lobbies in Amman, resulting in 60 deaths and 115 injured.
Amman, and Jordan in general, is the Middle East's hub for medical tourism.
Situated in north-central Jordan, Amman is the administrative centre of the Amman Governorate.
The Umayyads built a large palace on the Amman Citadel hill, known today as the Umayyad Palace.
In the Hebrew Bible, it is referred to as "Rabbat ʿAmmon" (Biblical Hebrew: , Tiberian Hebrew ''Rabbaṯ ʿAmmôn'').
The city has become famous for its fine dining scene among Western expatriates and Persian Gulf tourists.
About 10,000 Palestinians, mostly from Safad, Haifa and Acre, migrated to the city for economic opportunities before the 1948 war.
The capital of the district in the first half of the 14th century was the minor administrative post of Hisban, which had a considerably smaller garrison than the other administrative centers in Transjordan, namely Ajlun and al-Karak.
The large growth in population has significantly increased the need for new accommodation, and new districts of the city were established at a quick pace.
The system includes high-quality stations and stops; express buses that can carry more than 120 passengers and will run on a three-minute frequency during peak hours along Amman's busiest corridors; terminals and park-n-ride facilities; and an integrated fare collection system allowing passengers to pay the fare at stations before embarking on the bus.
After his purchase of the city, Sirghitmish transferred the courts, administrative bureaucracy, markets and most of the inhabitants of Hisban to Amman.
The bombings, which targeted civilians, caused widespread outrage among Jordanians.
Despite the changes, much remains of its old character.
The developers are Bahrain's Gulf Finance House, the Kuwait Investment and Finance Company (KIFC).
Amman derives its name from the 13th century BC when the Ammonites named it "Rabbath Ammon", with the term ''Rabbath'' meaning the "Capital" or the "King's Quarters".
In the late 9th century, Amman was noted as the "capital" of the Balqa by geographer al-Yaqubi.
It also contains bars, swimming pools and conference halls.
32 figures were found in two caches, 15 of them full figures, 15 busts, and two fragmentary heads.
The buildings usually have balconies on each floor, with the exception of the ground floor, which has a front and back yard.
In 2000, Amman Net became the first de facto private radio station to be established in the country, despite private ownership of radio stations being illegal at the time.
Abdoun Circle is a major centre of the city's nightlife where clubs maintain a strict "couples only" policy.
During the last ten years the city has experienced an economic, cultural and urban boom.
'Green Amman 2020' was initiated in 2014, aiming to turn the city to a green metropolis by 2020.
Amman is the 4th most visited Arab city and the ninth highest recipient of international visitor spending.
Furthermore, al-Muqaddasi describes Amman as a "harbor of the desert" where Arab Bedouin would take refuge, and that its citadel, which overlooked the town, contained a small mosque.
Most recently a wave of Syrian refugees have arrived in the city during the ongoing Syrian Civil War which began in 2011.
*University of Jordan
Service taxis, which most often operate on fixed routes, are readily available and inexpensive.
This strained Jordan's scarce water supply and exposed Amman to the dangers of quick expansion without careful municipal planning.
The airline is headquartered in Zahran district.
There are 222 registered liquor stores in Amman
The two theatres and the Nymphaeum fountain were built during the reign of Emperor Antoninus Pius around 161 AD.
In a report by Dunia Frontier Consultants, Amman, along with Doha, Qatar and Dubai, United Arab Emirates, are the favored hubs for multinational corporations operating in the Middle East and North Africa region.
Ownership of Amman following Sirghitmish's death in 1358 passed to successive generations of his descendants until 1395, when his descendants sold it to Emir Baydamur al-Khwarazmi, the ''na'ib as-saltana'' (viceroy) of Damascus.
The New Think Festival is a yearly weekend event that is part of NewThink, a non-profit initiative that aims to inspire youth to think about the world in an innovative way.
Because of its location along the railway, Amman was transformed from a small village into a major commercial hub in the region.
A total of 16 historic churches are located in Umm ar-Rasas ruins in Al-Jeezah district; the site is believed to have initially served as Roman fortified military camps which gradually became a town around the 5th century AD.
The third corridor connects Customs Square with Mahatta.
Afterward, part of Amman's cultivable lands were sold to Emir Sudun al-Shaykhuni (died 1396), the ''na'ib as-saltana'' of Egypt.
In 1321, the geographer Abu'l Fida, recorded that Amman was "a very ancient town" with fertile soil and surrounded by agricultural fields.
The towers are separated by a podium that is planned to become a mall.
There are 448 private schools in the city attended by 90,000 students, including Amman Baccalaureate School, Amman Academy, Amman National School, Modern American School, International School of Choueifat, American Community School in Amman and National Orthodox School.
In 2015 the festival hosted 40 different organizations at King Hussein Business Park in Amman that inspired their audience to be visionary and think differently about the world through presentations and workshops.
Downtown Amman, the city centre area (known in Arabic as ''Al-Balad''), has been dwarfed by the sprawling urban area that surrounds it.
A significant portion of business flowed into Amman following the 2003 Iraq War.
It is expected that in the next 10 years these three cities will capture the largest share of multinational corporation activity in the region.
The towers are one of the best known skyscrapers in the city.
In this politically, religiously and ethnically fraught corner of the world, it is a symbol of bloodlines and identity."
At higher elevations, the temperatures will be lower during winter and higher during summer.
Amman had already been functioning as an administrative centre.
Amman is the base city for the international Arab Bank, one of the largest financial institutions in the Middle East, serving clients in more than 600 branches in 30 countries on five continents.
In addition to the wide range of drinking and dancing venues on the social circuit of the city's affluent crowd, Amman hosts cultural entertainment events, including the annual Amman Summer Festival.
The figures have painted clothes, hair, and in some cases ornamental tattoos.
By 1982 when the excavations started, around  of road ran through the site.
By 1970, the population had swelled to an estimated 550,000.
Population of city reached 4,007,526 in 2015, Amman contains about 42% of Jordan's entire population.
The theatre was the larger venue of the two and had a capacity for 6,000 attendees.
However, the mayor is appointed by the king and not through elections.
It is a major tourist destination in the region, particularly among Arab and European tourists.
Originally, the city had been built on seven hills.
Amman began to be resettled in 1878, when hundreds of Circassians arrived following their exodus from the Caucasus; between 1872–1910, tens of thousands of Circassians had relocated to Ottoman Syria after being displaced by the Russian Empire during the events of the Russo-Circassian War.
The influence of new civilizations that conquered the city gradually changed its name to "Amman".
The increasingly frequent division and sale of the city and lands of Amman to different owners signaled declining revenues coming from Amman, while at the same time, Hisban was restored as the major city of the Balqa in the 15th century.
In 1879, English traveller Laurence Oliphant wrote of his visit to Amman in ''The Land of Gilead''.
In 2015, a ring road encompassing the city was constructed, which aims to connect the northern and southern parts of the city in order for traffic to be diverted outside Amman and to improve the environmental conditions in the city.
Built at roughly the same time as the theatre, the Odeon had 500 seats and is still in use today for music concerts.
One of the most original monuments in Jordan, and perhaps in the Hellenistic period in the Near East, is the village of Iraq Al-Amir in the valley of Wadi Al-Sir, southwest of Amman, which is home to Qasr Al-Abd (Castle of the Slave).
The city has become one of the most popular destinations for Western expatriates and college students who seek to live, study, or work in the Middle East or the Arab world in general.
Likewise, in 985, the Jerusalemite historian al-Muqaddasi described Amman as the capital of Balqa, and that it was a town in the desert fringe of Syria surrounded by villages and cornfields and was a regional source of lambs, grain and honey.
The main airport serving Amman is Queen Alia International Airport, situated about  south of Amman.
Abdali is being developed as a smart city centre that enables the deliverance of state-of-the-art technologies to every home, office and outlet, while offering district energy solutions and central gas systems to guarantee a safe and friendly environment in addition to the large savings in energy cost.
The Greater Amman Municipality has been investing towards making the city a better place, through a number of initiatives.
There are two international airports in Amman.
The city's population was around 10,000 in the 1930s.
The name was given as an adulation to his own nickname, Philadelphus.
*Al-Isra University
The early settlers who came from Palestine were overwhelmingly from Nablus, from which many of al-Salt's inhabitants had originated.
*Jordan Academy of Music
Jabal Amman is a well-known touristic attraction in old Amman, where the city's greatest souks, fine museums, ancient constructions, monuments, and cultural sites are found.
*Applied Science University
Queen Alia International Airport is the major international airport in Jordan and the hub for Royal Jordanian, the flag carrier.
Residential buildings are limited to four stories above street level and if possible another four stories below, according to the Greater Amman Municipality regulations.
The festival is one of the many events throughout the year to get youth involved.
Valued at more than US $5 billion, the Abdali project will create a new visible centre for Amman and act as the major business district for the city.
A small Armenian Catholic community of around 70 families is present in the city.
Amman receives 250,000 foreign patients a year and over $1 billion annually.
The city contains several high-end hotel franchises including the Four Seasons Hotel Amman, Sheraton Hotel Amman, Fairmont Amman, St. Regis Hotel Amman, Le Royal Hotel and others.
Daily newspapers published in Amman include ''Alghad'', ''Ad-Dustour'', ''The Jordan Times'', and ''Al Ra'i'', the most circulated newspaper in the country.
Alcohol is widely available in restaurants, bars, nightclubs, and supermarkets.
In the 630s, the Rashidun army conquered the region from the Byzantines, beginning the Islamic era in the Levant.
From a population of roughly 1,000 in 1890, Amman grew to around 1,000,000 inhabitants in 1990, primarily as a result of immigration, but also due to the high birthrate in the city.
Roughly 1.8 million tourists visited Amman in 2011 and spent over $1.3 billion in the city.
In 1909 a city council was established in Amman by Circassian Ismael Babouk who became the first ever Mayor of the capital, and in 1914 Amman's first city district centre was founded.
Under the Umayyad caliphs who began their rule in 661 AD, numerous desert castles were established as a means to govern the desert area of modern-day Jordan, several of which are still well-preserved.
Nearby Fuheis is a predominantly Christian town located to the northwest of the city.
Amman has extreme examples of microclimate, and almost every district exhibits its own weather.
It has a land area of  which yields a population density of about .
Zahran district in west Amman is the location of the Jordan Gate Towers, the first high-rise towers in the city.
Roman rule in Jordan left several ruins across the country, some of which exist in Amman, such as the Temple of Hercules at the Amman Citadel, the Roman Theatre, the Odeon, and the Nymphaeum.
The expansion of Queen Alia International Airport is an example of the Greater Amman Municipality's heavy investment in the city's infrastructure.
Popular Jordanian bus company services include JETT and Al-Mahatta.
The Greeks founded new cities in the area of modern-day Jordan, including Umm Qays, Jerash and Amman.
The city has a population of 4,007,526 and a land area of .
Taxis are the most common way to get around in Amman due their high availability and inexpensiveness.
The city has frequent bus connections to other cities in Jordan, as well as to major cities in neighboring countries; the latter are also served by service taxis.
The first radio station to originate in the city was ''Hunna Amman'' in 1959; it mainly broadcast traditional Bedouin music.
The Nymphaeum is believed to have contained a 600-square meter pool which was three meters deep and was continuously refilled with water.
The occupation of the Citadel Hill by the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem is so far based only on interpretations of Crusader sources.
It is a high-class commercial and residential project currently under construction, close to the 6th Circle.
''Al-Arab Al-Yawm'' is the only daily pan-Arab newspaper in Jordan.
*Columbia University: Amman Branch
In August, the average high temperatures in these areas are  in the day and  at night.
*Princess Sumaya University for Technology
Amman was a principal destination for refugees for the security and prosperity it offered.
Philadelphia was renamed "Amman" by the Muslims and became part of the district of Jund al-Urdunn.
Because Amman lacks a deep-rooted native population, the city does not have a distinct Arabic dialect, although recently such a dialect utilizing the various Jordanian and Palestinian dialects, has been forming.
This provided an economic boost for the city in a short period of time.
The earliest evidence of settlement in the area is a Neolithic site known as 'Ain Ghazal.
With the exception of a functioning railway system, Amman has a railway station as part of the Hejaz Railway.
Jordan's security as a whole was dramatically improved after the attack, and no major terrorist attacks have been reported since then.
With Jordan's capture of the West Bank during the war, many Palestinians from that area steadily migrated to Amman between 1950 and 1966, before another mass wave of Palestinian refugees from the West Bank moved to the city during the 1967 War.
Jabal Amman also contains the famous Rainbow Street and the cultural Souk Jara market.
Conquest of the Middle East and Central Asia by Alexander the Great firmly consolidated the influence of Hellenistic culture.
A second wave arrived after the Six-Day War in 1967, and a third wave of Palestinian and Jordanian refugees arrived in Amman from Kuwait after the 1991 Gulf War.
'''Amman''' (; ) is the capital and most populous city of Jordan, and the country's economic, political and cultural centre.
It was a typical average sized aceramic Neolithic village that accommodated around 3,000 inhabitants.
Amman had a strategic location along the Hejaz Railway; its capture by British forces and the Hashemite Arab army facilitated the British advance towards Damascus.
*Jordan Institute of Banking Studies
The majority of Jordan's radio stations are based in Amman.
These statues are human figures made with white plaster.
Circassians comprise about 2% of the population.
The first phase contains about ten towers, five of which are under construction to be completed by 2016.
Today, several Ammonite ruins across Amman exist, such as Qasr Al-Abd, Rujm Al-Malfouf and some parts of the Amman Citadel.
The site contains some well-preserved mosaic floors, particularly the mosaic floor of the Church of Saint Stephen.
Amman later attracted people from the southern part of the country, particularly Al Karak and Madaba.
*Jordan Media Institute
It is known among locals that some boroughs such as the northern suburb of Abu Nser are among the coldest in the city, and can be experiencing frost while other warmer districts such as Marka can be providing much warmer temperatures to its inhabitants at the same time.
The mosque is situated on Jabal Ashrafieh, the highest point in the city.
Areas of Amman have either gained their names from the hills (Jabal) or valleys (Wadi) they lie on, such as Jabal Lweibdeh and Wadi Abdoun.
There are numerous nightclubs and bars across the city, especially in West Amman.
Other nearby ruins include a village, an isolated house and a fountain, all of which are barely visible today due to the damage brought by a major earthquake that hit the region in the year 362.
It contains much of the valuable archaeological findings in the country, including some of the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Neolithic limestone statues of 'Ain Ghazal, and a copy of the Mesha Stele.
New arrivals consisting of Jordanians from the north and south of the country and immigrants from Palestine had increased the city's population from 30,000 in 1930 to 60,000 in 1947.
This burgeoning new nightlife scene is shaped by Jordan's young population.
Spring is brief and warm, where highs reach .
*Middle East University
Performers include JadaL, Torabyeh, Bilocate, Akher Zapheer, Autostrad and El Morabba3.
The Nymphaeum is situated southwest of the Odeon and served as Philadelphia's chief fountain.
The first wave of Iraqi refugees settled in the city after the 1991 Gulf War, with a second wave occurring in the aftermath of the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Amman is home to a growing number of foreign sports such as skateboarding and rugby; the latter has two teams based in the city: Amman Citadel Rugby Club and Nomads Rugby Club.
Ammon provided several natural resources to the region, including sandstone and limestone.
Ecclesiastical courts for matters of personal status are also located in Amman.
Amman has a developed public and private transportation system.
There are 20 universities in Amman.
All Jordanian citizens above 18 years old are eligible to vote in the municipal elections.
East Amman is predominantly filled with historic sites that frequently host cultural activities, while West Amman is more modern and serves as the economic center of the city.
'Ain Ghazal is well known for a set of small human statues found buried in pits which were discovered in 1983, when local archaeologists stumbled upon the edge of a large pit  containing plaster statues.
*Arab Academy for Banking and Financial Sciences
Amman was later destroyed by several earthquakes and natural disasters, including a particularly severe earthquake in 747.
It was built by a Circassian resident of Amman.
To the northeast of the theatre was a small odeon.
The ruins of Rujm Al-Malfouf consist of a surveillance stone tower that was used to ensure protection of their capital and several store rooms east of it.
Furthermore, several of the world's largest investment banks have offices in Amman including Standard Chartered, Société Générale, and Citibank.
Amman is considered one of the most liberal and westernized cities in the Arab world.
Archaeologists speculate that the structure was originally covered with a wooden roof to shield the audience from the weather.
The city's skyline is being continuously transformed through the emergence of new projects.
Al-Salt and al-Zarqa are located to the northwest and northeast, respectively, Madaba is located to the west and al-Karak and Ma'an are to Amman's southwest and southeast, respectively.
In 2011, ''Al Ra'i'' was ranked the 5th most popular newspaper in the Arab world by Forbes Middle-East report.
The Abdoun Bridge spans Wadi Abdoun and connects the 4th Circle to Abdoun Circle.
Today, Amman is considered to be among the most liberal and westernized Arab cities.
The mosque's interior is marked by light-coloured walls and Persian carpets.
