A review of interstellar ammonia cites the following reactions as the principal dissociation mechanisms:
Ammonia is important for normal animal acid/base balance.
Ammonia is moderately basic, a 1.0 M aqueous solution has a pH of 11.6 and if a strong acid is added to such a solution until the solution is neutral (pH = 7), 99.4% of the ammonia molecules are protonated.
* Phenol, in the Raschig–Hooker process
The aqueous solution of ammonia is basic.
With a large number of transitions sensitive to a wide range of excitation conditions, NH3 has been widely astronomically detected – its detection has been reported in hundreds of journal articles.
5.62–13.29&nbsp;mol/L
This releases hydrogen from carbonaceous substances at only 10-20% of energy used by electrolysis and may lead to hydrogen being produced from municipal wastes at below zero cost (allowing for the tipping fees and efficient catalytic reforming, such as cold-plasma).
* Urea, in the Bosch–Meiser urea process and in Wöhler synthesis
The concentration of such solutions is measured in units of the Baumé scale (density), with 26 degrees baumé (about 30% (by weight) ammonia at ) being the typical high-concentration commercial product.
'''Ammonia''' or '''azane''' is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen with the formula NH3.
This gives a total of eight electrons, or four electron pairs that are arranged tetrahedrally.
: NH3 + 2 O2 → HNO3 + H2O
Various renewable energy electricity sources are also potentially applicable.
In terms of raw ammonia supplies, plants would have to be built to increase production levels, requiring significant capital and energy sources.
It is lighter than air, its density being 0.589 times that of air.
It could be manufactured from renewable energy sources, as well as coal or nuclear power.
This urea is a major component of the dry weight of urine.
Catalytic (thermal) reforming is possible in small, distributed (even mobile) plants, to take advantage of low-value, stranded biomass/biowaste or natural gas deposits.
The solubility of halide salts increases from fluoride to iodide.
Other organizations have varying exposure levels.
The ammonia vapour from concentrated ammonia solutions is severely irritating to the eyes and the respiratory tract, and these solutions should only be handled in a fume hood.
: H2 + NH2 → NH3 + H
Ammonia has been detected in the atmospheres of the gas giant planets, including Jupiter, along with other gases like methane, hydrogen, and helium.
The energy barrier to this inversion is 24.7 kJ/mol, and the resonance frequency is 23.79 GHz, corresponding to microwave radiation of a wavelength of 1.260&nbsp;cm.
;Solid: The crystal symmetry is cubic, Pearson symbol cP16, space group P213 No.198, lattice constant 0.5125&nbsp;nm.
Methylamine is prepared commercially by the reaction of ammonia with chloromethane, and the reaction of ammonia with 2-bromopropanoic acid has been used to prepare racemic alanine in 70% yield.
''This section is about detection in the laboratory.
coli'' to undetectable levels.
For example, lithium dissolves in liquid ammonia to give a solution of lithium amide:
Exposure to very high concentrations of gaseous ammonia can result in lung damage and death.
The hydrogen in ammonia is capable of replacement by metals, thus magnesium burns in the gas with the formation of magnesium nitride Mg3N2, and when the gas is passed over heated sodium or potassium, sodamide, NaNH2, and potassamide, KNH2, are formed.
Some of the other possible formation reactions are:
The simplest pnictogen hydride, ammonia is a colourless gas with a characteristic pungent smell.
Since this molecular material can be spatially resolved, it is possible to constrain the heating/ionising sources, temperatures, masses, and sizes of the regions.
The dense material surrounding UCHII regions is likely primarily molecular.
The range of thermodynamic stability of liquid ammonia solutions is very narrow, as the potential for oxidation to dinitrogen, ''E''° (N2 + 6NH4+ + 6e− ⇌ 8NH3), is only +0.04&nbsp;V. In practice, both oxidation to dinitrogen and reduction to dihydrogen are slow.
Assuming an NH4+ abundance of 3×10−7 and an electron abundance of 10−7 typical of molecular clouds, the formation will proceed at a rate of 1.6×10−9 cm−3s−1 in a molecular cloud of total density 105 cm−3.
has a rate constant of 2.2×10−15.
Experiments have shown that the lethal concentration for a variety of fish species ranges from 0.2 to 2.0&nbsp;mg/l.
Ammonia has been used to darken quartersawn white oak in Arts & Crafts and Mission-style furniture.
Ammonia causes the explosive polymerisation of ethylene oxide.
Doppler-shifted velocity components allow for the separation of distinct regions of molecular gas that can trace outflows and hot cores originating from forming stars.
Liquid ammonia is an ionising solvent, although less so than water, and dissolves a range of ionic compounds, including many nitrates, nitrites, cyanides and thiocyanates.
This crystalline solid is only stable under high pressure, and decomposes back into trivalent ammonia and hydrogen gas at normal conditions.
The level of ammonia in any final product has not come close to toxic levels to humans.
Because ammonia results in a relatively streak-free shine, one of its most common uses is to clean glass, porcelain and stainless steel.
water 40.65&nbsp;kJ/mol, methane 8.19&nbsp;kJ/mol, phosphine 14.6&nbsp;kJ/mol) and can therefore be used in laboratories in uninsulated vessels without additional refrigeration.
* Hydrazine, in the Olin Raschig process and the peroxide process
Holographic sensors have been proposed for detecting concentrations up to 12.5% in volume.
Some notable ammine complexes include tetraamminediaquacopper(II) (Cu(NH3)4(H2O)22+), a dark blue complex formed by adding ammonia to a solution of copper(II) salts.
Esters and anhydrides also react with ammonia to form amides.
Most studies involving liquid ammonia solutions are done in reducing conditions; although oxidation of liquid ammonia is usually slow, there is still a risk of explosion, particularly if transition metal ions are present as possible catalysts.
Extragalactic ammonia was imaged using the VLA in IC 342.
The nitrogen atom in the molecule has a lone electron pair, which makes ammonia a base, a proton acceptor.
Others, such as nitrogen-fixing legumes, benefit from symbiotic relationships with rhizobia that create ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen.
It is a measure used mainly for quantifying values in waste treatment and water purification systems, as well as a measure of the health of natural and man made water reserves.
Because of its many uses, ammonia is one of the most highly produced inorganic chemicals.
Line ratio calculations provide a measurement of cloud temperature that is independent of previous CO observations.
Sulfur sticks are burnt to detect small leaks in industrial ammonia refrigeration systems.
Formation of this complex can also help to distinguish between precipitates of the different silver halides: silver chloride (AgCl) is soluble in dilute (2M) ammonia solution, silver bromide (AgBr) is only soluble in concentrated ammonia solution, whereas silver iodide (AgI) is insoluble in aqueous ammonia.
Ethanolamine is prepared by a ring-opening reaction with ethylene oxide: the reaction is sometimes allowed to go further to produce diethanolamine and triethanolamine.
Some of these are delineated below and primarily involve using ammonia as an interstellar thermometer.
Lower ambient temperatures reduce the rate of algal photosynthesis so less ammonia is removed by any algae present.
Ammonia is used to scrub SO2 from the burning of fossil fuels, and the resulting product is converted to ammonium sulfate for use as fertilizer.
Ammonia solutions should not be mixed with halogens, as toxic and/or explosive products are formed.
At a later period, when sal ammoniac was obtained by distilling the hooves and horns of oxen and neutralizing the resulting carbonate with hydrochloric acid, the name "spirit of hartshorn" was applied to ammonia.
In 1981, a Canadian company converted a 1981 Chevrolet Impala to operate using ammonia as fuel.
The process was deemed effective and safe by the US Department of Agriculture based on a study that found that the treatment reduces ''E.
Ammonia neutralizes the nitrogen oxides (NOx) pollutants emitted by diesel engines.
Most reptiles, birds, insects, and snails excrete uric acid solely as nitrogenous waste.
China accounted for 32.6% of that (increasingly from coal as part of urea synthesis), followed by Russia at 8.1%, India at 7.6%, and the United States at 6.4%.
At concentrations exceeding 2.0&nbsp;mg/L, ammonia causes gill and tissue damage, extreme lethargy, convulsions, coma, and death.
With the advent of the steel industry in the 20th century, ammonia became a byproduct of the production of coking coal.
Hydrogen for ammonia synthesis could also be produced economically by using the water gas reaction followed by the water gas shift reaction, produced by passing steam through red-hot coke, to give a mixture of hydrogen and carbon dioxide gases, followed by removal of the carbon dioxide "washing" the gas mixture with water under pressure (); or by using other sources like coal or coke gasification.
Acyl chlorides are the most reactive, but the ammonia must be present in at least a twofold excess to neutralise the hydrogen chloride formed.
This shape gives the molecule a dipole moment and makes it polar.
The conversion of ammonia to hydrogen via the sodium-amide process, either as a catalyst for combustion or as fuel for a proton exchange membrane fuel cell, is another possibility.&nbsp; Conversion to hydrogen would allow the storage of hydrogen at nearly 18 wt% compared to ~5% for gaseous hydrogen under pressure.
The standard enthalpy change of combustion, Δ''H''°c, expressed per mole of ammonia and with condensation of the water formed, is −382.81&nbsp;kJ/mol.
30% of agricultural nitrogen applied in the USA is in the form of anhydrous ammonia and worldwide 110 million tonnes are applied each year.
Ammonia engines were used experimentally in the 19th century by Goldsworthy Gurney in the UK and the St. Charles Avenue Streetcar line in New Orleans in the 1870s and 1880s, and during World War II ammonia was used to power buses in Belgium.
Tetraamminediaquacopper(II) hydroxide is known as Schweizer's reagent, and has the remarkable ability to dissolve cellulose.
Household ammonia ranges in concentration by weight from 5 to 10% ammonia.
Similar to propane, anhydrous ammonia boils below room temperature when at atmospheric pressure.
;Combustion: When mixed with oxygen, it burns with a pale yellowish-green flame.
Violent reactions have also been reported with acetaldehyde, hypochlorite solutions, potassium ferricyanide and peroxides.
Ammonia is considered to be a weak base.
Solutions of ammonia (5–10% by weight) are used as household cleaners, particularly for glass.
It is an important source of nitrogen for living systems.
Ammonium salts are found distributed through fertile soil and in seawater.
This proposal has since been confirmed by X-ray crystallography.
It is naturally found on Deimos and Phobos – the two moons of Mars.
Prevention rather than correction is recommended to reduce harm to farmed fish and in open water systems, the surrounding environment.
It is also found that cores with stars have broader lines than cores without stars.
Nitric acid is used for the production of fertilizers, explosives, and many organonitrogen compounds.
There have been safety concerns about the process as well as consumer complaints about the taste and smell of beef treated at optimal levels of ammonia.
Ammonia excretion is common in aquatic animals.
* Acrylonitrile, in the Sohio process
Eleven years later in 1785, Claude Louis Berthollet ascertained its composition.
Within an aquaculture environment, especially at large scale, there is no fast-acting remedy to elevated ammonia levels.
A total of 149 dark cloud positions were surveyed for evidence of 'dense cores' by using the (J,K) = (1,1) rotating inversion line of NH3.
Ammoniacal nitrogen (NH3-N) is a measure commonly used for testing the quantity of ammonium ions, derived naturally from ammonia, and returned to ammonia via organic processes, in water or waste liquids.
Ammonia toxicity is believed to be a cause of otherwise unexplained losses in fish hatcheries.
Ammonia is found in trace quantities in nature, being produced from the nitrogenous animal and vegetable matter.
It is also easier to store ammonia on board vehicles than to store hydrogen, as ammonia is less flammable than petrol or LPG.
As an example of the minor contribution other formation reactions play, the reaction:
;Solvent properties: Ammonia is miscible with water.
Three individual condensations were detected in Cepheus A, one of them with a highly elongated shape.
Three of these electron pairs are used as bond pairs, which leaves one lone pair of electrons.
The U. S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a 15-minute exposure limit for gaseous ammonia of 35 ppm by volume in the environmental air and an 8-hour exposure limit of 25 ppm by volume.
Mapping of NH3 gives typical clouds sizes of 0.1 pc and masses near 1 solar mass.
Although it is the second most produced chemical, the scale of ammonia production is a small fraction of world petroleum usage.
It is a pure σ-donor, in the middle of the spectrochemical series, and shows intermediate hard-soft behaviour.
A 25% (by weight) solution has a density of 0.907 g/cm3, and a solution that has a lower density will be more concentrated.
In birds, reptiles, and terrestrial snails, metabolic ammonium is converted into uric acid, which is solid, and can therefore be excreted with minimal water loss.
These cold, dense cores are the sites of future star formation.
Ammonia may itself diffuse across the renal tubules, combine with a hydrogen ion, and thus allow for further acid excretion.
Irritant ('''Xi''')
The NH3/H2 ratio has been estimated to range from 10−7 in small dark clouds up to 10−5 in the dense core of the Orion Molecular Cloud Complex.
Its most conspicuous property is its ability to dissolve alkali metals to form highly coloured, electrically conductive solutions containing solvated electrons.
Werner noted only two isomers (''fac''- and ''mer''-) of the complex CrCl3(NH3)3 could be formed, and concluded the ligands must be arranged around the metal ion at the vertices of an octahedron.
Although a total of 18 total production routes have been proposed, the principal formation mechanism for interstellar NH3 is the reaction:
The liver converts ammonia to urea through a series of reactions known as the urea cycle.
The central nitrogen atom has five outer electrons with an additional electron from each hydrogen atom.
Although common in nature and in wide use, ammonia is both caustic and hazardous in its concentrated form.
Ignition occurs when chlorine is passed into ammonia, forming nitrogen and hydrogen chloride; if chlorine is present in excess, then the highly explosive nitrogen trichloride (NCl3) is also formed.
Higher concentrations are hardly detected by conventional detectors, the type of detector is chosen according to the sensitivity required (e.g.
In fish and aquatic invertebrates, it is excreted directly into the water.
It contributes significantly to the nutritional needs of terrestrial organisms by serving as a precursor to food and fertilizers.
It is a protic substance and is capable of formation of amides (which contain the NH2− ion).
Ammonia is also a metabolic product of amino acid deamination catalyzed by enzymes such as glutamate dehydrogenase 1.
The salts produced by the action of ammonia on acids are known as the ammonium salts and all contain the ammonium ion (NH4+).
Anhydrous ammonia corrodes copper- and zinc-containing alloys, and so brass fittings should not be used for handling the gas.
Household ammonia or ammonium hydroxide is a solution of NH3 in water.
Assuming H2 densities of 105 and NH2/H2 ratio of 10−7, this reaction proceeds at a rate of 2.2×10−12, more than 3 orders of magnitude slower than the primary reaction above.
;Liquid: Liquid ammonia possesses strong ionising powers reflecting its high ε of 22.
Ammonia and ammonium salts can be readily detected, in very minute traces, by the addition of Nessler's solution, which gives a distinct yellow colouration in the presence of the least trace of ammonia or ammonium salts.
In organic chemistry, ammonia can act as a nucleophile in substitution reactions.
Comparison of the physical properties of NH3 with those of water shows NH3 has the lower melting point, boiling point, density, viscosity, dielectric constant and electrical conductivity; this is due at least in part to the weaker hydrogen bonding in NH3 and because such bonding cannot form cross-linked networks, since each NH3 molecule has only one lone pair of electrons compared with two for each H2O molecule.
Temperature and salinity also affect the proportion of NH4+.
During winter, when reduced feeds are administered to aquaculture stock, ammonia levels can be higher.
Concentrationmass/volume (w/v)
Conversion of such wastes into ammonia solves the problem of hydrogen storage, as hydrogen can be released economically from ammonia on-demand, without the need for high-pressure or cryogenic storage.
For detection in astronomy, see chapter In astronomy.''
Ammonia and ammonium salts are also found in small quantities in rainwater, whereas ammonium chloride (sal ammoniac), and ammonium sulfate are found in volcanic districts; crystals of ammonium bicarbonate have been found in Patagonian guano.
Modern ammonia-producing plants depend on industrial hydrogen production to react with atmospheric nitrogen using a magnetite catalyst or over a promoted Fe catalyst under high pressure () and temperature (450&nbsp;°C) to form anhydrous liquid ammonia.
Prolonged contact of ammonia solutions with silver, mercury or iodide salts can also lead to explosive products: such mixtures are often formed in qualitative inorganic analysis, and should be lightly acidified but not concentrated (3), while the IDLH concentration is estimated at 300&nbsp;ppm.
Some plants rely on ammonia and other nitrogenous wastes incorporated into the soil by decaying matter.
Substances containing ammonia, or those that are similar to it, are called ''ammoniacal''.
Most ammonium salts are soluble and act as acids in liquid ammonia solutions.
Excess ammonia may accumulate and cause alteration of metabolism or increases in the body pH of the exposed organism.
Ammonia, either directly or indirectly, is also a building block for the synthesis of many pharmaceutical products and is used in many commercial cleaning products.
The Reaction Motors XLR99 rocket engine that powered the  hypersonic research aircraft used liquid ammonia.
The high detection rate indicates that this is a common molecule in the interstellar medium and that high-density regions are common in the galaxy.
An important derivative is nitric acid.
Ammonia is also used to make the following compounds:
Clearly, between these two primary reactions, equation (1) is the dominant destruction reaction, with a rate ~10,000 times faster than equation (2).
The USGS reports global ammonia production in 2014 was 176 million tonnes.
Liquid ammonia can also attack rubber and certain plastics.
The scientific interest in this problem is motivated by the unusual structure of the active site of the enzyme, which consists of an Fe7MoS9 ensemble.
When applied to soil, it helps provide increased yields of crops such as maize and wheat.
It was also used by dyers in the Middle Ages in the form of fermented urine to alter the colour of vegetable dyes.
Listed below is a sample of journal articles that highlights the range of detectors that have been used to identify ammonia.
As a demonstration experiment, opened bottles of concentrated ammonia and hydrochloric acid produce clouds of ammonium chloride, which seem to appear "out of nothing" as the salt forms where the two diffusing clouds of molecules meet, somewhere between the two bottles.
Ammonium is excreted in the urine, resulting in net acid loss.
In some cases, the ammonia is discharged to the marine environment where it acts as a pollutant.
As early as in 1895, it was known that ammonia was "strongly antiseptic ... it requires 1.4 grams per litre to preserve beef tea."
The molecule's polarity and, especially, its ability to form hydrogen bonds, makes ammonia highly miscible with water.
In particular, it is used for prewashing of wool.
Consuming more than 1% of all man-made power, ammonia production is a significant component of the world energy budget.
: NH4+ + e− → NH3 + H·
In mammals, sharks, and amphibians, it is converted in the urea cycle to urea, because it is less toxic and can be stored more efficiently.
The global industrial production of ammonia in 2014 was  , a 16% increase over the 2006 global industrial production of .
For historical reasons, ammonia is named '''ammine''' in the nomenclature of coordination compounds.
In an aqueous solution, it can be expelled by boiling.
Caution should be used that the chemical is never mixed into any liquid containing bleach, as a poisonous gas may result.
Apart from these remarkable solutions, much of the chemistry in liquid ammonia can be classified by analogy with related reactions in aqueous solutions.
This technology, called SCR (selective catalytic reduction), relies on a vanadia-based catalyst.
Fish and amphibians lack this mechanism, as they can usually eliminate ammonia from their bodies by direct excretion.
The background corresponds well with the locations previously detected CO.
:(2) NH3 + HCO+ → NH4+ + CO
U.S. Navy Standards U.S. Bureau of Ships 1962 maximum allowable concentrations (MACs):continuous exposure (60 days): 25 ppm / 1 hour: 400 ppm Ammonia vapour has a sharp, irritating, pungent odour that acts as a warning of potentially dangerous exposure.
Diamminesilver(I) (Ag(NH3)2+) is the active species in Tollens' reagent.
The flammable range of ammonia in air is 16–25%.
with rate constants of 4.39×10−9 and 2.2×10−9, respectively.
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (42 U.S.C.
It also forms explosive fulminating compounds with compounds of gold, silver, mercury, germanium or tellurium, and with stibine.
Amines can be formed by the reaction of ammonia with alkyl halides, although the resulting -NH2 group is also nucleophilic and secondary and tertiary amines are often formed as byproducts.
Ammonia is directly or indirectly the precursor to most nitrogen-containing compounds.
See liquid ammonia as a solvent.
Prior to the availability of natural gas, hydrogen as a precursor to ammonia production was produced via the electrolysis of water or using the chloralkali process.
Because of ammonia's vaporization properties, it is a useful refrigerant.
One of the most characteristic properties of ammonia is its basicity.
The toxicity of ammonia solutions does not usually cause problems for humans and other mammals, as a specific mechanism exists to prevent its build-up in the bloodstream.
This key material is generated via the Ostwald process by oxidation of ammonia with air over a platinum catalyst at , ~9 atm.
Ammonia, as the vapor released by smelling salts, has found significant use as a respiratory stimulant.
Ammonia may be conveniently deodorized by reacting it with either sodium bicarbonate or acetic acid.
Its high octane rating of 120 and low flame temperature allows the use of high compression ratios without a penalty of high NOx production.&nbsp; Since ammonia contains no carbon, its combustion cannot produce carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons or soot.
* Amino acids, using Strecker amino-acid synthesis
This is due to the relatively high abundance of H3+.
