External gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases because these are completely absorbed upon leaving the water for the first time.
Despite being able to crawl on land, many of these prehistoric tetrapodomorph fish still spent most of their time in the water.
The ears are well developed in frogs.
Thus amphibians typically start out as larvae living in water, but some species have developed behavioural adaptations to bypass this.
Adult salamanders often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer, and a land phase in winter.
The tadpoles secrete a hormone that inhibits digestion in the mother whilst they develop by consuming their very large yolk supply.
Each egg has a large yolk sac and the larva feeds on this while it develops inside the egg, emerging fully formed as a juvenile salamander.
The origins and evolutionary relationships between the three main groups of amphibians is a matter of debate.
Amphibians evolved adaptations that allowed them to stay out of the water for longer periods.
They reproduce via direct development, an ecological and evolutionary adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free-standing water.
Of these, 1,356 (33.6%) were considered to be threatened and this figure is likely to be an underestimate because it excludes 1,427 species for which there was insufficient data to assess their status.
Urodela is a name sometimes used for all the extant species of salamanders.
''Fejervarya raja'') can inhabit brackish water, but there are no true marine amphibians.
Amphibians have a juvenile stage and an adult stage, and the circulatory systems of the two are distinct.
Altogether, over 200 toxins have been isolated from the limited number of amphibian species that have been investigated.
Many amphibians catch their prey by flicking out an elongated tongue with a sticky tip and drawing it back into the mouth before seizing the item with their jaws.
The female visits the nursery sites regularly and deposits unfertilised eggs in the water and these are consumed by the tadpoles.
By the age of about ten months they have developed a pointed head with sensory tentacles near the mouth and lost their eyes, lateral line systems and tails.
The superclass Tetrapoda is divided into four classes of vertebrate animals with four limbs.
At metamorphosis, rapid changes in the body take place as the lifestyle of the frog changes completely.
The care of offspring among amphibians has been little studied but, in general, the larger the number of eggs in a batch, the less likely it is that any degree of parental care takes place.
Their job is to filter the blood of metabolic waste and transport the urine via ureters to the urinary bladder where it is stored before being passed out periodically through the cloacal vent.
Many aquatic salamanders and all tadpoles have gills in their larval stage, with some (such as the axolotl) retaining gills as aquatic adults.
The musculoskeletal system is strong to enable it to support the head and body.
Most species lay their eggs underground and when the larvae hatch, they make their way to adjacent bodies of water.
Metamorphosis in amphibians is regulated by thyroxine concentration in the blood, which stimulates metamorphosis, and prolactin, which counteracts thyroxine's effect.
Snakes have been observed yawning and gaping when trying to swallow African clawed frogs (''Xenopus laevis''), which gives the frogs an opportunity to escape.
Their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae.
A 2005 molecular phylogeny, based on rDNA analysis, suggests that salamanders and caecilians are more closely related to each other than they are to frogs.
Salamanders are at their most vulnerable at metamorphosis as swimming speeds are reduced and transforming tails are encumbrances on land.
To enable sufficient cutaneous respiration, the surface of their highly vascularised skin must remain moist to allow the oxygen to diffuse at a sufficiently high rate.
Caecilians have a mostly Gondwanan distribution, being found in tropical regions of Africa, Asia and Central and South America.
All modern amphibians are included in the subclass Lissamphibia, which is usually considered a clade, a group of species that have evolved from a common ancestor.
It also appears that the divergence of the three groups took place in the Paleozoic or early Mesozoic (around 250 million years ago), before the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea and soon after their divergence from the lobe-finned fish.
This means that advocates of phylogenetic nomenclature have removed a large number of basal Devonian and Carboniferous amphibian-type tetrapod groups that were formerly placed in Amphibia in Linnaean taxonomy, and included them elsewhere under cladistic taxonomy.
Frogs, toads and salamanders all hatch from the egg as larvae with external gills.
Both of these are able to breed.
Almost all of these frogs live in wet tropical rainforests and their eggs hatch directly into miniature versions of the adult, passing through the tadpole stage within the egg.
The base and crown of these are composed of dentine separated by an uncalcified layer and they are replaced at intervals.
The hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle.
When on land, they mostly spend the day hidden under stones or logs or in dense vegetation, emerging in the evening and night to forage for worms, insects and other invertebrates.
surface area, volume, weight and movement, although discrimination among large numbers may be based on surface area.
The brain sends signals through the spinal cord and nerves to regulate activity in the rest of the body.
They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea.
Little is known of the territorial behaviour of caecilians, but some frogs and salamanders defend home ranges.
Their skulls are mostly broad and short, and are often incompletely ossified.
The ovum is at first rigidly held, but in fertilised eggs the innermost layer liquefies and allows the embryo to move freely.
often ingest aquatic plant material with the invertebrates on which they feed and a Brazilian tree frog (''Xenohyla truncata'') includes a large quantity of fruit in its diet.
Because oxygen concentration in the water increases at both low temperatures and high flow rates, aquatic amphibians in these situations can rely primarily on cutaneous respiration, as in the Titicaca water frog and the hellbender salamander.
Frogs can distinguish between low numbers (1 vs 2, 2 vs 3, but not 3 vs 4) and large numbers (3 vs 6, 4 vs 8, but not 4 vs 6) of prey.
Because most embryonic development is outside the parental body, it is subject to many adaptations due to specific environmental circumstances.
The tail often continues to twitch after separation which may distract the attacker and allow the salamander to escape.
Some salamanders in the genus ''Aneides'' and certain plethodontids climb trees and have long limbs, large toepads and prehensile tails.
They were the top land predators, sometimes reaching several metres in length, preying on the large insects of the period and the many types of fish in the water.
Some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid.
The relative scarcity of fossil evidence precludes precise dating, but the most recent molecular study, based on multilocus sequence typing, suggests a Late Carboniferous/Early Permian origin for extant amphibians.
Fertilisation is likely to be external as sirenids lack the cloacal glands used by male salamandrids to produce spermatophores and the females lack spermathecae for sperm storage.
The granular poison frog (''Oophaga granulifera'') is typical of a number of tree frogs in the poison dart frog family Dendrobatidae.
The tungara frog (''Physalaemus pustulosus'') builds a floating nest from foam to protect its eggs.
Reptiles, birds and mammals are amniotes, the eggs of which are either laid or carried by the female and are surrounded by several membranes, some of which are impervious.
A few days later, the tail is reabsorbed, due to the higher thyroxine concentration required for this to take place.
Tadpoles retain the lateral line system of their ancestral fishes, but this is lost in terrestrial adult amphibians.
The eggs of amphibians are typically laid in water and hatch into free-living larvae that complete their development in water and later transform into either aquatic or terrestrial adults.
There is a direct competition between males to win the attention of the females in salamanders and newts, with elaborate courtship displays to keep the female's attention long enough to get her interested in choosing him to mate with.
They remain in amplexus with their cloacae positioned close together while the female lays the eggs and the male covers them with sperm.
Calling carries the risk of attracting predators and involves the expenditure of much energy.
Their bodies writhe and they raise and lash their tails which makes it difficult for the predator to avoid contact with their poison-producing granular glands.
The free-living larvae are normally fully aquatic, but the tadpoles of some species (such as ''Nannophrys ceylonensis'') are semi-terrestrial and live among wet rocks.
lack teeth in the lower jaw, and toads (''Bufo spp.'')
The nervous system is basically the same as in other vertebrates, with a central brain, a spinal cord, and nerves throughout the body.
Pond-type larvae often have a pair of balancers, rod-like structures on either side of the head that may prevent the gills from becoming clogged up with sediment.
They scrape and bite food of many kinds as well as stirring up the bottom sediment, filtering out larger particles with the papillae around their mouths.
It has been suggested that salamanders arose separately from a Temnospondyl-like ancestor, and even that caecilians are the sister group of the advanced reptiliomorph amphibians, and thus of amniotes.
The suborder Cryptobranchoidea contains the primitive salamanders.
These three cell layers consist of the melanophores (occupying the deepest layer), the guanophores (forming an intermediate layer and containing many granules, producing a blue-green colour) and the lipophores (yellow, the most superficial layer).
Most salamanders are under  long.
Nevertheless, it is estimated that in up to 20% of amphibian species, one or both adults play some role in the care of the young.
The larvae emerge at varying stages of their growth, either before or after metamorphosis, according to their species.
The largest living amphibian is the  Chinese giant salamander (''Andrias davidianus'') but this is a great deal smaller than the largest amphibian that ever existed—the extinct  ''Prionosuchus'', a crocodile-like temnospondyl dating to 270 million years ago from the middle Permian of Brazil.
The blackbelly salamander (''Desmognathus quadramaculatus'') can bite an attacking common garter snake (''Thamnophis sirtalis'') two or three times its size on the head and often manages to escape.
The colour change displayed by many species is initiated by hormones secreted by the pituitary gland.
He keeps them moist and when they are ready to hatch, he visits a pond or ditch and releases the tadpoles.
Most amphibians go through metamorphosis, a process of significant morphological change after birth.
The tail may have a constriction at its base to allow it to be easily detached.
Any decline in amphibian numbers will affect the patterns of predation.
The Mexican burrowing toad (''Rhinophrynus dorsalis'') has a specially adapted tongue for picking up ants and termites.
* Subclass Temnospondyli† (diverse Paleozoic and early Mesozoic grade)
The main poison-producing glands, the paratoids, produce the neurotoxin bufotoxin and are located behind the ears of toads, along the backs of frogs, behind the eyes of salamanders and on the upper surface of caecilians.
The first line of defence in salamanders and frogs is the mucous secretion that they produce.
Eggs of some salamanders and frogs contain unicellular green algae.
The female salamander often broods the eggs.
The similarity of these to the scales of bony fish is largely superficial.
These have certain characteristics that are intermediate between the two other suborders.
The order Anura (from the Ancient Greek ''a(n)-'' meaning "without" and ''oura'' meaning "tail") comprises the frogs and toads.
With their complex reproductive needs and permeable skins, amphibians are often considered to be ecological indicators.
Over time, amphibians shrank in size and decreased in diversity, leaving only the modern subclass Lissamphibia.
Most amphibians, however, are able to exchange gases with the water or air via their skin.
There is a patch of specialized haircells, called ''papilla amphibiorum'', in the inner ear capable of detecting deeper sounds.
The largest frog is the African Goliath frog (''Conraua goliath''), which can reach  and weigh .
Other factors that may inhibit metamorphosis include lack of food, lack of trace elements and competition from conspecifics.
It also has a pair of short tentacles near the eye that can be extended and which have tactile and olfactory functions.
The smallest amphibian (and vertebrate) in the world is a microhylid frog from New Guinea (''Paedophryne amauensis'') first discovered in 2012.
There are associated changes in the neural networks such as development of stereoscopic vision and loss of the lateral line system.
The six families in the more evolutionarily advanced suborder Mesobatrachia are the fossorial Megophryidae, Pelobatidae, Pelodytidae, Scaphiopodidae and Rhinophrynidae and the obligatorily aquatic Pipidae.
The study of amphibians is called batrachology, while the study of both reptiles and amphibians is called herpetology.
These penetrate the jelly envelope after the eggs are laid and may increase the supply of oxygen to the embryo through photosynthesis.
It is anatomically very similar to modern frogs.
The females depart and territories may change hands.
Tadpoles have cartilaginous skeletons, gills for respiration (external gills at first, internal gills later), lateral line systems and large tails that they use for swimming.
Frogs are much more vocal, especially during the breeding season when they use their voices to attract mates.
Often the male collects and retains the egg mass, forming a sort of basket with the hind feet.
Some caecilians possess electroreceptors that allow them to locate objects around them when submerged in water.
This is a symplesiomorphic trait and they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals.
Stream dwellers mostly have larger mouths, shallow bodies and caudal fins; they attach themselves to plants and stones and feed on the surface films of algae and bacteria.
It contains no detergents but is created by whipping up proteins and lectins secreted by the female.
The outside of the skin is shed periodically more or less in one piece, in contrast to mammals and birds where it is shed in flakes.
Salamanders have a mostly Laurasian distribution, being present in much of the Holarctic region of the northern hemisphere.
There is a tendency for males to tolerate the holders of neighbouring territories while vigorously attacking unknown intruders.
The earliest amphibians evolved in the Devonian period from sarcopterygian fish with lungs and bony-limbed fins, features that were helpful in adapting to dry land.
The caecilians are limbless.
This keeps their skin moist and makes them slippery and difficult to grip.
The tiger salamander (''Ambystoma tigrinum'') is typical of the frogs and salamanders that hide under cover ready to ambush unwary invertebrates.
These larvae do not have gills but instead have specialised areas of skin through which respiration takes place.
Certain species in the Plethodontidae have a weak zone at the base of the tail and use this strategy readily.
Such was the case with the Black Sea invasion of the natural hybrid ''Pelophylax esculentus'' reported in 2010.
In the majority of species of caecilians, the young are produced by vivipary.
It has rudimentary eyes covered in skin, which are probably limited to discerning differences in light intensity.
In the early Carboniferous (360 to 345 million years ago), the climate became wet and warm.
There are large gaps in the fossil record, but the discovery of a proto-frog from the Early Permian in Texas in 2008 provided a missing link with many of the characteristics of modern frogs.
This also happens in salamander eggs, even when they are unfertilised.
The salamanders left odour marks around their territories which averaged  in size and were sometimes inhabited by a male and female pair.
These are usually feeding, breeding or sheltering sites.
They supplement this with gas exchange through the skin.
They diversified and became dominant during the Carboniferous and Permian periods, but were later displaced by reptiles and other vertebrates.
The suborder Salamandroidea contains the advanced salamanders.
In the walkers and runners the hind limbs are not so large, and the burrowers mostly have short limbs and broad bodies.
For adaptation to a water phase, prolactin is the required hormone, and for adaptation to the land phase, thyroxine.
The frog ''Allobates zaparo'' is not poisonous, but mimics the appearance of other toxic species in its locality, a strategy that may deceive predators.
All this can happen in about a day.
Another feature, unique to frogs and salamanders, is the columella-operculum complex adjoining the auditory capsule which is involved in the transmission of both airborne and seismic signals.
Frogs have been caught on fish hooks baited with red flannel and green frogs (''Rana clamitans'') have been found with stomachs full of elm seeds that they had seen floating past.
One such project is the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation Project that built on existing conservation efforts in Panama to create a country-wide response to the threat of chytridiomycosis.
An exception is the granular poison frog (''Oophaga granulifera'') where the male and female place their cloacae in close proximity while facing in opposite directions and then release eggs and sperm simultaneously.
In some species, such as the fire-bellied toad (''Bombina spp.
A number of causes are believed to be involved, including habitat destruction and modification, over-exploitation, pollution, introduced species, climate change, endocrine-disrupting pollutants, destruction of the ozone layer (ultraviolet radiation has shown to be especially damaging to the skin, eyes, and eggs of amphibians), and diseases like chytridiomycosis.
Young of the Cuban tree frog (''Osteopilus septentrionalis'') can occasionally be cannibalistic, the younger tadpoles attacking a larger, more developed tadpole when it is undergoing metamorphosis.
Their metabolic rate is low and as a result, their food and energy requirements are limited.
A unique feature is their ability to feed by suction, depressing either the left side of their lower jaw or the right.
In salamanders, defence of a territory involves adopting an aggressive posture and if necessary attacking the intruder.
This may distend like a balloon and acts as a resonator, helping to transfer the sound to the atmosphere, or the water at times when the animal is submerged.
Eyes and legs grow quickly, and a tongue is formed.
First a raft is built, then eggs are laid in the centre, and finally a foam cap is overlaid.
The young generally undergo metamorphosis from larva with gills to an adult air-breathing form with lungs.
They range in size from the Chinese giant salamander (''Andrias davidianus''), which has been reported to grow to a length of , to the diminutive ''Thorius pennatulus'' from Mexico which seldom exceeds  in length.
A few species give birth to live young, nourishing them with glandular secretions while they are in the oviduct.
The calls made by caecilians and salamanders are limited to occasional soft squeaks, grunts or hisses and have not been much studied.
In their normal gait, only one leg is advanced at a time in the manner adopted by their ancestors, the lobe-finned fish.
Others amphibians, such as the ''Bufo spp.''
These are long, cylindrical, limbless animals with a snake- or worm-like form.
This may involve snapping, chasing and sometimes biting, occasionally causing the loss of a tail.
The behaviour of red back salamanders (''Plethodon cinereus'') has been much studied.
They are attracted there by the calling of the first male to find a suitable place, perhaps a pool that forms in the same place each rainy season.
At the end of the Devonian period (360 million years ago), the seas, rivers and lakes were teeming with life while the land was the realm of early plants and devoid of vertebrates, though some, such as ''Ichthyostega'', may have sometimes hauled themselves out of the water.
Others brood their eggs and the larvae undergo metamorphosis before the eggs hatch.
Although most species are associated with water and damp habitats, some are specialised to live in trees or in deserts.
The short oesophagus is lined with cilia that help to move the food to the stomach and mucus produced by glands in the mouth and pharynx eases its passage.
Some species complete their development inside the egg and hatch directly into small frogs.
Mixing of the two bloodstreams is minimized by the anatomy of the chambers.
The cerebellum is the center of muscular coordination and the medulla oblongata controls some organ functions including heartbeat and respiration.
''Ichthyostega'' was one of the first primitive amphibians, with nostrils and more efficient lungs.
In some, the spermatophore may be placed directly into the female cloaca while in others, the female may be guided to the spermatophore or restrained with an embrace called amplexus.
On land, amphibians are restricted to moist habitats because of the need to keep their skin damp.
The female takes up the sperm packet by grasping it with the lips of the cloaca and pushing it into the vent.
The numbers of species cited above follows Frost and the total number of known amphibian species is over 7,000, of which nearly 90% are frogs.
Members of this order are eel-like aquatic salamanders with much reduced forelimbs and no hind limbs.
If threats are insufficient, chest to chest tussles may take place.
This is irrespective of other characteristics, i.e.
They swim by undulating their body from side to side.
The ringed caecilian (''Siphonops annulatus'') has developed a unique adaptation for the purposes of reproduction.
When fully developed, they break their way out of the egg capsules and disperse as juvenile salamanders.
Meanwhile, in the ponds and lakes, fewer frogs means fewer tadpoles.
Damage to either of these areas can reduce the fitness of the rival, either because of the need to regenerate tissue or because it impairs its ability to detect food.
Toads, salamanders and caecilians also use smell to detect prey.
This call is modified to a quieter courtship call on the approach of a female or to a more aggressive version if a male intruder draws near.
A global strategy to stem the crisis was released in 2005 in the form of the Amphibian Conservation Action Plan.
The number of known amphibian species is approximately 7,000, of which nearly 90% are frogs.
Amphibians breathe by means of a pump action in which air is first drawn into the buccopharyngeal region through the nostrils.
Adipose tissue is another important means of storing energy and this occurs in the abdomen, under the skin and, in some salamanders, in the tail.
The brood feed as a batch for about seven minutes at intervals of approximately three days which gives the skin an opportunity to regenerate.
Some fish had developed primitive lungs to help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the Devonian swamps were low in oxygen.
This frog lives in fast-flowing streams and internal fertilisation prevents the sperm from being washed away before fertilisation occurs.
reared larvae in her stomach after swallowing either the eggs or hatchlings; however, this stage was never observed before the species became extinct.
''Typhlonectes compressicauda'', a species from South America, is typical of these.
In the water, the sideways thrusts of their tails had propelled them forward, but on land, quite different mechanisms were required.
In many species of frog and in most lungless salamanders (Plethodontidae), direct development takes place, the larvae growing within the eggs and emerging as miniature adults.
In newts and salamanders, metamorphosis is less dramatic than in frogs.
They developed "hands" and "feet" with five or more digits; the skin became more capable of retaining body fluids and resisting desiccation.
They still needed to return to water to lay their shell-less eggs, and even most modern amphibians have a fully aquatic larval stage with gills like their fish ancestors.
Most eggs contain the pigment melanin which raises their temperature through the absorption of light and also protects them against ultraviolet radiation.
In one experiment, when offered live fruit flies (''Drosophila virilis''), salamanders choose the larger of 1 vs 2 and 2 vs 3.
