Six are intercity stops: Sloterdijk, Zuid, Amstel, Bijlmer ArenA, Lelylaan and Amsterdam Centraal.
Amsterdam is situated  below sea level.
Since 1999 the city of Amsterdam honours the best sportsmen and women at the Amsterdam Sports Awards.
Its responsibities include regional spatial planning and the metropolitan public transport concessions.
After the independence of Suriname in 1975, a large wave of Surinamese settled in Amsterdam, mostly in the Bijlmer area.
The Jews came to call the town Jerusalem of the West, a reference to their sense of belonging there.
Around 1815, architects broke with the baroque style and started building in different neo-styles.
Comprising  of land, the city proper has 4,457 inhabitants per km2 and 2,275 houses per km2.
The canals served for defence, water management and transport.
Philip Vingboons designed splendid merchants' houses throughout the city.
Many restaurants can be found in Amsterdam as well.
More than 100,000 Dutch Jews were deported to Nazi concentration camps of which some 60,000 lived in Amsterdam.
The Netherlands has a tradition of cabaret or ''kleinkunst'', which combines music, storytelling, commentary, theatre and comedy.
Still, the population of Amsterdam and other towns in Holland was only modest compared to the towns and cities of Flanders and Brabant, which comprised the most urbanised area of the Low Countries.
The fourth and outermost canal is the ''Singelgracht'', which is often not mentioned on maps, because it is a collective name for all canals in the outer ring.
The first is the area surrounding Amsterdam Sloterdijk railway station, where several newspapers like ''De Telegraaf'' have their offices.
In line with Protestant procedure of that time, all churches were converted to Protestant worship.
Originating as a small fishing village in the late 12th century, Amsterdam became one of the most important ports in the world during the Dutch Golden Age (17th century), a result of its innovative developments in trade.
This can be recognised by the suffix ''-meer'' which means ''lake'', as in Aalsmeer, Bijlmermeer, Haarlemmermeer, and Watergraafsmeer.
Together with Eindhoven (Brainport) and Rotterdam (Seaport), Amsterdam (Airport) forms the foundation of the Dutch economy.
Although the saying "Leef en laat leven" or "Live and let live" summarises the Dutch and especially the Amsterdam open and tolerant society, the increased influx of religions and cultures after the Second World War, has on a number of occasions strained social relations.
Huguenots came after the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, while the Flemish Protestants came during the Eighty Years' War.
The entire city centre has reattained its former splendour and, as a whole, is now a protected area.
Perhaps the most famous deportee was the young Jewish girl Anne Frank, who died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp.
After landflood in 1916 the depleted municipalities, Durgerdam, Holysloot, Zunderdorp and Schellingwoude, all lying north of Amsterdam, were, on their own request, annexed to the city on 1 January 1921.
The city has many open squares (plein in Dutch).
Annually, almost 4.5&nbsp;million people visit the park, which has a size of 1.000 hectares and is approximately three times the size of Central Park.
The theatre often has English programming.
In the early years of the 17th century, Maximilian's crown in Amsterdam's coat of arms was again replaced, this time with the crown of Emperor Rudolph II, a crown that became the Imperial Crown of Austria.
During that time, the city was the leading centre for finance and diamonds.
People started looting stores and warehouses in order to get supplies, mainly food.
Most secondary schools in Amsterdam offer a variety of different levels of education in the same school.
Construction started in 1613 and proceeded from west to east, across the breadth of the layout, like a gigantic windshield wiper as the historian Geert Mak calls it – and ''not'' from the centre outwards, as a popular myth has it.
Some of these markets are held on a daily basis, like the Albert Cuypmarkt and the Dappermarkt.
Despite an absence of an official Jewish ghetto, most Jews preferred to live in the eastern part of the old medieval heart of the city.
In 2000, Christians formed the largest religious group in the city (27% of the population).
The coat of arms of Amsterdam is composed of several historical elements.
During the 19th century, Samuel Sarphati devised a plan based on the grandeur of Paris and London at that time.
Each year in October, the city hosts the Amsterdam Dance Event (ADE) which is one of the leading electronic music conferences and one of the biggest club festivals for electronic music in the world.
In 1888, the Concertgebouworkest was established.
The canal construction in the southern sector was completed by 1656.
This is reflected in the architecture of that period.
The incorporated large-scale demolitions began in Amsterdam's formerly Jewish neighbourhood.
New museums, a railway station, and the Concertgebouw were built; in this same time, the Industrial Revolution reached the city.
Amsterdam, as well as most of the North Holland province, lies in USDA Hardiness zone 8b.
This was soon followed by reurbanisation and gentrification, however, leading to renewed population growth in the 2010s.
Amsterdam is intensely urbanised, as is the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area surrounding the city.
'''Amsterdam''' (; ) is the capital and most populous municipality of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
It lies to the east of Damrak and contains the city's famous red light district.
As they became established in the city, other Christian denominations used converted Catholic chapels to conduct their own services.
The city is located in the province of North Holland in the west of the country.
In July 2010, Eberhard van der Laan (Labour Party) was appointed mayor of Amsterdam by the national government for a six-year term after being nominated by the Amsterdam municipal council.
Many citizens travelled to the countryside to forage.
As the commercial capital of the Netherlands and one of the top financial centres in Europe, Amsterdam is considered an alpha world city by the Globalization and World Cities (GaWC) study group.
In the Middle Ages, Amsterdam was surrounded by a moat, called the Singel, which now forms the innermost ring in the city, and makes the city centre a horseshoe shape.
At the end of this century, the Rijksmuseum and Stedelijk Museum were built.
However, the later establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815 marked a turning point.
This led to the establishment of many non-Dutch-speaking religious churches.
The earliest recorded use of the name "Aemstelredamme" (Amsterdam) comes from a document dated October 27th, 1275.
The main aim of the plan, however, was to improve public health.
Foreign embassies are also located in The Hague.
Previous versions of the constitution only mentioned "the city of Amsterdam" ("''de stad Amsterdam''").
Other squares include Rembrandtplein, Muntplein, Nieuwmarkt, Leidseplein, Spui, and Waterlooplein.
In the 16th and 17th century non-Dutch immigrants to Amsterdam were mostly Huguenots, Flemings, Sephardi Jews and Westphalians.
The northwestern part of the square is bordered by the Van Gogh Museum, Stedelijk Museum, House of Bols Cocktail & Genever Experience and Coster Diamonds.
The outbreak of the Second World War and shifting priorities led to the current situation, where only roads A1, A2, and A4 originate from Amsterdam according to the original plan.
In 1928, Amsterdam hosted the Summer Olympics.
The permanent collection consists of works of art from artists like Piet Mondriaan, Karel Appel, and Kazimir Malevich.
Since 1981, the municipality of Amsterdam has gradually been divided into semi-autonomous boroughs, called ''stadsdelen'' or 'districts'.
Since Amsterdam is a multicultural city, a lot of different ethnic restaurants can be found.
Its purpose is to house temporary exhibitions of the museum.
Notable Amsterdam bands from the modern era include the Osdorp Posse and The Ex.
Others, like the Westerstraatmarkt, are held on a weekly basis.
Amsterdam has two universities: the University of Amsterdam (Universiteit van Amsterdam), and the VU University Amsterdam (Vrije Universiteit or "VU").
As with all Dutch municipalities, Amsterdam is governed by a directly elected municipal council, a municipal executive board and a mayor (''burgemeester'').
Several parts of the city and the surrounding urban area are polders.
Amsterdam's founding is relatively recent compared with much older Dutch cities such as Nijmegen, Rotterdam, and Utrecht.
The first Ashkenazi who arrived in Amsterdam were refugees from the Chmielnicki Uprising in Poland and the Thirty Years' War.
Parks and nature reserves make up 12% of Amsterdam's land area.
One of the principal architects behind the city's Catholic churches, Cuypers, was also responsible for the Amsterdam Central Station and the Rijksmuseum, which led to a refusal of Protestant King William III to open 'that monastery'.
Amsterdam's Hortus Botanicus, founded in the early 17th century, is one of the oldest botanical gardens in the world, with many old and rare specimens, among them the coffee plant that served as the parent for the entire coffee culture in Central and South America.
Interchanges on the A10 allow cars to enter the city by transferring to one of the 18 ''city roads'', numbered S101 through to S118.
The local government sponsors carsharing and carpooling initiatives such as ''Autodelen'' and ''Meerijden.nu''.
During the interwar period, the city continued to expand, most notably to the west of the Jordaan district in the Frederik Hendrikbuurt and surrounding neighbourhoods.
The southwestern border of the Museum Square is the Van Baerlestraat, which is a major thoroughfare in this part of Amsterdam.
The annual Uitmarkt is a three-day cultural event at the start of the cultural season in late August.
Greater Amsterdam includes 15 municipalities, and had a population of 1,293,208 in 2013.
Some of Van Gogh's most famous paintings, like the ''The Potato Eaters'' and ''Sunflowers'', are in the collection.
Hotels with 4 or 5 stars contribute 42% of the total beds available and 41% of the overnight stays in Amsterdam.
Boxer Raymond Joval and field hockey midfielder Carole Thate were the first to receive the awards, in 1999.
The city's population declined in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, dipping under 200,000 in 1820.
As a result, the demolition was stopped, and the highway was never built, with only the metro being finished.
Other immigrants, including refugees asylum seekers and illegal immigrants, came from Europe, America, Asia, and Africa.
The basketball team MyGuide Amsterdam competes in the Dutch premier division and play their games in the Sporthallen Zuid.
But as the ''Negen Straatjes'' are dominated by fashion stores the Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk offer a very wide variety of all kinds of stores, just to name some specialties: candy and other food related stores, lingerie, sneakers, wedding clothing, interior shops, books, Italian deli's, racing and mountain bikes, skatewear, etc.
The medieval and colonial age canals of Amsterdam, known as ''Grachten'', embraces the heart of the city where homes have interesting gables.
One of Amsterdam's busiest high streets is the narrow, medieval Kalverstraat in the heart of the city.
Strongly pushed by Dutch Revolt leader William the Silent, the Dutch Republic became known for its relative religious tolerance.
Between 1970 and 1980, Amsterdam experienced its sharpest population decline ever, and by 1985 the city had only 675,570 residents.
In 2004 film director Theo van Gogh was murdered in Amsterdam.
It handles over 50&nbsp;million passengers per year and is the home base of five airlines, KLM, transavia.com, Martinair, Arkefly and easyJet.
To the southeast of the square are situated a number of large houses, one of which contains the American consulate.
First and centre are three St Andrew's crosses, aligned in a vertical band on the city's shield (although Amsterdam's patron saint was Saint Nicholas).
In the 1960s guest workers from Turkey, Morocco, Italy and Spain emigrated to Amsterdam.
It has been compared with Venice, due to its division into approximately 90 islands, which are linked by more than 1,200 bridges.
In 2013, there were about 1,200,000 bicycles in Amsterdam outnumbering the amount of citizens in the city.
The tallest building in Amsterdam, the Rembrandt Tower, is situated there, as is the headquarters of Philips.
The city is also served by a seaport.
The Stadsschouwburg Amsterdam at the Leidseplein is the home base of Toneelgroep Amsterdam.
The western suburbs which were built in that period are collectively called the ''Westelijke Tuinsteden''.
In stark contrast to the relative decline of those other Hollandic towns, Amsterdam's population grew in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, which was mainly due to rise of the profitable Baltic maritime trade after the Burgundian victory in the Dutch–Hanseatic War.
The Huguenots accounted for nearly 20% of Amsterdam's inhabitants in 1700.
Many of its buildings have become monuments, and in July 2010 the ''Grachtengordel'' (Herengracht, Keizersgracht, and Prinsengracht) was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List.
Buildings of this period are very recognisable with their stepped gable façades, which is the common Dutch Renaissance style.
Most ''cafés'' have terraces in summertime.
Some Amsterdam citizens sheltered Jews, thereby exposing themselves and their families to the high risk of being imprisoned or sent to concentration camps.
Dogs, cats, raw sugar beets, and Tulip bulbs—cooked to a pulp—were consumed to stay alive.
In the 18th century, French theatre became popular.
Over the years, several canals have been filled in, becoming streets or squares, such as the Nieuwezijds Voorburgwal and the Spui.
In the 1950s Johnny Jordaan rose to fame with "Geef mij maar Amsterdam" ("I prefer Amsterdam"), which praises the city above all others (explicitly Paris); Jordaan sang especially about his own neighbourhood, the Jordaan ("Bij ons in de Jordaan").
In 1906, Joseph Conrad gave a brief description of Amsterdam as seen from the seaside, in ''The Mirror of the Sea''.
In the following centuries, the land was used for parks, senior citizens' homes, theatres, other public facilities, and waterways without much planning.
A number of these squats have become well known, such as OT301, Paradiso, Vrankrijk (closed down by city government), and the Binnenpret, and several are now businesses, such as health clubs and licensed restaurants.
A famous building in baroque style in Amsterdam is the Royal Palace on Dam Square.
The municipal council of Amsterdam voted to maintain the borough system by replacing the district councils with smaller, but still directly elected district committees (''bestuurscommissies'').
The S100 ''Centrumring'' is a smaller ringroad circumnavigating the city's centre.
These new neighbourhoods were built to relieve the city's shortage of living space and give people affordable houses with modern conveniences.
The five largest law firms of the Netherlands, a number of Dutch subsidiaries of large consulting firms like Boston Consulting Group and Accenture, and the World Trade Center Amsterdam are also located in Zuidas.
Hilversum is the principal centre for radio and television broadcasting in the Netherlands.
Amsterdam was granted city rights in either 1300 or 1306.
Smaller streets, such as the ''Jodenbreestraat'', were widened and saw almost all of their houses demolished.
These buildings were built according to the principles of the architect Hendrick de Keyser.
The city has been at times marked by ethnic tension.
Buildings which formerly housed brothels in the red light district have been converted to ateliers for young fashion designers, AKA eagle fuel.
Colleagues and contemporaries of Johnny include Tante Leen, Zwarte Riek, and Manke Nelis.
Amsterdam has its garment centre in the World Fashion Center.
, Schiphol was the fifth busiest airport in the world measured by international passenger numbers.
Regular services there are still offered in English under the auspices of the Church of Scotland.
Amsterdam is part of the conglomerate metropolitan area Randstad, with a total population of 6,659,300 inhabitants.
The 17th-century canals of Amsterdam and the 19–20th century Defence Line of Amsterdam are on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
The room occupation rate was 78% in 2006, up from 70% in 2005.
It is ranked fifth in this category and is only surpassed by London, Paris, Frankfurt and Barcelona.
In 1603, the first notification was made of Jewish religious service.
Buildings in this neighbourhood fell into disrepair after the Second World War, and a large section of the neighbourhood was demolished during the construction of the subway.
It is located in the south-east of the city next to the new Amsterdam Bijlmer ArenA railway station.
These riots are known as the ''Aardappeloproer'' (Potato rebellion).
Some nine hundred concerts and other events per year take place in the Concertgebouw, for a public of over 700,000, making it one of the most-visited concert halls in the world.
The mayor is a member of the municipal executive board, but also has individual responsibilies in maintaining public order.
In front of the Rijksmuseum on the square itself is a long, rectangular pond.
This urban renewal and expansion of the traditional centre of the city is part of the Structural Vision Amsterdam 2040 initiative
This was all the more remarkable as Amsterdam was neither the capital city nor the seat of government of the Dutch Republic, which itself was a much smaller state than England, France or the Ottoman Empire.
In 1345, an alleged Eucharistic miracle in the Kalverstraat rendered the city an important place of pilgrimage until the adoption of the Protestant faith.
Shortly before the First World War, the city began expanding, and new suburbs were built.
Real estate prices have surged and local shops are making way for tourist-oriented ones, making the centre inaffordable for the city's inhabitants.
This part of the coat of arms is the basis of the flag of Amsterdam, flown by the city government, but also as civil ensign for ships registered in Amsterdam.
The defences took the form of a moat and earthen dikes, with gates at transit points, but otherwise no masonry superstructures.
Bicycles are used by all socio-economic groups because of their convenience, Amsterdam's small size, the  of bike paths, the flat terrain, and the arguable inconvenience of driving an automobile.
Jews make up about 2% of the city's total population.
The northeastern part of the square is bordered by the very large Rijksmuseum.
Construction of a metro line connecting the part of the city north of the IJ to the centre was started in 2003.
A large influx of foreigners of many religions came to 17th-century Amsterdam, in particular Sefardic Jews from Spain and Portugal, Huguenots from France, and Protestants from the Southern Netherlands.
Amsterdam's merchants had the largest share in both the Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company.
Meanwhile, large private organisations, such as ''Stadsherstel Amsterdam'', were founded with the aim of restoring the entire city centre.
The opera house of Amsterdam is situated adjacent to the city hall.
The city has four beaches, the Nemo Beach, Citybeach "Het stenen hoofd" (Silodam), Blijburg, and one in Amsterdam-Noord.
Fashion brands like G-star, Gsus, BlueBlood, PICHICHI, Iris van Herpen, fair trade denim brand MUD Jeans, 10 feet and Warmenhoven & Venderbos, and fashion designers like Mart Visser, Viktor & Rolf, Sheila de Vries, Marlies Dekkers and Frans Molenaar are based in Amsterdam.
In the park is an open-air theatre, a playground and several horeca facilities.
In the 16th century, wooden buildings were razed and replaced with brick ones.
A large part of this precipitation falls as light rain or brief showers.
They range from small museums such as the Verzetsmuseum (Resistance Museum), the Anne Frank House, and the Rembrandt House Museum, to the very large, like the Tropenmuseum (Museum of the Tropics), Amsterdam Museum (formerly known as Amsterdam Historical Museum), Hermitage Amsterdam (a dependency of the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg) and the Joods Historisch Museum (Jewish Historical Museum).
The yearly Holland Festival attracts international artists and visitors from all over Europe.
Further plans were to build a new highway above the metro to connect the Central Station and city centre with other parts of the city.
Although the success of this struggle is visible today, efforts for further restoration are still ongoing.
The average number of guests per year staying at the four campsites around the city range from 12,000 to 65,000.
Though most studios are located in Hilversum and Aalsmeer, Amsterdam's influence on programming is very strong.
The Amsterdam Department for Research and Statistics uses a fourth conurbation, namely the ''Stadsregio Amsterdam'' ('City Region of Amsterdam').
Amsterdam was Europe's most important point for the shipment of goods and was the leading Financial centre of the world.
The current appearance of the square was realised in 1999, when the square was remodelled.
Amsterdam is currently one of the best European cities in which to locate an international business.
These city roads are regional roads without grade separation, and sometimes without a central reservation.
The Singelgracht should not be confused with the oldest and most inner canal ''Singel''.
It's a modern building with a panoramic view over the harbour.
From the station there are regular services to destinations such as Austria, Belarus, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Russia and Switzerland.
In the 19th and 20th centuries the city expanded, and many new neighborhoods and suburbs were planned and built.
There are over 200 primary schools in Amsterdam.
Even then, because Amsterdam is surrounded on three sides by large bodies of water, as well as having a significant heat-island effect, nights rarely fall below , while it could easily be  in Hilversum,  southeast.
Amsterdam had its own version of the style, which was called the Amsterdamse School.
Some of these primary schools base their teachings on particular pedagogic theories like the various Montessori schools.
Amsterdam is famous for its vibrant and diverse nightlife.
The Haarlemmerstraat and Haarlemmerdijk were voted best shopping street in the Netherlands in 2011.
At the end of the 19th century, the Jugendstil or Art Nouveau style became popular and many new buildings were constructed in this architectural style.
The 1949 song "Aan de Amsterdamse grachten" ("On the canals of Amsterdam") was performed and recorded by many artists, including John Kraaijkamp sr.; the best-known version is probably that by Wim Sonneveld (1962).
Calvinism became the dominant religion, and although Catholicism was not forbidden and priests allowed to serve, the Catholic hierarchy was prohibited.
The Amsterdam canal system is the result of conscious city planning.
Both projects dramatically improved commerce with the rest of Europe and the world.
The shortages sparked riots in which several people were killed.
These plans involved the development of new neighbourhoods consisting of ''housing blocks'' for all social classes.
Beyond the Grachtengordel are the former working class areas of Jordaan and de Pijp.
Bimhuis located near the Central Station, with its rich programming hosting the best in the field is considered one of the best jazz clubs in the world.
Ballet performances were given in this theatre as early as 1642.
