As a consequence, it is difficult to define concisely or precisely.
The ANOVA F-test is known to be nearly optimal in the sense of minimizing false negative errors for a fixed rate of false positive errors (i.e.
The method has some advantages over correlation: not all of the data must be numeric and one result of the method is a judgment in the confidence in an explanatory relationship.
There are two methods of concluding the ANOVA hypothesis test, both of which produce the same result:
Thus, this grouping fails to ''fit'' the distribution we are trying to explain (yellow-orange).
A histogram of dog weights from a show might plausibly be rather complex, like the yellow-orange distribution shown in the illustrations.
There are three classes of models used in the analysis of variance, and these are outlined here.
The one-hot encoding function  is defined such that the  entry of  is
estimated treatment effects can be taken at face value.
; Blocking: A schedule for conducting treatment combinations in an experimental study such that any effects on the experimental results due to a known change in raw materials, operators, machines, etc., become concentrated in the levels of the blocking variable.
One of the attributes of ANOVA which ensured its early popularity was computational elegance.
The Kruskal&ndash;Wallis test and the Friedman test are nonparametric tests, which  do not rely on an assumption of normality.
For example, to test the hypothesis that various medical treatments have exactly the same effect, the F-test's p-values closely approximate the permutation test's p-values: The approximation is particularly close when the design is balanced.
Below we make clear the connection between multi-way ANOVA and linear regression.
Because the levels themselves are random variables, some assumptions and the method of contrasting the treatments (a multi-variable generalization of simple differences) differ from the fixed-effects model.
In practice, "statistical models" and observational data are useful for suggesting hypotheses that should be treated very cautiously by the public.
simple case uses one-way (a single factor) analysis.
By construction, hypothesis testing limits the rate of Type I errors (false positives) to a significance level.
the result of the effect and is partially random error.
Ronald Fisher introduced the term variance and proposed its formal analysis in a 1918 article ''The Correlation Between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance''.
Several standardized measures of effect have been proposed for ANOVA to summarize the strength of the association between a predictor(s) and the dependent variable (e.g., &eta;2, &omega;2, or &fnof;2) or the overall standardized difference (&Psi;) of the complete model.
Laplace soon knew how to estimate a variance from a residual (rather than a total) sum of squares.
Regression is often useful.
Rejecting the null hypothesis would imply that different treatments result in altered effects.
ANOVA is the synthesis of several ideas and it is used for multiple
A dog show is not a random sampling of the breed: it is typically limited to dogs that are adult, pure-bred, and exemplary.
Reporting sample size analysis is generally required in psychology.
This occurs when the various factor levels are sampled from a larger population.
A variety of techniques are used with multiple factor ANOVA to reduce expense.
Such permutation tests characterize tests with maximum power against all alternative hypotheses, as observed by Rosenbaum.
; Factors: Process inputs an investigator manipulates to cause a change in the output.
Let that vector be .
DOE's typically require understanding of both random error and lack of fit error.
Kempthorne and his students make an assumption of ''unit treatment additivity'', which is discussed in the books of Kempthorne and David R. Cox.
Power analysis is often applied in the context of ANOVA in order to assess the probability of successfully rejecting the null hypothesis if we assume a certain ANOVA design, effect size in the population, sample size and significance level.
different levels of urea application in a crop, or different levels of antibiotic action on several bacterial species, or different levels of effect of some medicine on groups of patients.
will still be approximately correct."
The null hypothesis is rejected if this probability is less than or equal to the significance level (α).
say abused) statistical technique in psychological research."
In one-way ANOVA  and in two-way ANOVA .
The assumption of unit treatment additivity  usually cannot be directly falsified, according to Cox and Kempthorne.
An approach to problem solving involving collection of data that will support valid, defensible, and supportable conclusions.
ANOVA is (in part) a significance test.
In the randomization-based analysis, there is ''no assumption'' of a ''normal'' distribution and certainly ''no assumption'' of ''independence''.
Often one of the "treatments" is none, so the treatment group can act as a control.
There are several types of ANOVA.
Since the distributions of dog weight within each of the groups (shown in blue) has a large variance, and since the means are very close across groups, grouping dogs by these characteristics does not produce an effective way to explain the variation in dog weights: knowing which group a dog is in does not allow us to make any reasonable statements as to what that dog's weight is likely to be.
In the typical application of ANOVA, the null hypothesis is that all groups are simply random samples of the same population.
; DOE: Design of experiments.
For a randomized experiment, the assumption of unit-treatment additivity ''implies'' that the variance is constant for all treatments.
There are many such tests (10 in one table) and recommendations regarding their use are vague or conflicting.
The American Psychological Association holds the view that simply reporting significance is insufficient and that reporting confidence bounds is preferred.
; Design: A set of experimental runs which allows the fit of a particular model and the estimate of effects.
Analysis of variance became widely known after being included in Fisher's 1925 book ''Statistical Methods for Research Workers''.
Fortunately, experience says that high order interactions are rare.
The first was published in Polish by Neyman in 1923.
The rate of Type II errors depends largely on sample size (the rate will increase for small numbers of samples), significance
Compound comparisons typically compare two sets of groups means where one set has two or more groups (e.g., compare average group means of group A, B and C with group D).
See also Lack-of-fit sum of squares.
With this notation in place, we now have the exact connection with linear regression.
ANOVA "has long enjoyed the status of being the '''most used''' (some would
In short, ANOVA is a statistical tool used in several ways to develop and confirm an explanation for the observed data.
modeled data values.
measures responses in an attempt to determine an effect.
A dog show provides an example.
the probability of false negative errors, graphical methods based on an expected variation increase (above the residuals) and methods based on achieving a desired confident interval.
design of experiments.
The structure of the additive model allows solution for the additive coefficients by simple algebra rather than by matrix calculations.
* The computer method calculates the probability (p-value) of a value of F greater than or equal to the observed value.
Some popular designs use the following types of ANOVA:
The analysis, which is written in the experimental protocol before the experiment is conducted, is examined in grant applications and administrative review boards.
The proliferation of interaction terms increases the risk that some hypothesis test will produce a false positive by chance.
ANOVA is difficult to teach, particularly for complex experiments, with split-plot designs being notorious.
It is conceptually similar to multiple two-sample t-tests, but is more conservative (results in less type I error) and is therefore suited to a wide range of practical problems.
In the illustrations to the right, each group is identified as ''X''1, ''X''2, etc.
Before 1800 astronomers had isolated observational errors resulting
It is prudent to verify that the assumptions of ANOVA have been met.
Dunnett's test (a modification of the t-test) tests whether each of the other treatment groups has the same
Interpretation is easy when data is balanced across factors but much deeper understanding is needed for unbalanced data.
Including replication in a DOE allows separation of experimental error into its components: lack of fit and random (pure) error.
Kempthorne uses the randomization-distribution and the assumption of ''unit treatment additivity'' to produce a ''derived linear model'', very similar to the textbook model discussed previously.
Including replication allows an estimate of the random error independent of any lack of fit error.
The property of unit-treatment additivity is not invariant under a "change of scale", so statisticians often use transformations to achieve unit-treatment additivity.
"The orthogonality property of main effects and interactions present in balanced data does not carry over to the unbalanced case.
The analysis of variance provides the formal tools to justify these intuitive judgments.
The determination of statistical significance also required access to tables of the F function which were supplied by early statistics texts.
application of the method is best determined by problem pattern recognition
interaction terms first and expand the analysis beyond ANOVA if
definitions arguably leading toward a linguistic quagmire.
Random effects model (class II) is used when the treatments are not fixed.
Caution is advised when encountering interactions; Test
From here, one can use F-statistics or other methods to determine the relevance of the individual factors.
Typically, however, the one-way ANOVA is used to test for differences among at least three groups, since the two-group case can be covered by a t-test.
; Randomization: A schedule for allocating treatment material and for conducting treatment combinations in a DOE such that the conditions in one run neither depend on the conditions of the previous run nor predict the conditions in the subsequent runs.
* The textbook method is to compare the observed value of F with the critical value of F determined from tables.
Since the randomization-based analysis is complicated and is closely approximated by the approach using a normal linear model, most teachers emphasize the normal linear model approach.
interactions are found.
Standardized effect-size estimates facilitate comparison of findings across studies and disciplines.
This randomization is objective and declared before the experiment is carried out.
One rule of thumb: "If the largest standard deviation is less than twice the smallest standard deviation, we can use methods based on the assumption of equal standard deviations and our results
In order to obtain a fully general -way interaction ANOVA we must also concatenate every additional interaction term in the vector  and then add an intercept term.
An attempt to explain weight by breed is likely to produce a very good fit.
An attempt to explain the weight distribution by grouping dogs as (pet vs working breed) and (less athletic vs more athletic) would probably be somewhat more successful (fair fit).
However, many ''consequences'' of treatment-unit additivity can be falsified.
followed by the consultation of a classic authoritative test.
The use of unit treatment additivity and randomization is similar to the design-based inference that is standard in finite-population survey sampling.
This design-based analysis was discussed and developed by Francis J. Anscombe at Rothamsted Experimental Station and by Oscar Kempthorne at Iowa State University.
; Random error: Error that occurs due to natural variation in the process.
Therefore, by contraposition, a necessary condition for unit-treatment additivity is that the variance is constant.
produces apparently inconsistent experimental results.
The analysis of variance can be used as an exploratory tool to explain observations.
Following ANOVA with pair-wise multiple-comparison tests has been criticized on several grounds.
However, when applied to data from non-randomized experiments or observational studies, model-based analysis lacks the warrant of randomization.
The objective random-assignment is used to test the significance of the null hypothesis, following the ideas of C. S. Peirce and Ronald Fisher.
We simply regress response  against the vector .
Responses show a variability that is partially
The fixed-effects model (class I) of analysis of variance applies to situations in which the experimenter applies one or more treatments to the subjects of the experiment to see whether the response variable values change.
While the analysis of variance reached fruition in the 20th century, antecedents extend centuries into the past according to Stigler.
However, there is a concern about identifiability.
Interactions complicate the interpretation of
The heaviest show dogs are likely to be big strong working breeds, while breeds kept as pets tend to be smaller and thus lighter.
The ability to detect interactions is a major advantage of multiple
A statistically significant result, when a probability (p-value) is less than a threshold (significance level), justifies the rejection of the null hypothesis, but only if the a priori probability of the null hypothesis is not high.
The critical value of F is a function of the degrees of freedom of the numerator and the denominator and the significance level (α).
Consequently, the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more difficult than that for balanced designs."
Follow-up tests are often distinguished in terms of whether they are planned (a priori) or post hoc.
*Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) is used when there is more than one response variable.
*Factorial ANOVA is used when the experimenter wants to study the interaction effects among the treatments.
When there are only two means to compare, the t-test and the ANOVA F-test are equivalent; the relation between ANOVA and ''t'' is given by ''F''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''t''2.
If the response variable is expected to follow a parametric family of probability distributions, then the statistician may specify (in the protocol for the experiment or observational study) that the responses be transformed to stabilize the variance.
maximizing power for a fixed significance level).
The experimenter adjusts factors and
Testing one factor at a time hides interactions, but
A lengthy discussion of interactions is available in Cox (1958).
Simple comparisons compare one group mean with one other group mean.
In the general case, "The analysis of variance can also be applied to unbalanced data, but then the sums of squares, mean squares, and F-ratios will depend on the order in which the sources of variation
; Replication: Performing the same treatment combination more than once.
The effect of a single factor is also called a main effect.
Suppose we wanted to predict the weight of a dog based on a certain set of characteristics of each dog.
; Error: Unexplained variation in a collection of observations.
It is also common to apply ANOVA to observational data using an appropriate statistical model.
In a randomized controlled experiment, the treatments are randomly assigned to experimental units, following the experimental protocol.
In the ANOVA setting, the observed variance in a particular variable is partitioned into components attributable to different sources of variation.
statistical inference."
ANOVA "is probably the '''most useful''' technique in the field of
However, the significant overlap of distributions, for example, means that we cannot reliably say that ''X''1 and ''X''2 are truly distinct (i.e., it is perhaps reasonably likely that splitting dogs according to the flip of a coin—by pure chance—might produce distributions that look similar).
significant interaction will often mask the significance of main effects."
For example, the randomization-based analysis results in a small but (strictly) negative correlation between the observations.
However, there are differences.
The simplest techniques for handling unbalanced data restore balance by either throwing out data or by synthesizing missing data.
His first application of the analysis of variance was published in 1921.
"Classical ANOVA for balanced data does three things at once:
The analysis of variance has been studied from several approaches, the most common of which uses a linear model that relates the response to the treatments and blocks.
Comparisons can also look at tests of trend, such as linear and quadratic relationships, when the independent variable involves ordered levels.
Texts vary in their recommendations regarding
The ANOVA F–test (of the null-hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect) is recommended as a practical test, because of its robustness against many alternative distributions.
A common use of the method is the analysis of experimental data or the development of models.
Some analysis is required in support of the ''design'' of the experiment while other analysis is performed after changes in the factors are formally found to produce statistically significant changes in the responses.
One technique used in factorial designs is to minimize replication (possibly no replication with support of analytical trickery) and to combine groups when effects are found to be statistically (or practically) insignificant.
It is always appropriate to carefully consider outliers.
; Treatment: A treatment is a specific combination of factor levels whose effect is to be compared with other treatments.
For single factor (one way) ANOVA, the adjustment for unbalanced data is easy, but the unbalanced analysis lacks both robustness and power.
"Provide information on sample size and the process that led to sample size decisions."
All Chihuahuas are light and all St Bernards are heavy.
This allows the experimenter to estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole.
An experiment with many insignificant factors may collapse into one with a few factors supported by many replications.
Also, a statistician may specify that logarithmic transforms be applied to the responses, which are believed to follow a multiplicative model.
; Effect: How changing the settings of a factor changes the response.
; Responses: The output(s) of a process.
weighing impartial.
Furthermore, we assume the  factor has  levels.
They have a disproportionate impact on statistical conclusions and are often the result of errors.
For more complex designs the lack of balance leads to further complications.
Blocking is achieved by restricting randomization.
The randomization-based analysis has the disadvantage that its exposition involves tedious algebra and extensive time.
The terminology of ANOVA is largely from the statistical
which is 1 for no treatment effect.
As values of F increase above 1, the evidence is increasingly inconsistent with the null hypothesis.
While ANOVA is conservative (in maintaining a significance level) against multiple comparisons in one dimension, it is not conservative against comparisons in multiple dimensions.
mean as the control.
observations which receive the treatment and the general mean."
A successful grouping will split dogs such that (a) each group has a low variance of dog weights (meaning the group is relatively homogeneous) and (b) the mean of each group is distinct (if two groups have the same mean, then it isn't reasonable to conclude that the groups are, in fact, separate in any meaningful way).
As shown by the second illustration, the distributions have variances that are considerably smaller than in the first case, and the means are more reasonably distinguishable.
Randomization models were developed by several researchers.
These include hypothesis testing, the partitioning of sums of squares, experimental techniques and the additive model.
Before we could do that, we would need to ''explain'' the distribution of weights by dividing the dog population into groups based on those characteristics.
experiments offer more complexity.
assigned to experimental units by a combination of randomization and
Trends hint at interactions among factors or among observations.
ANOVA is a particular form of statistical hypothesis testing heavily used in the analysis of experimental data.
The vector  is the concatenation of all of the above vectors for all .
A test  result (calculated from the null hypothesis and the sample) is called statistically significant if it is deemed unlikely to have occurred by chance, ''assuming the truth of the null hypothesis''.
The experimental methods used in the study of the personal equation were later accepted by the emerging field of psychology  which developed strong (full factorial) experimental methods to which randomization and blinding were soon added.
In the era of mechanical calculators this simplicity was critical.
ANOVAs are useful for comparing (testing) three or more means (groups or variables) for statistical significance.
Planned tests are determined before looking at the data and post hoc tests are performed after looking at the data.
Random error is also called experimental error.
Few statisticians object to model-based analysis of balanced randomized experiments.
These include graphical methods based on limiting
In practice, the estimates of treatment-effects from observational studies  generally are often inconsistent.
