By definition, none of these creatures has a backbone.
He observed that when a ring-like portion of bark was removed on a trunk a swelling occurred in the tissues above the ring, and he unmistakably interpreted this as growth stimulated by food coming down from the leaves, and being captured above the ring.
Anatomy is inherently tied to  embryology, comparative anatomy, evolutionary biology, and phylogeny, as these are the processes by which anatomy is generated over immediate (embryology) and long (evolution) timescales.
It undulates from side to side to force the animal through the water when swimming.
All of a triploblastic animal's tissues and organs are derived from the three germ layers of the embryo, the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm.
'''Crocodilians''' are large, low-slung aquatic reptiles with long snouts and large numbers of teeth.
Locomotion is often provided by cilia or flagella or may proceed via the advance of pseudopodia, food may be gathered by phagocytosis, energy needs may be supplied by photosynthesis and the cell may be supported by an endoskeleton or an exoskeleton.
The feet have four or five digits and the toes are often webbed for swimming or have suction pads for climbing.
Turtles are vegetarians and the typical reptile teeth have been replaced by sharp, horny plates.
Staining techniques using artificial dyes were established to help distinguish between different types of tissue.
The body tissues are composed of numerous types of cell, including those found in muscles, nerves and skin.
The heart resembles that of the amphibian but there is a septum which more completely separates the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloodstreams.
They supplement this with gas exchange through the skin which needs to be kept moist.
The outer surface of the epidermis is normally formed of epithelial cells and secretes an extracellular matrix which provides support to the organism.
The main skeletal element is the vertebral column, composed of articulating vertebrae which are lightweight yet strong.
The skeleton, which forms the support structure inside the fish, is either made of cartilage, in cartilaginous fish, or bone in bony fish.
Epithelial cells can be squamous (flat), cuboidal or columnar and rest on a basal lamina, the upper layer of the basement membrane, the lower layer is the reticular lamina lying next to the connective tissue in the extracellular matrix secreted by the epithelial cells.
From 1822 the Royal College of Surgeons regulated the teaching of anatomy in medical schools.
He was one of the first experimental physiologists through his vivisection experiments on animals.
He was responsible for setting up the system of three years of "pre-clinical" academic teaching in the sciences underlying medicine, including especially anatomy.
This is one of the arguments put forward by Charles Darwin to support his theory of evolution.
The invention of the electron microscope brought a great advance in resolution power and allowed research into the ultrastructure of cells and the organelles and other structures within them.
The thorax has three pairs of segmented legs, one pair each for the three segments that compose the thorax and one or two pairs of wings.
It was Herophilus who made the point that damage to motor nerves induced paralysis.
Derived from the Greek  ''anatemnō'' "I cut up, cut open" from ἀνά ''ana'' "up", and τέμνω ''temnō'' "I cut", anatomy is the scientific study of the structure of organisms including their systems, organs and tissues.
Anatomy and physiology, which study (respectively) the structure and function of organisms and their parts, make a natural pair of related disciplines, and they are often studied together.
There is an inner ear but no external or middle ear.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) was trained in anatomy by Andrea del Verrocchio.
Snakes lack moveable eyelids, the eyes being covered by transparent "spectacle" scales.
These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat.
Unlike plant cells, animal cells have neither a cell wall nor chloroplasts.
There are many different types of epithelium, modified to suit a particular function.
They are tetrapods, but the snakes and a few species of lizard either have no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size.
Their forked tongues are used as organs of taste and smell and some species have sensory pits on their heads enabling them to locate warm-blooded prey.
They mostly have four limbs but some aquatic mammals have no limbs or limbs modified into fins and the forelimbs of bats are modified into wings.
During the third century, Greek physicians were able to differentiate nerves from blood vessels and tendons  and to realize that the nerves convey neural impulses.
Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically; that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems.
The history of anatomy is characterized by a progressive understanding of the functions of the organs and structures of the human body.
This system lasted until the reform of medical training in 1993 and 2003.
The skeleton consists of a skull, a hyoid bone, spine and ribs though a few species retain a vestige of the pelvis and rear limbs in the form of pelvic spurs.
The Ebers Papyrus (c. 1550 BCE) features a "treatise on the heart", with vessels carrying all the body's fluids to or from every member of the body.
The ribs attach to the spine and there are no limbs or limb girdles.
Nitrogenous waste is excreted primarily as urea.
Before the era of modern medical procedures, the main means for studying the internal structure of the body were palpation and dissection.
Valves seal the nostrils and ears when it is submerged.
They are often involved in teaching anatomy, and research into certain systems, organs, tissues or cells.
Great feats were made during the third century in both the digestive and reproductive systems.
Andreas Vesalius (1514–1564) (Latinized from Andries van Wezel), professor of anatomy at the University of Padua, is considered the founder of modern human anatomy.
Originally from Brabant, Vesalius published the influential book ''De humani corporis fabrica'' ("the structure of the human body"), a large format book in seven volumes, in 1543.
The long bones are thin, hollow and very light.
Anatomy developed little from classical times until the sixteenth century; as the historian Marie Boas writes, "Progress in anatomy before the sixteenth century is as mysteriously slow as its development after 1500 is startlingly rapid".
The bar under the second fenestra has also been lost and the jaws have extreme flexibility allowing the snake to swallow its prey whole.
Their bones are better ossified and their skeletons stronger than those of amphibians.
Connective tissue gives shape to organs and holds them in place.
A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required by physicians, especially surgeons and doctors working in some diagnostic specialties, such as histopathology and radiology.
The body of a fish is divided into a head, trunk and tail, although the divisions between the three are not always externally visible.
Microscopic anatomy is the study of structures on a microscopic scale, including histology (the study of tissues), and embryology (the study of an organism in its immature condition).
In some slow-moving radially symmetrical marine animals such as ctenophores and cnidarians (including sea anemones and jellyfish), the nerves form a nerve net, but in most animals they are organized longitudinally into bundles.
These have similar segmentation to the legs and function as taste and smell organs.
Philadelphia, Baltimore and New York were all renowned for body snatching activity as criminals raided graveyards at night, removing newly buried corpses from their coffins.
Cartilaginous fish produce a small number of large, yolky eggs.
Mammals have three bones in the middle ear and a cochlea in the inner ear.
Technical advances in the development of achromatic lenses increased the resolving power of the microscope and around 1839, Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann identified that cells were the fundamental unit of organization of all living things.
The tuatara has a well-developed parietal eye on its forehead.
In frogs the pelvic girdle is robust and the hind legs are much longer and stronger than the forelimbs.
The head and trunk are dorso-ventrally flattened and the tail is laterally compressed.
Sharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar to those of ancient fish, including skeletons composed of cartilage.
Large flight feathers are found on the wings and tail, contour feathers cover the bird's surface and fine down occurs on young birds and under the contour feathers of water birds.
Academic anatomists are usually employed by universities, medical schools or teaching hospitals.
There is one living species, ''Sphenodon punctatus''.
'''Tuataras''' superficially resemble lizards but the lineages diverged in the Triassic period.
In more complex animals, specialized receptor cells such as chemoreceptors and photoreceptors are found in groups and send messages along neural networks to other parts of the organism.
An exoskeleton is a thickened, rigid cuticle which is stiffened by mineralization, as in crustaceans or by the cross-linking of its proteins as in insects.
The feathers are outgrowths of the epidermis and are found in localized bands from where they fan out over the skin.
The cells of single-cell protozoans have the same basic structure as those of multicellular animals but some parts are specialized into the equivalent of tissues and organs.
In simple animals, receptor neurons in the body wall cause a local reaction to a stimulus.
Aristotle described vertebrate anatomy based on animal dissection.
The peripheral nervous system is divided into the somatic nervous system which conveys sensation and controls voluntary muscle, and the autonomic nervous system which involuntarily controls smooth muscle, certain glands and internal organs, including the stomach.
Air sac extensions from the lungs occupy the centre of some bones.
The bones of mammals are well ossified and their teeth, which are usually differentiated, are coated in a layer of prismatic enamel.
Skin consists of an outer layer of keratinized stratified squamous epithelium that covers the exterior of the vertebrate body.
The anatomy of the muscles and skeleton is described in the ''Hippocratic Corpus'', an Ancient Greek medical work written by unknown authors.
There is one row of teeth in the lower jaw and this fits between the two rows in the upper jaw when the animal chews.
They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea.
They are used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes and provide information on the internal structures and organs of the body to a degree far beyond the imagination of earlier generations.
An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms, sponges and some cephalopods.
Insects possess segmented bodies supported by a hard-jointed outer covering, the exoskeleton, made mostly of chitin.
The sternum is wide and usually has a keel and the caudal vertebrae are fused.
There is considerable variation between species and many adaptations to the body parts, especially wings, legs, antennae and mouthparts.
Their bodies tend to be dorso-ventrally flattened, they usually have five pairs of gill slits and a large mouth set on the underside of the head.
Some of these glands are specialized as mammary glands, producing milk to feed the young.
In higher animals striated muscles occur in bundles attached to bone to provide movement and are often arranged in antagonistic sets.
In the United States, medical schools began to be set up towards the end of the 18th century.
Some of the most striking advances in early anatomy and physiology took place in Hellenistic Alexandria.
In England, anatomy was the subject of the first public lectures given in any science; these were given by the Company of Barbers and Surgeons in the 16th century, joined in 1583 by the Lumleian lectures in surgery at the Royal College of Physicians.
'''Lizards''' have skulls with only one fenestra on each side, the lower bar of bone below the second fenestra having been lost.
The term "anatomy" is commonly taken to refer to human anatomy.
They are supported by the muscles which compose the main part of the trunk.
They burrow by means of zones of muscle contractions which move along the body and they swim by undulating their body from side to side.
The limbs of vertebrates are considered to be homologous because the same underlying skeletal structure was inherited from their last common ancestor.
Galen's drawings, based mostly on dog anatomy, became effectively the only anatomical textbook for the next thousand years.
Mammals are amniotes, and most are viviparous, giving birth to live young.
Human anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are complementary basic medical sciences, which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical school.
Spiders a class of arachnids have four pairs of legs; a body of two segments—a cephalothorax and an abdomen.
The only cutaneous gland is the single uropygial gland near the base of the tail.
Mammals breathe with lungs and have a muscular diaphragm separating the thorax from the abdomen which helps them draw air into the lungs.
Two of the most famous Greek anatomists and physiologists of the third century were Herophilus and Erasistratus.
They constitute about 95% of the animal species.
Over time, this medical practice expanded by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body.
The bladder is small as nitrogenous waste is excreted as uric acid.
Short wavelength electromagnetic radiation such as X-rays can be passed through the body and used in medical radiography to view interior structures that have different degrees of opaqueness.
He recognized that spermatozoa were produced by the testes and was the first to identify the prostate gland.
They have mouthparts called chelicerae which are often connected to venom glands as most spiders are venomous.
In the respiratory tract there is a type of ciliated epithelial lining; in the small intestine there are microvilli on the epithelial lining and in the large intestine there are intestinal villi.
Animal tissues can be grouped into four basic types: connective, epithelial, muscle and nervous tissue.
In more advanced animals, many glands are formed of epithelial cells.
Mondino's ''Anatomy'' of 1316 was the first textbook in the medieval rediscovery of human anatomy.
The discipline of anatomy is divided into macroscopic and microscopic anatomy.
Herophilus became known for his anatomical works making impressing contributions to many branches of anatomy and many other aspects of medicine.
Low frequency vibrations are detected by the lateral line system of sense organs that run along the length of the sides of fish, and these respond to nearby movements and to changes in water pressure.
Medical museums provided examples in comparative anatomy, and were often used in teaching.
The head typically bears a pair of sensory antennae, a pair of compound eyes, one to three simple eyes (ocelli) and three sets of modified appendages that form the mouthparts.
Invertebrates constitute a vast array of living organisms ranging from the simplest unicellular eukaryotes such as ''Paramecium'' to such complex multicellular animals as the octopus, lobster and dragonfly.
Collagen plays a major part in organizing and maintaining tissues.
In most vertebrates the notochord becomes the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral discs.
Nowadays, modern techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, fluoroscopy and ultrasound imaging have enabled researchers and practitioners to examine organs, living or dead, in unprecedented detail.
The teeth are conical and mostly uniform in size.
Most animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues and these animals are also known as eumetazoans.
There may also be protrusions such as microvilli, cilia, bristles, spines and tubercles.
Methods used include dissection, in which a body is opened and its organs studied, and endoscopy, in which a video camera-equipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used to explore the internal organs and other structures.
The nostrils, eyes and ears are elevated above the top of the flat head enabling them to remain above the surface of the water when the animal is floating.
Gross anatomy is the study of structures large enough to be seen with the naked eye, and also includes superficial anatomy or surface anatomy, the study by sight of the external body features.
The kingdom Animalia or '''metazoa''', contains multicellular organisms that are heterotrophic and motile (although some have secondarily adopted a sessile lifestyle).
The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column and is above the notochord and the gastrointestinal tract is below it.
The surface cells of the epidermis are modified into horny scales which create a waterproof layer.
The latter consists of sensory nerves that transmit information from sense organs and motor nerves that influence target organs.
Praxagoras identified the difference between arteries and veins.
They have a cloaca into which the urinary and genital passages open, but not a swim bladder.
Some graveyards were in consequence protected with watchtowers.
They are clothed in hair and their skin contains glands which secrete sweat.
Those simpler invertebrates which are formed from two germ layers of ectoderm and endoderm are called diploblastic and the more developed animals whose structures and organs are formed from three germ layers are called triploblastic.
Each typically has a cell membrane formed of phospholipids, cytoplasm and a nucleus.
Also in the 4th century BCE, Herophilos and Erasistratus produced more accurate anatomical descriptions based on vivisection of criminals in Alexandria during the Ptolemaic dynasty.
Marcello Malpighi, the father of microscopical anatomy, discovered that plants had tubules similar to those he saw in insects like the silk worm.
This produces an oily secretion that waterproofs the feathers when the bird preens.
The eggs are surrounded by amniotic membranes which prevents them from drying out and are laid on land, or develop internally in some species.
Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales, but contains many mucous glands and in some species, poison glands.
Muscle cells (myocytes) form the active contractile tissue of the body.
The epithelial cells on the external surface of the body typically secrete an extracellular matrix in the form of a cuticle.
About the same time, in the 1950s, the use of X-ray diffraction for studying the crystal structures of proteins, nucleic acids and other biological molecules gave rise to a new field of molecular anatomy.
Exoskeletons are derived from the epidermis and is composed of chitin in arthropods (insects, spiders, ticks, shrimps, crabs, lobsters).
They have a second pair of appendages called pedipalps attached to the cephalothorax.
The hearts of amphibians have three chambers, two atria and one ventricle.
At the end of each male pedipalp is a spoon-shaped cymbium that acts to support the copulatory organ.
The major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy, has been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format, in line with modern teaching methods.
'''Reptiles''' are a class of animals comprising turtles, tuataras, lizards, snakes and crocodiles.
The bony fish lineage shows more derived anatomical traits, often with major evolutionary changes from the features of ancient fish.
It includes the appearance and position of the various parts, the materials from which they are composed, their locations and their relationships with other parts.
The main external features of the fish, the fins, are composed of either bony or soft spines called rays, which with the exception of the caudal fins, have no direct connection with the spine.
It is found in such organs as sea anemone tentacles and the body wall of sea cucumbers.
A similar problem existed in Britain where demand for bodies became so great that grave-raiding and even anatomy murder were practised to obtain cadavers.
The fields of cytology and histology developed from here in the late 19th century.
The eyes are adapted for seeing underwater and have only local vision.
The eyes are relatively large, particularly in nocturnal species such as owls.
The dermis is covered with separate dermal placoid scales.
The extracellular matrix contains proteins, the chief and most abundant of which is collagen.
The structure and tissues of plants are of a dissimilar nature and they are studied in plant anatomy.
They face forwards in predators and sideways in ducks.
Metazoans do not include the sponges, which have undifferentiated cells.
Skeletal muscle contracts rapidly but has a limited range of extension.
Vacuoles, when present, are more in number and much smaller than those in the plant cell.
All vertebrates have a similar basic body plan and at some point in their lives, (mostly in the embryonic stage), share the major chordate characteristics; a stiffening rod, the notochord; a dorsal hollow tube of nervous material, the neural tube; pharyngeal arches; and a tail posterior to the anus.
It was the standard anatomy textbook for the next century.
They also conducted vivisections on the cadavers of condemned criminals, which was considered taboo until the Renaissance – Herophilus was recognized as the first person to perform systematic dissections.
These are formed from bony plates embedded in the dermis which are overlain by horny ones and are partially fused with the ribs and spine.
Reptiles are unable to use their skin for respiration as do amphibians and have a more efficient respiratory system drawing air into their lungs by expanding their chest walls.
Phenomenal anatomical observations of the human body were made, which have contributed towards the understanding of the brain, eye, liver, reproductive organs and the nervous system.
Lizards are mostly quadrupeds, with the trunk held off the ground by short, sideways-facing legs, but a few species have no limbs and resemble snakes.
The legs of most mammals are situated below the trunk, which is held well clear of the ground.
They mostly spawn a large number of small eggs with little yolk which they broadcast into the water column.
The defining characteristic of a vertebrate is the vertebral column, formed in the development of the segmented series of vertebrae.
The accurate and intricately detailed illustrations, often in allegorical poses against Italianate landscapes, are thought to have been made by the artist Jan van Calcar, a pupil of Titian.
Mammals are a diverse class of animals, mostly terrestrial but some are aquatic and others have evolved flapping or gliding flight.
Nervous tissue is composed of many nerve cells known as neurons which transmit information.
'''Snakes''' are closely related to lizards, having branched off from a common ancestral lineage during the Cretaceous period, and they share many of the same features.
Salamanders resemble lizards in appearance; their short legs project sideways, the belly is close to or in contact with the ground and they have a long tail.
He made use of his anatomical knowledge in his artwork, making many sketches of skeletal structures, muscles and organs of humans and other vertebrates that he dissected.
He noticed that the frequently fatal fever occurred more often in mothers examined by medical students than by midwives.
Frogs have large eyes and no tail.
They are tetrapods, but the caecilians and a few species of salamander have either no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size.
The city of Alexandria was the stepping-stone for Greek anatomy and physiology.
They have a bony skeleton, are generally laterally flattened, have five pairs of gills protected by an operculum, and a mouth at or near the tip of the snout.
Macroscopic anatomy, or gross anatomy, is the examination of an animal's body parts using unaided eyesight.
Anatomy can be studied using both invasive and non-invasive methods with the goal of obtaining information about the structure and organization of organs and systems.
Ignaz Semmelweis investigated puerperal fever and he discovered how it was caused.
Connective tissues are fibrous and made up of cells scattered among inorganic material called the extracellular matrix.
The reproductive system is designed for internal fertilization, with a copulatory organ present in most species.
The segments of the body are organized into three distinct parts, a head, a thorax and an abdomen.
The most basic types of metazoan tissues are epithelium and connective tissue, both of which are present in nearly all invertebrates.
His distinction between the arteries and veins – the arteries carrying the air through the body, while the veins carried the blood from the heart was a great anatomical discovery.
