In response, the Confederates confiscated his land and his slaves, and turned his home into a military hospital.
and concluded his speech, "may God bless this people and God save the Constitution."
Republicans viewed the address as a declaration of war, while one Democratic ally estimated Johnson's speech cost the party 200,000 votes in the 1866 congressional midterm elections.
Although strongly urged by Moderates to sign the Civil Rights Bill, Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27.
Lincoln considered several War Democrats for the ticket in 1864, and sent an agent to sound out General Benjamin Butler as a possible running mate.
In the legislative process, Congress added to the bill that restoration to the Union would follow the state's ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment, and completion of the process of adding it to the Constitution.
In his veto message, he objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when 11 out of 36 states were unrepresented in the Congress, and that it discriminated in favor of African-Americans and against whites.
When the balloting for the Senate seat began on January 20, 1875, he led with 30 votes, but did not have the required majority as three former Confederate generals, one former colonel, and a former Democratic congressman split the vote with him.
Congress assembled in early December 1865; Johnson's conciliatory annual message to them was well received.
The President was unhappy about the provocative actions of the Southern states, and about the continued control by the antebellum elite there, but made no statement publicly, believing that Southerners had a right to act as they did, even if it was unwise to do so.
As military governor, Johnson sought to eliminate rebel influence in the state.
He called a convention of the National Union Party.
He reluctantly supported efforts to enlist former slaves into the Union Army, feeling that African-Americans should perform menial tasks to release white Americans to do the fighting.
In his annual message to Congress in December, Johnson urged the repeal of the Tenure of Office Act and told legislators that had they admitted their Southern colleagues in 1865, all would have been well.
In fact, the President opposed both bills as infringements on state sovereignty.
The first American president to be impeached, he was acquitted in the Senate by one vote.
Johnson feared that the freedmen, many of whom were still economically bound to their former masters, might vote at their direction.
Ran away from the subscriber, two apprentice boys, legally bound, named William and Andrew Johnson&nbsp;... payment to any person who will deliver said apprentices to me in Raleigh, or I will give the above reward for Andrew Johnson alone."
Believing he would be killed if he stayed, Johnson fled through the Cumberland Gap, where his party was in fact shot at.
She was not often seen during her husband's presidency; their daughter Martha usually served as official hostess.
Lincoln died at 7:22&nbsp;am the next morning; Johnson's swearing in occurred between 10 and 11&nbsp;am with Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase presiding in the presence of most of the Cabinet.
When Southern states returned many of their old leaders, and passed Black Codes to deprive the freedmen of many civil liberties, Congressional Republicans refused to seat legislators from those states and advanced legislation to overrule the Southern actions.
Also on March 2, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act over the President's veto, in response to statements during the Swing Around the Circle that he planned to fire Cabinet secretaries who did not agree with him.
The Moderate Republicans sought to keep the Democrats out of power at a national level, and prevent former rebels from resuming power.
As the conflict between the branches of government grew, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act, restricting Johnson's ability to fire Cabinet officials.
To sound a theme of unity, Lincoln in 1864 ran under the banner of the National Union Party, rather than the Republicans.
Johnson was critical of the Tennessee common school system and suggested funding be increased via taxes, either statewide or county by county—a mixture of the two was passed.
Seymour's operatives sought Johnson's support, but he long remained silent on the presidential campaign.
He left his wife and family in Greeneville.
He had arranged to purchase a large farm near Greeneville to live on after his presidency.
Johnson was born in poverty in Raleigh, North Carolina.
A group of Democrats nominated Landon Carter Haynes to oppose Johnson as he sought a fifth term; the Whigs were so pleased with the internecine battle among the Democrats in the general election that they did not nominate a candidate of their own.
They shall suffer for this."
Grant stepped aside over Johnson's objection, causing a complete break between them.
Instead, white Southerners felt emboldened.
After the convention backed Lincoln, former Secretary of War Simon Cameron offered a resolution to nominate Hamlin, but it was defeated.
In May 1864, the President dispatched General Daniel Sickles to Nashville on a fact-finding mission.
The defense relied on the provision of the Tenure of Office Act that made it applicable only to appointees of the current administration.
Southern senators felt that those who took advantage of the provisions of the Homestead Bill were more likely to be Northern non-slaveholders.
The Whig Party had organized in opposition to Jackson, fearing the concentration of power in the Executive Branch of the government; Johnson differed from the Whigs as he opposed more than minimal government spending and spoke against aid for the railroads, while his constituents hoped for improvements in transportation.
As Southern states began the process of forming governments, Johnson's policies received considerable public support in the North, which he took as unconditional backing for quick reinstatement of the South.
According to Stewart, the veto was "for many his defining blunder, setting a tone of perpetual confrontation with Congress that prevailed for the rest of his presidency".
The issue of slavery had been complicated by the Supreme Court's ruling earlier in the year in ''Dred Scott v. Sandford'' that slavery could not be prohibited in the territories.
On March 3, the President hosted a large public reception at the White House on his final full day in office.
Soon after taking his seat, Johnson purchased his first slave, Dolly, aged 14.
In 1866, Johnson went on an unprecedented national tour promoting his executive policies, seeking to destroy his Republican opponents.
He then worked as a tailor in Columbia, Tennessee, but was called back to Raleigh by his mother and stepfather, who saw limited opportunities there and who wished to emigrate west.
This committee duly met, examining the President's bank accounts, and summoning members of the Cabinet to testify.
He succeeded in getting the appointments he wanted in return for his endorsement of John Bell, a Whig, for one of the state's U.S. Senate seats.
Conspiracy theorists point to the fact that on the day of the assassination, Booth came to the Kirkwood House and left one of his cards.
In his hour-long speech, he instead referred to himself over 200 times.
He came to Washington as usual without his wife and family; Eliza would visit Washington only once during Johnson's first time as senator, in 1860.
Along with legislation for land-grant colleges and for the transcontinental railroad, the Homestead Bill has been credited with opening the American West to settlement.
With the dealmaking, Johnson was confident of the result in advance of the verdict, and in the days leading up to the ballot, newspapers reported that Stevens and his Radicals had given up.
Johnson sought nomination by the 1868 Democratic National Convention in New York in July 1868.
Johnson favored the first, but opposed the others.
A series of more than a dozen vitriolic debates ensued.
Instead, he remained after word came that General Ulysses S. Grant had captured the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, presaging the end of the war.
A bipartisan majority of the committee voted down impeachment charges; the committee adjourned on June 3.
In 1872, there was a special election for an at-large congressional seat for Tennessee; Johnson initially sought the Democratic nomination, but when he saw that it would go to former Confederate general Benjamin F. Cheatham, decided to run as an independent.
He had achieved financial success in his tailoring business, but sold it to concentrate on politics.
Johnson's first tenure in the Senate came to a conclusion in March 1862 when Lincoln appointed him military governor of Tennessee.
After brief service in the Tennessee Senate, Johnson was elected to the federal House of Representatives in 1843, where he served five two-year terms.
In his first biennial speech, Johnson urged simplification of the state judicial system, abolishment of the Bank of Tennessee and establishment of an agency to provide uniformity in weights and measures; the last was passed.
In April 1866, the French government informed Seward that its troops would be brought home in stages, to conclude by November 1867.
Butler went so far as to imprison Woolley in the Capitol building  when he refused to answer questions, but failed to prove bribery.
Johnson, a slaveholding senator from a Southern state, made a major speech in the Senate the following May in an attempt to convince his colleagues that the Homestead Bill and slavery were not incompatible.
He found work quickly, met his first love, Mary Wood, and made her a quilt as a gift.
Johnson returned home after the special session concluded.
He attained the rank of colonel, though while an enrolled member, Johnson was fined for an unknown offense.
However, the Confederate allowed his wife and family to pass through the lines to join him.
A Democrat who ran with Lincoln on the National Union ticket, Johnson came to office as the Civil War concluded.
While he received such support from the white South, he underestimated the determination of Northerners to ensure that the war had not been fought for nothing.
His education was augmented by citizens who would come to Selby's shop to read to the tailors as they worked.
With the party split, Whig nominee General Zachary Taylor was easily victorious, and carried Tennessee.
In a number of works from 1956 onwards by such historians as Fawn Brodie, the former president was depicted as a successful saboteur of efforts to better the freedman's lot.
She taught him mathematics skills and tutored him to improve his writing.
Tennessee's governor had little power—Johnson could propose legislation but not veto it, and most appointments were made by the Whig-controlled legislature.
Johnson took to the Senate floor after the election, giving a speech well received in the North, "I will not give up this government&nbsp;... No; I intend to stand by it&nbsp;... and I invite every man who is a patriot to&nbsp;... rally around the altar of our common country&nbsp;... and swear by our God, and all that is sacred and holy, that the Constitution shall be saved, and the Union preserved."
Johnson was nominated for vice president by C.M.
One friend, Hugh Douglas, stated in a letter to him, "you have been in the way of our would be great men for a long time.
The Senate returned on May 26 and voted on the second and third articles, with identical 35–19 results.
The constitution was submitted for a public vote, and Johnson spoke widely for its adoption; the successful campaign provided him with statewide exposure.
When called upon by the crowd to say who they were, Johnson named Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens, Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner, and abolitionist Wendell Phillips, and accused them of plotting his assassination.
In these months, Union troops finished the retaking of eastern Tennessee, including Greeneville.
Surratt was executed with three others, including Atzerodt, on July 7, 1865.
Johnson remains the only former president to serve in the Senate.
He began looking towards the next Senate election, to take place in the legislature in early 1875.
At the time of Johnson's accession, the French had intervened in Mexico, sending troops there.
The conflict with Congress continued.
The Whigs had won the past two gubernatorial elections, and still controlled the legislature.
At the party's convention in Baltimore in June, Lincoln was easily nominated, although there had been some talk of replacing him with a Cabinet officer or one of the more successful generals.
He called them the "plebians"; he was less popular among the planters and lawyers who led the state Democratic Party, but none could match him as a vote-getter.
Afterwards, he was often addressed or referred to by his rank.
Much of eastern Tennessee was captured later that year.
He came close with the Danish West Indies as Denmark agreed to sell and the local population approved the transfer in a plebiscite, but the Senate never voted on the treaty and it expired.
Northern newspapers, in their obituaries, tended to focus on Johnson's loyalty during the war, while Southern ones paid tribute to his actions as president.
Although it was unusual at the time for a national candidate to actively campaign, Johnson gave a number of speeches in Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, and Indiana.
In January 1868, the Senate disapproved of his action, and reinstated Stanton, contending the President had violated the Tenure of Office Act.
One of Johnson's final acts as military governor was to certify the results.
On the second ballot, Kentucky switched to vote for Johnson, beginning a stampede.
Six weeks later, the assassination of Lincoln made him president.
His boost to Southern conservatives by undermining Reconstruction was his legacy to the nation, one that would trouble the country for generations to come."
Johnson traveled to Washington to be sworn in, although according to Gordon-Reed, "in light of what happened on March 4, 1865, it might have been better if Johnson had stayed in Nashville."
Johnson had three goals in Reconstruction.
Jacob Johnson was a poor man, as had been his father, William Johnson, but he became town constable of Raleigh before marrying and starting a family.
Johnson's funeral was held on August 3 in Greeneville.
He also took part in debates at Greeneville College.
Although some argued that civil government should simply resume once the Confederates were defeated in an area, Lincoln chose to use his power as commander in chief to appoint military governors over Union-controlled Southern regions.
The trip, including speeches in Chicago, St. Louis, Indianapolis and Columbus, proved politically disastrous, with the President making controversial comparisons between himself and Christ, and engaging in arguments with hecklers.
Andrew Johnson fell in love with the town at first sight, and when he became prosperous purchased the land where he had first camped and planted a tree in commemoration.
Following the 1831 Nat Turner slave rebellion, a state convention was called to pass a new constitution, including provisions to disenfranchise free people of color.
In late July, convinced some of his opponents were defaming him in the Ohio gubernatorial race, he decided to travel there to give speeches.
Allen of Indiana with an Iowa delegate as seconder.
In the weeks after the inauguration, Johnson only presided over the Senate briefly, and hid from public ridicule at the Maryland home of a friend, Francis Preston Blair.
Since Johnson was not elected President, he lacked political and moral authority over Congress.
Johnson was named on the second ballot with 491 votes to Hamlin's 17 and eight for Dickinson; the nomination was made unanimous.
Johnson and his party traveled through the Blue Ridge Mountains to Greeneville, Tennessee.
Through the remainder of the 19th century, there were few historical evaluations of Johnson and his presidency.
Don't wish to disturb you.
On March 30, 1867, de Stoeckl and Seward signed the treaty, working quickly as the Senate was about to adjourn.
Johnson, due to national interest in new railroad construction and in response to the need for better transportation in his own district, also supported government assistance for the East Tennessee and Virginia Railroad.
On May 16, the Senate voted on the 11th article of impeachment, accusing Johnson of firing Stanton in violation of the Tenure of Office of Act once the Senate had overturned his suspension.
Johnson gave a major speech in the Senate in December, decrying Northerners who would endanger the Union by seeking to outlaw slavery.
No seats in Congress were directly elected in the polling, but the Democrats took control of the Ohio General Assembly, allowing them to defeat for re-election one of Johnson's strongest opponents, Senator Benjamin Wade.
Lincoln expressed pleasure at the result, "Andy Johnson, I think, is a good man."
Even before he became an apprentice, Johnson came to listen.
Stanton refused to leave his office, and on February 24, 1868, the House impeached the President for intentionally violating the Tenure of Office Act, by a vote of 128 to 47.
The veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, often seen as a key mistake of Johnson's presidency, convinced Moderates there was no hope of working with him.
He served as alderman and mayor there before being elected to the Tennessee House of Representatives in 1835.
Gordon-Reed states of Johnson:
Grant, under protest, followed Johnson's order transferring Sheridan and another of the district commanders, Daniel Sickles, who had angered Johnson by firmly following Congress's plan.
Congress also proposed the Fourteenth Amendment to the states.
With Eliza remaining in Greeneville, Congressman Johnson shunned social functions in favor of study in the Library of Congress.
With former Tennessee senator John Bell running a fourth-party candidacy and further dividing the vote, the Republican Party elected its first president, former Illinois representative Abraham Lincoln.
In James Schouler's 1913 ''History of the Reconstruction Period'', the author accused Rhodes of being "quite unfair to Johnson", though agreeing that the former president had created many of his own problems through inept political moves.
At noon, Johnson conducted his first Cabinet meeting in the Treasury Secretary's office, and asked all members to remain in their positions.
After Brookins Campbell and the Whigs defeated Johnson for re-election in 1837, Johnson would not lose another race for thirty years.
Johnson won the election by 63,413 votes to 61,163; some votes for him were cast in return for his promise to support Whig Nathaniel Taylor for his old seat in Congress.
Always seen in impeccably tailored clothing, he cut an impressive figure, and had the stamina to endure lengthy campaigns with daily travel over bad roads leading to another speech or debate.
In October 1859, abolitionist John Brown and sympathizers raided the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia (today West Virginia).
Johnson advocated for the interests of the poor, maintained an anti-abolitionist stance, argued for only limited spending by the government and opposed protective tariffs.
Johnson vetoed their bills, and Congressional Republicans overrode him, setting a pattern for the remainder of his presidency.
Much of eastern Tennessee remained in Confederate hands, and the ebb and flow of war during 1862 sometimes brought Confederate control again close to Nashville.
One reason senators were reluctant to remove the President was that his successor would have been Ohio Senator Wade, the president ''pro tempore'' of the Senate.
After much debate about whether anything the President had done was a high crime or misdemeanor, the standard under the Constitution, the resolution was defeated by the House of Representatives on December 7, 1867, by a vote of 57 in favor to 108 opposed.
The pair were married by Justice of the Peace Mordecai Lincoln, first cousin of Thomas Lincoln, whose son would become president.
It was important, in Northern public opinion, that the South acknowledge its defeat, that slavery be ended, and that the lot of African-Americans be improved.
Negotiated by the United States Minister to Britain, former Maryland senator Reverdy Johnson, in late 1868, it was ignored by the Senate during the remainder of the President's term.
He was elected to the Tennessee Senate in 1841, where he served a two-year term.
Republicans had returned to using their previous identifier; Johnson intended to use the discarded name to unite his supporters and gain election to a full-term, in 1868.
Most Southerners elected to Congress were former Confederates, with the most prominent being Georgia Senator-designate and former Confederate vice president Alexander Stephens.
Polly Johnson eventually remarried, to Turner Doughtry, who was as poor as she was.
They rejected completely any claim of black inferiority, which had marked many earlier historical works, and saw the developing Civil Rights Era as a second Reconstruction; some writers stated they hoped their work on the postbellum era would advance the cause of civil rights.
Lincoln, who had watched sadly during the debacle, was sworn in, and delivered his acclaimed Second Inaugural Address.
Some expected Johnson to seek to be Tennessee's governor again or to attempt a return to the Senate, others that he would become a railroad executive.
Nevertheless, Congress refused to seat the Southern legislators and established a committee to recommend appropriate Reconstruction legislation.
The former president was defeated, finishing third, but the split in the Democratic Party defeated Cheatham in favor of an old Johnson Unionist ally, Horace Maynard.
Although the President preferred a more aggressive approach, Seward persuaded him to follow his lead.
Johnson left North Carolina for Tennessee, traveling mostly on foot.
Voting rights were less important—after all, only a handful of Northern states (mostly in New England) gave African-American men the right to vote on the same basis as whites, and in late 1865, Connecticut, Wisconsin, and Minnesota voted down African-American suffrage proposals by large margins.
In 1859, it failed on a procedural vote when Vice President Breckinridge broke a tie against the bill, and in 1860, a watered-down version passed both houses, only to be vetoed by Buchanan at the urging of Southerners.
Andrew Johnson was born in Raleigh, North Carolina, on December 29, 1808, to Jacob Johnson (1778–1812) and Mary ("Polly") McDonough (1783–1856), a laundress.
Later in June, Johnson and Stanton battled over the question of whether the military officers placed in command of the South could override the civil authorities.
Soon after taking office as president, Johnson reached an accord with Secretary of State William H. Seward that there would be no change in foreign policy.
The brothers went to Carthage, North Carolina, where Andrew Johnson worked as a tailor for several months.
When Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863, declaring freedom for all slaves in Confederate-held areas, he exempted Tennessee at Johnson's request.
In 1860, Lincoln's running mate had been Maine Senator Hannibal Hamlin.
Johnson hoped that he would be a compromise candidate for the presidential nomination as the Democratic Party tore itself apart over the slavery question.
Although the Whig Party was on its final decline nationally, it remained strong in Tennessee, and the outlook for Democrats there in 1855 was poor.
Faced with those results, Johnson's opponents gave up and dismissed proceedings.
Gordon-Reed points out that while Johnson's belief in an indissoluble Union was sincere, he had alienated Southern leaders, including Davis, who would soon be the president of the Confederate States of America, formed by the seceding states.
He won a second term in 1845 against Wiliam G. Brownlow, presenting himself as the defender of the poor against the aristocracy.
Johnson's final address as governor gave him the chance to influence his electors, and he made proposals popular among Democrats.
Stanton "relinquished" his office on May 26, and the Senate subsequently confirmed Schofield.
Tensions in Washington between pro- and anti-slavery forces increased greatly.
At his swearing-in in the Senate on March 5, 1875, he was greeted with flowers and sworn in with his predecessor as vice president, Hamlin, by that office's current incumbent, Henry Wilson, who as senator had voted for his ousting.
Reconstruction was increasingly seen as a noble effort to integrate the freed slaves into society.
Johnson helped organize a mechanics' (working men's) ticket in the 1829 Greeneville municipal election.
The Republicans had formed a number of factions.
When the President was slow to officially report ratifications of the Fourteenth Amendment by the new Southern legislatures, Congress passed a bill, again over his veto, requiring him to do so within ten days of receipt.
While many politicians had indulged in saber-rattling over the Mexican matter, Seward preferred quiet diplomacy, warning the French through diplomatic channels that their presence in Mexico was not acceptable.
He was initially deterred by a strong objection from Grant.
He seemed to respond to their ministrations, but suffered another stroke on the evening of July 30, and died early the following morning at the age of 66.
When a federal court released former Confederate president Davis on bail on May 13 (he had been captured shortly after the war), the committee investigated whether the President had impeded the prosecution.
He spoke only once in the short session, on March 22 lambasting President Grant for his use of federal troops in support of Louisiana's Reconstruction government.
As Southern slave states, including Tennessee, seceded to form the Confederate States of America, Johnson remained firmly with the Union.
Within three weeks, Congress had overridden his veto, the first time that had been done on a major bill in American history.
Memoirs from Northerners who had dealt with him, such as former vice president Henry Wilson and Maine Senator James G. Blaine, depicted him as an obstinate boor who tried to favor the South in Reconstruction, but who was frustrated by Congress.
The Republicans insisted on the full language of the amendment, and the deal fell through.
Johnson notified Congress of Stanton's suspension and Grant's interim appointment.
Thirty-five senators voted "guilty" and 19 "not guilty", thus falling short by a single vote of the two-thirds majority required for conviction under the Constitution.
Unable to stay in Raleigh, where he risked being apprehended for abandoning Selby, he decided to move west.
In Greeneville, Johnson established a successful tailoring business in the front of his home.
In 1948, a poll of his colleagues by historian Arthur M. Schlesinger deemed Johnson among the average presidents; in 1956, one by Clinton L. Rossiter named him as one of the near-great Chief Executives.
In the early 21st century, Johnson is among those commonly mentioned as the worst presidents in U.S. history.
Johnson considered firing Stanton, but respected him for his wartime service as secretary.
As Southern senators announced they would resign if their states seceded, he reminded Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis that if Southerners would only hold to their seats, the Democrats would control the Senate, and could defend the South's interests against any infringement by Lincoln.
The Democratic convention unanimously named him, though some party members were not happy at his selection.
By 1867, the Russian government saw its North American colony (today Alaska) as a financial liability, and feared losing control as American settlement reached there.
