A group of Cherokees led by John Ridge negotiated the Treaty of New Echota with Jackson's representatives.
Some people stood on good chairs in muddied boots just to get a look at the President.
Andrew Jackson Hutchings was Rachel's orphaned grand nephew.
After the divorce was officially completed, Rachel and Jackson remarried in 1794.
Whitehouse.gov notes,
For the standards of his times he was considered a humane slave owner who furnished his slaves food and housing, and did not prohibit his female slaves from having children.
He was deemed insane and was institutionalized.
In 1836, Jackson established the ten-hour day in national shipyards.
While imprisoned, the brothers contracted smallpox.
Jackson's support played an important role in Polk winning the nomination and the general election.
Salacious rumors held that Peggy as a barmaid in her father's tavern had been sexually promiscuous or had even been a prostitute.
Jackson feared that monied and business interests would corrupt republican values.
From George Washington to John Quincy Adams, the problem was typically ignored or dealt with lightly; though by Jackson's time the earlier policy had grown unsustainable.
Nonetheless, Jackson became a national hero for his actions in this battle and the War of 1812.
The Service Pension Act of 1832, for instance, provided pensions to veterans "even where there existed no obvious financial or physical need", while an Act of July 1836 enabled widows of Revolutionary War soldiers who met certain criteria to receive their husband's pensions.
Jackson also denied the right of secession: "The Constitution&nbsp;... forms a ''government'' not a league&nbsp;... To say that any State may at pleasure secede from the Union is to say that the United States is not a nation."
Many poor people came to the inaugural ball in their homemade clothes.
Throughout his lifetime Jackson may have owned as many as 300 slaves.
The Second Seminole War, started in December 1835, lasted over six years, finally ending in August 1842 under President John Tyler.
Jackson's father was born in Carrickfergus, County Antrim, in current-day Northern Ireland, around 1738.
Van Buren, with help from his friends in Philadelphia and Richmond, revived many of the ideals of the old Republican Party, gave it a new name as the Democratic Party, and forged a national organization of durability.
In 1787 he was admitted to the bar and moved to Jonesborough, in what was then the Western District of North Carolina.
Jackson remains one of the most studied and most controversial Americans of the 19th century.
Jackson's name has been associated with Jacksonian democracy or the spread of democracy in terms of the passing of political power from established elites to ordinary voters based in political parties.
In 1801, Jackson was appointed colonel in the Tennessee militia, which became his political as well as military base.
Jackson was elected as a delegate to the Tennessee constitutional convention in 1796.
It was not uncommon on the frontier for relationships to be formed and dissolved unofficially, as long as they were recognized by the community.
The upshot was a total revamping of the cabinet, with everyone resigning or being fired save the Postmaster General.
The widower Jackson invited Rachel's niece Emily Donelson to serve as hostess at the White House.
Jackson supported his vice president Martin Van Buren's successful presidential campaign in 1836.
Jackson's agent in Texas, Colonel Anthony Butler, suggested to take Texas over militarily, but Jackson refused.
He was ordered by President James Monroe in December 1817 to lead a campaign in Georgia against the Seminole and Creek Indians.
Meanwhile, the Cabinet wives insisted that the interests and honor of all American women was at stake.
Jackson's democratic approach incorporated patriotism for country as qualification for holding office.
Although Jackson sympathized with the South in the tariff debate, he also vigorously supported a strong union, with effective powers for the central government.
Jackson said he would forgive those who insulted him, but he would never forgive the ones who attacked his wife.
Gallatin criticized Jackson as "an honest man and the idol of the worshipers of military glory, but from incapacity, military habits, and habitual disregard of laws and constitutional provisions, altogether unfit for the office".
Historian Charles Grier Sellers says "Andrew Jackson's masterful personality was enough by itself to make him one of the most controversial figures ever to stride across the American stage."
Jackson, never known for timidity, became an advocate for this relocation policy in what is considered by some historians to be the most controversial aspect of his presidency.
Since he was not from a distinguished family, he had to make his career by his own merits; soon he began to prosper in the rough-and-tumble world of frontier law.
Most likely they traveled overland down through the Appalachian Mountains to the Scots-Irish community in the Waxhaws region, straddling the border between North and South Carolina.
In January 1835, Jackson paid off the entire national debt, the only time in U.S. history that has been accomplished.
Jackson, now commanding general, invalidated Pinckney's treaty and specified more direct terms upon both the Upper Creek and the Lower Creek.
During the 1832 Presidential Election the rechartering of the Second National Bank became the primary issue.
Later, he taught school and studied law in Salisbury, North Carolina.
Each time they performed perfectly.
Jackson formally recognized the Republic of Texas, nominating a chargé d'affaires on the last day of his Presidency, March 3, 1837.
The issue came to a head when Vice President Calhoun, in the South Carolina Exposition and Protest of 1828, supported the claim of his home state, South Carolina, that it had the right to "nullify"—declare void—the tariff legislation of 1828, and more generally the right of a state to nullify any Federal laws that went against its interests.
As a result, American exports increased 75% while imports increased 250%.
Southern politicians argued that tariffs benefited northern industrialists at the expense of southern farmers.
Those who attended backed Treasury Secretary William H. Crawford for President and Albert Gallatin for Vice President.
The problem was especially acute in the south (in particular the lands near the state of Georgia), where Indian populations were larger, denser, and more Americanized than those of the north.
Lawrence told doctors later his reasons for the shooting.
In anticipation of the 1832 election, Congress, led by Clay, attempted to reauthorize the Second Bank of the United States four years before the expiration of its charter.
He is also known for having signed the Indian Removal Act in 1830, which forcibly relocated a number of native tribes in the South to Indian Territory (now Oklahoma).
Most recently, his image appears on the U.S. $20 Federal reserve note, Series 2004-2006, with a redesigned, larger portrait.
He was the only U.S. president to have served as Grand Master of a state's Grand Lodge until Harry S. Truman in 1945.
Only George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Benjamin Franklin have appeared more often.
The national economy following the withdrawal of the remaining Funds from the Bank was booming and the federal government through duty revenues and sale of public lands was able to pay all bills.
His most controversial presidential actions included removal of the Indians from the southeast, the dismantling of the Bank of the United States, and his threat to use military force against the state of South Carolina to make it stop nullifying federal laws.
He claimed that with the President dead, "money would be more plenty" (a reference to Jackson's struggle with the Bank of the United States) and that he "could not rise until the President fell".
During Jackson's presidency, those in opposition to Jackson's purging of office holders, formed the Whig Party, calling Jackson "King Andrew I" having feared his military background, and named their party after the English parliamentary Whigs who opposed eighteenth century British monarchy.
Though the accusation was technically true, as were most personal attacks leveled against him during the campaign, it was based on events that occurred many years prior (1791 to 1794).
After being assured Andrew would recover, she volunteered to nurse prisoners of war on board two ships in Charleston harbor, where there had been an outbreak of cholera.
Jackson ordered the arrest of U. S. District Court Judge Dominic A.
Although he suffered ill health, Jackson remained influential in both national and state politics.
He was a firm advocate of the federal union of the states and rejected any talk of secession, insisting, "I will die with the Union."
As a result, the U.S. economy went into a depression, banks became insolvent, the national debt (previously paid off) increased, business failures rose, cotton prices dropped, and unemployment dramatically increased.
Other aspects of the spoils system including the buying of offices, forced political party campaign participation, and collection of assessments, did not take place until after Jackson's presidency.
Jackson's actions struck fear into the Seminole tribes as word spread of his ruthlessness in battle (he became known as "Sharp Knife").
Calhoun continued to serve as Vice President and boasted that Van Buren's political career was over, stating the defeated nomination would "...kill him, sir, kill dead.
Three years later, Jackson issued the Specie Circular, an executive order that required buyers of government lands to pay in "specie" (gold or silver coins).
Calhoun clarified his position by responding "The Union: Next to our Liberty, the most dear!"
At the time, Rachel was in an unhappy marriage with Captain Lewis Robards; he was subject to fits of jealous rage.
Jackson chose Martin Van Buren of New York as Secretary of State, John Eaton of Tennessee as Secretary of War, Samuel D. Ingham of Pennsylvania as Secretary of Treasury, John Branch of North Carolina as Secretary of Navy, John Berrien of Georgia as Attorney General, and William T. Barry of Kentucky as Postmaster General.
Indian wars broke out repeatedly, often when native tribes, especially the Muscogee and Seminole Indians, refused to abide by the treaties for various reasons.
Jackson's presidency marked the beginning of the ascendancy of the "spoils system" in American politics.
At age 13, he was captured and mistreated by the British army.
Jackson opposed the unpopular Pinckney treaty, desiring to end the threats that had caused the conflict with  the Creek nation in the first place.
In his third annual message to Congress, he expressed the view "I have heretofore recommended amendments of the Federal Constitution giving the election of President and Vice-President to the people and limiting the service of the former to a single term.
Jackson had three adopted sons: Theodore, an Indian about whom little is known, Andrew Jackson Jr., the son of Rachel's brother Severn Donelson, and Lyncoya, a Creek Indian orphan adopted by Jackson after the Creek War.
Shortly after Jackson first arrived in Nashville in 1788, he lived as a boarder with Rachel Stockly Donelson, the widow of John Donelson.
The area was so remote that the border between North and South Carolina had not been officially surveyed.
Jackson's presidency marked a new era in Indian-Anglo American relations initiating a policy of Indian removal.
According to author Gloria Jahoda, the Creeks coined their own name for him, ''Jacksa Chula Harjo'' or "Jackson, old and fierce".
As president, Jackson faced a threat of secession by South Carolina over the "Tariff of Abominations", which Congress had enacted under Adams.
Rachel died suddenly on December 22, 1828, before his inauguration, and was buried on Christmas Eve.
Jackson's initiatives to deal with the conflicts between Indians and American settlers has been a source of controversy on and off over the years, especially among his political opponents at the time and ideological opponents since.
When the messenger finally came, the old soldier, patriot and Christian was looking out for his approach.
Jackson believed that the president's authority was derived from the people.
Jackson initially opposed any federal exploration scientific expeditions during his first term in office.
There had developed a growing popular and political movement to deal with the problem, and out of this developed a policy to relocate certain Indian populations.
Jackson's service in the War of 1812 against the United Kingdom was conspicuous for bravery and success.
Andrew Jackson2 1862 Issue-2c.jpg|U.S.
Jackson's ''Specie Circular'', although designed to reduce speculation and stabilize the economy, left many investors unable to afford to pay loans backed by gold and silver.
As was the custom at the time, neither candidate personally campaigned, but their political followers organized many campaign events.
By the spring of 1831, only Barry remained, while the rest of Jackson's cabinet had been discharged.
Jackson's quick temper was notorious.
Two other Jacksonian acts in 1836 contributed to the Panic of 1837, the Specie Circular, that mandated Western lands only be purchased by money backed by gold and silver, and the Deposit and Distribution Act, that transferred federal monies from Eastern to western state banks which in turn led to a speculation frenzy by banks.
Robert Jackson died on April 27, 1781, a few days after their mother Elizabeth secured the brothers' release.
US forces and their allies killed 800 Red Stick warriors in this battle, but spared the chief Red Eagle, a mixed-race man also known as William Weatherford.
Jackson is frequently, though incorrectly, attributed the following response: "John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it".
When Tennessee achieved statehood that year, he was elected its U.S. Representative.
Jackson was a Freemason, having been initiated at Harmony Lodge No.
Jackson's philosophy as President followed much in the same line as Thomas Jefferson, advocating Republican values held by the Revolutionary War generation.
His parents were Scots-Irish colonists Andrew and Elizabeth Hutchinson Jackson, Presbyterians who had emigrated from Ireland two years earlier.
In total Jackson appointed 24 federal judges: six Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States and eighteen judges to the United States district courts.
Jackson repeatedly called for the abolition of the Electoral College by constitutional amendment in his annual messages to Congress as President.
It was subsequent to this that as many as 4,000 Cherokees died on the "Trail of Tears".
When Jackson was leaving through the East Portico after the funeral of South Carolina Representative Warren R. Davis, Richard Lawrence, an unemployed house painter from England, aimed a pistol at Jackson, which misfired.
The trade agreement with Siam was America's first treaty between the United States and an Asiatic country.
Brands says, "His audacity on behalf of the people earned him enemies who slandered him and defamed even his wife, Rachel.
In 1806, he killed a man in a duel over a matter of honor regarding his wife Rachel.
The campaign was very much a personal one.
In his December 1834 State of the Union address, Jackson sternly reprimanded the French government for non-payment, stating the federal government was "wholly disappointed" by the French, and demanded Congress authorize trade reprisals against France.
Jackson decided not to press charges.
Another notable crisis during Jackson's period of office was the "Nullification Crisis", or "secession crisis", of 1828–1832, which merged issues of sectional strife with disagreements over tariffs.
Jackson's supporters then founded what became the Democratic Party.
Due to the infighting between political factions, many Cherokees thought their appeals were still being considered when the relocation began.
Lawrence pulled out a second pistol, which also misfired.
When Jackson took office in 1829 spoliation claims, or compensation demands for the capture of American ships and sailors, dating from the Napoleonic era, caused strained relations between the U.S. and French governments.
He blamed Jackson for the loss of his job.
Calhoun's and Jackson's relationship deteriorated further.
Critics alleged that high tariffs (the "Tariff of Abominations") on imports of common manufactured goods made in Europe made those goods more expensive than ones from the northern U.S., raising the prices paid by planters in the South.
The Act authorized the President to negotiate treaties to buy tribal lands in the east in exchange for lands further west, outside of existing U.S. state borders.
The executions, and Jackson's invasion of territory belonging to Spain, a country with which the U.S. was not at war, created an international incident.
Jackson had claimed the authority to declare martial law over the entire City of New Orleans, not merely his "camp".
He felt that this had hastened her death and never forgave Adams.
Indian conflicts continued to intensify during Madison's presidency, particularly with the War of 1812, and in the years after.
Congress had been developing its own Indian relocation bill, and Jackson had many supporters in both the Senate and House who agreed with his goal.
The election also demonstrated the rapid development and organization of political parties during this time period.
The southern tribes included the Choctaw, Creek, Chickasaw, Seminole and the Cherokee.
In 1824 Jackson wrote a letter saying that he was born at an uncle's plantation in Lancaster County, South Carolina.
Petticoat politics emerged when the wives of cabinet members, led by Mrs. Calhoun, refused to socialize with the Eatons.
As none of the electors from Kentucky, Clay's home state, had initially voted for Adams, and Jackson had won more nationwide popular votes than Adams, some Kentucky politicians criticized Clay for violating the will of the people in return for personal political favors.
Allowing a prostitute in the official family was of course unthinkable—but for Jackson, after losing his own wife to horrible rumors, Peggy's virtue could not be questioned.
Occurring at the same time as the War of 1812, the Creek campaign saw Jackson command the U.S. forces, which included the Tennessee militia, U.S. regulars, and Cherokee, Choctaw, and Lower Creek warriors.
After winning election to the Senate, Jackson decided to run for president in 1824.
On May 18, 1836 Jackson signed a law creating and funding the oceanic United States Exploring Expedition.
::*Second Creek War May–July 1836; sporadic violence in 1837
Jackson asked Congress to pass a "Force Bill" explicitly authorizing the use of military force to enforce the tariff, but its passage was delayed until protectionists led by Clay agreed to a reduced Compromise Tariff.
A group of Cherokees petitioned in protest of the proposed removal, though this wasn't taken up by the Supreme Court or the U.S. Congress, in part due to delays and timing.
The Democratic Party's first national convention, held in Baltimore, in May 1832 nominated Jackson of Tennessee and Martin Van Buren of New York.
In the mid-1850s, second-hand evidence indicated that he may have been born at a different uncle's home in North Carolina.
The first recorded physical attack on a U.S. president was directed at Jackson.
The state of Georgia became involved in a contentious jurisdictional dispute with the Cherokees, culminating in the 1832 U.S. Supreme Court decision (''Worcester v. Georgia'').
But they fared better than did the six members of the militia whose executions, ordered by Jackson, would surface as the Coffin Handbills during his 1828 Presidential campaign.
Critics later alleged that Jackson exceeded orders in his Florida actions.
In contrast to several of his immediate successors, he denied the right of a state to secede from the union or to nullify federal law.
In that decision, U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall, in writing for the court, ruled that Georgia could not impose its laws upon Cherokee tribal lands.
(He was not attacked for merely owning slaves used in plantation work.)
The censure was a political maneuver spearheaded by Jackson-rival Senator Henry Clay, which served only to perpetuate the animosity between him and Jackson.
Modern historians, such as Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., often note the history of American conflicts with Indians dating to long before the American revolution, and the ultimate need for a solution which Jackson and Congress partly achieved.
The crowd became so large that Jackson's guards could not keep them out of the White House, which became so crowded with people that dishes and decorative pieces inside were eventually broken.
In November 1781 she died from the disease and was buried in an unmarked grave.
The aristocratic wives of European diplomats shrugged the matter off; they had their national interest to uphold, and had seen how life worked in Paris and London.
Its Presidential candidates had been chosen by an informal Congressional nominating caucus, but this had become unpopular.
Brands also notes that his opponents were terrified of his temper:
By 1824, the Democratic-Republican Party had become the only functioning national party.
It also elected him U.S.
Lionel Barrymore played Jackson in ''The Gorgeous Hussy'' (1936), a fictionalized biography of Peggy Eaton starring Joan Crawford.
In December 1832, he issued a resounding proclamation against the "nullifiers", stating that he considered "the power to annul a law of the United States, assumed by one State, incompatible with the existence of the Union, contradicted expressly by the letter of the Constitution, unauthorized by its spirit, inconsistent with every principle on which it was founded, and destructive of the great object for which it was formed".
Jackson's theory regarding rotation of office generated what would later be called the spoils system, a practice that Jackson, ironically, didn't justify.
By the 1830s, under constant pressure from settlers, each of the five southern tribes had ceded most of its lands, but sizable self-government groups lived in Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida.
When Jackson assumed office in 1829 he pocketed Adam's expedition plans.
However, it later became the symbol for the Democratic Party when cartoonist Thomas Nast popularized it.
However, Jackson was hesitant with recognizing Texas, unconvinced that the new republic could maintain independence from Mexico, and not wanting to make Texas an anti-slavery issue during the 1836 election.
Biddle's recharter bill passed the Senate on June 11 and the House on July 3, 1832.
The bullet that struck Jackson was so close to his heart that it was never safely removed.
Jackson was appointed commander of the Tennessee militia in 1801, with the rank of colonel.
Jackson's defeat burnished his political credentials, however; many voters believed the "man of the people" had been robbed by the "corrupt aristocrats of the East".
To complicate matters further, evidence shows that Rachel had been living with Jackson and referred to herself as Mrs. Jackson before the petition for divorce was ever made.
On May 6, 1833, Jackson sailed on USS ''Cygnet'' to Fredericksburg, Virginia, where he was to lay the cornerstone on a monument near the grave of Mary Ball Washington, George Washington's mother.
Jackson stated the Bank made "the rich richer and the potent more powerful".
The passage of the act was especially popular in the South where population growth and the discovery of gold on Cherokee land had increased pressure on tribal lands.
In keeping with his platform of economic decentralization, Jackson vetoed the renewal of its charter, thereby seemingly putting his chances for reelection in jeopardy.
One brig ship, , later used in the expedition; having been laid down, built, and commissioned by Secretary Dickerson in May 1836, circumnavigated the world, explored and mapped the Southern Ocean, confirming the existence of the Antarctica continent.
Jackson also had an unruly shock of red hair, which had completely grayed by the time he became president at age 61.
Jackson's first choice of Cabinet proved to be unsuccessful, full of bitter partisanship and gossip, especially between Eaton, Calhoun, and Van Buren.
Starting with nine slaves, he held as many as 44 by 1820 and later held up to 150 slaves, making him among the planter elite.
During the American Civil War the Confederate government also issued two Confederate postage stamps bearing Jackson's portrait, one a 2-cent red stamp and the other a 2-cent green stamp, both issued in 1863.
"&nbsp;– a clear challenge to Calhoun.
This area later became the Southwest Territory (1790), the precursor to the state of Tennessee.
Jackson nominated Van Buren to be Minister to England; Calhoun blocked the nomination.
Jackson's political opponents castigated Jackson's veto as "the very slang of the leveller and demagogue", claiming Jackson was using class warfare to gain support from the common man.
Here Jackson became acquainted with their daughter, Rachel Donelson Robards.
Jackson was also featured in the 4th episode of the history podcast, The Broadsides.
He was later elected major general of the Tennessee militia in 1802.
Jackson believed the solid victory was a popular mandate for his veto of the Bank's recharter and his continued warfare on the Bank's control over the national economy.
Jackson put Secretary of Navy Mahlon Dickerson in charge, to assemble suitable ships, officers, and scientific staff for the expedition; with a planned launch before Jackson's term of office expired.
(His return to the U.S. Senate in 1823, after 24 years, 11 months, 3 days out of office, marks the second longest gap in service to the chamber in history.)
Jackson captured Pensacola, Florida, with little more than some warning shots, and deposed the Spanish governor.
The relationship between the President and Emily became strained during the Petticoat affair, and the two became estranged for over a year.
He is gone, but his memory lives, and will continue to live."
Jackson was a lean figure, standing at 6 feet, 1 inch (1.85&nbsp;m) tall, and weighing between 130 and 140 pounds (64&nbsp;kg) on average.
The Nullification Crisis was defused when the tariff was amended and Jackson threatened the use of military force if South Carolina attempted to secede.
But he may have claimed to be a South Carolinian because the state was considering nullification of the Tariff of 1824, which he opposed.
Sam Houston and David Crockett served under Jackson in this campaign.
A woman who broke that code was dishonorable and unacceptable.
, grown by enslaved workers.
