Carnegie tried to keep this information concealed, but legal documents released in 1900, during proceedings with the ex-chairman of Carnegie Steel, Henry Clay Frick, revealed how favorable the tariffs had been.
*At the height of his career, Carnegie was the second-richest person in the world, behind only John D. Rockefeller of Standard Oil.
To this end, in the early 1880s in partnership with Samuel Storey, he purchased numerous newspapers in England, all of which were to advocate the abolition of the monarchy and the establishment of "the British Republic".
The highlight was a return to Dunfermline, where Carnegie's mother laid the foundation stone of a Carnegie library which he funded.
Andrew's father, William Carnegie, started off working in a cotton mill but would then earn money weaving and peddling linens.
His starting wage was $1.20 per week.
In one year, the farm yielded over $1,000,000 in cash dividends, and petroleum from oil wells on the property sold profitably.
Carnegie believed that it is the effort and will of the people, that maintains the peace in international relations.
Carnegie left on a trip to Scotland before the unrest peaked.
The mansion was named a National Historic Landmark in 1966.
In addition, Spencer thought that as all institutions grow they become evermore corrupted by the influence of power and money.
John Pierpont Morgan was a banker and perhaps America's most important financial deal maker.
In total Carnegie funded some 3,000 libraries, located in 47 US states, and also in Canada, the United Kingdom, what is now the Republic of Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, the West Indies, and Fiji.
Carnegie did not want to marry during his mother's lifetime, instead choosing to take care of her in her illness towards the end of her life.
He also paid close attention to his work, and quickly learned to distinguish the differing sounds the incoming telegraph signals produced.
Carnegie was so proud of "Dippi" that he had casts made of the bones and plaster replicas of the whole skeleton donated to several museums in Europe and South America.
He strongly opposed the annexation of the Philippines, almost to the point of supporting William Jennings Bryan against McKinley in 1900.
After she died in 1886, the 51-year-old Carnegie married Louise Whitfield, who was 21 years his junior.
In his autobiography, Carnegie describes his family as moderate Presbyterian believers, writing that "there was not one orthodox Presbyterian" in his family; various members of his family having somewhat distanced themselves from Calvinism, some of them leaning more towards Swedenborg theology.
He believed the poor possessed an advantage over the wealthy because they receive greater attention from their parents and are taught better work ethics.
Spencerian 'survival of the fittest' firmly credits any provisions made to assist the weak, unskilled, poor and distressed to be an imprudent disservice to evolution.
He used his connection to the two men to acquire contracts for his Keystone Bridge Company and the rails produced by his ironworks.
Spencer stated that he trusted no organization of any kind, "political, religious, literary, philanthropic", and believed that as they expanded in influence so too did their regulations expand.
Although Cambria Iron and Steel's facilities were heavily damaged by the flood, they returned to full production within a year.
Carnegie believed that it involved a denial of the fundamental democratic principle, and he also urged William McKinley to withdraw American troops and allow the Filipinos to live with their independence.
Furthermore, Spencerian evolution held that those unfit to sustain themselves must be allowed to perish.
The surrounding neighborhood on Manhattan's Upper East Side has come to be called Carnegie Hill.
Individuals who survived to this, the latest and highest stage of evolutionary progress would be "those in whom the power of self-preservation is the greatest—are the select of their generation."
For its inaugural international event, the CPU sponsored a conference to be held on August 1, 1914, on the shores of Lake Constance in southern Germany.
The aim of the Trust was to improve and extend the opportunities for scientific research in the Scottish universities and to enable the deserving and qualified youth of Scotland to attend a university.
He is often identified as one of the richest people and one of the richest Americans ever.
To secure local interest, in 1885, he gave $500,000 to Pittsburgh for a public library, and in 1886, he gave $250,000 to Allegheny City for a music hall and library; and $250,000 to Edinburgh for a free library.
On the surface, Andrew Carnegie appears to be a strict laissez-faire capitalist and follower of Herbert Spencer, often referring to himself as a disciple of Spencer.
In 1889, Carnegie published "Wealth" in the June issue of the ''North American Review''.
He went on to declare that public schools and colleges fill the heads of students with inept, useless knowledge and exclude useful knowledge.
To this end, he needed to buy out Carnegie and several other major producers and integrate them into one company, thereby eliminating duplication and waste.
It was said that "...Carnegie never wanted to see or touch these bonds that represented the fruition of his business career.
Let them lie safe in a vault in New Jersey, safe from the New York tax assessors, until he was ready to dispose of them..."
The same year Carnegie became a figure of controversy.
This project was an important proof-of-concept for steel technology, which marked the opening of a new steel market.
He is not only known for his successes but his enormous amounts of philanthropist works, not only to charities but also to promote democracy and independence to colonized countries.
The investment proved a great success and a source of profit for Woodruff and Carnegie.
*To spend the first third of one's life getting all the education one can.
Spencer wrote that in production the advantages of the superior individual are comparatively minor, and thus acceptable, yet the benefit that dominance provides those who control a large segment of production might be hazardous to competition.
In the late 1880s, Carnegie Steel was the largest manufacturer of pig iron, steel rails, and coke in the world, with a capacity to produce approximately 2,000 tons of pig metal per day.
In particular, it appears Carnegie either misunderstood or intentionally misrepresented some of Spencer's principal arguments.
Although actively involved in running his many businesses, Carnegie had become a regular contributor to numerous magazines, most notably ''The Nineteenth Century'', under the editorship of James Knowles, and the influential ''North American Review'', led by editor Lloyd Bryce.
Among his many philanthropic efforts, the establishment of public libraries throughout the United States, Britain, Canada and other English-speaking countries was especially prominent.
Throughout the 1880s and 1890s, for example, Carnegie allowed his steel works to fill large orders of armor plate for the building of an enlarged and modernized United States Navy, but he opposed American oversea expansion.
Carnegie spent energy and resources lobbying congress for a continuation of favorable tariffs from which he earned millions of dollars a year.
To some, Carnegie represents the idea of the American dream.
He published three books on travel.
Carnegie strongly believed in this because he had risen from the bottom.
Carnegie, through Keystone, supplied the steel for and owned shares in the landmark Eads Bridge project across the Mississippi River at St. Louis, Missouri (completed 1874).
Money is just a push for the act.
Carnegie started work as a telegrapher and by the 1860s had investments in railroads, railroad sleeping cars, bridges and oil derricks.
In 1864, Carnegie invested $40,000 in Story Farm on Oil Creek in Venango County, Pennsylvania.
Although he had left the Pennsylvania Railroad Company, he remained closely connected to its management, namely Thomas A. Scott and J. Edgar Thomson.
In spring 1861, Carnegie was appointed by Scott, who was now Assistant Secretary of War in charge of military transportation, as Superintendent of the Military Railways and the Union Government's telegraph lines in the East.
They toured Scotland by coach, and enjoyed several receptions en route.
Afterwards, the company successfully resumed operations with non-union immigrant employees in place of the Homestead plant workers, and Carnegie returned to the United States.
After reading it, Gladstone requested its publication in England, where it appeared as "The Gospel of Wealth" in the ''Pall Mall Gazette''.
The building was built in 1903 and he lived there until his death and Louise until her death in 1946.
Its membership included former presidents of the United States Grover Cleveland and Benjamin Harrison and literary figures like Mark Twain.
Carnegie also held a strong opinion against inherited wealth.
The war demonstrated how integral the industries were to American success.
The creation of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in 1910 was regarded as a milestone on the road to the ultimate goal of abolition of war.
He also prepared (but did not deliver) an address in which he professed a belief in "an Infinite and Eternal Energy from which all things proceed".
*Lauder College (named after his uncle who encouraged him to get an education) in the Halbeath area of Dunfermline was renamed Carnegie College in 2007.
A few years later, he received a few shares in Theodore Tuttle Woodruff's sleeping car company, as a reward for holding shares that Woodruff had given to Scott and Thomson, as a payoff.
He built a leadership role as a philanthropist for the United States and the British Empire.
* The concert halls in Dunfermline and New York are named after him.
He did not think free market competition necessitated competitive warfare.
Carnegie learned much about management and cost control during these years, and from Scott in particular.
When word of the dam's failure was telegraphed to Pittsburgh, Frick and other members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club gathered to form the Pittsburgh Relief Committee for assistance to the flood victims as well as determining never to speak publicly about the club or the flood.
He was named after his legal grandfather.
Carnegie later joked that he was "the first casualty of the war" when he gained a scar on his cheek from freeing a trapped telegraph wire.
Prior to the flood, speculators had purchased the abandoned reservoir, made less than well-engineered repairs to the old dam, raised the lake level, built cottages and a clubhouse, and created the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club.
Spencer believed that just as there were many varieties of beetles, respectively modified to existence in a particular place in nature, so too had human society "spontaneously fallen into division of labour".
In a notably Spencerian manner, Carnegie argued that unions impeded the natural reduction of prices by pushing up costs, which blocked evolutionary progress.
The first part was the gathering and the accumulation of wealth.
For many years he was a member of Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, pastored from 1905 to 1926 by Social Gospel exponent Henry Sloane Coffin, while his wife and daughter belonged to the Brick Presbyterian Church.
In 1836, the family moved to a larger house in Edgar Street (opposite Reid's Park), following the demand for more heavy damask from which his father, William Carnegie, benefited.
*Disney's Scrooge McDuck is thought to have been inspired by Carnegie.
The book made many Americans appreciate their country's economic progress and sold over 40,000 copies, mostly in the US.
Carnegie devoted the remainder of his life to large-scale philanthropy, with special emphasis on local libraries, world peace, education and scientific research.
The steel price dropped as a direct result, and Bessemer steel was rapidly adopted for rails; however, it was not suitable for buildings and bridges.
He made many connections this way.
He was highly influenced in public life by John Bright.
Carnegie worked to develop several iron works, eventually forming The Keystone Bridge Works and the Union Ironworks, in Pittsburgh.
He helped Washington create the National Negro Business League.
Spencer thought any attempt to prevent "the really salutary sufferings" of the less fortunate "bequeath to posterity a continually increasing curse".
He reformed his enterprises into conventional joint stock corporations as preparation to this end.
In the early 20th century, a decade after Mr. Pratt's death, when expansion and city revenues grew tight, Carnegie returned the favor and endowed a large sum to permit the building of many Carnegie Libraries in the Enoch Pratt system in Baltimore and enabled EPFL to expand through the next quarter-century to meet the needs of the growing city and supply neighborhood branches for its annexed suburbs.
To counter what he perceived as imperialism on the part of the United States, Carnegie personally offered $20 million to the Philippines so that the Filipino people could buy their independence from the United States.
During the last 18 years of his life, he gave away to charities, foundations, and universities about $350 million (in 2015 share of GDP, $78.6 billion) – almost 90 percent of his fortune.
As the delegates made their way to the conference by train, Germany was invading Belgium.
Spencer insisted that all forms of philanthropy that uplift the poor and downtrodden were reckless and incompetent.
Carnegie worked with others in establishing a steel rolling mill, and steel production and control of industry became the source of his fortune.
The Carnegie-donated library is now owned by the Johnstown Area Heritage Association, and houses the Flood Museum.
As Van Slyck (1991) showed, the last years of the 19th century saw acceptance of the idea that free libraries should be available to the American public.
This act strongly impressed the other American anti-imperialists, who soon elected him vice-president of the Anti-Imperialist League.
The sixty-odd club members were the leading business tycoons of Western Pennsylvania and included among their number Frick's best friend, Andrew Mellon, his attorneys Philander Knox and James Hay Reed, as well as Frick's business partner, Carnegie.
In the following year, Carnegie gave £8,000 for the establishment of a Dunfermline Carnegie Library in Scotland.
In 1881, Carnegie took his family, including his 70-year-old mother, on a trip to the United Kingdom.
*To spend the next third making all the money one can.
Andrew Carnegie was born in Dunfermline, Scotland, in a typical weaver's cottage with only one main room, consisting of half the ground floor which was shared with the neighboring weaver's family.
Frick brought in thousands of strikebreakers to work the steel mills and Pinkerton agents to safeguard them.
*Carnegie, Pennsylvania, and Carnegie, Oklahoma, were named in his honor.
He was a powerful supporter of the movement for spelling reform as a means of promoting the spread of the English language.
The Carnegie Collections of the Columbia University Rare Book and Manuscript Library consist of the archives of the following organizations founded by Carnegie: The Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY); The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP); the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching (CFAT);The Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs (CCEIA).
It was created by a deed which he signed on June 7, 1901, and it was incorporated by Royal Charter on August 21, 1902.
In 1911, Carnegie became a sympathetic benefactor to George Ellery Hale, who was trying to build the  Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson, and donated an additional ten million dollars to the Carnegie Institution with the following suggestion to expedite the construction of the telescope: "I hope the work at Mount Wilson will be vigorously pushed, because I am so anxious to hear the expected results from it.
Carnegie emphatically resisted government intrusion in commerce, as well as government-sponsored charities.
Carnegie bought Skibo Castle in Scotland, and made his home partly there and partly in his New York  mansion located at 2 East 91st Street at Fifth Avenue.
I should like to be satisfied before I depart, that we are going to repay to the old land some part of the debt we owe them by revealing more clearly than ever to them the new heavens."
In 1886, Carnegie wrote his most radical work to date, entitled ''Triumphant Democracy''.
His 1889 article proclaiming "The Gospel of Wealth" called on the rich to use their wealth to improve society, and it stimulated a wave of philanthropy.
When Carnegie was thirteen, his father had fallen on very hard times as a handloom weaver and with the country in starvation.
But the design of the idealized free library was the subject of prolonged and heated debate.
Carnegie believed in using his fortune for others and doing more than making money.
Several decades later, Carnegie's visit with Mr. Pratt for several days; resting and dining in his city mansion, then touring, visiting and talking with staff and ordinary citizen patrons of the newly established Enoch Pratt Free Library (1886) impressed the Scotsman deeply and years later he was always heard to proclaim that "Pratt was my guide and inspiration".
The cover depicted an upended royal crown and a broken scepter.
Despite Carnegie's personal dedication to Herbert Spencer as a friend, his adherence to Spencer's political and economic ideas is more contentious.
Carnegie urged other wealthy people to contribute to society in the form of parks, works of art, libraries and other endeavors that improve the community and contribute to the "lasting good".
Following the defeat of Union forces at Bull Run, he personally supervised the transportation of the defeated forces.
One critical requirement was that church-related schools had to sever their religious connections to get his money.
Andrew's family had to borrow money from the Lauders  in order to migrate.
Carnegie believed the concentration of capital was essential for societal progress and should be encouraged.
Following his tour of the UK, he wrote about his experiences in a book entitled ''An American Four-in-hand in Britain''.
His interest in music led him to fund construction of 7,000 church organs.
The buyout, secretly negotiated by Charles M. Schwab (no relation to Charles R. Schwab), was the largest such industrial takeover in United States history to date.
Carnegie and his family belonged to the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.
There had been some speculation as to the dam's integrity, and concerns had been raised by the head of the Cambria Iron Works downstream in Johnstown.
Carnegie also bought out some regional competitors, and merged with others, usually maintaining the majority shares in the companies.
Despite his efforts towards international peace, Carnegie faced many dilemmas on his quest.
When some of the workers demanded the full 60%, management locked the union out.
*To spend the last third giving it all away for worthwhile causes.
Over the course of twenty years, Carnegie's steel properties grew to include the Edgar Thomson Steel Works, the Lucy Furnace Works, the Union Iron Mills, the Homestead Works, the Keystone Bridge Works, the Hartman Steel Works, the Frick Coke Company, and the Scotia ore mines among many other industry related assets.
He believed that the Endowment exists to promote information on the nations' rights and responsibilities under existing international law and to encourage other conferences to codify this law.
His mother avoided the topic of religion.
Under his organization, the telegraph service rendered efficient service to the Union cause and significantly assisted in the eventual victory.
Though, being a child, his family led vigorous theological and political disputes.
She eventually became the primary breadwinner by the 1840s.
He concluded negotiations on March 2, 1901, and formed the United States Steel Corporation.
As well as having good business sense, Carnegie possessed charm and literary knowledge.
He built Pittsburgh's Carnegie Steel Company, which he sold to J.P. Morgan in 1901 for $480 million (2015 per share of GDP, $370 billion).
He was a very hard worker and would memorize all of the locations of Pittsburgh's businesses and the faces of important men.
Before his death on August 11, 1919, Carnegie had donated $350,695,654 for various causes.
The "Andrew Carnegie Dictum" was:
Between 1881 when the club was opened, and 1889, the dam frequently sprang leaks and was patched, mostly with mud and straw.
He was an immigrant from Scotland who came to America and became successful.
In addition to ''Triumphant Democracy'' (1886), and ''The Gospel of Wealth'' (1889), he also wrote ''Our Coaching Trip, Brighton to Inverness'' (1882),  ''An American Four-in-hand in Britain'' (1883), ''Round the World'' (1884), ''The Empire of Business'' (1902), ''The Secret of Business is the Management of Men'' (1903), ''James Watt'' (1905) in the Famous Scots Series, ''Problems of Today'' (1907), and his posthumously published ''Autobiography of Andrew Carnegie'' (1920).
Carnegie Mellon University and the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh jointly administer the Andrew Carnegie Collection of digitized archives on Carnegie's life.
Carnegie helped open the rail lines into Washington D.C. that the rebels had cut; he rode the locomotive pulling the first brigade of Union troops to reach Washington D.C.
Carnegie felt that unions represented the narrow interest of the few while his actions benefited the entire community.
In 1901, Carnegie was 66 years of age and considering retirement.
Sir Henry Bessemer had invented the furnace which allowed the high carbon content of pig iron to be burnt away in a controlled and rapid way.
Carnegie made his fortune in the steel industry, controlling the most extensive integrated iron and steel operations ever owned by an individual in the United States.
This strategy was a success, and Knox and Reed were able to fend off all lawsuits that would have placed blame upon the club's members.
One of his two great innovations was in the cheap and efficient mass production of steel by adopting and adapting the Bessemer process for steel making.
Furthermore, Carnegie's success was due to his convenient relationship with the railroad industries, which not only relied on steel for track, but were also making money from steel transport.
Beyond a gift of $10 million for peace promotion, Carnegie also encouraged the "scientific" investigation of the various causes of war, and the adoption of judicial methods that should eventually eliminate them.
His capacity, his willingness for hard work, his perseverance, and his alertness soon brought forth opportunities.
At the suggestion of his friend Benjamin Ruff, Carnegie's partner Henry Clay Frick had formed the exclusive South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club high above Johnstown, Pennsylvania.
Despite its inauspicious beginning, the CPU thrived.
Through the CPU, Carnegie hoped to mobilize the world's churches, religious organizations, and other spiritual and moral resources to join in promoting moral leadership to put an end to war forever.
* An American high school, Carnegie Vanguard High School in Houston, Texas, is named after him
He did not oppose the annexation of the Hawaiian islands or Puerto Rico, but he opposed the annexation of the Philippines.
The telescope saw first light on November 2, 1917, with Carnegie still alive.
In 1914, on the eve of the First World War, Carnegie founded the Church Peace Union (CPU), a group of leaders in religion, academia, and politics.
In these letters, one of which was published in the ''New York Times'' in full text, Carnegie is extolled as a "lover of the world of humanity and one of the founders of Universal Peace".
Workers considered the stoppage a "lockout" by management and not a "strike" by workers.
Lauder's son, also named George Lauder, grew up with Andrew and would become his business partner.
Furthermore, Spencer argued that individuals with superior resources who deliberately used investment schemes to put competitors out of business were committing acts of "commercial murder".
Defeat of the Confederacy required vast supplies of munitions, as well as railroads (and telegraph lines) to deliver the goods.
However, he did not begin his philanthropic work in all earnest until 1881, with the gift of a library to his hometown of Dunfermline, Scotland.
The following is taken from one of Carnegie's memos to himself:
In doing so, Carnegie left mediation of the dispute in the hands of his associate and partner Henry Clay Frick.
In 1855, Scott made it possible for Carnegie to invest $500 in the Adams Express, which contracted with the Pennsylvania to carry its messengers.
The letter agreeing to sell his share was signed on February 26, 1901.
Carnegie was a well-regarded writer.
In 1901, in Scotland, he gave $10 million to establish the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland.
After he sold his steel company in 1901, Carnegie was able to get fully involved in the peace cause, both financially and personally.
Carnegie spent his last years as a philanthropist.
He also donated £50,000 to help set up the University of Birmingham in 1899.
After selling Carnegie Steel, he surpassed Rockefeller as the richest American for the next couple of years, reaching a personal net worth of US$310 billion—a fortune not yet known to the modern world.
Frick was well known in industrial circles for maintaining staunch anti-union sensibilities.
In 1883, Carnegie bought the rival Homestead Steel Works, which included an extensive plant served by tributary coal and iron fields, a 425-mile (685&nbsp;km) long railway, and a line of lake steamships.
Less than 20 miles downstream from the dam sat the city of Johnstown.
By 1889, the U.S. output of steel exceeded that of the UK, and Carnegie owned a large part of it.
The holdings were incorporated in the United States Steel Corporation, a trust organized by Morgan, and Carnegie retired from business.
When he built his first steel plant, he made a point of naming it after Thomson.
On the subject of charity Andrew Carnegie's actions diverged in the most significant and complex manner from Herbert Spencer's philosophies.
With the coming-of-age of railroads superseding canal barge transport, the lake was abandoned by the Commonwealth, sold to the Pennsylvania Railroad, and sold again to private interests and eventually came to be owned by the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club in 1881.
He had written about his views on social subjects and the responsibilities of great wealth in ''Triumphant Democracy'' (1886) and ''Gospel of Wealth'' (1889).
Witnessing sectarianism and strife in 19th century Scotland regarding religion and philosophy, Carnegie kept his distance from organized religion and theism.
Additionally, a previous owner removed and sold for scrap the 3 cast iron discharge pipes that previously allowed a controlled release of water.
Carnegie's criticism of British society did not mean dislike; on the contrary, one of Carnegie's ambitions was to act as a catalyst for a close association between English-speaking peoples.
Carnegie had some investments in the iron industry before the war.
