After doing some initial work on the lyrics, he pulled out of the project and Lloyd Webber subsequently wrote the musical with Alan Ayckbourn, who provided the book and lyrics.
The Dutch composer Louis Andriessen commented that: "There are two sorts of stealing (in music) – taking something and doing nothing with it, or going to work on what you've stolen.
On 23 June 2010, the painting was sold at auction for £34.7&nbsp;million to an anonymous telephone bidder.
In interviews promoting ''Amused to Death'', Roger Waters, formerly of Pink Floyd, claimed that Lloyd Webber had copied a short chromatic riff from the 1971 song "Echoes" for sections of ''The Phantom of the Opera'', released in 1986; nevertheless, he decided he did not want to file a lawsuit.
Several of the tunes were later used for ''Aspects of Love'' and ''Sunset Boulevard''.
BBC Radio 2 broadcast a concert of music from the Lloyd-Webber musicals on 24 August 2007.
A special performance of ''The Phantom of the Opera at the Royal Albert Hall'' for the 25th anniversary was broadcast live to cinemas in early October 2011 and later released on DVD and Blu-ray in February 2012.
The show also runs full-time in a custom-built theatre in Bochum, Germany, where it has been running since 1988.
The contestants all sang "The Phantom of the Opera".
Many years later, Lloyd Webber and Ayckbourn revisited this project, producing a thoroughly reworked and more successful version entitled ''By Jeeves'' (1996).
Lloyd Webber was knighted by the Queen in 1992.
It ran for 19 months and 500 performances.
The show has been re-worked into a new musical, ''The Boys in the Photograph'', which had its world première at The Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts in April 2008.
In 1998 ''Whistle Down the Wind'' made its debut, a musical written with lyrics supplied by Jim Steinman.
Lloyd Webber's first collaboration with lyricist Tim Rice was ''The Likes of Us'', a musical based on the true story of Thomas John Barnardo.
An out-of-court settlement was reached, where the foundation retained ownership rights.
On 1 July 2007, Lloyd Webber presented excerpts from his musicals as part of the Concert for Diana held at Wembley Stadium, London, an event organised to celebrate the life of Princess Diana almost 10 years after her death.
Lloyd Webber wrote a Requiem Mass dedicated to his father, William, who had died in 1982.
Lloyd Webber produced a staging of ''The Sound of Music'', which débuted November 2006.
He also had originally set music to Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats at the age of 15.
In 1978, Lloyd Webber embarked on a solo project, the "Variations", with his cellist brother Julian based on the 24th Caprice by Paganini, which reached number two in the pop album chart in the United Kingdom.
In 2014, it was announced that Webber's next project would be a musical adaptation of the 2003 film ''School of Rock''.
Although composed in 1965, it was not publicly performed until 2005, when a production was staged at Lloyd Webber's Sydmonton Festival.
In 2006, Lloyd Webber planned to sell ''Portrait of Angel Fernández de Soto'' by Pablo Picasso to benefit the Andrew Lloyd Webber Foundation.
Also present were Sierra Boggess, who has been cast as Christine Daaé, and Ramin Karimloo, who portrayed Phantom, a role he most recently played in the West End.
There are some very romantic moments in his music, and there is some real...trash that he doesn't even think about parting with.
The EBU corrected Webber, telling him Ukraine's singer Gaitana was black, that year's winner Loreen for Sweden was of North African background and accompanied by a black backing dancer, and France's contestant Anggun was Indonesian.
He had his prostate completely removed as a preventative measure.
He has received a number of awards, including a knighthood in 1992, followed by a peerage from Queen Elizabeth II for services to Music, seven Tonys, three Grammys (as well as the Grammy Legend Award), an Academy Award, fourteen Ivor Novello Awards, seven Olivier Awards, a Golden Globe, a Brit Award, the 2006 Kennedy Center Honors, and the 2008 Classic Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music.
He was recognised for his outstanding contribution to American performing arts.
In 2013, Webber reunited with Christopher Hampton and Don Black on ''Stephen Ward the Musical''.
''Cricket'' (1986), also called ''Cricket (Hearts and Wickets)'', reunited Lloyd Webber with Tim Rice to create this short musical for Queen Elizabeth's 60th birthday, first performed at Windsor Castle.
Later, he would be the owner of a number of West End theatres, including the Palace.
The show also featured a search for three young actors to play and share the title character's role, but the show's main focus was on the search for Nancy.
In 1998, Lloyd Webber released a film version of "Cats", which was filmed at the Adelphi Theatre in London.
He lives at Sydmonton Court, Hampshire, and owns much of nearby Watership Down.
Politically, Lloyd Webber has supported the UK's Conservative Party, allowing his song "Take That Look Off Your Face" to be used on a party promotional film seen by an estimated 1 million people before the 2005 general election.
Between April and June 2007, he appeared in BBC One's ''Any Dream Will Do!
He acknowledged a similarity between the Andante movement of Mendelssohn's Violin Concerto in E minor and the ''Jesus Christ Superstar'' song "I Don't Know How to Love Him", but wrote that Lloyd Webber:
Following the opening of ''Love Never Dies'', Lloyd Webber again began a search for a new musical theatre performer in the BBC One series ''Over the Rainbow''.
Lloyd Webber had on a number of occasions written sacred music for the annual Sydmonton Festival.
''Pie Jesu'' from Requiem achieved a high placing on the UK pop charts.
The main theme was used as the theme tune for ITV's long-running ''South Bank Show'' throughout its 32-year run.
In early 2009 a series, called ''Eurovision: Your Country Needs You'', was broadcast to find a performer for a song that he would compose for the competition.
He cast the winner, Danielle Hope, in the role of Dorothy and a dog to play Toto in his forthcoming stage production of ''The Wizard of Oz''.
It transferred to Broadway in 1979.
''Cats'', ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'', ''Jesus Christ Superstar'' and ''By Jeeves'' have been adapted into made for television films that have been released on DVD and VHS and often air on BBC.
He then married singer Sarah Brightman on 22 March 1984 in Hampshire.
In 1997, he was created a life peer as '''Baron Lloyd-Webber''', of Sydmonton in the County of Hampshire.
The arena tour started in September 2012 and also starred comedian Tim Minchin as Judas Iscariot, former Spice Girl Melanie C as Mary Magdalene and BBC Radio 1 DJ Chris Moyles as King Herod.
Garnering mixed reviews from critics, due in part to the frequent absences of the show's star Maria Friedman due to breast cancer treatment, it closed only a brief three months later on 19 February 2006.
He is involved in a number of charitable activities, including the Elton John AIDS Foundation, Nordoff Robbins, Prostate Cancer UK and War Child.
He cast Brightman in the lead role in his musical ''The Phantom of the Opera'', among other notable roles.
His ''The Beautiful Game'' opened in London and has never been seen on Broadway.
I saw no black faces on the programme Eurovision 2012.
In 2001 the ''New York Times'' referred to him as "the most commercially successful composer in history".
In 1965, Lloyd Webber was a Queen's Scholar at Westminster School and studied history for a term at Magdalen College, Oxford, although he abandoned the course in Winter 1965 to study at the Royal College of Music and pursue his interest in musical theatre.
There have been a number of film adaptations of the Lloyd Webber musicals.
Andrew Lloyd Webber has yet to think up a single note; in fact, the poor guy's never invented one note by himself.
His wealth increased to £750&nbsp;million in 2007, but the publication ranked him 101st in 2008.
He's not a very good editor of his own stuff."
Its aim was to find a new Joseph for his revival of ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat''.
Viewers' telephone voting during the series raised more than £500,000 for the BBC's annual ''Children in Need'' charity appeal, according to host Graham Norton on air during the final.
However, Lloyd Webber's biographer, John Snelson, countered such accusations.
Originally opening in Washington, Lloyd Webber was reportedly not happy with the casting or Harold Prince's production and the show was subsequently revised for a London staging directed by Gale Edwards, the production is probably most notable for the number-one hit from Boyzone "No Matter What" which left only the UK charts when the price of the CD single was changed to drop it out of the official top ten.
The first is plagiarism.
He has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, is an inductee into the Songwriter's Hall of Fame, and is a fellow of the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors.
The song "Don't Cry for Me Argentina" became a hit single and the musical was staged at the Prince Edward Theatre in a production directed by Harold Prince and starring Elaine Paige in the title role.
On 1 March 2011, ''The Wizard of Oz'' opened at The Palladium Theatre, starring Danielle Hope as Dorothy and Michael Crawford as the Wizard.
He sits as a Conservative member of the House of Lords.
The songwriter Ray Repp also claimed that Lloyd Webber stole a different melody from his own song "Till You".
Patti LuPone created the role of Eva on Broadway for which she won a Tony.
Lloyd Webber had toyed with the idea of writing a musical based on Billy Wilder's critically acclaimed movie, ''Sunset Boulevard'', since the early 1970s when he saw the film, but the project didn't come to fruition until after the completion of ''Aspects of Love'' when the composer finally managed to secure the rights from Paramount Pictures, The composer worked with two collaborators, as he had done on ''Aspects of Love''; this time Christopher Hampton and Don Black shared equal credit for the book and lyrics.
Lloyd Webber received a Grammy Award in 1986 for ''Requiem'' in the category of best classical composition.
'', which followed the same format as ''How Do You Solve a Problem Like Maria?''.
The role was won by Jodie Prenger despite Lloyd Webber's stated preference for one of the other contestants; the winners of the Oliver role were Harry Stott, Gwion Wyn-Jones and Laurence Jeffcoate.
In 1994, ''Sunset Boulevard'' became a successful Broadway show, opening with the largest advance in Broadway history, and winning seven Tony Awards that year.
He made the controversial decision to choose an unknown to play leading lady Maria, who was found through the BBC's reality television show ''How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?
William Richard Lloyd Webber (born 24 August 1993)
On 11 February 2007, Lloyd Webber was featured as a guest judge on the reality television show ''Grease: You're the One that I Want!''
Lloyd Webber was made a Conservative life peer in 1997, however by the end of 2015, he had voted only 33 times.
''Evita'' was a highly successful show that ran for ten years in the West End.
The show followed a similar format to its ''Maria'' and ''Joseph'' predecessors, this time involving a search for an actress to play the role of Nancy in an upcoming West End production of the Lionel Bart musical ''Oliver!''
...brings a new dramatic tension to Mendelssohn's original melody through the confused emotions of Mary Magdalene.
The opening theme may be Mendelssohn, but the rhythmic and harmonic treatment along with new lines of highly effective melodic development are Lloyd Webber's.
He and lyricist and composer Tim Rice wrote a number of new songs for the production to supplement the songs from the film.
In April 2008, Lloyd Webber reprised his role as judge, this time in the BBC musical talent show ''I'd Do Anything''.
Several of his songs have been widely recorded and were hits outside of their parent musicals, notably "The Music of the Night" from ''The Phantom of the Opera'', "I Don't Know How to Love Him" from ''Jesus Christ Superstar'', "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina" and "You Must Love Me" from ''Evita'', "Any Dream Will Do" from ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'' and "Memory" from ''Cats''.
Stylistically, ''The Likes of Us'' is fashioned after the Broadway musical of the 1940s and 1950s; it opens with a traditional overture comprising a medley of tunes from the show, and the score reflects some of Lloyd Webber's early influences, particularly Richard Rodgers, Frederick Loewe, and Lionel Bart.
It premiered at St. Thomas Church in New York on 24 February 1985.
Unlike Roger Waters, Ray Repp did decide to sue, but the court ruled in Lloyd Webber's favour.
It enjoyed a record run in the West End, but ran for less than two years on Broadway.
The winner was Norway's Alexander Rybak with his world record composition "Fairytale".
The winner of the show was Connie Fisher.
For its subsequent performances, Rice and Lloyd Webber revised the show and added new songs to expand it to a more substantial length.
One nomination for Best Original Song: "Learn to Be Lonely" from the 2004 motion picture ''The Phantom of the Opera'' .
In 2012 Lloyd Webber fronted a new ITV primetime show ''Superstar'' which gave the UK public the chance to decide who would play the starring role of Jesus in an upcoming arena tour of ''Jesus Christ Superstar''.
''Jesus Christ Superstar'' (1973) was directed by Norman Jewison; ''Evita'' (1996) was directed by Alan Parker; and ''The Phantom of the Opera'' (2004) was directed by Joel Schumacher and co-produced by Lloyd Webber.
''Aspects of Love'' followed in 1989, a musical based on the story by David Garnett.
In 1969 Rice and Lloyd Webber wrote a song for the Eurovision Song Contest called "Try It and See," which was not selected.
Plus one nomination for Best Original Song: "Learn to Be Lonely" from the 2004 motion picture ''The Phantom of the Opera''.
Lloyd Webber also premiered ''The Phantom of the Opera'' in 1986, inspired by the 1911 Gaston Leroux novel.
This culminated in a two-hour-long production being staged in the West End on the back of the success of ''Jesus Christ Superstar''.
Together they had two children; a daughter and a son:
In an interview in 2011, LuPone commented "He writes crap music... ''Evita'' was his best score, ''Evita'' in its bizarreness - when I first heard it I thought 'I swear to God, he hated women' ...
The EBU thoroughly denied racism in its show, and insisted it unites Europe for three nights in a year.
The lyrics were by Don Black and Charles Hart and the original production was directed by Trevor Nunn.
''Cats'' (1981) was to become the longest running musical in London, where it ran for 21 years before closing.
Thirdly, he married Madeleine Gurdon in Westminster on 9 February 1991.
In late 2009, Lloyd Webber had surgery for early-stage prostate cancer, but had to be readmitted to hospital with post-operative infection in November.
That's rather poor".
Lloyd Webber started writing his own music at a young age, a suite of six pieces at the age of nine.
Several of his musicals have run for more than a decade both in the West End and on Broadway.
The contest organisers also told Webber that black singer Dave Benton won for Estonia in 2001.
On 8 October 2009, Lloyd Webber launched the musical ''Love Never Dies'' at a press conference held at Her Majesty's Theatre, where the original ''Phantom'' has been running since 1986.
David Mallet directed the film, and Gillian Lynne choreographed it.
Perhaps because of its large orchestration, live performances of the Requiem are rare.
An exhibition of works from his collection was presented at the Royal Academy in 2003 under the title ''Pre-Raphaelite and Other Masters – The Andrew Lloyd Webber Collection''.
Lloyd Webber is also the president of the Arts Educational Schools London, a performing arts school located in Chiswick, West London.
Only two of the songs from the original production remained ("Half a Moment" and "Banjo Boy").
On 16 September 2004, his production of ''The Woman in White'' opened at the Palace Theatre in London.
It became a hit and is still running in both the West End and on Broadway; in January 2006 it overtook ''Cats'' as the longest-running musical on Broadway.
In October 2015 Lloyd Webber was involved in a controversial House of Lords vote over proposed cuts to tax credits, voting with the Government in favour of the plan.
Even so, by its closing in 1997, "it had not recouped its reported $13&nbsp;million investment."
The cast consisted of performers who had been in the show before, including Ken Page (the original Old Deuteronomy on Broadway), Elaine Paige (original Grizabella in London) and Sir John Mills as Gus: the Theatre Cat.
A revised production opened on Broadway at the Marquis Theatre on 17 November 2005.
In November 2006, he withdrew the painting from auction after a claim that the previous owner had been forced to sell it under duress in Nazi Germany.
He wrote the part of Christine for his then-wife, Sarah Brightman, who played the role in the original London and Broadway productions alongside Michael Crawford as the Phantom.
Lloyd Webber collaborated with Rice once again to write ''Evita'' (1978 in London/1979 in U.S.), a musical based on the life of Eva Perón.
Denise Van Outen introduced songs from ''Whistle Down the Wind'', ''The Beautiful Game'', ''Tell Me on a Sunday'', ''The Woman in White'', ''Evita''  and ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'' – as well as Rodgers and Hammerstein's ''The Sound of Music'', which Lloyd Webber revived in 2006 at the London Palladium, and the 2002 musical ''Bombay Dreams''.
Lloyd Webber was featured on the U.S. talent show ''American Idol'', acting as a mentor when the 6 finalists had to select one of his songs to perform for the judges that week.
The same was also done with a reworked version of ''Love Never Dies''.
His aunt Viola, an actress, took him to see many of her shows and through the stage door into the world of the theatre.
He said: "I don't think there's any point in beating around the bush.
Isabella Aurora Lloyd Webber (born 30 April 1996).
''Starlight Express'' (1984) was a commercial hit, but received negative reviews from the critics.
''Joseph'' began life as a short cantata that gained some recognition on its second staging with a favourable review in ''The Times''.
His company, the Really Useful Group, is one of the largest theatre operators in London.
Producers in several parts of the UK have staged productions, including national tours, of the Lloyd Webber musicals under licence from the Really Useful Group.
Jade Ewen won the right to represent Britain, winning with It's My Time, by Lloyd Webber and Diane Warren.
The United Kingdom finished 5th in the contest.
A revised Broadway production at the Broadway Theatre two years later ran for only 284 performances.
He also put on "productions" with Julian and his Aunt Viola in his toy theatre (which he built at Viola's suggestion).
Lloyd Webber has married three times.
On 26 February 2010, he appeared on BBC's ''Friday Night with Jonathan Ross'' to promote ''Love Never Dies''.
The song works in its own right as its many performers and audiences can witness.
Also in April 2008.
Filmed in Melbourne, Australia, it received a limited cinema release in the US and Canada in 2012, to see if it would be viable to bring the show to Broadway.
With music by Bollywood composer A.R.
I was questioned by the press over Jade Ewen's race, and I think we would have placed second, but there is a problem when you go further east.
''Jeeves'' failed to make any impact at the box office and closed after a short run of only three weeks.
The planned follow-up to ''Jesus Christ Superstar'' was a musical comedy based on the Jeeves and Wooster novels by P. G. Wodehouse.
On 11 February 2012, ''Phantom of the Opera'' played its 10,000th show on Broadway.
As with ''Jesus Christ Superstar'', Evita was released first as a concept album (1976) and featured Julie Covington singing the part of Eva Perón.
'', in which he was a judge.
The production was directed by Harold Prince, who had also earlier directed ''Evita.''
The Sunday Times Rich List 2006 ranked him the 87th-richest man in Britain with an estimated fortune of £700&nbsp;million.
It was announced on 25 August 2006, on his personal website, that his next project would be ''The Master and Margarita''; however, it was announced in late March 2007 that he had abandoned the project.
In August 2014, Lloyd Webber was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to ''The Guardian'' opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September's referendum on that issue.
In this respect, it is markedly different from the composer's later work, which tends to be either predominantly or wholly through-composed, and closer in form to opera than to the Broadway musical.
At the contest, Lloyd Webber accompanied her on the piano during the performance.
In 2009, he publicly criticised the Labour government's introduction of a new 50% rate of income tax on Britain's top earners, claiming it would damage the country by encouraging talented people to leave.
From 1995-2000, Lloyd Webber wrote the Matters of Taste column in The Daily Telegraph where he reviewed restaurants and hotels, and these were illustrated by Lucinda Rogers.
He is properly styled as '''The Lord Lloyd-Webber'''; the title is hyphenated, although his surname is not.
He attended the ceremony on 3 December 2006; it aired on 26 December 2006.
With rewritten lyrics it became "King Herod's Song" in their third musical, ''Jesus Christ Superstar'' (1970).
Lloyd Webber has been accused of plagiarism in his works.
It has since gone on a tour of the UK.
Tim Rice was uncertain about this venture, partly because of his concern that he might not be able to do justice to the novels that he and Lloyd Webber so admired.
They divorced on 3 January 1990.
The show had a respectable run at The Cambridge Theatre in London.
Rahman and lyrics by Don Black, iIt ran for two years at the Apollo Victoria Theatre.
In January 2010, he declared he was cancer-free.
Church music had been a part of the composer's upbringing and the composition was inspired by an article he had read about the plight of Cambodian orphans.
If you're talking about Western Europe it's fine, but Ukraine, not so good."
The first amateur performance was by a children's theatre group in Cornwall called "Kidz R Us".
Charles Hart wrote the lyrics for ''Phantom'' with some additional material provided by Richard Stilgoe, with whom Lloyd-Webber co-wrote the book of the musical.
In 2002 he turned producer, bringing the musical ''Bombay Dreams'' to London.
Webber caused controversy with a series of comments about Eurovision in a ''Radio Times'' interview.
The same year, Lloyd Webber also composed a new theme tune for the long-running documentary series ''Whicker's World'', which was used from 1978-80.
Lee Mead won the contest after quitting his part in the ensemble – and as understudy in ''The Phantom of the Opera'' – to compete for the role.
Nicholas Lloyd Webber (born 2 July 1979)
It received positive reviews and was No.1 on DVD charts in the UK and Ireland, and did well in America.
In 1968, Rice and Lloyd Webber were commissioned to write a piece for the Colet Court preparatory school, which resulted in ''Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'', a retelling of the biblical story of Joseph in which Lloyd Webber and Rice humorously pastiche a number of musical styles such as Elvis-style rock'n'roll, Calypso and country music.
: Based on the 2003 film
Lloyd Webber is an art collector, with a passion for Victorian art.
In 1992 he set up the Andrew Lloyd Webber Foundation which supports the arts, culture and heritage in the UK.
He has composed 13 musicals, a song cycle, a set of variations, two film scores, and a Latin Requiem Mass.
They have three children, two sons and one daughter, all of whom were born in Westminster:
On January 19, 2015, auditions opened for children aged nine to fifteen in cooperation with the School of Rock music education program, which predated the film by several years.
''Aspects'' had a run of four years in London, but closed after less than a year on Broadway.
The show opened at the Adelphi Theatre in London on 12 July 1993, and ran for 1,529 performances.
Lloyd Webber accepted the challenge of managing the UK's entry for the 2009 Eurovision Song Contest, to be held in Moscow.
Imogen Lloyd Webber (born 31 March 1977)
Rice and Lloyd Webber parted ways soon after ''Evita''.
In spite of the show's popularity and extensive run in London's West End, it lost money due to the sheer expense of the production.
In 2008, amateur rights were released by the National Operatic and Dramatic Association (NODA) in association with the Really Useful Group.
The show has also seen two tours of the US, as well as an Australian/Japanese production, a three-year UK touring production, which transferred to New Zealand later in 2009.
He married first Sarah Hugill on 24 July 1971 and they divorced on 14 November 1983.
In September 2006, Lloyd Webber was named to be a recipient of the prestigious Kennedy Center Honors with Zubin Mehta, Dolly Parton, Steven Spielberg, and Smokey Robinson.
