Warhol's work both as a commercial artist and later a fine artist displays a casual approach to image making, in which chance plays a role and mistakes and unintentional marks are tolerated.
The exhibit included the works ''Marilyn Diptych'', ''100 Soup Cans'', ''100 Coke Bottles,'' and ''100 Dollar Bills''.
Later that year, he moved to New York City and began a career in magazine illustration and advertising.
Equally noteworthy is the way these works—and their means of production—mirrored the atmosphere at Andy's New York "Factory".
Pavol's son, James Warhola, became a successful children's book illustrator.
Warhol's body was taken back to Pittsburgh, by his brothers, for burial.
Many films by avant-garde cineast Jonas Mekas have caught the moments of Warhol's life.
He also founded, with Gerard Malanga, ''Interview'' magazine, and published ''The Philosophy of Andy Warhol'' (1975).
At the Stable Gallery exhibit, the artist met for the first time poet John Giorno who would star in Warhol's first film, ''Sleep'', in 1963.
They consisted mainly of "blotted ink" drawings (or monoprints), a technique which he applied in much of his early art.
As has been addressed by a range of scholars, many of his films premiered in gay porn theaters.
Warhol owned more than 40 and felt very protective of his hairpieces, which were sewn by a New York wig-maker from hair imported from Italy.
Warhol's brother has described the artist as "really religious, but he didn't want people to know about that because it was private".
After the shooting, the Factory scene heavily increased security, and for many the "Factory 60s" ended.
Warhol's painting of a can of Campbell's soup cost $1,500 while each autographed can sold for $6.
* ''The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (From A to B & Back Again)'' (1975, ISBN 0-15-671720-4)—according to Pat Hackett's introduction to ''The Andy Warhol Diaries'', Pat Hackett did the transcriptions and text for the book based on daily phone conversations, sometimes (when Warhol was traveling) using audio cassettes that Andy Warhol gave her.
Despite the private nature of his faith, in Warhol's eulogy John Richardson depicted it as devout: "To my certain knowledge, he was responsible for at least one conversion.
Important figures in the New York underground art/cinema world, such as writer John Giorno and film-maker Jack Smith, also appear in Warhol films of the 1960s, revealing Warhol's connections to a diverse range of artistic scenes during this time.
During his life, Warhol regularly attended Mass, and the priest at Warhol's church, Saint Vincent Ferrer, said that the artist went there almost daily, although he was not observed taking Communion or going to Confession and sat or knelt in the pews at the back.
Warhol exceeded the demands of the commission and produced nearly 100 variations on the theme, mostly silkscreens and paintings, and among them a collaborative sculpture with Basquiat, the "Ten Punching Bags (Last Supper)".
Warhol had this to say about the attack: "Before I was shot, I always thought that I was more half-there than all-there—I always suspected that I was watching TV instead of living life.
Other members of Warhol's Factory crowd included Freddie Herko, Ondine, Ronald Tavel, Mary Woronov, Billy Name, and Brigid Berlin (from whom he apparently got the idea to tape-record his phone conversations).
Warhol's lovers included John Giorno, Billy Name, Charles Lisanby, and Jon Gould.
He designed the cover art for The Rolling Stones' albums ''Sticky Fingers'' (1971) and ''Love You Live'' (1977), and the John Cale albums ''The Academy in Peril'' (1972) and ''Honi Soit'' in 1981.
Actor Greg Travis portrays Warhol in a brief scene from the film ''Watchmen'' (2009).
During these years, he founded his studio, "The Factory" and gathered about him a wide range of artists, writers, musicians, and underground celebrities.
A fan of the ''Batman''  series, Warhol's movie was an "homage" to the series, and is considered the first appearance of a blatantly campy Batman.
Biographer Bob Colacello provides some details on Andy's "piss paintings":
At times when he was confined to bed, he drew, listened to the radio and collected pictures of movie stars around his bed.
At the time of his death, Warhol was working on ''Cars'', a series of paintings for Mercedes-Benz.
Said cassettes contained conversations with Brigid Berlin (also known as Brigid Polk) and former ''Interview'' magazine editor Bob Colacello.
The resulting imagery in both Warhol's commercial art and later in his fine art endeavors is often replete with imperfection—smudges and smears can often be found.
The Andy Warhol Museum in his native city, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, which holds an extensive permanent collection of art and archives, is the largest museum in the United States dedicated to a single artist.
It also included significant works of art, such as George Bellows's ''Miss Bentham''.
In the soon to be released 2016 feature, ''The Billionaire Boys Club'', Cary Elwes portrays Warhol in a film based on the true story about Ron Levin (portrayed by Kevin Spacey) a friend of Warhol's who was murdered in 1986.
The Artists Rights Society is the U.S. copyright representative for the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts for all Warhol works with the exception of Warhol film stills.
The original edition was limited to 190 numbered, hand colored copies, using Dr. Martin's ink washes.
Many of his most famous works (portraits of Liza Minnelli, Judy Garland, and Elizabeth Taylor, and films such as ''Blow Job'', ''My Hustler'' and ''Lonesome Cowboys'') draw from gay underground culture and/or openly explore the complexity of sexuality and desire.
These are believed to be his first two published artworks.
Warhol designed many album covers for various artists starting with the photographic cover of John Wallowitch's debut album, ''This Is John Wallowitch
One of the most important collaborators during this period was Gerard Malanga.
These and other titles document gay underground and camp culture, and continue to feature prominently in scholarship about sexuality and art.
Others record improvised encounters between Factory regulars such as Brigid Berlin, Viva, Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling, Holly Woodlawn, Ondine, Nico, and Jackie Curtis.
His most popular and critically successful film was ''Chelsea Girls'' (1966).
Warhol's famous portrait of Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong was created in 1973.
''Blue Movie'' was publicly screened in New York City in 2005 for the first time in more that 30 years.
Warhol died in Manhattan, at 6:32&nbsp;am, on February 22, 1987.
The shooting had a profound effect on Warhol's life and art.
He became a hypochondriac, developing a fear of hospitals and doctors.
Asked if Warhol was only a voyeur, Billy Name also denied it, saying: "He was the essence of sexuality.
Pop art was an experimental form that several artists were independently adopting; some of these pioneers, such as Roy Lichtenstein, would later become synonymous with the movement.
Warhol later described this period as very important in the development of his personality, skill-set and preferences.
All digital images of Warhol are exclusively managed by Corbis, while all transparency images of Warhol are managed by Art Resource.
''Batman Dracula'' is a 1964 film that was produced and directed by Warhol, without the permission of DC Comics.
The work sold for $10,000 at an auction on November 17, 1971, at Sotheby's New York.
The malpractice case was quickly settled out of court; Warhol's family received an undisclosed sum of money.
The movies make emotions look so strong and real, whereas when things really do happen to you, it's like watching television—you don't feel anything.
His parents were working-class Lemko emigrants from Mikó (now called Miková), located in today's northeastern Slovakia, part of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire.
His cow wallpaper (literally, wallpaper with a cow motif) and his oxidation paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that was then oxidized with urine) are also noteworthy in this context.
Art critic Robert Hughes called him "the white mole of Union Square."
Warhol's father worked in a coal mine.
Everything's plastic, but I love plastic.
Although many artists of this period worked in commercial art, most did so discreetly.
Andy exuded it, along with his great artistic creativity….It brought a joy to the whole art world in New York."
For his first major exhibition Warhol painted his famous cans of Campbell's Soup, which he claimed to have had for lunch for most of his life.
Warhol was a practicing Ruthenian Catholic.
He loved celebrities, so he painted them as well.
By the beginning of the 1960s, Warhol had become a very successful commercial illustrator.
Interviewed in 1980, he indicated that he was still a virgin—biographer Bob Colacello who was present at the interview felt it was probably true and that what little sex he had was probably "a mixture of voyeurism and masturbation—to use his Andy's word ''abstract''".
In November 2013, his "Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster)" diptych sold at Sotheby's Contemporary Art Auction for $105.4 million, a new record for the famed pop artist (pre-auction estimates at $80 million).
These people all participated in the Factory films, and some—like Berlin—remained friends with Warhol until his death.
Warhol's first pop art paintings were displayed in April 1961, serving as the backdrop for New York Department Store Bronwit Teller's window display.
Agent W is desperate to end his undercover job ("I'm so out of ideas I'm painting soup cans and bananas, for Christ sakes!"
The series of ''The Last Supper'' was seen by some as "arguably his greatest," but by others as "wishy-washy, religiose" and "spiritless."
Bowie recorded a song called "Andy Warhol" for his 1971 album ''Hunky Dory''.
The true extent of his collections was not discovered until after his death, when the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh took in 641 boxes of his "Stuff."
Few of the Warhol-directed films are available on video or DVD.
Warhol produced both comic and serious works; his subject could be a soup can or an electric chair.
After a successful career as a commercial illustrator, Warhol became a renowned and sometimes controversial artist.
I want to be plastic."
The fact that Warhol's homosexuality influenced his work and shaped his relationship to the art world is a major subject of scholarship on the artist and is an issue that Warhol himself addressed in interviews, in conversation with his contemporaries, and in his publications (''e.g.
His acolyte and assistant director, Paul Morrissey, took over the film-making chores for the Factory collective, steering Warhol-branded cinema towards more mainstream, narrative-based, B-movie exploitation fare with ''Flesh'', ''Trash'', and ''Heat''.
Malanga assisted the artist with the production of silkscreens, films, sculpture, and other works at "The Factory", Warhol's aluminum foil-and-silver-paint-lined studio on 47th Street (later moved to Broadway).
After Warhol's death, the films were slowly restored by the Whitney Museum and are occasionally projected at museums and film festivals.
People sometimes say that the way things happen in movies is unreal, but actually it's the way things happen in life that's unreal.
During the 1960s, Warhol also groomed a retinue of bohemian and counterculture eccentrics upon whom he bestowed the designation "Superstars", including Nico, Joe Dallesandro, Edie Sedgwick, Viva, Ultra Violet, Holly Woodlawn, Jackie Curtis, and Candy Darling.
Some have suggested that his frequent refusal to comment on his work, to speak about himself (confining himself in interviews to responses like "Um, no" and "Um, yes", and often allowing others to speak for him)—and even the evolution of his pop style—can be traced to the years when Warhol was first dismissed by the inner circles of the New York art world.
An idea expressed in the book: "Making money is art, and working is art and good business is the best art."
The wake was at Thomas P. Kunsak Funeral Home and was an open-coffin ceremony.
Warhol started the diary to keep track of his expenses after being audited, although it soon evolved to include his personal and cultural observations.
On November 23, 1961 Warhol wrote Latow a check for $50 which, according to the 2009 Warhol biography, ''Pop, The Genius of Warhol'', was payment for coming up with the idea of the soup cans as subject matter.
Those drips emulated the style of successful abstract expressionists (such as Willem de Kooning).
What seduced me was the Andy Warhol who I saw alone.
The Foundation remains one of the largest grant-giving organizations for the visual arts in the U.S.
During his time there, Warhol joined the campus  Modern Dance Club and Beaux Arts Society.
He is also notable as a gay man who lived openly as such before the gay liberation movement, and he is credited with coining the widely used expression "15 minutes of fame".
Warhol's assertion of virginity would seem to be contradicted by his hospital treatment in 1960 for condylomata, a sexually transmitted disease.
The coffin was a solid bronze casket with gold plated rails and white upholstery.
It was first exhibited in 1963 at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles.
Warhol's first portrait of ''Basquiat'' (1982) is a black photosilkscreen over an oxidized copper "piss painting".
It was the gallerist Muriel Latow who came up with the ideas for both the soup cans and Warhol's dollar paintings.
In November 2014, "Triple Elvis" sold for $81.9m (£51.9m) at auction in New York.
Earlier on the day of the attack, Solanas had been turned away from the Factory after asking for the return of a script she had given to Warhol.
During the 1950s, Warhol gained fame for his whimsical ink drawings of shoe advertisements.
Warhol's collections included airplane menus, unpaid invoices, pizza dough, pornographic pulp novels, newspapers, stamps, supermarket flyers, and cookie jars, among other eccentricities.
Andy Warhol's first New York solo pop art exhibition was hosted at Eleanor Ward's Stable Gallery November 6–24, 1962.
The character is portrayed as having robot-like mannerisms.
Warhol was an inspiration towards Cattelan's magazine and photography compilations, such as ''Permanent Food, Charley'', and ''Toilet'' ''Paper''.
One of his main collections was his wigs.
and "You gotta fake my death, okay?
It was during the 1960s that Warhol began to make paintings of iconic American objects such as dollar bills, mushroom clouds, electric chairs, Campbell's Soup Cans, Coca-Cola bottles, celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Elvis Presley, Marlon Brando, Troy Donahue, Muhammad Ali, and Elizabeth Taylor, as well as newspaper headlines or photographs of police dogs attacking civil rights protesters.
His friends referred to his numerous collections, which filled not only his four-story townhouse, but also a nearby storage unit, as "Andy's Stuff."
The film ''Eat'' consists of a man eating a mushroom for 45 minutes.
These latter "Warhol" films starred Joe Dallesandro—more of a Morrissey star than a true Warhol superstar.
He held exhibitions at the Hugo Gallery and the Bodley Gallery in New York City; in California, his first West Coast gallery exhibition was on July 9, 1962, in the Ferus Gallery of Los Angeles.
His art used many types of media, including hand drawing, painting, printmaking, photography, silk screening, sculpture, film, and music.
As an advertisement illustrator in the 1950s, Warhol used assistants to increase his productivity.
He sometimes refused to explain his work.
The influence of the large collaborations with Basquiat can be seen in Warhol's "The Last Supper" cycle, his last and possibly his largest series.
(The title is a play on words by Warhol on the title of French author Marcel Proust's ''À la recherche du temps perdu''.)
Warhol was an early adopter of the silk screen printmaking process as a technique for making paintings.
In this respect Warhol was a fan of "Art Business" and "Business Art"—he, in fact, wrote about his interest in thinking about art as business in ''The Philosophy of Andy Warhol from A to B and Back Again''.
This symposium set the tone for Warhol's reception.
II, Grants & Exhibitions; and Vol.
A memorial service was held in Manhattan for Warhol on April 1, 1987, at St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York.
Before the shooting, Solanas had been a marginal figure in the Factory scene.
The Milan exhibition that opened in January 1987 with a set of 22 silk-screens, was the last exhibition for both the artist and the gallerist.
Warhol also had an appreciation for intense Hollywood glamour.
He has suggested that all one needs to know about his work is "already there 'on the surface.'"
By this period, Warhol was being criticized for becoming merely a "business artist".
Warhol was buried next to his mother and father.
One of his most famous films, ''Sleep'', monitors poet John Giorno sleeping for six hours.
Warhol had this to say about Coca-Cola:
In March 2011, a chrome statue of Andy Warhol and his Polaroid camera was revealed at Union Square in New York City.
His detailed and elegant drawings for I. Miller shoes were particularly popular.
Many of his creations are very collectible and highly valuable.
Warhol's ability to find the uncanny, silly, or seductive in any given object, whether said object is mundane or sensational, influenced many artists working through photo and media outlets, among a vast number of other mediums.
Uwe Husslein cites filmmaker Jonas Mekas, who accompanied Warhol to the Trio premiere, and who claims Warhol's static films were directly inspired by the performance.
Another item found in Warhol's boxes at the museum in Pittsburgh was a mummified human foot from Ancient Egypt.
Andy Warhol had two older brothers—Pavol (Paul), the oldest, was born before the family emigrated; Ján was born in Pittsburgh.
A 2009 article in ''The Economist'' described Warhol as the "bellwether of the art market".
Most of these were given by Warhol as gifts to clients and friends.
Designed by Richard Sheaff of Scottsdale, Arizona, the stamp was unveiled at a ceremony at The Andy Warhol Museum and features Warhol's painting "Self-Portrait, 1964".
Warhol created the fashion magazine ''Interview'' that is still published today.
His Rorschach inkblots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be.
Warhol was dressed in a black cashmere suit, a paisley tie, a platinum wig, and sunglasses.
Warhol has been described as playing dumb to the media.
It was indicated that Warhol spent only a total of 23 minutes to paint the entire car.
In addition, a body of religious-themed works was found posthumously in his estate.
In 1979, reviewers disliked his exhibits of portraits of 1970s personalities and celebrities, calling them superficial, facile and commercial, with no depth or indication of the significance of the subjects.
In hindsight, however, some critics have come to view Warhol's superficiality and commerciality as "the most brilliant mirror of our times," contending that "Warhol had captured something irresistible about the zeitgeist of American culture in the 1970s."
In the early 1970s, most of the films directed by Warhol were pulled out of circulation by Warhol and the people around him who ran his business.
Other important films include ''Bike Boy'', ''My Hustler'', ''The Nude Restaurant'', and ''Lonesome Cowboys'', a raunchy pseudo-western.
According to news reports, he had been making good recovery from a routine gallbladder surgery at New York Hospital before dying in his sleep from a sudden post-operative cardiac arrhythmia.
The script had apparently been misplaced.
Warhol, who would become famous as the "Pope of Pop", turned to this new style, where popular subjects could be part of the artist's palette.
Artist Maurizio Cattelan describes that it is difficult to separate daily encounters from the art of Andy Warhol: "That's probably the greatest thing about Warhol: the way he penetrated and summarized our world, to the point that distinguishing between him and our everyday life is basically impossible, and in any case useless."
After the band's first album, Warhol and band leader Lou Reed started to disagree more about the direction the band should take, and their artistic friendship ended.
It has also been contradicted by his lovers, including Warhol muse BillyBoy who has said they had sex to orgasm: "When he wasn't being Andy Warhol and when you were just alone with him he was an incredibly generous and very kind person.
Warhol was an avid collector.
Many of Warhol's later works depicted religious subjects, including two series, ''Details of Renaissance Paintings'' (1984) and ''The Last Supper'' (1986).
So I decided I just wasn't going to care, because those were all the things that I didn't want to change anyway, that I didn't think I 'should' want to change&nbsp;... Other people could change their attitudes but not me".
A self-portrait by Andy Warhol (1963–64), which sold in New York at the May Post-War and Contemporary evening sale in Christie's, fetched $38.4 million.
On June 3, 1968, radical feminist writer Valerie Solanas shot Warhol and Mario Amaya, art critic and curator, at Warhol's studio.
Warhol: a feature film produced by Michael De Luca, with a screenplay by Terence Winter.
They're so beautiful.
Another, ''Empire'' (1964), consists of eight hours of footage of the Empire State Building in New York City at dusk.
At the grave, the priest said a brief prayer and sprinkled holy water on the casket.
He was posed holding a small prayer book and a red rose.
With his longtime friend Stuart Pivar, Warhol founded the New York Academy of Art in 1979.
His work became popular and controversial.
Guy Pearce portrayed Warhol in the film, ''Factory Girl'' (2007), about Edie Sedgwick's life.
When Warhol was 13, his father died in an accident.
Throughout the decade it became increasingly clear that there had been a profound change in the culture of the art world, and that Warhol was at the center of that shift.
In 1966 he "produced" their first album ''The Velvet Underground & Nico'', as well as providing its album art.
Despite negative criticism when these were first shown, Warhol called some of them "masterpieces," and they were influential for his later work.
Warhol, with Paul Morrissey, acted as the band's manager, introducing them to Nico (who would perform with the band at Warhol's request).
In the movie, ''Highway to Hell'', a group of Andy Warhols are part of the ''Good Intentions Paving Company'' where good-intentioned souls are ground into pavement.
He suffered physical effects for the rest of his life, including being required to wear a surgical corset.
Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the handmade from the artistic process.
Warhol strongly influenced the new wave/punk rock band Devo, as well as David Bowie.
One of Warhol's last works was a portrait of Aretha Franklin for the cover of her 1986 gold album ''Aretha'', which was done in the style of the ''Reigning Queens'' series he had completed the year before.
4, inscribed "Jerry" on the front cover and given to Geraldine Stutz, was used for a facsimile printing in 1987, and the original was auctioned in May 2006 for US $35,000 by Doyle New York.
Solanas was arrested the day after the assault, after turning herself in to police.
The exhibition marked his West Coast debut of pop art.
When rendering commercial objects for advertising Warhol devised a technique that resulted in a characteristic image.
To him, part of defining a niche was defining his subject matter.
In third grade, Warhol had Sydenham's chorea (also known as St. Vitus' Dance), the nervous system disease that causes involuntary movements of the extremities, which is believed to be a complication of scarlet fever which causes skin pigmentation blotchiness.
The show was presented as a typical U.S. small supermarket environment, except that everything in it—from the produce, canned goods, meat, posters on the wall, etc.—was created by six prominent pop artists of the time, among them the controversial (and like-minded) Billy Apple, Mary Inman, and Robert Watts.
Cartoons were already being used by Lichtenstein, typography by Jasper Johns, and so on; Warhol wanted a distinguishing subject.
Warhol's 1965 film ''Vinyl'' is an adaptation of Anthony Burgess' popular dystopian novel ''A Clockwork Orange''.
He adopted the young painter Jean-Michel Basquiat, and the band The Velvet Underground, presenting them to the public as his latest interest, and collaborating with them.
In his book ''POPism'' Warhol writes, "When you do something exactly wrong, you always turn up something."
He took considerable pride in financing his nephew's studies for the priesthood".
In 1979, Warhol was commissioned by BMW to paint a Group 4 race version of the then elite supercar BMW M1 for the fourth installment in the BMW Art Car Project.
Unlike the three artists before him, Warhol declined the use of a small scale practice model, instead opting to immediately paint directly onto the full scale automobile.
Manifesto'', a separatist feminist tract that advocated the elimination of men; and appeared in the 1968 Warhol film ''I, a Man''.
As a teenager, Warhol graduated from Schenley High School in 1945.
Warhol's book ''A La Recherche du Shoe Perdu'' (1955) marked his "transition from commercial to gallery artist".
Created in 1963, this work has only been seen in public once in the past 26 years.
