A moribund person who is not expected to survive without the operation
It reduces the duration of postoperative tracheal intubation by roughly half.
However, in 1799, British chemist and inventor Humphry Davy decided to find out by experimenting on himself.
On the same day, 19 December 1846, in Dumfries Royal Infirmary, Scotland, a Dr. Scott used ether for a surgical procedure.
Two broad classes exist:
The potency of an inhalational anesthetic is quantified by its minimum alveolar concentration or MAC.
Loss of memory (amnesia) is created by action of drugs on multiple (but specific) regions of the brain.
The immediate time after anesthesia is called emergence.
Although the three entities (delirium, early POCD and long-term POCD) are separate, the presence of delirium post-operatively predicts the presence of early POCD.
* ''Infiltrative anesthesia'': a small amount of local anesthetic is injected in a small area to stop any sensation (such as during the closure of a laceration, as a continuous infusion or "freezing" a tooth).
In the US, 35% of anesthetics are provided by physicians in solo practice, about 55% are provided by anesthesia care teams (ACTs) with anesthesiologists medically directing anesthesiologist assistants or certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs), and about 10% are provided by CRNAs in solo practice.
Having an ASA score of 3, 4 or 5 places the person at 10.65 times greater risk than someone with an ASA score of 1 or 2.
All anesthetics in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Japan are administered by doctors.
General anesthesia (as opposed to sedation or regional anesthesia) has three main goals: lack of movement (paralysis), unconsciousness, and blunting of the stress response.
The purpose of the anesthetic machine is to provide anesthetic gas at a constant pressure, oxygen for breathing and to remove carbon dioxide or other waste anesthetic gases.
The drugs used in combination offered a better risk profile to the person under anesthetic and a quicker recovery.
- Glycopyrronium bromide (here under trade name Robinul), reducing secretions
Spinal and epidural are the most commonly used forms of central neuraxial blockade.
Anesthesia is unique, in that it is not a direct means of treatment, rather it allows others to do things that may treat, diagnose, or cure an ailment which would otherwise be painful or complicated.
Incorrect pre-operative assessments or preparations are the root cause of 11% of all adverse anesthetic events.
Of these first famous anesthetics, only nitrous oxide is still widely used today, with chloroform and ether having been replaced by safer but sometimes more expensive general anesthetics, and cocaine by more effective local anesthetics with less abuse potential.
Consciousness is the higher order process that synthesizes information.
The physical examination helps quantify the impact of anything found in the medical history in addition to lab tests.
One exception is a condition called long-term post-operative cognitive dysfunction, characterized by persistent confusion lasting weeks or months, which is more common in those undergoing cardiac surgery and in the elderly.
The scale assesses a high-order of risk as the patient's general health relates to an anesthetic.
German surgeon August Bier (1861–1949) was the first to use cocaine for intrathecal anesthesia in 1898.
On-demand pain medications typically include either opioid or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs but can also make use of novel approaches such as inhaled nitrous oxide or ketamine.
Common preemptive approaches include epidural neuraxial blockade or nerve blocks.
For instance,  an operation on a person who is between the ages of 60–79 years old places the patient at 2.32 times greater risk than someone less than 60 years old.
Nausea and vomiting are reported at 9.8% but will vary with the type of anesthetic and procedure.
Most commonly, relatives of the person report a lack of attention, memory and loss of interest in activities previously dear to the person (such as crosswords).
But fearing the pain of surgery, Venable kept putting the operation off.
The following are the types of regional anesthesia:
general anesthetics, hypnotics, sedatives, neuromuscular-blocking drugs, narcotic, and analgesics.
Prior to anesthetic in the early 19th century, the physiologic stress from surgery caused significant complications and many deaths from shock.
'''ASA physical status classification system'''
Hence, Long suggested that he have his operation while under the influence of ether.
Respected surgeons in Europe including Liston, Dieffenbach, Pirogov, and Syme quickly undertook numerous operations with ether.
It was first used in 1859 by Karl Koller, at the suggestion of Sigmund Freud, in eye surgery in 1884.
It has vaporizers, ventilators, an anesthetic breathing circuit, waste gas scavenging system and pressure gauges.
- Fentanyl, for analgesia
Hypothermia, shivering and confusion are also common in the immediate post-operative period because of the lack of muscle movement (and subsequent lack of heat production) during the procedure.
Nerve blocks are also associated with a lower risk of neurologic complications when compared to neuraxial blocks.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists have developed a six-tier scale which stratifies the pre-operative physical state of the patient called the ASA physical status.
The use of chloroform in anesthesia is linked to James Young Simpson, who, in a wide-ranging study of organic compounds, found chloroform's efficacy on 4 November 1847.
Because of the large amount of local anesthetic required to affect the nerve, the maximum dose of local anesethetic has to be considered.
The first use of anesthesia in the Southern Hemisphere took place in Launceston, Tasmania, that same year.
There is usually overlap in the contributing factors that lead to morbidity and mortality between the health of the patient, the surgery being performed and the anesthetic.
Morbidity can be major (myocardial infarction, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, renal failure/insufficiency, postoperative cognitive dysfunction and allergy) or minor (minor nausea, vomiting, readmission).
Nerve blocks are also used as a continuous infusion, following major surgery such as knee, hip and shoulder replacement surgery, and may be associated with lower complications.
Examples of major risks include death, heart attack and pulmonary embolism whereas minor risks can include postoperative nausea and vomiting and hospital readmission.
Put simply, the brain reboots itself."
The effect is to make people less aware and less reactive to noxious stimuli.
Davy wrote about the potential anesthetic properties of nitrous oxide, but nobody at that time pursued the matter any further.
This occurred in the surgical amphitheater now called the Ether Dome.
The previously skeptical Warren was impressed and stated, "Gentlemen, this is no humbug."
For this reason, preemptive acute pain management may reduce both acute and chronic pain and is tailored to the surgery, the environment in which it is given (in-patient/out-patient) and the individual patient.
Hypnosis, for instance, is generated through actions on the nuclei in the brain and is similar to the activation of sleep.
There are both major and minor risks of anesthesia.
It is estimated that 22% of people dream during general anesthesia  and 1 or 2 cases per 1000 have some consciousness termed "awareness during general anesthesia".
According to a recent study conducted at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, the brain navigates its way through a series of activity clusters, or "hubs" on its way back to consciousness.
In a similar way, people in the workforce may report an inability to complete tasks at the same speed they could previously.
The sponge was then dried and stored; just before surgery the sponge was moistened and then held under the patient's nose.
In a letter to Morton shortly thereafter, physician and writer Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. proposed naming the state produced "anesthesia", and the procedure an "anesthetic".
There are many types of regional anesthesia either by injecting into the tissue itself, a vein that feeds the area or around a nerve trunk that supplies sensation to the area.
Epidural anesthesia uses larger doses of anesthetic infused through an indwelling catheter which allows the anesthetic to be augmented should the effects begin to dissipate.
The ancient Egyptians had some surgical instruments, as well as crude analgesics and sedatives, including possibly an extract prepared from the mandrake fruit.
By the early 19th century, ether was being used by humans, but only as a recreational drug.
Nociception (pain sensation) is not hard-wired into the body.
Spinal anesthesia is a "one-shot" injection that provides rapid onset and profound sensory anesthesia with lower doses of anesethetic, and is usually associated with neuromuscular blockade (loss of muscle control).
Sedatives such as benzodiazepines are usually given with pain relievers (such as narcotics, or local anesthetics or both) because they don't, by themselves, provide significant pain relief.
Its anaesthetic properties were noted early in 1847 by Marie-Jean-Pierre Flourens (1794–1867).
The common thread to modern machinery in this field is the use of fail-safe systems that decrease the odds of catastrophic misuse of the machine.
Local anesthetics were used in Inca civilization where shamans chewed coca leaves and performed operations on the skull while spitting into the wounds they had inflicted to anesthetize.
Mild systemic disease
Other variables include age greater than 80 (3.29 times risk compared to those under 60), gender (females have a lower risk of 0.77), urgency of the procedure (emergencies have a 4.44 times greater risk), experience of the person completing the procedure (less than 8 years experience and/or less than 600 cases have a 1.06 times greater risk) and the type of anesthetic (regional anesthetics are lower risk than general anesthetics).
Examples include epidural anaesthesia and spinal anaesthesia.
Because central neuraxial blockade causes arterial and vasodilation, a drop in blood pressure is common.
Pain management is classified into either pre-emptive or on-demand.
From the perspective of the person giving the sedation, the patient will appear sleepy, relaxed and forgetful, allowing unpleasant procedures to be more easily completed.
This includes electrocardiography (ECG), heart rate, blood pressure, inspired and expired gases, oxygen saturation of the blood (pulse oximetry), and temperature.
There is significant variation in the speed of onset and duration of anesthesia depending on the potency of the drug (e.g.
When all went well, the fumes rendered the patient unconscious.
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (also known as ''POCD'' and post-anesthetic confusion) is a disturbance in cognition after surgery.
The core instrument in an inhalational anesthetic delivery system is an anesthetic machine.
The first attempts at general anesthesia were probably herbal remedies administered in prehistory.
One part of the risk assessment is based on the patients' health.
In the UK the Association of Anaesthetists (AAGBI) have set minimum monitoring guidelines for general and regional anesthesia.
The higher the MAC, generally, the less potent the anesthetic.
He immediately thought of its potential in surgery.
The use of ultrasound may reduce complication rates and improve quality, performance time, and time to onset of blocks.
A patient under regional or local anesthesia remains conscious.
The first stage of an anesthetic is the pre-operative risk assessment made up of the medical history, physical examination and  lab tests.
The ideal anesthetic drug would provide hypnosis, amnesia, analgesia, and muscle relaxation without undesirable changes in blood pressure, pulse or breathing.
Long-term postoperative cognitive dysfunction is a subtle deterioration in cognitive function, that can last for weeks, months, or longer.
For more invasive surgery, monitoring may also include temperature, urine output, blood pressure, central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, cardiac output, cerebral activity, and neuromuscular function.
Compare that to the rate of deaths totally attributed to surgical factors (1:2860) or anesthesia alone (1:185,056) illustrating that the single greatest factor in anesthetic mortality is the health of the patient.
- Atracurium, for neuromuscular block
Eventually, the need for blunting of the surgical stress response was identified by Harvey Cushing, who injected local anesthetic prior to hernia repairs.
When pain is blocked from a part of the body using local anesthetics, it is generally referred to as regional anesthesia.
In the US, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) have established minimum monitoring guidelines for patients receiving general anesthesia, regional anesthesia, or sedation.
This led to the development of other drugs that could blunt the response leading to lower surgical mortality rates.
Nurse anesthetists also administer anesthesia in 109 nations.
Anesthesia is the combination of the endpoints (discussed above) which are reached by drugs acting on different but overlapping sites in the central nervous system.
An ineffective block is most often due to inadequate anxiolysis or sedation rather than a failure of the block itself.
- Propofol, an hypnotic
To his astonishment he found that nitrous oxide made him laugh, so he nicknamed it laughing gas.
Dr. Andrew Hudson, an assistant professor in anesthesiology states, "Recovery from anesthesia is not simply the result of the anesthetic 'wearing off,' but also of the brain finding its way back through a maze of possible activity states to those that allow conscious experience.
Drugs like midazolam produce amnesia through different pathways by blocking the formation of long-term memories.
Regional anesthesia, for instance, affects analgesia; benzodiazepine-type sedatives (used in twilight sleep) favor amnesia; and general anesthetics can affect all of the endpoints.
The physiologic effects are much greater when the block is placed above the 5th thoracic vertebra.
Memories are created as either declarative or non-declarative memories in several stages (short-term, long-term, long-lasting) the strength of which is determined by the strength of connections between neurons termed synaptic plasticity.
In the early days of anesthesia, anesthetics could reliably achieve the first two, allowing surgeons to perform necessary procedures, but many patients died because the extremes of blood pressure and pulse caused by the surgical insult were ultimately harmful.
The MAC is the percentage dose of anaesthetic that will prevent a response to painful stimulus in 50% of subjects.
The most common approach to reach the endpoints of general anesthesia is through the use of inhaled general anesthetics.
Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
After determining the health of the person undergoing anesthetic and the endpoints that are required to complete the procedure, the type of anesthetic can be selected.
* ''Peripheral nerve block'': local anesthetic is injected near a nerve that provides sensation to particular portion of the body.
Conveniently, a participant in one of those "ether frolics", a student named James Venable, had two small tumors he wanted excised.
Suffix added for patients undergoing emergency procedure
This was the first case of an operator-anesthetist.
There is a need for airway support in 6.8%, there can be urinary retention (more common in those over 50 years of age) and hypotension in 2.7%.
More recently, several intravenous drugs have been developed which, if desired, allow inhaled general anesthetics to be avoided completely.
Venable agreed, and on 30 March 1842 he underwent a painless operation.
Since inhalational aenesthetics are inflammable, various checklists have been developed to confirm that the machine is ready for use, that the safety features are active and the electrical hazards are removed.
The advantage of sedation over a general anesthetic is that it generally does not require support of the airway or breathing (no tracheal intubation or mechanical ventilation) and can have less of an effect on the cardiovascular system which may add to a greater margin of safety in some patients.
The goal of anesthesia is to achieve the endpoints required for the given surgical procedure with the least risk to the patient.
Snow also involved himself in the production of equipment needed for the administration of inhalational anesthetics, the forerunner of today's anesthesia machines.
To achieve the goals of anesthesia, drugs act on different but interconnected parts of the nervous system.
Rather than stating a flat rate of morbidity or mortality, many factors are reported as contributing to the relative risk of the procedure and anesthetic combined.
For instance,  the "sun" conjures up feelings, memories and a sensation of warmth rather than a description of a round, orange warm ball seen in the sky for part of a 24‑hour cycle.
Intravenous anesthetic is delivered either by bolus doses or an infusion pump.
Aside from the generalities of the patients health assessment, an evaluation of the specific factors as they relate to the surgery also need to be considered for anesthesia.
Epidural anesethesia does not typically affect muscle control.
An American-born physician, Boott, encouraged London dentist James Robinson to perform a dental procedure on a Miss Lonsdale.
On October 16, 1846, Boston dentist William Thomas Green Morton gave a successful demonstration using diethyl ether to medical students at the same venue.
There is good evidence that POCD occurs after cardiac surgery and the major reason for its occurrence is the formation of microemboli.
Early Arab writings mention anesthesia by inhalation.
Sedation (also referred to as ''dissociative anesthesia'' or ''twilight anesthesia'') creates hypnotic, sedative, anxiolytic, amnesic, anticonvulsant, and centrally produced muscle-relaxing properties.
Direct comparisons between mortality statistics cannot reliably be made over time and across countries because of differences in the stratification of risk factors, however, there is evidence that anesthetics have made a significant improvement in safety but to what degree is uncertain.
For minor surgery, this generally includes monitoring of heart rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure, and inspired and expired concentrations for oxygen, carbon dioxide, and inhalational anesthetic agents.
Morton at first attempted to hide the actual nature of his anesthetic substance, referring to it as Letheon.
After Morton had induced anesthesia, surgeon John Collins Warren removed a tumor from the neck of Edward Gilbert Abbott.
With larger diameter nerves (such as the interscalene block for upper limbs or psoas compartment block for lower limbs) the nerve and position of the needle is localized with ultrasound or electrical stimulation.
**Peripheral blockade inhibits sensory perception in an isolated part of the body, such as numbing a tooth for dental work or administering a nerve block to inhibit sensation in an entire limb.
Discovered in 1831 by an American physician Samuel Guthrie (1782–1848), and independently a few months later by Frenchman Eugène Soubeiran (1797–1859) and Justus von Liebig (1803–73) in Germany, chloroform was named and chemically characterised in 1834 by Jean-Baptiste Dumas (1800–84).
This led to many deaths from the use of chloroform that (with hindsight) might have been preventable.
Choice of surgical method and anaesthetic technique aims to reduce risk of complications, shorten time needed for recovery and minimise the surgical stress response.
In this anesthetic method, a sponge was soaked in a dissolved solution of opium, mandragora, hemlock juice, and other substances.
* ''Central nerve blockade'': Local anesthetic is injected or infused in or around a portion of the central nervous system (discussed in more detail below in Spinal, epidural and caudal anesthesia).
Central neuraxial anesthesia is the injection of local anesthetic around the spinal cord to provide analgesia in the abdomen, pelvis or lower extremities.
- Ephedrine, in case of hypotension
A declared brain-dead person whose  organs are being removed for donor purposes
Cocaine was later isolated and became the first effective local anesthetic.
For instance, anesthesia during childbirth must consider not only the mother but the baby.
For instance, propofol (injection) might be used to start the anesthetic, fentanyl (injection) used to blunt the stress response, midazolam (injection) given to ensure amnesia and sevoflurane (inhaled) during the procedure to maintain the effects.
Diagnosing a person's pre-operative physical status allows the clinician to minimize anesthetic risks.
* ''Systemic local anesthetics'': local anesthetics are given systemically (orally or intravenous) to relieve neuropathic pain
The best anesthetic, therefore is the one with the lowest risk to the patient that still achieves the endpoints required to complete the procedure.
Lab tests help in diagnosis but only in 3% of cases, underscoring the need for a full history and physical examination prior to anesthetics.
John Snow of London published articles from May 1848 onwards "On Narcotism by the Inhalation of Vapours" in the London Medical Gazette.
The faster the surgery was, the lower the rate of complications (leading to reports of very quick amputations).
Cancers and tumors that occupy the lungs or throat create special challenges to general anesthesia.
The effect is almost immediate.
Initially, people thought this gas to be lethal, even in small doses, like some other nitrogen oxides.
Inhalational anesthetics are thought to exact their effects on different parts of the central nervous system.
Different types of anesthesia (which are discussed in the following sections) affect the endpoints differently.
The latter are called nerve blocks and are divided into peripheral or central nerve blocks.
The more detailed pre-operative medical history aims to discover genetic disorders (such as malignant hyperthermia or pseudocholinesterase deficiency), habits (tobacco, drug and alcohol use), physical attributes (such as obesity or a difficult airway) and any coexisting diseases (especially cardiac and respiratory diseases) that might impact the anesthetic.
Many drugs can produce a sedative effect including benzodiazepines, propofol, thiopental, ketamine and inhaled general anesthetics.
Tied closely to the concepts of amnesia and hypnosis is the concept of consciousness.
Its use spread quickly and gained royal approval in 1853 when John Snow gave it to Queen Victoria during the birth of Prince Leopold.
Instead, it is a dynamic process wherein persistent painful stimuli can sensitize the system and either make pain management difficult or promote the development of chronic pain.
The first fatality directly attributed to chloroform anesthesia was recorded on 28 January 1848 after the death of Hannah Greener.
When local anesthetic is injected around a larger diameter nerve that transmits sensation from an entire region it is referred to as a nerve block.
This drop is largely dictated by the venous side of the circulatory system which holds 75% of the circulating blood volume.
He received a US patent for his substance, but news of the successful anesthetic spread quickly by late 1846.
To understand the relative risk of each contributing factor, consider that the rate of deaths totally attributed to the patient's health is 1:870.
There can also be anesthesiologist assistants (US) or physician assistant (anaesthesia) (UK) who assist with anesthesia.
In the 1930s, physicians started to augment inhaled general anesthetics with intravenous general anesthetics.
Inhalational anesthetics will reliably produce amnesia through general suppression of the nuclei at doses below those required for loss of consciousness.
PCA has been shown to provide slightly better pain control and increased patient satisfaction when compared with conventional methods.
Bian Que (Chinese: 扁鹊, Wade–Giles: ''Pien Ch'iao'', c. 300 BC) was a legendary Chinese internist and surgeon who reportedly used general anesthesia for surgical procedures.
Unfortunately, though free of ether's flammability and consequent explosion hazard, chloroform is not as safe pharmacologically, especially when administered by an untrained practitioner (medical students, nurses, and occasionally members of the public were often pressed into giving anesthetics at this time).
Likewise, a person can have dreams (a state of subjective consciousness) during anesthetic or have consciousness of the procedure despite having no indication of it under anesthetic.
Pain that is well managed during and immediately after surgery improves the health of patients (by decreasing physiologic stress) and the potential for chronic pain.
Each has its own potency which is correlated to its solubility in oil.
In addition, the operating room environment must be monitored for ambient temperature and humidity, as well as for accumulation of exhaled inhalational anesthetic agents, which might be deleterious to the health of operating room personnel.
Throughout Europe, Asia, and the Americas a variety of ''Solanum'' species containing potent tropane alkaloids were used for anesthesia.
Romanian surgeon Nicolae Racoviceanu-Piteşti (1860–1942) was the first to use opioids for intrathecal analgesia; he presented his experience in Paris in 1901.
The likelihood of a complication occurring is proportional to the relative risk of a variety of factors related to the patient's health, the complexity of the surgery being performed and the type of anesthetic.
It was two years after the introduction of ether anesthetics that the first death directly related to anesthetic was reported.
Each anesthetic produces amnesia through unique effects on memory formation at variable doses.
Patients under general anesthesia must undergo continuous physiological monitoring to ensure safety.
American physician Crawford W. Long noticed that his friends felt no pain when they injured themselves while staggering around under the influence of ether.
This relationship exists because the drugs bind directly to cavities in proteins of the central nervous system, although several theories of general anaesthetic action have been described.
There are also many smaller instruments used in airway management and monitoring the patient.
Doctors specializing in perioperative care, development of an anesthetic plan, and the administration of anesthetics are known in the US as ''anesthesiologists'' and in the UK, Canada, Australia, and NZ as ''anaesthetists'' or ''anaesthesiologists''.
These statistics can also be compared to the first such study on mortality in anesthesia from 1954, which reported a rate of death from all causes at 1:75 and a rate attributed to anesthesia alone at 1:2680.
In 13th century Italy, Theodoric Borgognoni used similar mixtures along with opiates to induce unconsciousness, and treatment with the combined alkaloids proved a mainstay of anesthesia until the nineteenth century.
