Research shows that people who suffer from excessive anger often harbor and act on dysfunctional attributions, assumptions and evaluations in specific situations.
a good friend moving away).
The concept of wrath contributed to a definition of gender and power.
In contrast, a higher probability of positive outcomes from workplace anger expression likely will occur when one's expressed anger stays in the space between the expression and impropriety thresholds.
Immanuel Kant rejects revenge as vicious.
Ephrem Fernandez has identified six bipolar dimensions of anger expression.
This tendency can manifest in retrospective thinking as well: in a 2005 study, angry subjects said they thought the risks of terrorism in the year following 9/11 in retrospect were low, compared to what the fearful and neutral subjects thought.
Disturbances that may not have involved anger at the outset leave residues that are not readily recognized but that operate as a lingering backdrop for focal provocations (of anger)."
Wrath was sinful because of the social problems it caused, sometimes even homicide.
A more positive view of anger is espoused by Roman Catholic pastoral theologian Henri J. M. Nouwen.
For Seneca, anger was "worthless even for war."
The angry person usually finds the cause of their anger in an intentional, personal, and controllable aspect of another person's behavior.
On the other hand, Ahmed ibn Sahl al-Balkhi classified anger (along with aggression) as a type of neurosis, while al-Ghazali (Algazel) argued that anger takes form in rage, indignation and revenge, and that "the powers of the soul become balanced if it keeps anger under control."
Anger is defined in Buddhism as: "being unable to bear the object, or the intention to cause harm to the object."
# '''Dispositional anger''' is related more to character traits than to instincts or cognitions.
Anger (Arabic:غضب, ''ghadab'') in Islam is considered to be instigated by Satan (''Shaitan'').
According to Leland R. Beaumont, each instance of anger demands making a choice.
It is an emotion that involves a strong uncomfortable and emotional response to a perceived provocation, hurt or threat.
In neuroimaging studies of anger, the most consistently activated region of the brain was the lateral orbitofrontal cortex.
Aristotle on the other hand, ascribed some value to anger that has arisen from perceived injustice because it is useful for preventing injustice.
A person overwhelmed with anger destroys his wealth.
In anger, the catecholamine activation is more strongly norepinephrine than epinephrine (the reverse being the case for fear).
In this regard, anger is unlike other "negative" emotions such as sadness and fear, which promote analytical thinking.
Christians believe that those who reject His revealed Word, Jesus, condemn themselves, and are not condemned by the wrath of God.
Anger is considered to be packed with more evil power than desire.
For instance, if a person's car is damaged, they will feel angry if someone else did it (e.g.
The person is then tried to be imagery-based relieved of his or her recent angry experiences.
However, psychologists have also criticized the "catharsis theory" of aggression, which suggests that "unleashing" pent-up anger reduces aggression.
Distinguishing between genetic and environmental factors however requires further research and actual measurement of specific genes and environments.
These therapies often come within the schools of CBT (or Cognitive Behavioural Therapies) like modern systems such as REBT (Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy).
Rage problems are conceptualized as "the inability to process emotions or life's experiences" either because the capacity to regulate emotion (Schore, 1994) has never been sufficiently developed or because it has been temporarily lost due to more recent trauma.
According to Encyclopædia Britannica, an internal infection can cause pain which in turn can activate anger.
God is not an intellectual abstraction, nor is He conceived as a being indifferent to the doings of man; and His pure and lofty nature resents most energetically anything wrong and impure in the moral world: "O Lord, my God, mine Holy One&nbsp;... Thou art of eyes too pure to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity."
Anger can mobilize psychological resources for corrective action.
Another example of widespread deflection of anger from its actual cause toward scapegoating, Fiero says, was the blaming of Jews for the economic ills of Germany by the Nazis.
While most women were phlegmatic, individual women under certain circumstances could also be choleric.
One should avoid being too busy or deal with anger-provoking people.
Now at last you're face to face with Him&nbsp;...
It is caused by the thwarting of desires.
They relate to the direction of anger, its locus, reaction, modality, impulsivity, and objective.
While these trait clusters varied from individual to individual most authors in the Middle Ages assumed certain clusters of traits characterized men more than women and vice versa.
Anger is seen as a supportive mechanism to show a person that something is wrong and requires changing.
The English term originally comes from the term ''anger'' of Old Norse language.
When people are in a certain emotional state, they tend to pay more attention to, or remember, things that are charged with the same emotion; so it is with anger.
Seneca warns that this education should not blunt the spirit of the children nor should they be humiliated or treated severely.
Modern psychologists point out that suppression of anger may have harmful effects.
Regarding the latter, David Hume argues that because "anger and hatred are passions inherent in our very frame and constitution, the lack of them is sometimes evidence of weakness and imbecility."
This can create a feedback, as this extra blame can make the angry person angrier still, so they in turn places yet more blame on the other person.
He doesn't realize that his danger is born from within.
The negative expression of this state is known as aggression.
In contrast, anger can be destructive when it does not find its appropriate outlet in expression.
The priest continued, "you no longer hate Him.
At the same time, they should not be pampered.
Both Seneca and Galen (and later philosophers) agree that the process of controlling anger should start in childhood on grounds of malleability.
(CCC 2302) Hatred is the sin of desiring that someone else may suffer misfortune or evil, and is a mortal sin when one desires grave harm.
Tiedens examined in her study whether anger expression promotes status attribution.
Masculinity involved a wide range of possible behaviors, and men were not angry all the time.
Disposition included a balance of the previous four qualities, the four elements and the four humors.
At the beginning of life the human infant struggles indiscriminately against any restraining force, whether it be another human being or a blanket which confines his movements.
Gaining a profit, he turns it into a loss, having done damage with word & deed.
Seneca also advises that children's requests should not be granted when they are angry.
The first "expression threshold" is crossed when an organizational member conveys felt anger to individuals at work who are associated with or able to address the anger-provoking situation.
Some view anger as an emotion which triggers part of the fight or flight brain response.
Anger inflames the mind.
Learning among antisocial personalities also occurred better when they were involved with high intensity stimulation.
Buddhist monks, such as Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetans in exile, sometimes get angry.
Some of them that discuss it, such as Seneca, considered women to be more prone to anger than men.
Expressions of anger used negatively
As well as "Anger begins with madness, and ends in regret."
Research conducted with youthful offenders using a social skills training program (aggression replacement training), found significant reductions in anger, and increases in anger control.
wanted to explore whether people give up more easily to an angry opponent or to a happy opponent.
Anger may be utilized effectively by setting boundaries or escaping from dangerous situations.
In addition, it was found that a reason for that decision originates from the fact that the person expressing anger was perceived as an ability owner, and was attributed a certain social status accordingly.
Mind is the seat of anger, and its expressions are mostly through the activities of the mind.
Reform rabbi Kaufmann Kohler explains:
When someone appears to slight you, you should be at first reluctant to believe this, and should wait to hear the full story.
They are taught to see the provocation and the anger itself as occurring in a series of stages, each of which can be dealt with."
It mentions the anger of Moses (''Musa'') against his people for worshiping a golden calf and at the moment when Moses strikes an Egyptian for fighting against an Israelite.
He argued that "...&nbsp;in sporting contests, it is a mistake to become angry".
The first is when organizational members suppress rather than express their anger—that is, they fail to cross the "expression threshold".
Given their choleric "nature", men exhibited hot temperatures and were quick to anger.
In many religions, anger is frequently attributed to God or gods.
They tend to rely more on stereotypes, and pay less attention to details and more attention to the superficial.
Denying and suppressing anger is contrary to St. Paul's admonition in his Epistle to the Ephesians 4:26.
Rage is understood as "a whole load of different feelings trying to get out at once" (Harvey, 2004) or as raw, undifferentiated emotions, that spill out when another life event that cannot be processed, no matter how trivial, puts more stress on the organism than it can bear.
An angry person tends to anticipate other events that might cause them anger.
The American psychologist Albert Ellis has suggested that anger, rage, and fury partly have roots in the philosophical meanings and assumptions through which human beings interpret transgression.
The removal of anger from the hearts of believers by God (Arabic:  '''') after the fighting against Muhammad's enemies is over.
Previous researchers, such as Keating, 1985 have found that people with angry face expression were perceived as powerful and as in a high social position.
The Hebrew Bible says that opposition to God's Will results in God's anger.
based on these findings was whether expression of emotion influences others, since it is known that people use emotional information to conclude about others' limits and match their demands in negotiation accordingly.
The higher probability of negative outcomes from workplace anger likely will occur in either of two situations.
The latter does not seem to have been of much concern to earlier philosophers.
Galen repeats Seneca's points but adds a new one: finding a guide and teacher can help the person in controlling their passions.
Medieval ideas of gender assumed men were more rational than women.
They will tend to rate anger-causing events (e.g.
(Book of Jeremiah 4:10).
Entitlement & Frustration
Frustration of material desires produces anger.
In the Bible, says Father Nouwen, "it is clear that only by expressing our anger and hatred directly to God will we come to know the fullness of both his love and our freedom."
The situations leading to anger should be explored by the person.
In this way, people can be trained to deal with the onset of anger, its progression, and the residual features of anger.
Anger is an emotional reaction that impacts the body.
Adherence to the philosophy of the Māyāvādīs, belief in the fruitive results of the karma-vādīs, and belief in plans based on materialistic desires are called avirodha-prīti.
John W. Fiero cites Los Angeles riots of 1992 as an example of sudden, explosive release of suppressed anger.
Factors stated to lead to anger include selfishness, arrogance and excessive ambition.
The frenzy of anger nourishes egoism and conceit and it is the greatest benefactor of the limited ego.
It served to ignore those who are present, contradicts those who are absent, produces insults, and responds harshly to insults that are received.
The suppressed anger may find another outlet, such as a physical symptom, or become more extreme.
Dangers seem smaller, actions seem less risky, ventures seem more likely to succeed, and unfortunate events seem less likely.
The Buddha himself on anger:
The rapid, minimal, and evaluative processing of the emotional significance of the sensory data is done when the data passes through the amygdala in its travel from the sensory organs along certain neural pathways towards the limbic forebrain.
Anger can occur when a person feels their personal boundaries are being or going to be violated.
Anger is a distinct strategy of social influence and its use (i.e.
He also argued that animal will is "conditioned by anger and appetite" in contrast to human will which is "conditioned by the intellect."
A common medieval belief was that those prone to anger had an excess of yellow bile or choler (hence the word "choleric").
To avoid conceived loss or fear that something will be taken away.
When you've forced me to admit that I hate Him, will you be any better off?"
Aristotle identified traits he believed women shared: female, feminine, passive, focused on matter, inactive, and inferior.
Over-protective Instinct & Hostility
The therapy is followed by the so-called "stress inoculation" in which the clients are taught "relaxation skills to control their arousal and various cognitive controls to exercise on their attention, thoughts, images, and feelings.
While anger can activate aggression or increase its probability or intensity, it is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for aggression.
Research has found that persons who are prepared for aversive events find them less threatening, and excitatory reactions are significantly reduced.
Displays of anger can be used as a manipulation strategy for social influence.
C. FitzSimons Allison holds that "we worship God by expressing our honest anger at him."
Anger when viewed as a protective response or instinct to a perceived threat is considered as positive.
Extension of the Stimuli of the Fighting Reactions.
However, there is a difference; most often a spiritual person is aware of the emotion and the way it can be handled.
Hate is indifference and contempt.
In a discussion of confession, John Mirk, an English 14th-century Augustinian writer, tells priests how to advise the penitent by considering the spiritual and social consequences of anger:
William DeFoore, an anger-management writer, described anger as a pressure cooker: we can only apply pressure against our anger for a certain amount of time until it explodes.
Every man's humoral balance was different, some men were strong, other weak, also some more prone to wrath then others.
Seneca further advises daily self-inquisition about one's bad habit.
In dealing with other people, one should not be too inquisitive: It is not always soothing to hear and see everything.
People feel angry when they sense that they or someone they care about has been offended, when they are certain about the nature and cause of the angering event, when they are certain someone else is responsible, and when they feel they can still influence the situation or cope with it.
Maddened with anger, he destroys his status.
Anger can potentially mobilize psychological resources and boost determination toward correction of wrong behaviors, promotion of social justice, communication of negative sentiment and redress of grievances.
indicated that the anger expressers were perceived as stubborn, dominant and powerful.
This research found that low fear messages  were less provocative to the ASPD population, and high positive arousal stimulated their ability to concentrate, and subsequently learn new skills for anger reduction.
The words annoyance and rage are often imagined to be at opposite ends of an emotional continuum: mild irritation and annoyance at the low end and fury or murderous rage at the high end.
The neutral act of anger becomes the sin of wrath when it's directed against an innocent person, when it's unduly unbending or long-lasting, or when it desires excessive punishment.
It can also facilitate patience.
Unlike other negative emotions like sadness and fear, angry people are more likely to demonstrate correspondence bias – the tendency to blame a person's behavior more on his nature than on his circumstances.
The hadis state various ways to diminish, prevent and control anger.
Seneca addresses the question of mastering anger in three parts: 1. how to avoid becoming angry in the first place 2. how to cease being angry and 3. how to deal with anger in others.
In other words, whether anger contributes to perceptions or legitimization of others' behaviors.
For instance, a display or anger to shock a individual to stop sunbathings intensely, this may save their life, and would be therefore considered socially and morally acceptable in every sense.
Biblical scholar Leonard Pine concludes from his studies in the Book of Habakkuk that "far from being a sin, proper remonstration with God is the activity of a healthy faith relationship with Him."
It is equally challenging to be around an angry person and the impact can also cause psychological/emotional trauma if not dealt with.
When the priest called, the countess vented her anger toward her daughter and husband, then at the priest who responded gently, "open your heart to God."
The Quran attributes anger to prophets and believers as well as Muhammad's enemies.
Thus medieval women were supposed to act submissively toward men and relinquish control to their husbands.
he crashed into a wall out of momentary carelessness).
done evil to this people?"
The facial and skeletal musculature are strongly affected by anger.
Thus, in response to the question: "Is any anger acceptable in Buddhism?'
In general, suppression of anger (Arabic: کاظم, ''kazm'') is deemed a praiseworthy quality in the hadis.
In addition, it was found that people were inclined to easily give up to those who were perceived by them as powerful and stubborn, rather than soft and submissive.
Such explanations confirm the illusion that anger has a discrete external cause.
Many medieval authors in 1200 agreed the differences between men and women were based on complexion, shape, and disposition.
As for the agitations of the bickering mind, they are divided into two divisions.
belligerent behaviors) as a goal achievement mechanism proves to be a successful strategy.
In a 2010 Dutch study, test subjects were primed to feel anger or fear by being shown an image of an angry or fearful face, and then were shown an image of a random object.
Everyone experiences anger, Andrew D. Lester observes, and furthermore anger can serve as "a spiritual friend, a spiritual guide, and a spiritual ally."
(Book of Exodus 5:22).
Her findings clearly indicated that participants who were exposed to either an angry or a sad person were inclined to express support for the angry person rather than for a sad one.
The model suggests that organizational norms establish emotion thresholds that may be crossed when employees feel anger.
Shake your fist at Him, spit in His face, scourge Him."
a hailstorm) or guilt and shame if they were personally responsible (e.g.
Irritability, sullenness and churlishness are examples of the last form of anger.
These results strengthen the argument that participants analyze the opponent's emotion to conclude about their limits and carry out their decisions accordingly.
To prevent change in functioning.
In Hinduism, anger is equated with sorrow as a form of unrequited desire.
Medieval Christianity vigorously denounced anger as one of the seven cardinal, or deadly sins, but some Christian writers at times regarded the anger caused by injustice as having some value.
When anger spreads, when a man becomes angry, he has no shame, no fear of evil, is not respectful in speech.
the release of glucose, stored in the liver and muscles as glycogen).
In contrast to Kushner's reading of the Bible, David Blumenthal finds an "abusing God" whose "sometimes evil" actions evoke vigorous protest, but without severing the protester's relationship with God.
This belief was related to Seneca's belief that "red-haired and red-faced people are hot-tempered because of excessive hot and dry humors."
It is shared between both human and non-human animals, and it occurs when the animal is tormented or trapped.
Here, one expresses anger in a way fellow organizational members find acceptable, prompting exchanges and discussions that may help resolve concerns to the satisfaction of all parties involved.
The Almighty has brought calamity upon me" (Book of Ruth 1:20–21 ''abr'').
Saint Basil viewed anger as a "reprehensible temporary madness."
The muscle tension provides a sense of strength and self-assurance.
Two main differences between the modern understanding and ancient understanding of anger can be detected, Kemp and Strongman state: one is that early philosophers were not concerned with possible harmful effects of the suppression of anger; the other is that, recently, studies of anger take the issue of gender differences into account.
A person who is angry tends to place more blame on another person for their misery.
Furthermore, the opposite of anger is a kind of insensibility, Aristotle stated.
Perspiration increases (particularly when the anger is intense).
The behaviors associated with anger are designed to warn aggressors to stop their threatening behavior.
Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Galen all agreed on that, in terms of biology and sexual differentiation, heat was the most important of the qualities because it determined shape and disposition.
have revealed that people who compared scenarios involving an angry and a sad character, attributed a higher social status to the angry character.
In such cases the angry person is seen as the problem—increasing chances of organizational sanctions against him or her while diverting attention away from the initial anger-provoking incident.
This anger is not inconsistent with God's love, as demonstrated in the Gospel where the righteous indignation of Christ is shown in the Cleansing of the Temple.
Aquinas felt that if anger was justified, it was not a sin.
The objects of anger are perceived as a hindrance to the gratification of the desires of the angry person.
The techniques are sequenced contingently in three phases of treatment: prevention, intervention, and postvention.
Unnecessary hunger or thirst should be avoided and soothing music be listened to.
Medieval scholars believed most men were choleric, or hot and dry.
It feeds the limited ego and is used for domination and aggression.
Complexion involved the balance of the four fundamental qualities of heat, coldness, moistness, and dryness.
One of these methods is to perform a ritual ablution, a different narration states that the angry person should lie down and other narrations instructs the angry person to invoke God and seek refuge from the Devil, by reciting ''I take refuge with Allah/God from the accursed Devil.''
