Later, other urban plans were drawn up, with a new emphasis on nature and heritage protection, as well as on social mixing.
File:Angers lac de maine.jpg|Sunset on the Lac de Maine
Located inside the old ''Hôpital Saint-Jean'', the ''Musée Jean-Lurçat et de la tapisserie contemporaine'' displays tapestries dating from the 19th and 20th centuries.
The original structure, romanesque, received gothic columns and vaults in the middle of the 12th century, giving birth to the Angevin gothic, a style that quickly spread in Western France and the Angevin possessions in Italy.
Their confluence, just north of Angers, creates the Maine, a short but wide river that flows into the Loire several kilometers south.
Its unemployment rate (9.9% in 2009) is close to the national rate.
The existing building was completed in 1871 and its auditorium contains six stalls and four balconies, totaling 730 seats.
Angers had a local TV channel ''Angers 7'' which went bankrupt in 2010 and was replaced 3 years later by ''Angers Télé''.
He transformed the castle moat into a menagerie and built several gardens.
In 1850, a catastrophic failure of the Basse-Chaîne suspension bridge caused the deaths of over 200 soldiers.
The first abbey, Saint-Aubin, was built during the 7th century to house the sarcophagus of Saint Albinius.
File:P1020272 Angers Logis Pincé reductwk.JPG|Logis Pincé
File:Abbaye st Nicolas d'Angers.jpg|Abbey of Saint Nicholas (Mother-House of Good Shepherd Sisters)
On the southern limits of the commune, close to the Maine, stands the ''Couvent de la Baumette'', founded during the 15th century by René of Anjou.
The Germans made it the seat of a regional Kommandantur.
With its , it is the biggest structure of its type in northwestern France.
File:P1020199 Angers Tour Saint-Aubin reductwk.JPG|Tower of Saint-Aubin
King René of Anjou contributed to the economic revival in a city that had been diminished by the Black Death (1347–1350) and the Hundred Years War (1337–1453).
File:Hopital-St-Jean-Angers (3).JPG|Musée Jean-Lurçat
The ''Grand Théâtre'', dominating the Place du Ralliement, was first built in 1791, but destroyed by a fire in 1853.
It is the 18th most populated commune in France, having reached its maximum population in 2006, with 152,337 inhabitants.
Inside the castle, a special gallery displays the Apocalypse Tapestry, ordered by Louis I of Naples at the end of the 14th century.
Other concert halls include the ''Chabada'', the ''Amphitéa'' and the former Ursuline chapel.
Its site has been occupied since antiquity; the castle itself was built between 1230 and 1240 by Louis IX of France.
The national French channel France 3, however, still presents local news in its programs.
The museum also contains a graphic design studio, a gallery devoted to the history of Angers and a temporary exhibition gallery.
The fight was nevertheless difficult and Angers was liberated the day after, at around 5 p.m.
The Musée des Beaux-Arts d'Angers, located in the Renaissance ''Logis Barrault'', displays a collection of paintings and sculptures dating from the 14th century to today.
Angers again became rebellious and Louis XIV sent his army to seize it.
Thus, Anjou ceased to be an appanage and fell into the Royal domain.
René, then 65 years old, did not want to lead a war against his nephew and surrendered his domains without a fight.
File:Palais épiscopal du Tau - Angers - 20101126.jpg|Palace of Tau
It is also  far from Pornic, the closest sea resort, situated on the Atlantic ocean.
The old medieval center is still dominated by the massive château of the Plantagenêts, home of the ''Apocalypse Tapestry'', the biggest medieval tapestry ensemble in the world.
Vestiges from the Neolithic are more abundant and include numerous polished stone axes.
In 1373, Louis I of Naples and Anjou ordered the six tapestries illustrating the Apocalypse of St John known today as the ''Apocalypse Tapestry''.
The confluence of the three rivers and the proximity of the Loire make up a natural crossroads which favoured the foundation of the antique ''Juliomagus''.
During the 12th century, after internal divisions in Brittany, the county of Nantes was annexed by Anjou.
Angers is a hilly town, particularly marked by a rocky promontory dominating the lower valley of Anjou.
The accident was mainly caused by soldiers' lilting march which created resonance in the bridge structure.
Angers developed at the confluence of three rivers, the Mayenne, the Sarthe, and the Loir, all coming from the north and flowing south to the Loire.
The neighbouring ''Palais du Tau'', the former episcopal palace, dates from the 12th century.
By the end of the Age of Iron, Angers was a relatively densely populated hillfort.
The city also displays several Renaissance and classical hôtels particuliers, the most renowned being the ''Logis Pincé'' from the 16th century.
The Orchestre National des Pays de la Loire, shared with Nantes, usually performs at the Congress Center, built in 1983, with a capacity of 1,240 seats.
In 1551, Angers became the seat of a bailiwick and the présidial of a jurisdiction, a position the city kept until 1790.
It was soon assimilated to the medieval Angevin University (''''), which had been dissolved during the French Revolution.
France was troubled at this time by several famines and epidemics and by political instability.
It is the cradle of the Plantagenet dynasty and was during the reign of René of Anjou one of the intellectual centers of Europe.
In 1789, the city lost its ancient administrative positions, replaced in 1790 by the department of ''Mayenne-et-Loire'', soon renamed "Maine-et-Loire".
Anjou, as a political entity, disappeared, although the new department included most of its territory.
During the 1990s, the redevelopment of the Saint-Serge quarter, located just north of the historical center, produced a new business center, gardens and university buildings.
The Latin ''Andecavum'' gave also Anjou its name.
Anjou BC is Angers's basketball team, playing in second division.
He again took control of the town in 873, before the Carolingian Emperor ousted him.
In September 1939, when Poland was invaded by Germany, the Polish government-in-exile settled in Angers.
The city also has a variety of sports halls, tennis courts, swimming pools, shooting and archery stands, a velodrome, a rowing center, an ice rink and a fencing hall.
In 2010, a large amusement park, Terra Botanica, was inaugurated close to Saint-Aubin island.
The city is situated just south of the confluence of the Loir, Mayenne and Sarthe which form together the river Maine.
The urban structure there dates back from the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries.
Angers is the historical capital of Anjou and was for centuries an important stronghold in northwestern France.
Angers is also both at the edge of the Val de Loire, a World Heritage Site, and the Loire-Anjou-Touraine regional natural park.
The Empire disappeared in 1204–1205 when the King of France, Philip II, seized Normandy and Anjou.
It is also the seat of an  Court of Appeal and of several regional or local institutes, concerning for example, customs, education or science.
A center of learning, Angers boasts two renowned universities and several specialized institutions, altogether enrolling more than 26,000 students.
In 1849, the Angers-Saumur railway was built; it was extended to Nantes two years later.
The ''Place du Ralliement'', the main square, was then built in place of three churches destroyed during the French Revolution and, later, ring boulevards planted with trees replaced the city walls.
The first months of the French Revolution were relatively quiet in Angers.
The disaster inhibited the construction of suspension bridges in France for two decades.
Angers continues to have two different universities.
Until the 1980s, Angers experienced several massive urban development plans, such as the construction of the Lac de Maine, and several vast council estates and shopping malls, as well as the construction of a highway which crossed the city through its center, a project that forced the destruction of many old buildings and destroyed the original quays on the Maine.
During the 1960s the old gravel pits around the Maine were filled with water to form the Lac de Maine, which now hosts a marina.
That part of the city experienced a quick development during the industrial revolution and became a big river port.
Angers enjoys a rich cultural life, made possible by its universities and museums.
During the 19th century, others were built, for example the Faculty of Pharmacy garden and the Roseraie.
File:Maison de Simon Poisson - Angers - 20100801.jpg|House Poisson
The ''Maison d'Adam'' ("Adam's House"), located behind the cathedral, is an excellent example of the half-timbered houses which were built during the Middle Ages.
They consequently went back north for a while, around Le Mans, before crossing the Loire at Ancenis on 16 December.
The area had also developed a small-scale textile industry and begun producing machines, as well as commercial-scale production of hemp and flowers.
After 1945 and the Second World War, several large council estates made of tower blocks were built around the city center, the first of them being Belle-Beille in 1953.
Angers proper covers  and has a population of 147,305 inhabitants, while around 394,700 live in its metropolitan area.
Thanks to its several higher education schools, laboratories, and various offices, Angers is the largest horticultural center in Europe and, as the home of the Community Plant Variety Office, Angers is the hub of the plant breeders' rights system in the European Community.
During the 19th century, the city was deeply influenced by the urban transformations in Paris.
The nearest airport is Angers - Loire Airport, which replaced in 1998 an older airport near the Saint-Aubin island.
Around 929, he took the title of count (earl) of Angers and founded the first Anjou dynasty, the House of Ingelger (''French: Ingelgeriens'').
It has 1,500 beds and around 5,500 people work there.
The metropolitan area included in 2009 133 communes, 394,710 inhabitants and .
243 people died and many others were wounded.
The bishop, Gabriel Bouvery, organized on his side an "Angevin League".
The skyline is also marked by the ''Tour Saint-Aubin''.
It is more than  long, the largest medieval tapestry in the world.
In 1971, a decision was made to reestablish a public university, and the Université catholique d'Angers was split between the Université catholique de l'Ouest (private) and the Université d'Angers (public).
The institution was then renamed the "Free Faculty of Angers" (''''), although it kept its original name on an informal basis.
Regional trains go to Cholet, Saumur, Tours, Blois, Nevers and Bourges.
The Grand Théâtre and the Théâtre du Quai are the venues of three institutions, ''Angers-Nantes Opéra'', an opera company also based in Nantes, the Contemporary Dance National Center (CNDC), inaugurated by Alwin Nikolais in 1978, and the ''Nouveau théâtre d'Angers'' (NTA).
The early prosperity of the town was largely due to the nearby quarries of slate, whose abundant use for the roofs of Angers led to its sobriquet as the "Black City".
The Royalist army soon crossed the river and progressed as far as Granville, in Normandy, in November.
In Angers, 290 prisoners were shot and 1020 died of illness in jail.
Its education and research institutes are the driving force behind the city's science and technology industries.
File:Angers Oisellerie.jpg |Half-timbered houses in rue de l'Oisellerie
The ''Hôtel-Dieu'', founded in the 12th century, is one of the oldest hospitals in France.
Angers subsequently formed the capital of the province of Anjou.
It is the aldermen who stopped the slaughter.
The area's vinyards focused on sparkling wine and fruit was increasingly preserved for sale elsewhere.
Successive Germanic invasions in &nbsp;275 and 276 forced the inhabitants to move to the highest point of their city and to build a wall around a small area of around .
File:P1020234 Angers Musée des beaux-arts rwk.JPG|The Musée des Beaux-Arts
The walls were last reconstructed between 1230 and 1240, on an order of King Louis IX.
File:Angers 2008 PD 04.JPG|The cathedral
It is successively mentioned as '''Andecava civitas''' (6th century), '''Andecavis''' (&nbsp;769), '''Andegavis''' (861&nbsp;&nbsp;882), '''Angieus''' (in 1127) and '''Angeus''' (in 1205).
In 1228, during Louis IX's minority, Blanche of Castile decided to fortify the city and to rebuild the castle.
The Angers metropolitan area is a major economic center in western France, particularly active in the industrial sector, horticulture, and business tourism.
Two private hospitals and a regional center for reëducation also exist.
It displays Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Etruscan antiquities as well as Chinese and Japanese artifacts.
Angers received its first bishop in 372 during the election of Martin of Tours.
La Doutre, an old quarter located on the western bank of the Maine and facing the castle, contains two major medieval sites, the former ''Abbaye du Ronceray'', built during the 11th and 12th century, and the ''Hôpital Saint-Jean'', founded by Henry II of England and used as the city hospital until 1870.
The inhabitants of both the city and the province are called ''Angevins''.
Saint-Serge Abbey was founded by the Merovingian kings Clovis II and Theuderic III a century later.
Angers is divided into eight cantons; most of them include parts of Angers plus some surrounding communes.
File:Ile Saint-Aubin-2.jpg|The Saint-Aubin island protected area
Because of the floodplains that surround the city north and south, Angers can only grow significantly on an east-west axis.
File:La Maison Bleue - Angers - 20110119.jpg|The "Blue House"
Since 1977, all the successive mayors have been members of the Socialist Party, whereas the Maine-et-Loire department has always been governed by moderate right-wing parties.
Successive attacks on 29 and 30 May destroyed the train station and its surroundings which were reconstructed in the 1950s.
In 1875, a "free faculty" was created.
File:Angers 2008 PD 01.JPG|Planted quays around the river Maine
In 2009, Angers had 147,305 inhabitants, 0.3% less than ten years before.
Depending on their social and economic issues, some of them can have priority for financial assistance and urban regeneration.
File:Chateau angers tour double.jpg|The castle
The line runs from Avrillé-Ardenne in the north to Angers-Roseraie in the south, passing by the center and the train station.
The ''Parc des Expositions'', where fairs are currently held, welcomes 600,000 visitors and more than 300 events each year.
Similar town dedications were common in Roman Gaul, and toponyms often kept a Gallic element.
The Premiers Plans festival, dedicated to European first films and meant to help new directors meet their audience, is conducted every year and lasts one week.
The bodies of slain Protestants were thrown in the Mayenne.
It was then known as '''Juliomagus''' (, ''Iouliomagos''), a name by which it also appears in the ''Tabula Peutingeriana''.
The city traditionally had a somewhat sombre appearance from the quantity of local slate used in construction but many quarters were gradually destroyed, redeveloped, or rebuilt on the Parisian model.
The ''Logis Pincé'', constructed during the Renaissance, is the home of the museum of the same name.
In 1794, fierce repression was conducted in the whole region against the Royalists.
Angers is on both the Nantes-Paris and Nantes-Lyon railways.
File:Vue sur la Doutre, Angers.jpg|View of La Doutre; the industrial port has become a marina
The tramway consists of one  line with 25 stops.
The films are screened in three small cinemas, while two big generalist multiplexes also exist in Angers.
New districts of the city were also opened up on the opposite bank of the river.
The Royalists' bad tactics, as well as the strength of Angers city wall and castle, caused their loss.
The system uses partial ground-level power supply, which avoids aerial wires and preserves the historical character of the city center.
The city wall, which formed a square around the old city core, was demolished around 1850 and replaced by wide boulevards.
The construction of the current building started during the 12th century on the remains of an older sanctuary.
The local economy also relies on the presence of many administrative, educational, and health institutions.
File:Terra Botanica Angers.JPG|Terra Botanica
The ''Maison bleue'' ("Blue House"), built in 1927, is an Art Deco masterpiece.
Elevation varies  above sea level.
File:Nouvelles Galeries (Angers).jpg|A department store on a 19th-century street
Inspired by manuscript miniatures, the successive scenes, designed by Jean Bondol, illustrate the Apocalypse of St John.
From the 850s, Angers suffered from its situation on the border with Brittany and Normandy.
Pushed back, the Vendéens went back south and, to cross the Loire again, had to attack Angers.
It also supports research labs investigating horticulture and biotechnology.
The club plays in the Magnus League (first division).
Today, portions of wall are still visible in Rue Toussaint and Boulevard Carnot, as well as some towers, like the ''Tour Villebon'' and the ''Tour des Anglais''.
On the night of 28 May 1944, the first Allied bombing occurred over the Saint-Laud quarter.
For example, Angers is the leading hydrangeas producer in Europe.
At the same time, with the growth of Protestantism in France, a Catholic was placed at the head of the city and its castle while the bourgeoisie formed a Catholic militia to protect Angers from the Huguenots.
The Saint-Maurice cathedral is a major landmark in the cityscape, with its two spires culminating at .
The INSEE, the French institute for statistics, divides the commune of Angers into twelve sectors.
During the 1970s, the modernist approach on urban extension was replaced by a more individualistic point of view and more and more detached houses were built for the middle class.
By the time of the First World War, Cointreau had developed the distillation of liqueurs from the area's fruit to an industrial level.
In 870, the Viking chief Hastein seized Angers where he settled until a successful siege temporarily displaced him.
The town is also home to a state university, the University of Angers, best university in France in 2015 for success rates.
The War of Vendée, a Royalist rebellion and counterrevolution led in Vendée, a department located at the southwest of Maine-et-Loire, reached the Loire in March 1793.
The ''Théâtre du Quai'', inaugurated in 2007, has two auditoriums; one contains 980 seats and several balconies, and the other, more flexible, can welcome 400 seated or 960 standing spectators.
The Angers Loire Métropole, an economic and political association of communes, includes 33 communes and around 272,000 inhabitants.
At the premature death of Louis XIII in 1643, his son Louis XIV was only an infant.
The Jardin du Mail (''Mall Garden''), an esplanade situated outside the ring boulevards, was built between 1820 and 1880 on the former Champs de Mars (Fields of Mars, a place where the garrisons used to train and parade).
Angers's other educational institutions include lycées, training colleges and a school of fine art.
The renovation of the previous convention center and the addition of a 400 conference room at the back by the garden should be finished in 2018.
In the mid-19th century, the principal manufactures were goods for sailing ships (sailcloth and rope), linen and hose, sugar, leather, wax, and oil, as well as agricultural products (mainly wheat, wine, and fruit).
Cointreau continues to produce its orange triple-sec liqueur in nearby Saint-Barthélemy-d'Anjou, but many of the other industries have since vanished.
Angers fell to the Nazis during the same month.
The étang Saint-Nicolas, made by a sluice on a small river, the Brionneau, was protected as early as 1936.
It is chef-lieu of the Maine-et-Loire department and was, before the French Revolution, the capital of the province of Anjou.
The public transportation company, Irigo, which operates the tram, also organizes the bus network consisting of 13 urban lines and 12 suburban lines.
The city is also the home of two local stations, ''Radio Campus'' and ''Radio G !''.
Angers is an important convention center, with a present convention trade of around €8,000,000.
Modern Angers produces Scania trucks at Ecouflant and computers by Bull, Packard Bell, and NEC.
File:Hanno.mahout clean.jpg|Italian drawing, 17th century, at the Musée des Beaux-Arts
The Château d'Angers, built on a schist promontory, dominates the river Maine and the old town.
The castle of Angers was then the seat of the Court and the dynasty.
The Angers—Loire Airport is located in the commune of Marcé,  from Angers and close to the A11 and the A85.
Helped by the local French Forces of the Interior, they progressively moved forward to the city center.
The club was created in 1919 and returned to Ligue 1 (French top league) in 2015 after 21 years.
22 other communes situated farther form with them the agglomeration community of the Angers Loire Métropole.
The industrial activities drastically changed; port activity declined whereas new factories, such as Technicolor SA in 1957, emerged.
Totally refurbished in 2004, it is now a testimony to 1930s architecture.
The Jardin des plantes, the first botanical garden, dates back from the beginning of the 18th century.
During the 15th century, a chapel and the Châtelet were added in the courtyard.
Henceforth there were no more counts of Anjou, as the French king had made Anjou a dukedom.
Sculptures and architectural details were added to the façade during the 16th century.
Around &nbsp;400, the city came to be referred to as the '''civitas Andecavorum''' ("tribal capital of the Andecavi").
Located in the ''Abbaye Toussaint'', the ''Galerie David d'Angers'' gathers sculptures, reliefs, and medallions by David d'Angers, a 19th-century sculptor born in the city.
Between 19 and 31 May 1793, between 650 and 1000 Republican families sought asylum in Angers.
'''Angers''' () is a city in western France, about  southwest of Paris.
At the same time, he also ruled the vast Angevin Empire, which stretched from the Pyrenees to Ireland.
