Almost all surviving poetry is found in only one manuscript copy, but there are a number of different versions of some prose works, especially the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', which was apparently promulgated to monasteries by the royal court.
A wrecker of mead-benches, rampaging among foes.
The collection of buildings discovered at Yeavering, formed part of an Anglo-Saxon royal vill  or king's tun.
The final struggles were complicated by internal dissension, and especially by the treacherous acts of Ealdorman Eadric of Mercia, who opportunistically changed sides to Cnut's party.
Ruthwell Cross c.750
Beads are also sometimes found in male burials, with large beads often associated with prestigious weapons.
Generally preferring not to settle within the old Roman cities, the Anglo-Saxons built small towns near their centres of agriculture, at fords in rivers or sited to serve as ports.
In most respects, including its grammar, it was much closer to modern German and Icelandic than to modern English.
The suitors of the court would pronounce a judgment which fixed how the case would be decided: legal problems were considered to be too complex and difficult for mere human decision and so proof or demonstration of the right would depend upon some irrational, non-human criterion.
Later, Northumberland's patron saint, Saint Cuthbert, was an abbot of the monastery, and then Bishop of Lindisfarne.
Works from the south were more restrained in their ornamentation than are those from Northumbria.
Wars and pillaging removed or destroyed much Anglo-Saxon art, while the settlement introduced new Scandinavian craftsmen and patrons.
By the end of the sixth century, larger kingdoms had become established on the south or east coasts.
She could and did rule a kingdom if her husband died.
From the mid-8th century to the mid-10th a number of important buildings survive.
One part manned the burhs and found the permanent garrisons which would make it impossible for the Danes to overrun Wessex, although they would also take to the field when extra soldiers were needed.
The major kingdoms had grown through absorbing smaller principalities and the means through which they did it and the character their kingdoms acquired as a result are one of the major themes of the Middle Saxon period.
Thus the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons was not just their switching from one practice to another, but making something new out of their old inheritance and their new belief and learning.
The most noticeable feature of the Anglo-Saxon legal system is the apparent prevalence of legislation in the form of law codes.
As they adopted this language and culture, the barriers began to dissolve between peoples, who had earlier lived parallel lives.
In 829 Egbert went on, the chronicler reports, to conquer "the kingdom of the Mercians and everything south of the Humber".
Le Goff, suggests that the Anglo-Saxon period was defined by its use of wood, providing evidence for the care and craftsmanship that the Anglo–Saxon invested into their wooden material culture, from cups to halls, and the concern for trees and timber in Anglo–Saxon place–names, literature and religion.
Assigning ethnic labels such as "Anglo-Saxon" is fraught with difficulties.
He had been at the monastery in Iona when Oswald asked to be sent a mission to Christianise the Kingdom of Northumbria from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism.
Western monasticism, as a whole, had been evolving since the time of the desert fathers, but, in the seventh century, monasticism in England confronted a dilemma that brought to question the truest representation of the Christian faith.
The two most common methods were the ordeal by hot iron and by cold water.
It was only in the later part of Edward the Elder's reign that we see a type of war which a twelfth Century soldier would have recognised.
Therefore it seems better to me, if it seems so to you, that we also translate certain books  ...and bring it about ...if we have the peace, that all the youth of free men who now are in England, those who have the means that they may apply themselves to it, be set to learning, while they may not be set to any other use, until the time when they can well read English writings.
This is a priest's guide on how to care for people.
The system of primogeniture (inheritance by the first-born male) was not introduced to England until after the Norman Conquest, so Anglo-Saxon siblings — girls as well as boys — were more equal in terms of status.
It was common for children to be fostered, either in other households or in monasteries, perhaps as a means of extending the circle of protection beyond the kin group.
This value could also be used to set the fine payable if a person was injured or offended against.
This put all the monks and nuns in England under one set of detailed customs for the first time.
''hreran mid hondumhrimcealde sæ''
Research in the early twentieth century, and still continuing today, has shown that a form of Anglo-Saxon was still being spoken, and not merely among uneducated peasants, into the thirteenth century in the West Midlands.
Linguists such as Richard Coates have suggested there could not have been meaningful contact between the languages, which is reasonable argued from the small amount of loanwords.
A Latin gospel book, the Lindisfarne Gospels are richly illuminated and decorated in an Insular style that blends not only Irish and Western Mediterranean elements but, incorporates imagery from the Eastern Mediterranean, including Coptic Christianity as well.
There was Shield Sheafson, scourge of many tribes,
The former consisted in carrying a red-hot iron for five paces: the wound was immediately bound up and if, on unbinding, it was found to be festering the case was lost.
The age of majority was usually either ten or twelve, when a child could legally take charge of inherited property, or be held responsible for a crime.
Nick Highham has provided a summary of the importance of language to the Anglo-Saxon culture:
The archaeological evidence shows considerable continuity in the system of landscape and local governance, which was inherited from the indigenous community.
This territorial model, known as a multiple estate or shire has been developed in a range of studies and Colm O'Brien, in applying this to Yeavering has proposed a geographical definition of the wider shire of Yeavering and also a geographical definition of the principal estate whose structures Hope-Taylor excavated.
Bede's story of Cædmon, the cowherd who became the 'Father of English Poetry' represents the real heart of the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons from paganism to Christianity.
Ac se kyng þeah him swiðe heardlice wið feaht mid þam mannum þe him gelæstan woldon, þær wearð micel wæl geslægen on ægðre healfe.
The process from warrior to ''cyning'' – Old English for king – is described in ''Beowulf'':
In that court were two young men named Dunstan and Æthelwold who were made priests, supposedly at the insistence of Athelstan, right at the end of his reign in 939.
Many Anglo-Saxon nobles fled to Scotland, Ireland, and Scandinavia.
The disappearance of the aristocratic families which had traditionally played an active role in the governance of the realm, coupled with Cnut's choice of thegnly advisors, put an end to the balanced relationship between monarchy and aristocracy so carefully forged by the West Saxon Kings.
Horses played a central role in funerary practices as well as in other rituals.
The stone buildings imposed on England by the Romans would have been 'startling' and 'exceptional', and following the collapse of Roman society in the fifth century there was a widespread return to timber building, a 'cultural shift' that it is not possible to explain by recourse to technological determinism.
Alfred translated this book himself and explains in the preface:
the terms ''ænglisc'' ('the language') and ''Angelcynn'' ('the people') were also used by West Saxon King Alfred to refer to the people; in doing so he was following established practice.
If either the party or any of the helpers failed in the oath, either refusing to take it or sometimes even making an error in the required formula, the proof failed and the case was adjudged to the other side.
Threatened by extended Danish invasions and occupation of eastern England, this identity was re-established; it dominated until after the Norman Conquest.
Soon afterwards, it became impossible for people to read Old English, and the texts became useless.
The rituals associated with these include horse fights, burials, consumption of horse meat, and horse sacrifice.
Rather than being organized around rhyme, the poetic line in Anglo-Saxon is organised around alliteration, the repetition of stressed sounds, any repeated stressed sound, vowel or consonant, could be used.
A 'good' king was a generous king who through his wealth won the support which would ensure his supremacy over other kingdoms.
The judges of the court were all those who had the right and duty of attending the court, the suitors.
Codex Aureus of Canterbury c.750
The pit may have been used for storage, but more likely was filled with straw for winter insulation.
In the 19th century the term ''Anglo-Saxon'' was broadly used in philology, and is sometimes so used at present.
Cnut appears to have adopted wholeheartedly the traditional role of Anglo-Saxon kingship.
Roofing materials varied, with thatch being the most common, though turf and even wooden shingles were also used.
In circumstances where freedom at law, acceptance with the kindred, access to patronage, and the use and possession of weapons were all exclusive to those who could claim Germanic descent, then speaking Old English without Latin or Brittonic inflection had considerable value.
Various studies have been carried out investigating the distribution and chronological change of bead types.
Trewhiddle style on silver ring c.775–850
However, the population of England at home remained largely Anglo-Saxon; for them, little changed immediately except that their Anglo-Saxon lord was replaced by a Norman lord.
By the middle of the 8th century, other kingdoms of southern Britain were also affected by Mercian expansionism.
The term ''Angli Saxones'' seems to have first been used in continental writing of the 8th century; Paul the Deacon uses it to distinguish the English Saxons from the continental Saxons (''Ealdseaxe'', literally, 'old Saxons').
The influence of Old Norse on the lexicon of the English language has been profound: responsible for such basic vocabulary items as ''sky'', ''leg'', the pronoun ''they'', the verb form ''are'', and hundreds of other words.
In addition to fostering metalworking skills, Christianity stimulated stone sculpture and manuscript illumination.
Marriage comprised a contract between the woman's family and the prospective bridegroom, who was required to pay a 'bride-price' in advance of the wedding and a 'morning gift' following its consummation.
These were originally all free male inhabitants of the neighbourhood but, over time, suit of court became an obligation attached to particular holdings of land.
They were frequently appealed to and relied upon in litigation.
Raids were signs of God punishing his people, Ælfric refers to people adopting the customs of the Danish and exhorts people not to abandon the native customs on behalf of the Danish ones, and then requests a 'brother Edward', to try to put an end to a 'shameful habit' of drinking and eating in the outhouse, which some of the countrywomen practiced at beer parties.
Bede makes it clear in both his Ecclesiastical History and his Historiam Abbatum that the masonry construction of churches, including his own at Jarrow, was undertaken morem Romanorum, 'in the manner of the Romans,' in explicit contrast to existing traditions of timber construction.
The vast majority of early Anglo-Saxon female graves contain beads, which are often found in large numbers in the area of the neck and chest.
Widows were in a particularly favourable position, with inheritance rights, custody of their children and authority over dependants.
This explains why dynasties waxed and waned so quickly, a kingdom was only as strong as its leader-king.
In particular, the army which arrived in 865 remained over many winters, and part of it later settled what became known as the Danelaw.
The Anglo-Saxon system put an emphasis upon compromise and arbitration: litigating parties were enjoined to settle their differences if at all possible.
Stone could be used, and was used, to build churches.
Although not themselves sources of law, Anglo-Saxon charters are a most valuable historical source for tracing the actual legal practices of the various Anglo-Saxon communities.
Old English literary works include genres such as epic poetry, hagiography, sermons, Bible translations, legal works, chronicles, mainly the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', riddles and others.
In all there are about 400 surviving manuscripts from the period, a significant corpus of both popular interest and specialist research.
The transition between the Christian and pagan traditions is occasionally apparent in 7th century works; examples include the Crundale buckle and the Canterbury pendant.
As his powers waxed and his worth was proved.
The normal methods of proof were oath-helping or the ordeal.
The growth and popularity of monasticism was not an entirely internal development, with influence from the continent shaping Anglo-Saxon monastic life.
The speech of an illiterate ''ceorl'', on the other hand, can not be reconstructed.
Another common design was simple post framing, with heavy posts set directly into the ground, supporting the roof.
However, Nick Higham seems to agree with Bede, who identified three phases of settlement: an exploration phase, when mercenaries came to protect the resident population; a migration phase, which was substantial as implied by the statement that ''Anglus'' was deserted; and an establishment phase, in which Anglo-Saxons started to control areas, implied in Bede's statement about the origins of the tribes.
While Aldhelm was doing his work in Malmesbury, far from him, up in the North of England, Bede was writing a large quantity of books, gaining a reputation in Europe and showing that the English could write history and theology, and do astronomical computation (for the dates of Easter, among other things).
From 980 onwards the ''Anglo -Saxon Chronicle'' records renewed raiding against England .
James Anthony Froude, Charles Kingsley and Edward A. Freeman used the term ''Anglo-Saxon'' to justify racism and imperialism, claiming that the "Anglo-Saxon" ancestry of the English made them racially superior to the colonised peoples.
In plan, however, the churches remained essentially conservative.
The two monastic traditions were the Celtic and the Roman, and a decision was made to adopt the Roman tradition.
That was one good king.
Beowulf, for all its heroic content, clearly makes the point that economic and military success were intimately linked.
If she were injured or abused in her marriage her relatives were expected to look after her interests.
On the Continent during the eleventh century was developed a group of interrelated Romanesque styles, associated with the rebuilding of many churches on a grand scale, made possible by a general advance in architectural technology and mason-craft.
Manuscripts were not common items.
Battle was risky and best avoided unless all the factors were on your side.
Richard North suggests that the sacrifice of the tree was in accordance with pagan virtues and "the image of Christ's death was constructed in this poem with reference to an Anglian ideology of the world tree".
A simple nave without aisles provided the setting for the main altar; east of this a chancel arch separated off the apse for use by the clergy.
Robbing a thane called for a higher penalty than robbing a ceorl.
Then came William, the Earl of Normandy, into Pevensey on the evening of St.Michael's mass, and soon as his men were ready, they built a fortress at Hasting's port.This was told to King Harold, and he gathered then a great army and come towards them at the Hoary Apple Tree, and William came upon him unawares before his folk were ready.
The reign of King Æthelred the Unready witnessed the resumption of Viking raids on England, putting the country and its leadership under strains as severe as they were long sustained.
It is very common for the intermixing of speakers of different dialects, such as those that occur during times of political unrest, to result in a mixed language, and one theory holds that exactly such a mixture of Old Norse and Old English is thought to have accelerated the decline of case endings in Old English.
What is presumed to be one of these "æstel" (the word only appears in this one text) is the gold, rock crystal and enamel Alfred Jewel, discovered in 1693, which is assumed to have been fitted with a small rod and used as a pointer when reading.
It is certainly one of the largest, weighing 34 kilograms.
The term ''Anglo-Saxon'' is sometimes used to refer to peoples descended or associated in some way with the English ethnic group, but there is no universal definition for the term.
Most of this land was common outfield arable land (of an outfield-infield system) that provided individuals with the means to build a basis of kinship and group cultural ties.
''Oft Scyld Scéfing – sceaþena þréatum
The Anglo-Saxon period denotes the period of British history between about 450 and 1066, after their initial settlement and up until the Norman conquest.
The increasingly difficult times brought on by the Viking attacks are reflected in both Ælfric's and Wulfstan's works, but most notably in Wulfstan's fierce rhetoric in the ''Sermo Lupi ad Anglos'', dated to 1014.
The first payment was 10,000 pounds."
Beyond the whale-road had to yield to him
The Anglo-Saxon period includes the creation of an English nation, with many of the aspects that survive today, including regional government of shires and hundreds.
On the day of Egbert's succession to the kingdom of Wessex, in 802, a Mercian ealdorman from the province of the ''Hwicce'' had crossed the border at Kempsford, with the intention of mounting a raid into northern Wiltshire; the Mercian force was met by the local ealdorman, "and the people of Wiltshire had the victory".
When Athelflæd died, Mercia was absorbed by Wessex.
In particular, the work of Catherine Hills and Sam Lucy on the evidence of Spong Hill has moved the chronology for the settlement earlier than 450, with a significant number of items now in phases before Bede's date.
The ties of loyalty to a lord, were to the person of a lord, not to his station; there was no real concept of patriotism or loyalty to a cause.
Athelstan's court had been an intellectual incubator.
The most important court in the later Anglo-Saxon period was the Shire Court.
It also shows that, superb though individual pieces may be in terms of craftsmanship, the value of such items as currency and their potential roles as tribute or the spoils of war could, in a warrior society, outweigh appreciation of their integrity and artistry.
A crisis arose in 1051 when Godwine defied the king's order to punish the men of Dover, who had resisted an attempt by Eustace of Boulogne to quarter his men on them by force.
A variety of materials other than glass were available for Anglo-Saxon beads including; amber, rock crystal, amethyst, bone, shells, coral and even metal.
This affected everyone in the Kingdom.
I desired to live worthily as long as I lived, and to leave after my life, to the men who should come after me, the memory of me in good works.
Then Harald the King was slain, and Leofwine the Earl, his brother, and Gyrth, and many good men, and the Frenchmen held the place of slaughter.
Unlike in the Carolingian world, late Anglo–Saxon royal halls continued to be of timber in the manner of Yeavering centuries before, even though the king could clearly have mustered the resources to build in stone.
There was another means of dealing with military issues.
Thus while all Old English poetry has common features, we can also identify three strands: religious poetry, which includes poems about specifically Christian topics, such as the cross and the saints; Heroic or epic poetry, such as ''Beowulf'', which is about heroes, warfare, monsters, and the Germanic past; and poetry about "smaller" topics, including introspective poems (the so-called elegies), "wisdom" poems (which communicate both traditional and Christian wisdom), and riddles.
Anglo–Saxon building forms were very much part of this general building tradition.
Rædwald raised a large army, presumably from among the kings who accepted his overlordship, and 'not giving him time to summon and assemble his whole army, Rædwald met him with a much greater force and slew him on the Mercian border on the east bank of the river Idle'.
The coming of Christianity revolutionised the visual arts, as well as other aspects of society.
Benedictine Monasticism spread throughout England, these became centers of learning again, run by people trained in Glastonbury, with one rule, the works of Aldhelm at the center of their curricula but also influenced by the vernacular efforts of Alfred.
Importantly, whatever their origin or whenever they flourished, these dynasties established their claim to lordship through their links to extended kin ties.
In 664, the Synod of Whitby was convened and established Roman practice (in style of tonsure and dates of Easter) as the norm in Northumbria, and thus "brought the Northumbrian church into the mainstream of Roman culture."
A charter was a written document from a king or other authority confirming a grant either of land or some other valuable right.
The decorative motifs used on these northern carvings (as on items of personal adornment or everyday use) echo Scandinavian styles.
Problems also came for Edward from the resentment caused by the king's introduction of Norman friends.
Although there are many gaps in the evidence, it is clear that the seventh-century Mercian kings were formidable rulers who were able to exercise a wide-ranging overlordship from their Midland base.
The archaeological evidence agrees with this earlier timescale.
The chronology of nucleated villages is much debated and not yet clear.
The last man in this dynasty to have a Brythonic name was King Caedwalla, who died as late as 689.
Such visits would be periodic and it is likely that he would visit each royal villa only once or twice a year.
And I command in God's name that no man may take the æstel from the book nor the book from the church.
However what Alfred was alluding to was that in order for a king to fulfil his responsibilities towards his people, particularly those concerned with defence, he had the right to make considerable exactions from the landowners and people of his kingdom.
An example of this was the leadership of Rædwald of East Anglia and how the East Anglian primacy did not survive his death.
Frequently these buildings have sunken floors; a shallow pit over which a plank floor was suspended.
However, a systematic comparison of burials with and without weapons, using archaeological and skeletal data, suggests that this assumption is much too simplistic and even misleading.
Turning to strategy, of the period before Alfred the evidence gives the Impression that Anglo-Saxon armies fought battles frequently.
The royal council or witan played a central but limited role in the Anglo-Saxon period.
Characteristic of the 5th century is the quoit brooch with motifs based on crouching animals, as seen on the silver quoit brooch from Sarre, Kent.
This emphasis on social standing affected all parts of the Anglo-Saxon world.
In 793, Lindisfarne was raided and while this was not the first raid of its type it was the most prominent.
This process started with Edward the Elder – who with his sister, Æthelflæd, Lady of the Mercians, initially, charters reveal, encouraged people to purchase estates from the Danes, thereby to reassert some degree of English influence in territory which had fallen under Danish control.
Charters and law were also established.
He was joined the following year by his colleague Hadrian, a Latin-speaking African by origin and former abbot of a monastery in Campania (near Naples).
And I will send one to each bishopric in my kingdom, and in each will be an æstel worth fifty mancuses.
In the reformation, churchman looking for signs of an English church reinterpreted Anglo-Saxon Christianity.
Gildas calls the peace a "grievous divorce with the barbarians".
Oswiu's extension of overlordship over the Picts and Scots is expressed in terms of making them tributary.
There are about 30,000 surviving lines of Old English poetry and about ten times that much prose, and the majority of both is religious.
For the first time following the Anglo-Saxon invasion, coins began circulating in Kent during his reign.
It attested his grants of land to churches or laymen, consented to his issue of new laws or new statements of ancient custom, and helped him deal with rebels and persons suspected of disaffection.
Settlement patterns as well as village plans in England fall into two great categories: scattered farms and homesteads in upland and woodland Britain, nucleated villages across a swathe of central England.
Old English is a West Germanic language closely related to Old Frisian and Old Saxon.
The fleet does not appear to have stayed long in England, but it started a trend which others subsequently followed.
Heinrich Härke and Richard Coates point out that they are invisible archaeologically and linguistically.
The flourishing of sculpture in Mercia, occurred slightly later than in Northumbria and is dated to the second half of the 8th century.
It remained for Swein Forkbeard, king of Denmark, to conquer the kingdom of England in 1013–14, and (after Æthelred's restoration) for his son Cnut to achieve the same in 1015–16.
In the Shire Court, charters and writs would be read out for all to hear.
At first sight, there would seem little to debate.
Several of these kingdoms may have had as their initial focus a territory based on a former Roman ''civitas''.
Though manuscripts dominate the corpus, sufficient architectural sculpture, ivory carving and metalwork survives to show that the same styles were current in secular art, and became widespread in the south at parochial level.
Thus, as Lethbridge reminds us, "to say, 'this is a monument erected in Christian times and therefore the symbolism on it must be Christian,' is an unrealistic approach.
These objects were the products of a society that invested its modest surpluses in personal display, who fostered craftsmen and jewellers of a high standard, and a society where the possession of a fine brooch or buckle was a valuable status symbol and possible tribal emblem – in death as much as in life.
These 'tun' consisted of a series of buildings designed to provide short-term accommodation for the king and his household.
However, by the tenth and eleventh centuries, the rise of the manor and its significance in terms of both settlement and the management of land, which becomes very evident in the Domesday Book.
Þis wearð þa Harolde cynge gecydd, he gaderade þa mycelne here, com him togenes æt þære haran apuldran, Wyllelm him com ongean on unwær, ær þis folc gefylced wære.
Mercia was a diverse area of tribal groups, as shown by the Tribal Hidage; the peoples were a mixture of Brythonic speaking peoples and "Anglo-Saxon" pioneers and their early leaders had Brythonic names, such as Penda.
In Old English there is a distinction between two different kinds of verbs.
There was no underlying administration or bureaucracy to maintain any gains beyond the lifetime of a leader.
A variation on the sunken floor design is found in towns, where the "basement" may be as deep as 9 feet, suggesting a storage or work area below a suspended floor.
Many linguists believe that Old English received little influence from the local insular languages especially Common Brittonic (the language that may have been the majority language in Lowland Britain).
They constituted the common enemy, making the English the more conscious of a national identity which overrode deeper distinctions; they could be perceived as an instrument of divine punishment for the people's sins, raising awareness of a collective Christian identity; and by 'conquering' the kingdoms of the East Angles, the Northumbrians and the Mercians they created a vacuum in the leadership of the English people.
Catherine Hills suggests that it is no accident, "that the English call themselves by the name sanctified by the Church, as that of a people chosen by God, whereas their enemies use the name originally applied to piratical raiders".
The belief was "the Christian Church was Roman therefore a masonry church was a Roman building".
As 'wager of law' it remained a way of determining cases in the common law until its abolition in the 19th century.
In a society in which each was known to his neighbour and in which religious emphasis was placed upon the sanctity of an oath, the system was probably more satisfactory.
Hadstock (Essex), Clayton and Sompting (Sussex); this style continued towards the end of the century as at Milborne Port (Somerset).
Elaborate crypts are a feature of Wilfrid's buildings.
Hardwicks are dairy farms and Swinhopes the valleys where pigs were pastured.
The outlines of the story are told in the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', though the annals represent a West Saxon point of view.
Near the end of the Old English period the English language underwent a third foreign influence, namely the Scandinavian influence of Old Norse.
