Following the American Revolution, Anglican congregations in the United States and British North America (which would later form the basis for the modern country of Canada) were each reconstituted into autonomous churches with their own bishops and self-governing structures; which, through the expansion of the British Empire and the activity of Christian missions, was adopted as the model for many newly formed churches, especially in Africa, Australasia and the regions of the Pacific.
In terms of personal piety some Anglicans may recite the rosary and angelus, be involved in a devotional society dedicated to "Our Lady" (the Blessed Virgin Mary) and seek the intercession of the saints.
Some liberal and moderate Anglicans see this opposition as representing a new fundamentalism within Anglicanism.
Both Anglo-Catholics and Evangelicals have been affected by this movement such that it is not uncommon to find typically charismatic postures, music, and other themes evident during the services of otherwise Anglo-Catholic or Evangelical parishes.
Many of the new Anglican formularies of the mid-16th century corresponded closely to those of contemporary Reformed Protestantism.
Rowan Williams, the Archbishop of Canterbury from 2002 to 2012, was the first archbishop appointed from outside the Church of England since the Reformation: he was formerly the Archbishop of Wales.
Moreover, Sykes criticises the proposition, implicit in theories of ''via media'', that there is no distinctive body of Anglican doctrines, other than those of the universal church; accusing this of being an excuse not to undertake systematic doctrine at all.
Unlike in Roman Catholicism, the consecrated bread and wine are always offered to the congregation at a eucharistic service ("communion in both kinds").
Non-parochial priests may earn their living by any vocation, although employment by educational institutions or charitable organisations is most common.
and what that Word did make it;
In more recent years it has led some jurisdictions to permit the ordination of people in same-sex relationships and to authorise rites for the blessing of same-sex unions (see Homosexuality and Anglicanism).
Many of those provinces that ordain women to the priesthood previously allowed them to be ordained only to the diaconate.
For instance, in the 18th century the influential Evangelical Anglican William Wilberforce, along with others, campaigned against the slave trade.
A dean is a priest who is the principal cleric of a cathedral or other collegiate church and the head of the chapter of canons.
Another distinctive feature of Anglican religious life is the existence of some mixed-gender communities.
Those within the Church of England opposed to the Tractarians, and to their revived ritual practices, introduced a stream of Parliamentary Bills aimed to control innovations in worship.
Many Anglicans look to the Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888 as the ''sine qua non'' of communal identity.
Some Anglicans opposed to various liberalising changes, in particular the ordination of women, have become Roman Catholics or Orthodox.
A changing focus on social issues after the Second World War led to Lambeth Conference resolutions countenancing contraception and the remarriage of divorced persons.
In brief, the Quadrilateral's four points are the scriptures, as containing all things necessary to salvation; the creeds (specifically, the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds) as the sufficient statement of Christian faith; the dominical sacraments of Baptism and Holy Communion; and the historic episcopate.
The council consists of representative bishops, clergy, and laity chosen by the thirty-eight provinces.
In the original ''Book of Common Prayer'' these were derived from combinations of the ancient monastic offices of Matins and Lauds; and Vespers and Compline respectively.
He took the bread and brake it;
This extends beyond the ceremony of High Church services to even more theologically significant territory, such as sacramental theology (see Anglican sacraments).
This view was associated – especially in the writings of Edward Bouverie Pusey – with the theory of Anglicanism as one of three "branches" (alongside the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church) historically arising out of the common tradition of the earliest Ecumenical Councils.
In British parliamentary legislation referring to the English Established Church, there is no need for a description; it is simply the Church of England, though the word "Protestant" is used in many Acts specifying the succession to the Crown and qualifications for office.
The Tractarian formulation of the theory of the ''via media'' was essentially a party platform, and not acceptable to Anglicans outside the confines of the Oxford Movement.
Frederick Denison Maurice, through such works as ''The Kingdom of Christ'', played a pivotal role in inaugurating another movement, Christian socialism.
These provinces may take the form of national churches (such as in Canada, Uganda, or Japan) or a collection of nations (such as the West Indies, Central Africa, or South Asia), or geographical regions (such as Vanuatu and Solomon Islands) etc.
It has resolutely refused to identify decisively as Catholic or Protestant and sees it as a "virtue" rather than a "handicap," MacCulloch, ibid: indeed it prefers to see itself as both.
What resulted was a form of Christianity distinct from Rome in many traditions and practices."
With British colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards, Anglican churches were planted around the globe.
In addition, most prayer books include a section of prayers and devotions for family use.
Some in this movement, such as Wesley and George Whitefield, took the message to the United States, influencing the First Great Awakening and creating an Anglo-American movement called Methodism that would eventually break away, structurally, from the Anglican churches after the American Revolution.
Anglicans look for authority in their "standard divines" (see below).
This meeting, with King Oswiu as the final decision maker, "led to the acceptance of Roman usage elsewhere in England and brought the English Church into close contact with the Continent."
The first Anglican church in the Americas was built at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607.
To that extent, they are in the company of the continental reformer Martin Luther rather than Ulrich Zwingli.
The degree of distinction between Reformed and western Catholic tendencies within the Anglican tradition is routinely a matter of debate both within specific Anglican churches and throughout the Anglican Communion.
On the doctrine of justification, for example, there is a wide range of beliefs within the Anglican Communion, with some Anglo-Catholics arguing for a faith with good works and the sacraments.
Many of the early Church fathers wrote of the presence of Christianity in Roman Britain, with Tertullian stating "those parts of Britain into which the Roman arms had never penetrated were become subject to Christ".
Adherents of Anglicanism are called ''Anglicans''.
Some Anglican monastic communities have a Daily Office based on that of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' but with additional antiphons and canticles, etc.
For nearly three centuries, this round of daily professional choral worship represented a tradition entirely distinct from that embodied in the intoning of Parish Clerks, and the singing of "west gallery choirs" which commonly accompanied weekly worship in English parish churches.
Liturgy is regulated by the prayer books and consists of the Holy Eucharist (some call it Holy Communion or Mass), the other six Sacraments, and the Divine Office or Liturgy of the Hours.
Within these Communion provinces may exist subdivisions, called ecclesiastical provinces, under the jurisdiction of a metropolitan archbishop.
He hosts and chairs the Lambeth Conferences of Anglican Communion bishops, and decides who will be invited to them.
In the time of Henry VIII the nature of Anglicanism was based on questions of jurisdiction – specifically, the belief of the Crown that national churches should be autonomous – rather than theological disagreement.
Sykes nevertheless agrees with those heirs of Maurice who emphasise the incompleteness of Anglicanism as a positive feature, and quotes with qualified approval the words of Michael Ramsey:
England remains the largest single Anglican province, with 26&nbsp;million members.
More conservative elements within and outside of Anglicanism (primarily African churches and factions within North American Anglicanism) have opposed these proposals.
Many provinces of the Anglican Communion ordain both men and women as deacons.
They emphasise the two dominical sacraments of Baptism and Eucharist, viewing the other five as "lesser rites".
It retains the services for Morning and Evening Prayer and Compline and includes a section entitled "Prayer during the Day".
The service is constructed around a sermon focused on Biblical exposition and opened with one or more Bible readings and closed by a series of prayers (both set and extemporised) and hymns or songs.
''(See Episcopal polity)''.
All thirty-nine provinces of the Anglican Communion are autonomous, each with their own primate and governing structure.
Confusing the matter was the fact that the 37th Article of Religion in the ''Book of Common Prayer'' states that "it is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in the wars."
Others have, at various times, joined the Continuing Anglican movement.
Although many Anglican churches now use a wide range of modern service books written in the local language, the structures of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' are largely retained.
Since the late 1990s a number have appeared in smaller communities, often as a result of a division in the town's existing Episcopal churches.
While Anglo-Catholic practices, particularly liturgical ones, have resurfaced and become more common within the tradition over the last century, there remain many places where practices and beliefs remain on the more Reformed or Evangelical side (see Sydney Anglicanism).
A small yet influential aspect of Anglicanism is its religious orders and communities.
The four points (the sufficiency of scripture, the historic creeds, the two dominical sacraments, and the historic episcopate) were proposed as a basis for discussion, although they have frequently been taken as a non-negotiable bottom-line for any form of reunion.
Nowadays, in most Anglican churches, the Eucharist is celebrated in a manner similar to the usage of Catholics and some Lutherans though, in many churches, more traditional, "pre-Vatican II", models of worship are common, (e.g.
Contrary to popular misconception, the British monarch is not the constitutional "head" but in law the "Supreme Governor" of the Church of England, nor does he or she have any role in provinces outside England.
This statement was strongly reasserted when "the 67th General Convention of the Episcopal Church reaffirms the statement made by the Anglican Bishops assembled at Lambeth in 1978 and adopted by the 66th General Convention of the Episcopal Church in 1979, calling "Christian people everywhere ... to engage themselves in non-violent action for justice and peace and to support others so engaged, recognizing that such action will be controversial and may be personally very costly... this General Convention, in obedience to this call, urges all members of this Church to support by prayer and by such other means as they deem appropriate, those who engaged in such non-violent action, and particularly those who suffer for conscience' sake as a result; and be it further Resolved, that this General Convention calls upon all members of this Church seriously to consider the implications for their own lives of this call to resist war and work for peace for their own lives."
Their orientation is best summed up by Lightfoot's observation that "Life which Christ is and which Christ communicates, the life which fills our whole beings as we realise its capacities, is active fellowship with God."
All baptised members of the church are called Christian faithful, truly equal in dignity and in the work to build the church.
More or less extensively adapted, this choral tradition also became the direct inspiration for robed choirs leading congregational worship in a wide range of Christian denominations.
The corpus produced by Anglican divines is diverse.
In many cities, especially in England, Anglican and Catholic priests and lay people often meet several times a week to pray the office in common.
In Anglicanism there is a distinction between liturgy, which is the formal public and communal worship of the Church, and personal prayer and devotion which may be public or private.
Published in 1593 and subsequently, Hooker's eight-volume work is primarily a treatise on church-state relations, but it deals comprehensively with issues of biblical interpretation, soteriology, ethics and sanctification.
For the next one hundred years, religious orders for both men and women proliferated throughout the world, becoming a numerically small but disproportionately influential feature of global Anglicanism.
Between these extremes are a variety of styles of worship, often involving a robed choir and the use of the organ to accompany the singing and to provide music before and after the service.
Newman himself subsequently rejected the theory of the ''via media'', as essentially historicist and static; and hence unable to accommodate any dynamic development within the church.
Rapid social change in the industrialised world during the 20th century compelled the church to examine issues of gender, sexuality and marriage.
Contrariwise, Sykes notes a high degree of commonality in Anglican liturgical forms, and in the doctrinal understandings expressed within those liturgies.
In the following century, two further factors acted to accelerate the development of a distinct Anglican identity.
The Community of the Sisters of Melanesia, started in 1980 by Sister Nesta Tiboe, is a growing community of women throughout the Solomon Islands.
All Anglican prayer books contain offices for Morning Prayer (Matins) and Evening Prayer (Evensong).
Continuing churches have generally been formed by people who have left the Anglican Communion.
One of Henry VIII's earliest acts was their dissolution and seizure of their assets.
The faith of Anglicans is founded in the Scriptures and the Gospels, the traditions of the Apostolic Church, the historical episcopate, the first seven ecumenical councils and the early Church Fathers (among these councils, especially the premier four ones, and among these Fathers, especially those active during the five initial centuries of Christianity, according to the ''quinquasaecularist'' principle proposed by the English bishop Lancelot Andrewes and the Lutheran dissident Georg Calixtus).
The All Saints Sisters of the Poor, with convents in Catonsville, Maryland and elsewhere use an elaborated version of the Anglican Daily Office.
A new culture emerged around the Irish Sea among the Celtic peoples with Celtic Christianity at its core.
Among the early Anglican divines of the 16th and 17th centuries, the names of Thomas Cranmer, John Jewel, Matthew Parker, Richard Hooker, Lancelot Andrewes and Jeremy Taylor predominate.
Government in the Anglican Communion is synodical, consisting of three houses of laity (usually elected parish representatives), clergy, and bishops.
This only made the dilemma more acute, with consequent continual litigation in the secular and ecclesiastical courts.
These churches at first used and then revised the ''Book of Common Prayer'' until they, like their parent church, produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries, which come under the general heading of the Liturgical Movement.
For each personal ordinariate the ordinary may be a former Anglican bishop or priest.
The effort was to create a national church in legal continuity with its traditions, but inclusive of certain doctrinal and liturgical beliefs of the Reformers.
The Church of England has been a church of missionaries since the 17th century when the Church first left English shores with colonists who founded what would become the United States, Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa and established Anglican churches.
Of the seven sacraments, all Anglicans recognise Baptism and the Eucharist as being directly instituted by Christ.
Primates, archbishops and metropolitans are all bishops and members of the historical episcopate who derive their authority through apostolic succession – an unbroken line of bishops that can be traced back to the 12 apostles of Jesus.
A small but enthusiastic minority use the Anglican Breviary, or other translations and adaptations of the Pre-Vatican II Roman Rite and Sarum Rite, along with supplemental material from cognate western sources, to provide such things as a common of Octaves, a common of Holy Women and other additional material.
The Sisters of the Church, started by Mother Emily Ayckbowm in England in 1870, has more sisters in the Solomons than all their other communities.
"), though some Anglo-Catholic priests (like Roman Catholic priests) may say private Masses.
These theologians regard scripture as interpreted through tradition and reason as authoritative in matters concerning salvation.
Historian Heinrich Zimmer writes that "Just as Britain was a part of the Roman Empire, so the British Church formed (during the fourth century) a branch of the Catholic Church of the West; and during the whole of that century, from the Council of Arles (316) onward, took part in all proceedings concerning the Church.'
Although these "Lady Masses" were discontinued at the Reformation, the associated musical tradition was maintained in the Elizabethan Settlement through the establishment of choral foundations for daily singing of the Divine Office by expanded choirs of men and boys.
Other common Sunday services include an early morning Eucharist without music, an abbreviated Eucharist following a service of morning prayer and a service of evening prayer, sometimes in the form of sung Evensong, usually celebrated between 3 and 6&nbsp;pm The late-evening service of Compline was revived in parish use in the early 20th century.
By the end of the century, the retention in Anglicanism of many traditional liturgical forms and of the episcopate was already seen as unacceptable by those promoting the most developed Protestant principles.
There are also set forms for intercessory prayer, though this is now more often extemporaneous.
Priests also serve as chaplains of hospitals, schools, prisons, and in the armed forces.
In their rejection of absolute parliamentary authority, the Tractarians – and in particular John Henry Newman – looked back to the writings of 17th-century Anglican divines, finding in these texts the idea of the English church as a ''via media'' between the Protestant and Catholic traditions.
Composers closely concerned with this tradition include Edward Elgar, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Gustav Holst, Charles Villiers Stanford and Benjamin Britten.
In contrast to this movement, clergy such as the Bishop of Liverpool, John Charles Ryle, sought to uphold the distinctly Reformed identity of the Church of England.
As a result of assuming Roman usages, the Celtic Church surrendered its independence and from this point on, the Church in England "was no longer purely Celtic, but became Anglo-Roman-Celtic".
Anglicanism represents the third largest Christian communion in the world, after the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Churches.
In the Church of England the position of archdeacon can only be held by someone in priestly orders who has been ordained for at least six years.
It was first convened by Archbishop Charles Longley in 1867 as a vehicle for bishops of the Communion to "discuss matters of practical interest, and pronounce what we deem expedient in resolutions which may serve as safe guides to future action."
Prior to the Catholic revival of the 19th century, which eventually restored the Holy Eucharist as the principal Sunday liturgy, and especially during the 18th century, a morning service combining Matins, the Litany and ante-Communion comprised the usual expression of common worship; while Matins and Evensong were sung daily in cathedrals and some collegiate chapels.
Anglo-Catholic (and some Broad Church) Anglicans celebrate public liturgy in ways that understand worship to be something very special and of utmost importance.
Anglican and Catholic representatives declared that they had "substantial agreement on the doctrine of the Eucharist" in the 'Windsor Statement on Eucharistic Doctrine" from the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Consultation (1971) and the  Elucidation of the ARCIC Windsor Statement (1979).
The 19th century saw the founding and expansion of social oriented evangelism with societies such as the Church Pastoral Aid Society (CPAS) in 1836, Mission to Seafarers in 1856, Mothers' Union in 1876 and Church Army in 1882 all carrying out a personal form of evangelism.
Liberal churches may use freely structured or experimental forms of worship, including patterns borrowed from ecumenical traditions such as those of Taizé Community or the Iona Community.
Since the late 1960s these fallacies have been criticised.
Repeatedly, throughout Anglican history, this principle has reasserted itself in movements of social justice.
The other five — Confession and absolution, Matrimony, Confirmation, Holy Orders (also called Ordination) and Anointing of the Sick (also called Unction) — are regarded variously as full sacraments by Anglo-Catholics, many High Church and some Broad Church Anglicans, but merely as "sacramental rites" by other Broad Church and Low Church Anglicans, especially Evangelicals associated with Reform UK and the Diocese of Sydney.
While there are high church, broad church, and low church Continuing Anglicans, many Continuing churches are Anglo-Catholic with highly ceremonial liturgical practices.
An important aspect of Anglican religious life is that most communities of both men and women lived their lives consecrated to God under the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience (or in Benedictine communities, Stability, Conversion of Life, and Obedience) by practicing a mixed life of reciting the full eight services of the Breviary in choir, along with a daily Eucharist, plus service to the poor.
Furthermore, the Reverend Dick Sheppard, who during the 1930s was one of Britain's most famous Anglican priests due to his landmark sermon broadcasts for BBC radio, founded the Peace Pledge Union a secular pacifist organisation for the non-religious that gained considerable support throughout the 1930s.
A number of important 20th century works by non-Anglican composers were originally commissioned for the Anglican choral tradition – for example the ''Chichester Psalms'' of Leonard Bernstein, and the ''Nunc dimittis'' of Arvo Pärt.
Historically, the most influential of these – apart from Cranmer – has been the 16th century cleric and theologian Richard Hooker who after 1660 was increasingly portrayed as the founding father of Anglicanism.
Anglican worship, however, is as diverse as Anglican theology.
Outside the Anglican Communion, Anglican ordinations (at least of male priests) are recognised by the Old Catholic Church Provoo Communion Lutherans and various Independent Catholic churches.
In 1841 Marian Rebecca Hughes became the first woman to take the vows of religion in communion with the Province of Canterbury since the Reformation.
This practice is becoming more frequent in the Roman Catholic Church as well, especially through the Neocatechumenal Way.
His work was instrumental in the establishment of the Christian socialist movement, although he himself was not in any real sense a socialist but, "a Tory paternalist with the unusual desire to theories his acceptance of the traditional obligation to help the poor", influenced Anglo-Catholics such as Charles Gore, who wrote that, "the principle of the incarnation is denied unless the Christian spirit can be allowed to concern itself with everything that interests and touches human life."
In the United Kingdom, the publication of ''Daily Prayer'', the third volume of Common Worship was published in 2005.
Although now separate from Rome, the English Church, at this point in history, continued to maintain the Roman Catholic theology on many things, such as the sacraments.
Other more traditional Anglicans tend to follow the 1662 ''Book of Common Prayer'', and retain the use of the King James Bible.
Within the coming universal church that Maurice foresaw, national churches would each maintain the six signs of Catholicity: baptism, Eucharist, the creeds, Scripture, an episcopal ministry, and a fixed liturgy (which could take a variety of forms in accordance with divinely ordained distinctions in national characteristics).
Anglican eucharistic theology is divergent in practice, reflecting the essential comprehensiveness of the tradition.
The question often arises as to whether the Anglican Communion should be identified as a Protestant or Catholic church, or perhaps as a distinct branch of Christianity altogether.
Hence, for Maurice, the Protestant tradition had maintained the elements of national distinction which were amongst the marks of the true universal church, but which had been lost within contemporary Roman Catholicism in the internationalism of centralised Papal Authority.
For years he was chairman of the Ragged school Board.
In the 19th century, the dominant issues concerned the adverse effects of industrialisation.
Vestments are worn by the clergy, sung settings are often used and incense may be used.
Many Anglican churches will also have daily morning and evening prayer and some have midweek or even daily celebration of the Eucharist.
Whilst never actively endorsed by the Anglican Church, many Anglicans unofficially have adopted the Augustinian "Just War" doctrine.
Anglican interest in ecumenical dialogue can be traced back to the time of the Reformation and dialogues with both Orthodox and Lutheran churches in the 16th century.
* The Lambeth Conference is the oldest international consultation.
After Roman troops withdrew from Britain, however, the "absence of Roman military and governmental influence and overall decline of Roman imperial political power enabled Britain and the surrounding isles to develop distinctively from the rest of the West.
He calls the once-a-decade Lambeth Conference, chairs the meeting of primates, and is President of the Anglican Consultative Council.
Lay people also serve on the parish altar guild (preparing the altar and caring for its candles, linens, flowers etc.
This process is accomplished through collaboration with and consent of ecclesial representatives ''(see Ecclesiastical Commissioners)''.
It was called ''common prayer'' originally because it was intended for use in all Church of England churches which had previously followed differing local liturgies.
Since the 1960s there has been a sharp decline in the number of professed religious in most parts of the Anglican Communion, especially in North America, Europe, and Australia.
Churches which call themselves Anglican will have identified themselves so because they use some form or variant of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' in the shaping of their worship.
Although two important constitutive elements of what later would emerge as Anglicanism, were present in 1559 – the historic episcopate and the ''Book of Common Prayer'' – neither the laypeople nor the clergy perceived themselves as Anglicans at the beginning of Elizabeth I's reign.
It is expected that provision will be made to allow the retention of aspects of Anglican liturgy; cf.
Most ordained ministers in the Anglican Communion are priests, who usually work in parishes within a diocese.
The earlier part of the 20th century is marked by Charles Gore, with his emphasis on natural revelation, and William Temple's focus on Christianity and society, while from outside England, Robert Leighton, Archbishop of Glasgow, and several clergy from the United States have been suggested, such as William Porcher DuBose, John Henry Hobart (1775–1830, Bishop of New York 1816–30), William Meade, Phillips Brooks and Charles Henry Brent.
The Order for Holy Communion may be celebrated bi-weekly or monthly (in preference to the daily offices), by priests attired in choir habit, or more regular clothes, rather than Eucharistic vestments.
Others belong to a more Evangelical or low church tradition and tend to support the Thirty-nine Articles and simpler worship services.
The Archbishop of Canterbury has a precedence of honour over the other primates of the Anglican Communion, and for a province to be considered a part of the Communion means specifically to be in full communion with the See of Canterbury.
On the whole, Anglican divines view the ''via media'' of Anglicanism not as a compromise, but as "a positive position, witnessing to the universality of God and God's kingdom working through the fallible, earthly ''ecclesia Anglicana''."
These latter trends reflect a countervailing tendency in Anglicanism towards insularity, reinforced perhaps by the "big tent" nature of the tradition which seeks to be comprehensive of various views and tendencies.
The word ''Anglicanism'' came into being in the 19th century.
In the 21st century, there has been renewed effort to reach children and youth.
In most industrialised countries, church attendance has decreased since the 19th century.
The usual Anglican response was to focus on education and give support to 'The National Society for the Education of the Children of the Poor in the principles of the Church of England'.
The Eucharist is central to worship for most Anglicans as a communal offering of prayer and praise in which the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ are proclaimed through prayer, reading of the Bible, singing, giving God thanks over the bread and wine for the innumerable benefits obtained through the passion of Christ, the breaking of the bread, and reception of the bread and wine as representing the body and blood of Christ as instituted at the Last Supper.
This ecumenical aspiration became much more of a possibility, as other denominational groups rapidly followed the example of the Anglican Communion in founding their own transnational alliances: the Alliance of Reformed Churches, the Ecumenical Methodist Council, the International Congregational Council, and the Baptist World Alliance.
"Churchmanship" can be defined as the manifestation of theology in the realms of liturgy, piety and, to some extent, spirituality.
The Anglican Communion has no international juridical organisation.
Not surprisingly, this vision of a becoming universal church as a congregation of autonomous national churches, proved highly congenial in Anglican circles; and Maurice's six signs were adapted to form the Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888.
The Evangelical Revival, influenced by such figures as John Wesley and Charles Simeon, re-emphasised the importance of justification through faith and the consequent importance of personal conversion.
The original book of 1549 (revised 1552) was one of the instruments of the English Reformation, replacing the various 'uses' or rites in Latin that had been used in different parts of the country with a single compact volume in the language of the people, so that "now from henceforth all the Realm shall have but one use".
Following the passing of the 1604 canons, all Anglican clergy had to formally subscribe to the articles.
Anglicanism's presence in the rest of the world is due to large-scale emigration, the establishment of expatriate communities or the work of missionaries.
Nevertheless, the aspiration to ground Anglican identity in the writings of the 17th century divines, and in faithfulness to the traditions of the Church Fathers reflects a continuing theme of Anglican ecclesiology, most recently in the writings of Henry Robert McAdoo.
In 1841, the rebuilt Leeds Parish Church established a surpliced choir to accompany parish services, drawing explicitly on the musical traditions of the ancient choral foundations.
The lack of social consensus among and within provinces of diverse cultural traditions has resulted in considerable conflict and even schism concerning some or all of these developments (see Anglican realignment).
Augustine, on two occasions, "met in conference with members of the Celtic episcopacy, but no understanding was reached between them."
This version was made mandatory in England and Wales by the Act of Uniformity and was in standard use until the mid-20th century.
It is the prohibition against deacons pronouncing blessings that leads some to believe that deacons cannot solemnise matrimony.
The spectrum of Anglican beliefs and practice is too large to be fit into these labels.
Many Continuing Anglicans believe that the faith of some churches in communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury has become unorthodox and therefore have not sought to also be in communion with him.
Arguably, the most influential of the original articles has been Article VI on the "sufficiency of scripture" which says that "Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation."
The group rapidly gained popularity amongst Anglican intellectuals, including Vera Brittain, Evelyn Underhill and former British political leader George Lansbury.
High Anglicans may genuflect or cross themselves in the same way as Roman Catholics.
See, for example, Order of the Holy Cross and Order of St Helena, editors, ''A Monastic Breviary'' (Wilton, Conn.: Morehouse-Barlow, 1976).
The sermon (or homily) is typically about ten to twenty minutes in length, often comparably short to sermons in Evangelical churches.
He also hosts and chairs the Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting and is responsible for the invitations to it.
National, provincial, and diocesan synods maintain different scopes of authority, depending on their canons and constitutions.
Different individuals, groups, parishes, dioceses and provinces may identify more closely with one or the other, or some mixture of the two.
There are, however, a number of churches that are not within the Anglican Communion which also consider themselves to be Anglican, most notably those referred to as Continuing Anglican churches, and those which are part of the Anglican realignment movement.
An Anglican position on the eucharistic sacrifice ("Sacrifice of the Mass") was expressed in the response ''Saepius officio'' of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York to Pope Leo XIII's Papal Encyclical ''Apostolicae curae''.
In what is known as the Gregorian Mission, the Roman Catholic Pope Gregory I, sent Augustine of Canterbury to British Isles in 596 AD, with the purpose of evangelising the pagans there (who were largely Anglo-Saxons), as well as to reconcile the Celtic churches in the British Isles to the See of Rome.
Throughout the work, Hooker makes clear that theology involves prayer and is concerned with ultimate issues and that theology is relevant to the social mission of the church.
In some official and many unofficial Anglican service books these offices are supplemented by other offices such as the Little Hours of Prime and prayer during the day such as (Terce, Sext, None and Compline).
However, the case of John William Colenso Bishop of Natal, reinstated in 1865 by the English Judicial Committee of the Privy Council over the heads of the Church in South Africa, demonstrated acutely that the extension of episcopacy had to be accompanied by a recognised Anglican ecclesiology of ecclesiastical authority, distinct from secular power.
The insularity and complacency of the early established Church of England has tended to influence Anglican self-identity and inhibit engagement with the broader society in favour of internal debate and dialogue.
The principles of the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship are often formulated as a statement of belief that "Jesus' teaching is incompatible with the waging of war, that a Christian church should never support or justify war and that our Christian witness should include opposing the waging or justifying of war."
Morning Prayer, for instance, is often used instead of the Holy Eucharist for Sunday worship services, although this is not necessarily true of all low church parishes.
In the 19th century the term ''Anglicanism'' was coined to describe the common religious tradition of these churches; as also that of the Scottish Episcopal Church, which, though originating earlier within the Church of Scotland, had come to be recognised as sharing this common identity.
