Most of the oil along its coast was discovered under Portuguese rule by the Cabinda Gulf Oil Company (CABGOC) from 1968 onwards.
The National Police are in the process of standing up an air wing, which will provide helicopter support for operations.
Angola has participated in the World Women's Handball Championship for several years.
Governors of the 18 provinces are appointed by the president.
Angola's economy is expected to grow by 3.9 percent in 2014 said the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
In 1999, the gross primary enrollment rate was 74 percent and in 1998, the most recent year for which data are available, the net primary enrollment rate was 61 percent.
At , Angola is the world's twenty-third largest country.
In many areas drivers have established alternate tracks to avoid the worst parts of the surface, although careful attention must be paid to the presence or absence of landmine warning markers by the side of the road.
In the Human Development Index Angola constantly ranks in the bottom group.
Voter turnout dropped from 80% in 2008 to 60%.
However, due to the global recession the economy contracted an estimated −0.3% in 2009.
An inquiry carried out in 2008 by the Angolan Instituto Nacional de Estatística has it that in the rural areas roughly 58% must be classified as "poor", according to UN norms, but in the urban areas only 19%, while the overall rate is 37%.
Drought affects 1.4 million people across seven of Angola’s 18 provinces.
In 1990, when the Cold War ended, MPLA abandoned its ties to the Marxist–Leninist ideology and declared social democracy to be its official ideology, going on to win the 1992 general election.
With the support of the United States, Zaïre and South Africa intervened militarily in favour of the FNLA and UNITA with the intention of taking Luanda before the declaration of independence.
11,400 of those refugees were originally from the Democratic Republic of Congo, who arrived in the 1970s.
There are also Brazilian-made EMB-312 Tucano for training role, Czech-made L-39 for training and bombing role, Czech Zlin for training role and a variety of western made aircraft such as C-212\Aviocar, Sud Aviation Alouette III, etc.
Although the political situation of the country began to stabilize, regular democratic processes were not established until the elections in Angola in 2008 and 2012 and the adoption of a new Constitution of Angola in 2010, all of which strengthened the prevailing Dominant-party system.
According to estimates by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics, the adult literacy rate in 2011 was 70.4%.
The legal system is based on Portuguese and customary law but is weak and fragmented, and courts operate in only 12 of more than 140 municipalities.
The Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda-Armed Forces of Cabinda (FLEC-FAC) announced a virtual Federal Republic of Cabinda under the Presidency of N'Zita Henriques Tiago.
In the 19th century, European settlers slowly and hesitantly began to establish themselves in the interior.
Independence was achieved in 1975 under communist rule backed by the Soviet Union after the protracted liberation war.
This became a political side issue, as FNLA and UNITA, given their regional constituencies, came out in favour of a greater attention to the African languages, and as the FNLA favoured French over Portuguese.
Epidemics of cholera, malaria, rabies and African hemorrhagic fevers like Marburg hemorrhagic fever, are common diseases in several parts of the country.
That same year, Angola descended into an intense civil war that lasted until 2002.
According to estimates released by Angola's central bank, the country's economy should grow at an annual average rate of 5 percent over the next four years, boosted by the increasing participation of the private sector.
New treaties with Kongo were signed in 1649; others with Njinga's Kingdom of Matamba and Ndongo followed in 1656.
The Portuguese established their primary early trading post at Soyo, which is now the northernmost city in Angola apart from the Cabinda enclave.
In the cities, a majority of families, well beyond those officially classified as poor, have to adopt a variety of survival strategies.
In September 2014, the Angolan Institute for Cancer Control (IACC) was created by presidential decree, and it will integrate the National Health Service in Angola.
There are about 1000 mostly Christian religious communities in Angola.
BODIVA (Angola Securities and Debt Stock Exchange, in English) received the secondary public debt market, and it is expected to start the corporate debt market by 2015, but the stock market should only be a reality in 2016.
Portugal's new revolutionary leaders began in 1974 a process of political change at home and accepted independence for its former colonies abroad.
In terms of the classifications used in constitutional law, its regime is considered one of several authoritarian regimes in Africa.
#In the Portuguese "bridgeheads" Luanda and Benguela, which existed on the coast of what today is Angola since the 15th and 16th century, respectively, Portuguese was spoken not only by the Portuguese and their ''mestiço'' descendents, but—especially in and around Luanda—by a significant number of Africans, although these always remained native speakers of their local African language.
Travel on highways outside of towns and cities in Angola (and in some cases within) is often not best advised for those without four-by-four vehicles.
One of the economic consequences of the social and regional disparities is a sharp increase in Angolan private investments abroad.
The classification of money-laundering as a crime is one of the novelties in the new legislation.
Nearly 4000 people were suspected of being infected as of August 2016 when the outbreak began to subside.
Angola's economic growth is highly uneven, with the majority of the nation's wealth concentrated in a disproportionately small sector of the population.
One of the characteristics of the Cabindan independence movement is its constant fragmentation, into smaller and smaller factions.
The council of foreign affairs states that the World Bank mentioned that Sonangol " is a taxpayer, it carries out quasi-fiscal activities, it invests public funds, and, as concessionaire, it is a sector regulator.
Angola scored poorly on the 2013 Ibrahim Index of African Governance.
However, operations in diamond mines include partnerships between state-run Endiama and mining companies such as ALROSA which continue operations in Angola.
Paulo Dias de Novais founded São Paulo de Loanda (Luanda) in 1575 with a hundred families of settlers and four hundred soldiers.
According to the Fund, robust growth in the non-oil economy, mainly driven by a very good performance in the agricultural sector, is expected to offset a temporary drop in oil production.
As a consequence, more than half the population is now living in the cities which, from the linguistic point of view, have become highly heterogeneous.
Although budgetary allocations for education were increased in 2004, the education system in Angola continues to be extremely under-funded.
Mastery of the official language is probably more extended in Angola than it is elsewhere in Africa, and this certainly applies to its use in everyday life.
Foreign missionaries were very active prior to independence in 1975, although since the beginning of the anti-colonial fight in 1961 the Portuguese colonial authorities expelled a series of Protestant missionaries and closed mission stations based on the belief that the missionaries were inciting pro-independence sentiments.
The main beneficiary of this situation is a social segment constituted during the last decades, around the political, administrative, economic, and military power holders, which has accumulated (and continues accumulating) enormous wealth.
On 11 March 2015, the First Angolan Forum of Telecommunications and Information Technology was held, in Luanda under the motto "The challenges of telecommunications in the current context of Angola".
The Bantu came from the north, probably from somewhere near the present-day Republic of Cameroon.
It is reported that higher percentages of boys attend school than girls.
A highly multiethnic country, Angola's 25.8 million people span various tribal groups, customs, and traditions.
Development of the hinterland began after the Berlin Conference in 1885 fixed the colony's borders, and British and Portuguese investment fostered mining, railways, and agriculture based on various forced-labour and voluntary labour systems.
There are three intertwined historical reasons for this situation.
But in the end none of the African parties respected the commitments they had made, and military force resolved the issue.
Catholics, as well as some major Protestant denominations, provide help for the poor in the form of crop seeds, farm animals, medical care and education.
The population is forecast to grow to over 60 million people to 2050, 2.7 times the 2014 population.
The joint decree of the minister of Telecommunications and Information Technologies, José Carvalho da Rocha, and the minister of Science and Technology, Maria Cândida Pereira Teixeira, states that "under the massification" of that Angolan domain, "conditions are created for the transfer of the domain root '.ao' of Portugal to Angola".
''The Economist'' reported in 2008 that diamonds and oil make up 60% of Angola's economy, almost all of the country's revenue and are its dominant exports.
Life expectancy, which was just 46 years in 2002, reached 51 in 2011.
In addition to administrative reorganization, modernization projects include procurement of new vehicles, aircraft and equipment, construction of new police stations and forensic laboratories, restructured training programs and the replacement of AKM rifles with 9&nbsp;mm Uzis for officers in urban areas.
In addition Angola has some of the most important and biggest ports and so it is vital to connect them to the interior of the country as well as to neighbouring countries.
Portugal has been present in Angola for 400&nbsp;years, occupied the territory in the 19th and early 20th century, and ruled over it for about 50 years.
On 16 October 2014, Angola was elected for the second time as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council, with 190 favourable votes out of 193.
This outbreak of the yellow fever is the worst in the southern African country in three decades.
Dengue, filariasis, leishmaniasis, and onchocerciasis (river blindness) are other diseases carried by insects that also occur in the region.
A small number of AAF personnel are stationed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Kinshasa) and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville).
“Angola requires 4.5 million tonnes a year of grain but only grows about 55% of the corn it needs, 20% of the rice and just 5% of its required wheat”(African economic Outlook) but “less than 3 percent of Angola's abundant fertile land is cultivated and the economic potential of the forestry sector remains largely unexploited” (World Bank).
Iliffe notes that "Portuguese records of Angola from the 16th century show that a great famine occurred on average every seventy years; accompanied by epidemic disease, it might kill one-third or one-half of the population, destroying the demographic growth of a generation and forcing colonists back into the river valleys".
At the same time, the white and "mestiço" population, where some knowledge of African languages could previously often be found, neglected this aspect more and more, to the point of frequently ignoring it totally.
It is composed of Ovimbundu (language Umbundu) 37%, Ambundu (language Kimbundu) 23%, Bakongo 13%, and 32% other ethnic groups (including the Chokwe, the Ovambo, the Ganguela and the Xindonga) as well as about 2% ''mestiços'' (mixed European and African), 1.6% Chinese and 1% European.
The exclave province of Cabinda has borders with the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
According to Aristides Safeca, Secretary of State for Telecommunications, the satellite will provide telecommunications services, TV, internet and e-government and will remain into orbit "at best" for 18 years.
During the Angolan Civil War (1975–2002), nearly half of all schools were reportedly looted and destroyed, leading to current problems with overcrowding.
Angola has a rich subsoil heritage, from diamonds, oil, gold, copper, and a rich wildlife (dramatically impoverished during the civil war), forest, and fossils.
The measure is part of the Strategic Plan for the Elimination of Measles 2014–2020 created by the Angolan Ministry of Health which includes strengthening routine immunization, a proper dealing with measles cases, national campaigns, introducing a second dose of vaccination in the national routine vaccination calendar and active epidemiological surveillance for measles.
According to The Heritage Foundation, a conservative American think tank, oil production from Angola has increased so significantly that Angola now is China's biggest supplier of oil.
The purpose of this new center is to ensure the health and medical care in oncology, policy implementation, programs and plans for prevention and specialized treatment.
The enormous differences between the regions pose a serious structural problem for the Angolan economy, illustrated by the fact that about one third of economic activities are concentrated in Luanda and neighbouring Bengo province, while several areas of the interior suffer economic stagnation and even regression.
The Portuguese régime, meanwhile, refused to accede to the demands for independence, provoking an armed conflict that started in 1961 when freedom fighters attacked both white and black civilians in cross-border operations in northeastern Angola.
As a Portuguese colony, Angola did not encompass its present borders until the early 20th century, following resistance by groups such as the Cuamato, the Kwanyama and the Mbunda.
However, eight opposition parties rejected the elections as rigged, sparking the Halloween massacre.
However, on March 23, 2016, official data revealed by Angola's National Statistic Institute  - Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE), states that Angola has a population of 25.789.024 inhabitants.
The name ''Angola'' comes from the Portuguese colonial name ''Reino de Angola (Kingdom of Angola)'', appearing as early as Dias de Novais's 1571 charter.
They were eliminated after one defeat and two draws in the group stage.
After many years of conflict that weakened all of the insurgent parties, Angola gained its independence on 11 November 1975, after the 1974 coup d'état in Lisbon, Portugal, which overthrew the Portuguese régime headed by Marcelo Caetano.
Quite a number of voices demand the recognition of "Angolan Portuguese" as a specific variant, comparable to those spoken in Portugal or in Brazil.
At the same time, a majority of the Bakongo who had fled to the Democratic Republic of Congo in the early 1960s, or of their children and grandchildren, returned to Angola, but mostly did not settle in their original "habitat", but in the cities—and again above all in Luanda.
Its reaction was to implement a number of changes without substantially changing its character.
A Supreme Court serves as the appellate tribunal; a Constitutional Court does not hold the powers of judicial review.
In Angola, there is a Culture Ministry that is managed by Culture Minister Rosa Maria Martins da Cruz e Silva.
Angola is the top basketball team of FIBA Africa, and a regular competitor at the Summer Olympic Games and the FIBA World Cup.
(See also Chibalo.)
Transport is  an important aspect in Angola because it is strategically located and it could become a regional logistics hub.
As for REMA, the provinces of Luanda, Benguela, Lubango and Soyo have currently working media libraries.
The force has an estimated 6,000 patrol officers, 2,500 taxation and frontier supervision officers, 182 criminal investigators and 100 financial crimes detectives and around 90 economic activity inspectors.
'''Angola''' , officially the '''Republic of Angola''' ( ; Kikongo, Kimbundu and Umbundu: ''Repubilika ya Ngola''), is a country in Southern Africa.
Furthermore, Sonangol, the state run oil company, has control of 51% of Cabinda’s oil.
“China has extended three multibillion dollar lines of credit to the Angolan government; two loans of $2 billion from China Exim Bank, one in 2004, the second in 2007, as well as one loan in 2005 of $2.9 billion from China International Fund Ltd.”  Growing oil revenues have also created opportunities for corruption: according to a recent Human Rights Watch report, 32&nbsp;billion US dollars disappeared from government accounts from 2007 to 2010.
Each site has a bibliographic archive, multimedia resources and computers with Internet access, as well as areas for reading, researching and socializing.
These tendencies continued and grew under the rule of the MPLA whose main social roots are exactly in those social segments where the mastery of Portuguese as well as the proportion of native Portuguese speakers was highest.
Life for European colonists was difficult and progress slow.
Angola has one of the highest infant mortality rates in the world and one of the world's lowest life expectancies.
The first Angolan satellite, AngoSat-1, will be ready for launch into orbit in 2017 and it will ensure telecommunications throughout the country.
In 2014, Angola launched a national campaign of vaccination against measles, extended to every child under ten years old and aiming to go to all 18 provinces in the country.
Thousands of Angolan small-scale farmers are trapped in poverty.
At this time, the mobile media libraries are already operating in the provinces of Luanda, Malanje, Uíge, Cabinda and Lunda South.
The war came to be known as the Colonial War.
The oil glut led to a local unleaded gasoline "pricetag" of £0.37 per gallon.
However, while there exists a certain number of idiomatic particularities in everyday Portuguese, as spoken by Angolans, it remains to be seen whether or not the Angolan government comes to the conclusion that these particularities constitute a configuration that justifies the claim to be a new language variant.
In the 16th century Portugal gained control of the coast through a series of treaties and wars.
MPLA head officials continue e.g.
The ''substrate'' of Angolan culture is African, mostly Bantu, while Portuguese culture has been imported.
China is Angola's biggest trade partner and export destination as well as the fourth-largest importer.
A 2007 survey concluded that low and deficient niacin status was common in Angola.
Gross and net enrollment ratios are based on the number of students formally registered in primary school and therefore do not necessarily reflect actual school attendance.
It is comparable in size to Mali, or twice the size of France or Texas.
Other factors, such as the presence of landmines, lack of resources and identity papers, and poor health prevent children from regularly attending school.
This entailed a significant increase in jobs for Africans, on condition that they spoke Portuguese.
To its south lay the Kingdom of Ndongo, from which the area of the later Portuguese colony was sometimes known as '''Dongo'''.
The security brought about by the 2002 peace settlement has led to the resettlement of 4&nbsp;million displaced persons, thus resulting in large-scale increases in agriculture production.
Angola's capital, Luanda, lies on the Atlantic coast in the northwest of the country.
On 19 December 2014, the Capital Market in Angola started.
Some teachers may reportedly demand payment or bribes directly from their students.
UNITA gave up its armed wing and assumed the role of major opposition party, although in the knowledge that under the present regime a legitimate democratic election was impossible.
The executive branch of the government is composed of the President, the Vice-Presidents and the Council of Ministers.
It established trade routes with other trading cities and civilisations up and down the coast of southwestern and West Africa and even with the Great Zimbabwe Mutapa Empire, but engaged in little or no transoceanic trade.
With an area of approximately , the Northern Angolan province of Cabinda is unusual in being separated from the rest of the country by a strip, some  wide, of the Democratic Republic of Congo along the lower Congo river.
These are in part a result of the almost continual state of conflict from 1961 onwards, although the highest level of destruction and socio-economic damage took place after the 1975 independence, during the long years of civil war.
There continue to be significant disparities in enrollment between rural and urban areas.
to be given senior positions in top-level companies or other fields, although a few outstanding UNITA figures are given some of the economic as well as the military share.
The diverse ethnic communities  – the Ovimbundu, Ambundu, Bakongo, Chokwe, Mbunda and other peoples – maintain to varying degrees their own cultural traits, traditions and languages, but in the cities, where slightly more than half of the population now lives, a mixed culture has been emerging since colonial times – in Luanda since its foundation in the 16th century.
Cabinda's petroleum production from its considerable offshore reserves now accounts for more than half of Angola's output.
Since January 2014 the Republic of Angola has held the presidency of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).
However, at the same time the social and economic inequality that has characterised the country since long has not diminished, but on the contrary deepened in all respects.
The U.S. Department of State estimates the Muslim population at 80,000–90,000, while the Islamic Community of Angola puts the figure closer to 500,000.
The economy grew 18% in 2005, 26% in 2006 and 17.6% in 2007.
Also, there is a small Brazilian community of about 5,000 people.
In 2014, Angola resume the National Festival of Angolan Culture (FENACULT), after a 25-years break.
The toponym was derived by the Portuguese from the title ''ngola'' held by the kings of Ndongo.
In 2015, the executive secretary of ICGLR, Ntumba Luaba, said that Angola is the example to be followed by members of the organization, because of the significant progress made over the 12 years of peace, particularly in terms of socioeconomic and political-military stability.
From this fact we can appreciate the capacity that Angola has to increase production not only for the national market but also for the international one.
Cabinda borders the Congo Republic to the north and north-northeast and the DRC to the east and south.
The best known of these is the Kingdom of the Kongo that had its centre in the northwest of contemporary Angola, but included important regions in the west of present-day Democratic Republic and Republic of Congo and in southern Gabon.
The project also includes training teachers at a national level, "as a way to introduce and use new information technologies in primary schools, thus reflecting an improvement in the quality of teaching."
The region now known as Angola was reached by the Portuguese explorer Diogo Cão in 1484.
The Portuguese established several other settlements, forts, and trading posts along the Angolan coast, principally trading in Angolan slaves for Brazilian plantations.
The conquest of Pungo Andongo in 1671 was the last major Portuguese expansion from Luanda, as attempts to invade Kongo in 1670 and Matamba in 1681 failed.
However, overall almost half the population has to be considered as poor, but in this respect there are dramatic differences between the countryside and the cities (where by now slightly more than 50% of the people live).
In response, Cuba intervened in favor of the MPLA (see: Cuba in Angola), which became a flash point for the Cold War.
For the time being, the biggest share of these investments is concentrated in Portugal where the Angolan presence (including that of the family of the state president) in banks as well as in the domains of energy, telecommunications, and mass media has become notable, as has the acquisition of vineyards and orchards as well as of touristic enterprises.
It has since become a relatively stable unitary presidential republic.
The total fertility rate of Angola is 5.54 children born per woman (2012 estimates), the 11th highest in the world.
In 2010, the Angolan government started building the Angolan Media Libraries Network, distributed throughout several provinces in the country to facilitate the people's access to information and knowledge.
This part of the Atlantic slave trade continued until after Brazil's independence in the 1820s.
there were an estimated 400,000 Democratic Republic of the Congo migrant workers, at least 220,000 Portuguese, and about 259,000 Chinese living in Angola.
Sub-Saharan Africa nations are globally achieving impressive improvements in well-being, according to a report by Tony Blair Africa Governance Initiative and The Boston Consulting Group.
In December 2006, Angola was admitted as a member of OPEC.
At the same time, in urban areas social inequality is most evident, and assumes extreme forms in the capital, Luanda.
Population estimates are, however, highly unreliable.
Portugal had a minimalist presence in Angola for nearly five hundred years, and early calls for independence provoked little reaction amongst the population who had no social identity related to the territory as a whole.
With Cuban support, the MPLA held Luanda and declared independence on 11 November 1975, with Agostinho Neto becoming the first president, though the civil war continued.
The country now depends on expensive food imports, mainly from South Africa and Portugal, while more than 90% of farming is done at thefamily and subsistence level.
This will undoubted have consequences on the living standard of rural civilians.
Due to this market control the company ends up determining the profit given to the government and the taxes paid.
In 2004, the  Eximbank approved a $2&nbsp;billion line of credit to Angola.
A fleet under Salvador de Sá retook Luanda for Portugal in 1648; reconquest of the rest of the territory was completed by 1650.
At this time, most of the half-million Portuguese who lived in Angola – and who had accounted for the majority of the skilled workers in public administration, agriculture, industries and trade – fled the country, leaving its once prosperous and growing economy in a state of bankruptcy.
The transformation industry that had come into existence in the late colonial period collapsed at independence, because of the exodus of most of the ethnic Portuguese population, but has begun to reemerge with updated technologies, partly because of the influx of new Portuguese entrepreneurs.
Khoi and San hunter-gatherers are the earliest known modern human inhabitants of the area.
It is the seventh-largest country in Africa, and is bordered by Namibia to the south, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north and east, Zambia to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to west.
Following negotiations held in Portugal, itself experiencing severe social and political turmoil and uncertainty due to the April 1974 revolution, Angola's three main guerrilla groups agreed to establish a transitional government in January 1975.
The year before, the Portuguese had established relations with the Kingdom of Kongo, which stretched at the time from modern Gabon in the north to the Kwanza River in the south.
The rhythm of this expansion was considerably accelerated during the late colonial period, 1961–1974, so that by the end of the colonial period children all over the territory (with relatively few exceptions) had at least some access to the Portuguese language.
Angola's financial system is maintained by the National Bank of Angola and managed by governor Jose de Lima Massano.
Angolan culture reflects centuries of Portuguese rule, namely in the predominance of the Portuguese language and Roman Catholicism, combined with diverse indigenous influences.
As a consequence of all this, the African "lower middle class" which at that stage formed in Luanda and other cities began to prevent their children from learning the local African language, in order to guarantee that they learned Portuguese as their native language.
Agriculture and forestry is an area of opportunity for the country.
During this time, the Bantu established a number of political units ("kingdoms", "empires") in most parts of what today is Angola.
This campaign took place together with the vaccination against polio and vitamin A supplementation.
Angola is a member state of the United Nations, OPEC, African Union, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, the Latin Union and the Southern African Development Community.
More overtly political and "nationalist" organisations first appeared in the 1950s and began to make demands for self-determination, especially in international forums such as the Non-Aligned Movement.
The coastal exclave of Cabinda in the north, borders the Republic of the Congo to the north, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the south.
Since independence from Portugal in 1975, a number of Angolan students continued to be admitted every year at high schools, polytechnical institutes, and universities in Portugal, Brazil and Cuba through bilateral agreements; in general, these students belong to the elites.
Control of the oil industry is consolidated in Sonangol Group, a conglomerate owned by the Angolan government.
According to the Angolan Minister of Economy, Abraão Gourgel, the financial market of the country grew modestly from 2002 and now lies in third place at the level of sub-Saharan Africa.
Bilateral trade reached $27.67&nbsp;billion in 2011, up 11.5% year-on-year.
Amid the Portuguese Restoration War, the Dutch occupied Luanda in 1641, using alliances with local peoples against Portuguese holdings elsewhere.
Ndongo was a kingdom in the highlands, between the Kwanza and Lukala Rivers, nominally tributary to the king of Kongo but which was seeking greater independence during the 16th century.
The new Portuguese government tried to mediate an understanding between the three competing movements, and succeeded in getting them to agree, on paper, to form a common government.
Since independence, oil and diamonds have been the most important economic resource.
The new constitution, adopted in 2010, further sharpened the authoritarian character of the regime.
The languages in Angola are those originally spoken by the different ethnic groups and Portuguese, introduced during the Portuguese colonial era.
According to a 1995 census, Cabinda had an estimated population of 600,000, approximately 400,000 of whom live in neighboring countries.
According to a study on the banking sector, carried out by Deloitte, the monetary policy led by Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA), the Angolan national bank, allowed a decrease in the inflation rate put at 7.96% in December 2013, which contributed to the sector's growth trend.
Completing the road infrastructure is likely to take some decades, but substantial efforts are already being made.
