In the 19th century, its population was estimated at 20,000 to 60,000.
An adjacent museum houses a wax statue of Atatürk, his writings, letters and personal items, as well as an exhibition of photographs recording important moments in his life and during the establishment of the Republic.
Following its annexation by the Seljuk Turks in 1073, the city became known in many European languages as '''Angora'''; it was also known in Ottoman Turkish as '''Engürü'''.
Emission Group – Fifty Turkish Lira –  I.
Two other Galatian tribal centers, Tavium near Yozgat, and Pessinus (Balhisar) to the west, near Sivrihisar, continued to be reasonably important settlements in the Roman period, but it was Ancyra that grew into a grand metropolis.
Although they are known for their shimmery white coat, currently there are more than twenty varieties including black, blue and reddish fur.
During the middle of the 4th century, Ancyra was involved in the complex theological disputes over the nature of Christ, and a form of Arianism seems to have originated there.
He later joined the Virtue Party and then the AKP.
Ankara was Atatürk's headquarters from 1920 and has been the capital of the Republic since its founding in 1923, replacing Istanbul following the fall of the Ottoman Empire.
Persian sovereignty lasted until the Persians' defeat at the hands of Alexander the Great who conquered the city in 333 BC.
The Levant Company maintained a factory in the town from 1639 to 1768.
The attack targeted Güven Park.
As with many ancient cities, Ankara has gone by several names over the ages.
The Alaeddin Mosque is the oldest mosque in Ankara.
Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo (''Atatürk Orman Çiftliği'') is an expansive recreational farming area which houses a zoo, several small agricultural farms, greenhouses, restaurants, a dairy farm and a brewery.
The province of Ankara is divided into 25 districts.
The February 2016 Ankara bombing occurred on 17 February 2016 in Ankara.
Ankara has a large number of minor teams, playing at regional levels: Bugsaşspor in Sincan; Etimesgut Şekerspor in Etimesgut; Türk Telekomspor owned by the phone company in Yenimahalle; Ankara Demirspor in Çankaya; Keçiörengücü, Keçiörenspor, Pursaklarspor, Bağlumspor in Keçiören; and Petrol Ofisi Spor owned by the oil company in Altındağ.
In the 19th century, the city also exported substantial amounts of goat and cat skins, gum, wax, honey, berries, and madder root.
Gençlerbirliği's B team, Hacettepe SK (formerly known as Gençlerbirliği OFTAŞ) played in the Turkish Super League for a while until being relegated.
The METU Science and Technology Museum (''ODTÜ Bilim ve Teknoloji Müzesi'') is located inside the Middle East Technical University campus.
It was also used in the previous logo of the Ministry of Culture & Tourism.
As with all other cities of Turkey, football is the most popular sport in Ankara.
The Angora rabbit () is a variety of domestic rabbit bred for its long, soft hair.
The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (''Anadolu Medeniyetleri Müzesi'') is situated at the entrance of the Ankara Castle.
In another display, wax figures of former presidents of the Republic of Turkey are on exhibit.
The town was reincorporated into the Roman Empire under Emperor Aurelian in 272.
Ankara is currently served by a suburban rail named Ankaray (A1) and three subway lines (M1, M2, M3) of the Ankara Metro with about 300,000 total daily commuters, while an additional subway line (M4) is currently under construction.
It is a pleasant place to spend a day with family, be it for having picnics, hiking, biking or simply enjoying good food and nature.
The first Angora goats were brought to Europe by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, about 1554, but, like later imports, were not very successful.
Many ancient artifacts were discovered during the excavations along the road and most of them are currently displayed at the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations.
Although situated in one of the driest places of Turkey and surrounded mostly by steppe vegetation except for the forested areas on the southern periphery, Ankara can be considered a green city in terms of green areas per inhabitant, at  per head.
It is  long and  wide.
The 2015 Ankara bombings occurred on 10 October 2015 at 10:04 local time (EEST) in Ankara.
Overall, the AKP enjoys the most support throughout the city.
An estimated 200,000 people lived in Ancyra in good times during the Roman Empire, a far greater number than was to be the case from after the fall of the Roman Empire until the early 20th century.
On 23 August 2011, another YHT high-speed line commercially started its service between Ankara and Konya.
Following the Ottoman defeat at World War I, the Ottoman capital Constantinople (modern Istanbul) and much of Anatolia were occupied by the Allies, who planned to share these lands between Armenia, France, Greece, Italy and the United Kingdom, leaving for the Turks the core piece of land in central Anatolia.
Alexander came from Gordion to Ankara and stayed in the city for a short period.
A  long gondola lift with four stations connects the district of Şentepe to the Yenimahalle metro station.
It is the largest Ottoman mosque in Ankara and was built by the famous architect Sinan in the 16th century.
The city grew significantly in size and importance under the Phrygians starting around 1000&nbsp;BC, and experienced a large expansion following the mass migration from Gordion, (the capital of Phrygia), after an earthquake which severely damaged that city around that time.
Both the Greek archbishopric and the Armenian eparchy are now listed by the Catholic Church as titular sees.
Initially elected in the 1994 local elections, he was re-elected in 1999, 2004 and 2009.
As in other Roman towns, the reign of Diocletian marked the culmination of the persecution of the Christians.
The Central Anatolia Region is one of the primary locations of grape and wine production in Turkey, and Ankara is particularly famous for its Kalecik Karası and Muscat grapes; and its Kavaklıdere wine, which is produced in the Kavaklıdere neighbourhood within the Çankaya district of the city.
The new section, now centered on Kızılay Square, has the trappings of a more modern city: wide streets, hotels, theaters, shopping malls, and high-rises.
The region's history can be traced back to the Bronze Age Hattic civilization, which was succeeded in the 2nd millennium BC by the Hittites, in the 10th century BC by the Phrygians, and later by the Lydians, Persians, Greeks, Galatians, Romans, Byzantines, and Turks (the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, the Ottoman Empire and Turkey.)
The museum incorporates the largest exhibition hall in Turkey.
Most are calm and docile but should be handled carefully.
They come in tabby and tabby-white, along with smoke varieties, and are in every color other than pointed, lavender, and cinnamon (all of which would indicate breeding to an outcross.)
Ancyra quickly turned into a Christian city, with a life dominated by monks and priests and theological disputes.
Clement's life describes how he was taken to Rome, then sent back, and forced to undergo many interrogations and hardship before he, and his brother, and various companions were put to death.
Ankaragücü used to play in the Turkish Super League until being relegated to the TFF First League at the end of the 2011–2012 season.
The museum holds periodic exhibitions of modern and contemporary art as well as hosting other contemporary arts events.
The '' Victory Monument'' (Turkish: ''Zafer Anıtı'') was crafted by Austrian sculptor Heinrich Krippel in 1925 and was erected in 1927 at Ulus Square.
Çankaya, the rim of the majestic hill to the south of the present city center, stood well outside the Roman city, but may have been a summer resort.
The fleece taken from an Angora goat is called mohair.
combat aircraft such as the F-86 Sabre, F-100 Super Sabre, F-102 Delta Dagger, F-104 Starfighter, F-5 Freedom Fighter, F-4 Phantom; and cargo planes such as the Transall C-160.)
This mall is the largest throughout the Ankara region.
On 13 March 2009, the new Yüksek Hızlı Tren (YHT) high-speed rail service began operation between Ankara and Eskişehir.
The Hatti Sun Disc has been used in the previous logo of Ankara Metropolitan Municipality.
Ankara's annual average precipitation is fairly low at , nevertheless precipitation can be observed throughout the year.
A number of the global automotive companies also have production facilities in Ankara, such as the German bus and truck manufacturer MAN SE.
The town council or senate gave way to the bishop as the main local figurehead.
After the death of Augustus in &nbsp;14, a copy of the text of the ''Res Gestae Divi Augusti'' (the ''Monumentum Ancyranum'') was inscribed on the interior of the temple's '''' in Latin and a Greek translation on an exterior wall of the ''''.
The finely carved walnut mimber (pulpit) is of particular interest.
It is also a titular metropolis of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
The baths were built during the reign of the Roman emperor Caracalla in the early 3rd century to honor Asclepios, the God of Medicine.
On 25 July 2014, the Ankara–Istanbul high-speed line of YHT entered service.
In response, the leader of the Turkish nationalist movement, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, established the headquarters of his resistance movement in Ankara in 1920.
With the Supreme Electoral Council and courts rejecting Yavaş's appeals, he has declared intention to take the irregularities to the European Court of Human Rights.
Ankara is also famous for the ''Monumentum Ancyranum'' (''Temple of Augustus and Rome'') which contains the official record of the ''Acts of Augustus'', known as the ''Res Gestae Divi Augusti'', an inscription cut in marble on the walls of this temple.
Three councils were held in the former capital of Galatia in Asia Minor, during the 4th century.
A large percentage of the complicated employment in Ankara is provided by the state institutions; such as the ministries, undersecretariats, and other administrative bodies of the Turkish government.
Suluhan is a historical Inn in Ankara.
The ruins of Ancyra still furnish today valuable bas-reliefs, inscriptions and other architectural fragments.
All of the aforementioned teams have their home at the Ankara 19 Mayıs Stadium in Ulus, which has a capacity of 21,250 (all-seater).
The city gave its name to the Angora wool shorn from Angora rabbits, the long-haired Angora goat (the source of mohair), and the Angora cat.
Other centers were Pessinos, today's ''Balhisar'', for the Trocmi tribe, and Tavium, to the east of Ankara, for the ''Tolstibogii'' tribe.
In its heyday, Roman Ankara was a large market and trading center but it also functioned as a major administrative capital, where a high official ruled from the city's Praetorium, a large administrative palace or office.
The mosque was built in honor of Hacı Bayram-ı Veli, whose tomb is next to the mosque, two years before his death (1427–28).
Ancyra's importance rested on the fact that it was the junction point where the roads in northern Anatolia running north-south and east-west intersected.
The ''Armada'',''CEPA'' and ''Kentpark'' malls on the highway, the ''Galleria'', ''Arcadium'' and ''Gordion'' in Ümitköy, and a huge mall, ''Real'' in Bilkent Center, offer North American and European style shopping opportunities (these places can be reached through the Eskişehir Highway.)
Ankara is a very old city with various Hittite, Phrygian, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman archaeological sites.
In retrospect, the 2013–14 protests against the AKP government were particularly strong in Ankara, proving to be fatal on multiple occasions.
The Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library is a literary museum and archive opened in 2011 and dedicated to Mehmet Akif Ersoy (1873–1936), the poet of the Turkish National Anthem.
Another renowned natural product of Ankara is its indigenous type of honey (''Ankara Balı'') which is known for its light color and is mostly produced by the Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo in the Gazi district, and by other facilities in the Elmadağ, Çubuk and Beypazarı districts.
Likewise, the anchor monument is also related with the Spanish name of the mall, Armada, which means naval fleet.
Kocatepe Mosque is the largest mosque in the city.
Because of Ankara's high altitude and its dry summers, nightly temperatures in the summer months are cool.
Ankara is the center of the state-owned and private Turkish defence and aerospace companies, where the industrial plants and headquarters of the Turkish Aerospace Industries, MKE, ASELSAN, Havelsan, Roketsan, FNSS, Nurol Makina, and numerous other firms are located.
There are also many foreign citizens working as diplomats or clerks in the embassies of their respective countries.
Also a Hungarian MiG-21, a Pakistani MiG-19, and a Bulgarian MiG-17 are on display at the museum.
Halkbank Ankara is currently the leading domestic powerhouse in Men's Volleyball, having won many championships and cups in the Turkish Men's Volleyball League and even the CEV Cup in 2013.
Anıtkabir is located on an imposing hill, which forms the ''Anıttepe'' quarter of the city, where the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, founder of the Republic of Turkey, stands.
The oldest settlements in and around the city center of Ankara belonged to the Hattic civilization which existed during the Bronze Age and was gradually absorbed c. 2000–1700 BC by the Indo-European Hittites.
In 1998, the Colored Angora Goat Breeders Association was set up to promote breeding of colored Angoras.
File:Halkbank.jpg|Halkbank Tower (1993) designed by Doğan Tekeli and Sami Sisa
Prior to World War I, the town supported a British consulate and a population of around 28,000, roughly ⅓ of whom were Christian.
The remains, the stage, and the backstage of the Roman theatre can be seen outside the castle.
They were the Turkish Cup winners in 1987 and 2001.
At least 28 people were killed when a bomb attack targeted a convoy of shuttles carrying both civilians and military personnel during evening rush hour.
The earlier Armenian Genocide put an end to the residential eparchy of Ancyra of the Armenian Catholic Church, which had been established in 1850.
A small river, the Ankara Çayı, ran through the center of the Roman town.
Orhan I, the second Bey of the Ottoman Empire, captured the city in 1356.
The city was then known as ''Ancyra''.
The high population within Çankaya, as well as Yenimahalle to an extent, has allowed the CHP to take overall second place behind the AKP in both local and general elections, with the MHP a close third, despite the fact that the MHP is politically stronger than the CHP in almost every other district.
Skaters in Ankara usually meet in the park near the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.
Emission Group – Fifty Turkish Lira –  I.
As Ankara started expanding westward in the 1970s, several modern, suburbia-style developments and mini-cities began to rise along the western highway, also known as the Eskişehir Road.
The 2012-built THF Sport Hall hosts the Handball Super League and Women's Handball Super League matches scheduled in Ankara.
They were not the only ones to use the Roman highway network, which was equally convenient for invaders.
Rainfall occurs mostly during the spring and autumn.
The seating area is still under excavation.
The mimber (pulpit) and mihrap (prayer niche) are of white marble, and the mosque itself is of Ankara stone, an example of very fine workmanship.
There is also the newly expanded ''ANKAmall'' at the outskirts, on the Istanbul Highway, which houses most of the well-known international brands.
Esenboğa International Airport, located in the north-east of the city, is Ankara's main airport.
Erected in 1978 at Sıhhiye Square, this impressive monument symbolizes the Hatti Sun Disc (which was later adopted by the Hittites) and commemorates Anatolia's earliest known civilization.
It was subsequently publicized by the Austrian ambassador Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq in the 16th century.
Though paganism was probably tottering in Ancyra in Clement's day, it may still have been the majority religion.
The IDEF in Ankara is one of the largest international expositions of the global arms industry.
The War of Independence Museum (''Kurtuluş Savaşı Müzesi'') is located on Ulus Square.
In classical antiquity and during the medieval period, the city was known as '''Ánkyra''' (, &nbsp;"anchor") in Greek and '''Ancyra''' in Latin; the Galatian Celtic name was probably a similar variant.
Today, only the basement and first floors remain.
The city has one football club currently competing in the Turkish Super League: Gençlerbirliği, founded in 1923, is known as the ''Ankara Gale'' or the ''Poppies'' because of their colors: red and black.
They first appeared in the United States in the early 20th century.
Twenty years later, Christianity and monotheism had taken its place.
The CHP's key and almost only political stronghold in Ankara lies within the central area of Çankaya, which is the city's most populous district.
There are many popular spots for skateboarding which is active in the city since the 1980s.
Nine of them deal with conditions for the reconciliation of the lapsi; the others, with marriage, alienations of church property, etc.
While the CHP has always gained between 60 and 70% of the vote in Çankaya since 2002, political support elsewhere throughout Ankara is minimal.
However, a great many blue and odd-eyed white cats have normal hearing, and even deaf cats lead a very normal life if kept indoors.
The remains of the church of St. Clement can be found today in a building just off Işıklar Caddesi in the Ulus district.
It was connected to Constantinople by railway before the First World War, continuing to export mohair, wool, berries, and grain.
The electorate of Ankara thus tend to vote in favour of the political right, far more so than the other main cities of Istanbul and İzmir.
Government offices and foreign embassies are also located in the new section.
Ancient buildings reflecting Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman history and narrow winding streets mark the old section.
Built in the Turkish neoclassical style, it is one of the largest new mosques in the city, completed and opened in 2013.
In the late 4th century, Ancyra became something of an imperial holiday resort.
The Celtic element was probably relatively small in numbers; a warrior aristocracy which ruled over Phrygian-speaking peasants.
In Ancyra, their first target was the 38-year-old Bishop of the town, whose name was Clement.
The monument was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 5 lira banknote of 1937–1952 and of the 1000 lira banknotes of 1939–1946.
Ahmet Hamdi Akseki Mosque is located near the Presidency of Religious Affairs on the Eskişehir Road.
For about a decade, the town was one of the western outposts of one of Palmyrean empress Zenobia in the Syrian Desert, who took advantage of a period of weakness and disorder in the Roman Empire to set up a short-lived state of her own.
The mosque was decorated with Anatolian Seljuk style patterns.
The usable space inside this mosque is  on the first floor and  on the second floor.
Monthly mean temperatures range from  in January to  in July, with an annual mean of .
There is also an exact replica of the house where Atatürk was born in 1881, in Thessaloniki, Greece.
It has a carved walnut mimber, the inscription on which records that the mosque was completed in early AH 574 (which corresponds to the summer of 1178 AD) and was built by the Seljuk prince Muhiddin Mesud Şah (d. 1204), the Bey of Ankara, who was the son of the Anatolian Seljuk sultan Kılıç Arslan II (reigned 1156–1192.)
The rabbits were popular pets with French royalty in the mid-18th century, and spread to other parts of Europe by the end of the century.
After Ankara became the capital of the newly founded Republic of Turkey, new development divided the city into an old section, called ''Ulus'', and a new section, called ''Yenişehir''.
The Turkish State Railways operates passenger train service from Ankara to other major cities, such as: İstanbul, Eskişehir, Balıkesir, Kütahya, İzmir, Kayseri, Adana, Kars, Elâzığ, Malatya, Diyarbakır, Karabük, Zonguldak and Sivas.
In 1924, the year after the government had moved there, Ankara had about 35,000 residents.
In 278 BC, the city, along with the rest of central Anatolia, was occupied by a Celtic group, the Galatians, who were the first to make Ankara one of their main tribal centers, the headquarters of the Tectosages tribe.
Its size and prominent location have made it a landmark for the city.
The Byzantines and Seljuks further made restorations and additions.
The Roman Baths of Ankara have all the typical features of a classical Roman bath complex: a ''frigidarium'' (cold room), a ''tepidarium'' (warm room) and a ''caldarium'' (hot room).
A few days earlier, Ankara had officially replaced Constantinople as the new Turkish capital city, on 13 October 1923.
The government is a prominent employer, but Ankara is also an important commercial and industrial city, located at the center of Turkey's road and railway networks.
However, the persecution proved unsuccessful and in 314 Ancyra was the center of an important council of the early church; which considered ecclesiastical policy for the reconstruction of the Christian Church after the persecutions, and in particular the treatment of 'lapsi'—Christians who had given in and conformed to paganism during these persecutions.
In Phrygian tradition, King Midas was venerated as the founder of Ancyra, but Pausanias mentions that the city was actually far older, which accords with present archaeological knowledge.
As a result, many illegal houses called gecekondu were built around the city, causing the unplanned and uncontrolled urban landscape of Ankara, as not enough planned housing could be built fast enough.
By 1927 there were 44,553 residents and by 1950 the population had grown to 286,781.
In each room there is a window, a niche and a chimney.
In 303, Ancyra was one of the towns where the co-Emperors Diocletian and his deputy Galerius launched their anti-Christian persecution.
The first of these, the Synod of Ancyra, an orthodox plenary synod, was held in 314, and its 25 disciplinary canons constitute one of the most important documents in the early history of the administration of the Sacrament of Penance.
Due to its elevation and inland location, Ankara has cold, snowy winters and hot, dry summers.
Many restored traditional Turkish houses inside the citadel area have found new life as restaurants, serving local cuisine.
At the end of the 4th century, St. Jerome, a native of Dalmatia, observed that the language spoken around Ankara was very similar to that being spoken in the northwest of the Roman world near Trier.
Up the hill to the castle gate, there are many shops selling a huge and fresh collection of spices, dried fruits, nuts, and other produce.
According to the ''vakfiye'' (inscription) of the building, the Ottoman era ''han'' was commissioned by Hasan Pasha, a regional beylerbey, and was constructed between 1508 and 1511, during the final years of the reign of Sultan Bayezid II.
Commuter rail also runs between the stations of Sincan and Kayaş.
The War of Independence was planned and directed here as recorded in various photographs and items presently on exhibition.
Ankara Aviation Museum (''Hava Kuvvetleri Müzesi Komutanlığı'') is located near the Istanbul Road in Etimesgut.
A poor quality diet will curtail mohair development.
There are about 50 museums in the city.
In front of the museum building, there is a marble and bronze equestrian statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal) which was crafted in 1927 by the renowned Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica.
Angoras are bred mainly for their wool because it is silky and soft.
After the  Battle of Köse Dağ in 1243, in which the Mongols defeated the Seljuks, most of Anatolia became part of the dominion of the Mongols.
Most of them, including Hacettepespor, play their matches at Cebeci İnönü Stadium in the Cebeci district.
Ancyra was the center of a tribe known as the ''Tectosages'', and Augustus upgraded it into a major provincial capital for his empire.
After Constantinople became the East Roman capital, emperors in the 4th and 5th centuries would retire from the humid summer weather on the Bosporus to the drier mountain atmosphere of Ancyra.
This mosque, in the Ulus quarter next to the Temple of Augustus, was built in the early 15th century in Seljuk style by an unknown architect.
It has now been covered and diverted, but it formed the northern boundary of the old town during the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman periods.
By that time the city also took its name ''Ἄγκυρα'' (''Ánkyra'', meaning ''anchor'' in Ancient Greek) which, in slightly modified form, provides the modern name of ''Ankara''.
There are also galleries which host guest exhibitions.
Ancyra then formed the capital of the new province of Galatia.
However, the Celtic language continued to be spoken in Galatia for many centuries.
It was sacked by Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha in 1832.
Located at Zafer Square (Turkish: ''Zafer Meydanı''), the marble and bronze statue was crafted by the renowned Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica in 1927 and depicts a standing Atatürk who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal.
During the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s, the city grew in a planned and orderly pace.
Today, Angora goats produce white, black (deep black to greys and silver), red (the color fades significantly as the goat gets older), and brownish fiber.
It was founded in the Ulus quarter near the Ankara Citadel and was constructed by the Ahi fraternity during the late 14th and early 15th centuries.
It can accommodate 6 thousand people during general prayers, and up to 30 thousand people during funeral prayers.
There is a fine collection of folkloric items, as well as artifacts from the Seljuk and Ottoman periods.
The W gene which is responsible for the white coat and blue eye is closely related to the hearing ability, and the presence of a blue eye can indicate that the cat is deaf to the side the blue eye is located.
Ankara is also famous for its pears.
Now the capital city of the Roman province of Galatia, Ancyra continued to be a center of great commercial importance.
It was originally the first Parliament building (TBMM) of the Republic of Turkey.
