Most writers on the subject agree that she had been pregnant during her trial.
Thomas Shepard, the minister of Newtown (which later became Cambridge), began writing letters to Cotton as early as the spring of 1636.
There they settled near an ancient landmark called Split Rock, not far from what became the Hutchinson River in northern Bronx, New York City.
On 25 October 1636, seven ministers gathered at the home of Cotton to confront the developing discord; they held a "private conference" which included Hutchinson and other lay leaders from the Boston church.
These gatherings brought women, as well as their husbands, "to enquire more seriously after the Lord Jesus Christ."
The memorial was a grass roots effort by a local Newport organisation, the Anne Hutchinson Memorial Committee headed by Newport artist Valerie Debrule.
When Cotton testified, he tended to not remember many events of the October meeting, and attempted to soften the meaning of statements that Hutchinson was being accused of.
Shepard went even further when he began criticising the Boston opinions to his Newtown congregation during his sermons.
Three of the ministers were sworn in, and each testified against Hutchinson.
Hutchinson stood at the next meeting, on Thursday, 22 March, and read her recantation in a subdued voice to the congregation.
Will Hutchinson was highly successful in his mercantile business and brought a considerable estate with him to New England, arriving in Boston in the late summer of 1634.
Winthrop wrote, "Thus it had pleased the Lord to have compassion of his poor churches here, and to discover this great imposter, an instrument of Satan so fitted and trained to his service for interrupting the passage of his kingdom in this part of the world, and poisoning the churches here".
The fate of the Hutchinson family was aptly summarised by LaPlante:
Anne was a midwife, and very helpful to those needing her assistance, as well as forthcoming with her personal religious understandings.
As a matter of due process, the ministers would have to be sworn in, but would agree to do so only if the defence witnesses spoke first.
William Coddington rose, asserting, "I do not see any clear witness against her, and you know it is a rule of the court that no man may be a judge and an accuser too," ending with, "Here is no law of God that she hath broken nor any law of the country that she hath broke, and therefore deserve no censure."
Hutchinson was called to trial on Thursday, 15 March 1638, weary and in poor health following a four-month detention.
This compelled her to move totally out of the reach of the Bay colony and its sister colonies in Connecticut and New Haven and move into the jurisdiction of the Dutch.
She lived in London as a young adult, and there married an old friend from home, William Hutchinson.
To 19th century America, she was a crusader for religious liberty, as the nation celebrated its new achievement of the separation of church and state.
He became a town selectman and deputy to the General Court.
Historians have given a variety of reasons for this seemingly impulsive statement, including an "exultant impulse", "hysteria", "cracking under the strain of the inquest", and being "possessed of the Spirit".
During her tenure in Portsmouth, Hutchinson developed a new philosophy concerning religion.
Hutchinson responded to this with a verse from Titus, saying that "the elder women should instruct the younger."
This is known now as a hydatidiform mole, a condition occurring most often in women over 45, resulting from one or two sperm cells fertilising a blighted egg.
Winthrop was not interested in this quibbling, though; he was using Hutchinson's bold assertions to lead the court in the direction of rewriting history, according to the historical interpretations of Winship.
Hutchinson was exposed to his teaching for the first time, and she immediately saw a big difference between her own doctrines and his.
The distance was not great, yet Hutchinson was rarely able to see her children because of the weather, which was particularly harsh that winter.
Biographer Eve LaPlante suggests, "Her success before the court may have astonished her judges, but it was no surprise to her.
In 1987, Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis pardoned Anne Hutchinson, revoking the order of banishment by Governor Winthrop 350&nbsp;years earlier.
He stressed that the ministers were not as upset about any Hutchinson remarks at the end of the October meeting as they appeared to be later.
She continued to criticise the ministers of violating their mandate of confidentiality.
The ministers intended to protect their orthodox doctrine and to examine Hutchinson's theological errors.
To the Puritan clergy, his sermon was "censurable and incited mischief."
In February 2015, researcher Claire Bellerjeau discovered and positively identified a tribute poem to Anne Hutchinson written in 1770 by Jupiter Hammon, the first published Black American poet.
The first two witnesses made brief statements that had little effect on the court, but Cotton was grilled extensively.
Anne Hutchinson was born Anne Marbury in Alford, Lincolnshire, England, and baptised there on 20 July 1591, the daughter of Francis Marbury and Bridget Dryden.
Had they succeeded, historian Dunn believes that they would have profoundly changed the thrust of Massachusetts history.
The ministers overwhelmingly concluded that Hutchinson's unsound beliefs outweighed all the good which she had done, and that she endangered the spiritual welfare of the community.
On 12 March 1640, the towns of Portsmouth and Newport agreed to re-unite peacefully.
Marbury's repeated challenges to the Anglican authorities led to his censure and imprisonment several years before Anne was born; in 1578 he was given a public trial, of which, during a period of house arrest, he made a transcript from memory.
Hutchinson was now not only banished from the colony, but excommunicated from the church, and her leading supporters had been given three months to leave the colony, including Coddington and Coggeshall, while others were disenfranchised or dismissed from their churches.
'''Anne Hutchinson''', born '''Anne Marbury''' (1591–1643), was a Puritan spiritual adviser, mother of 15, and an important participant in the Antinomian Controversy that shook the infant Massachusetts Bay Colony from 1636 to 1638.
Three United States presidents are among her descendants—Franklin D. Roosevelt, George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush—as are the United States presidential aspirants Stephen A. Douglas, George W. Romney, and Mitt Romney.
In August 1643, Hutchinson, six of her children, and other household members were massacred by Siwanoys during Kieft's War.
Though I have not herd, nayther do I thinke you have bine unfaythfull to your Husband in his Marriage Covenant, yet that will follow upon it.
Governor Vane began challenging the doctrines of the colony's divines, and supporters of Hutchinson refused to serve during the Pequot War of 1637 because Wilson was the chaplain of the expedition.
"Therefor, I doe Admonish you, and alsoe charge you in the name of Christ Jesus, in whose place I stand&nbsp;... that you would sadly consider the just hand of God agaynst you, the great hurt you have done to the Churches, the great Dishonour you have brought to Jesus Christ, and the Evell that you have done to many a poore soule."
According to Hutchinson biographer Eve LaPlante, some literary critics trace the character of Hester Prynne in Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''The Scarlet Letter'' to Hutchinson's persecution in the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Most of the material in the following ancestor chart is from Champlin, except for the Williamson line which was published in ''The American Genealogist'' by F. N. Craig in 1992.
He called Mrs. Hutchinson and read the numerous errors with which she had been charged.
Historian Michael Winship noted in 2005 that the church seemed to approach the Puritan ideal of a Christian community.
Dryden's brother, Erasmus, was the grandfather of the famous playwright and Poet Laureate, John Dryden.
He moved to the remote market town of Alford in Lincolnshire, about  north of London.
William, baptised 22 June 1623, died during infancy, and Samuel, baptised 17 December 1624, lived in Boston, married, and had a child, but left behind few records.
This was "not histrionics, but pedagogy," according to Winship; it was Hutchinson's attempt to teach the Court, and doing so was consistent with her character.
The organization is called Friends of Anne Hutchinson; it meets annually at the memorial in Portsmouth on the Sunday nearest to 20 July, the date of Anne's baptism, to celebrate her life and the local colonial history of the women of Aquidneck Island.
The trial was presided over by Governor John Winthrop, on the charge of "traducing slandering the ministers".
About this time Marbury married his first wife, Elizabeth Moore, who bore three children, then died.
Another boost for the free grace advocates came during the same month, when the young aristocrat Henry Vane was elected as the governor of the colony.
By 1633, Cotton's inclination toward such Puritan practices had attracted the attention of Archbishop William Laud, who was on a campaign to suppress any preaching and practices that did not conform to the practices of the established Anglican Church.
The exact location of the Hutchinson house has been a source of great interest for several centuries.
I command you in the name of Christ Jesus and of this Church as a Leper to withdraw your selfe out of the Congregation."
Wilson explored an accusation made by Shepard at the end of the previous meeting, and new words brought on new assaults.
Peter Bulkley, the pastor at Concord, wrote, "Let her damned heresies, and the just vengeance of God, by which she perished, terrify all her seduced followers from having any more to do with her leaven."
The first day had gone fairly well for Hutchinson, who had held her own in a battle of wits with the magistrates.
Susanna, baptised 4 September 1614, died in Alford during the plague in 1630, and Richard, baptised 8 December 1615 was admitted to the Boston church in 1634, but returned to England, after which no further record has been found.
Winthrop's account has given Hutchinson near legendary status and, as with all legends, what exactly she stood for has shifted over the centuries.
She found his emphasis on morality and his doctrine of "evidencing justification by sanctification" to be disagreeable.
Hutchinson and the other free grace advocates continued to question the orthodox ministers in the colony.
All week the two ministers worked with her and, under their supervision, she had written out a formal recantation of her unsound opinions that had formerly brought objection.
For some of the ministers, though, it was not sufficient for this proud, strong-minded woman to submit to the humiliation of making a public confession, according to the opinion of Emery Battis.
With the permission of the court, Hutchinson was allowed to spend the week at his home, where the recently arrived Reverend John Davenport was also staying.
She was taken captive, was named "Autumn Leaf" by one account, and lived with the Indians for two to six years (accounts vary) until ransomed back to her family members, most of whom were living in Boston.
She gave birth to their child during the voyage to the colonies, whom they named Seaborn.
The Hutchinsons had been friendly to them but, following their mistreatment by the Dutch, these natives ravaged the New Netherland colony in a series of incidents known as Kieft's War.
The court in November had ordered that 58 citizens of Boston and 17 from adjacent towns be disarmed unless they repudiated the "seditious label" given them, and many of these people followed Hutchinson into exile.
To the chagrin of clergy and colony officials, Hutchinson interpreted the doctrine of the Perseverance of the saints according to the Free Grace model, which taught that the saved could sin freely without endangering their salvation, instead of the Lordship salvation model prevalent at that time, which noted that those who were truly saved would demonstrate by seeking to follow the ways of their Saviour.
The property had supposedly been secured by an agent of the Dutch West India Company in 1640, but the negotiation was transacted with members of the Siwanoy people in distant Norwalk, and the local natives likely had little to do with that transaction, if they even knew of it at all.
There was more parrying between Cotton and the court, but the exchanges were not picked up in the transcript of the proceedings.
Another strong influence on Hutchinson was closer to her home in the nearby town of Bilsby.
It took days or even weeks for Winthrop to receive the news, so the event almost certainly occurred in August 1643, and this is the date found in most sources.
The colony's ministers became more aware of Hutchinson's meetings, and they contended that such "unauthorised" religious gatherings might confuse the faithful.
Cotton had not yet given up on his parishioner.
On or shortly after 21 October 1636, Winthrop gave the first public warning of the problem that consumed him and the leadership of the Massachusetts Bay Colony for much of the next two years.
Winthrop responded, "The court knows wherefore and is satisfied."
She persuaded her husband to resign from his position as a magistrate, as Roger Williams put it, "because of the opinion, which she had newly taken up, of the unlawfulness of magistracy."
Coddington became governor of the island, and William Hutchinson was chosen as one of his assistants.
Here his expression of puritan views, though somewhat muffled, was tolerated, because of a shortage of pastors.
He was an officer in the colonial militia, and died from wounds received during King Philip's War.
The Hutchinson family purchased a half-acre lot on the Shawmut Peninsula, now downtown Boston.
Laymen were sent from the Boston church to Portsmouth to convince Hutchinson of her errors; she shouted at them, "the Church at Boston?
In 1580, at the age of 25, he was released and was considered sufficiently reformed to preach and teach.
What began as the quibbling over fine points of Christian doctrine ended as a confrontation over the role of authority in the colony."
During the morning of the second day of the trial, it appeared that Hutchinson had been given some legal counsel the previous evening, and she had more to say.
By winter, the theological schism had become great enough that the General Court called for a day of fasting to help ease the colony's difficulties.
She became an active midwife, and while tending to women in childbirth, she provided them with spiritual advice.
The men who accompanied Coddington to Newport tended to be the strongest leaders; several became presidents or governors of the entire united colony after 1646, such as Coggeshall, Nicholas Easton, William Brenton, Jeremy Clarke, and Henry Bull.
They sailed aboard the ''Griffin'', the same ship that had carried Cotton and their oldest son a year earlier.
Another issue was that some of the ministers had heard that Hutchinson had criticised them during her conventicles for preaching a covenant of works and said that they were not able ministers of the New Testament.
As to her overall historical impact, Winship writes in his 2005 book on Hutchinson and the Free Grace Controversy, "Hutchinson's well-publicized trials and the attendant accusations against her made her the most famous, or infamous, English woman in colonial American history."
Her defence was that she had spoken reluctantly and in private, that she "must either speak false or true in my answers" in the ministerial context of the meeting.
Soon she was hosting women at her house weekly, providing commentary on recent sermons.
Soon they heard about an engaging minister named John Cotton who preached at Saints Botolph's Church in the large port of Boston, about  from Alford.
She insisted that the ministers testify under oath, which they were very hesitant to do.
She believed that her response, which was largely coaxed from her, was private and confidential.
The towns were to remain autonomous with laws made by the citizens.
Hutchinson responded to this only when prompted, and only to one or two ministers at a time.
Early Massachusetts historian William Hubbard found the church to be "in so flourishing a condition as were scarce any where else to be paralleled."
In 1914, John Champlin published the bulk of the currently known ancestry of Anne Hutchinson, showing her descent on her father's side of the family from Charlemagne and Alfred the Great.
Her husband and other friends had already left the colony to prepare for a new place to live.
She delivered what her doctor John Clarke described as a handful of transparent grapes.
Hutchinson went to New Netherland some time after the summer of 1642 with seven of her children, a son-in-law, and several servants—16 total persons by several accounts.
Cotton was pressed by Dudley on whether or not he supported Hutchinson's revelation; he said that he could find theological justification for it.
Two days later, over 30 men signed a document forming a new "civil body politic".
In 1635, a difficult situation occurred when senior pastor John Wilson returned from a lengthy trip to England where he had been settling his affairs.
Within a year of his first wife's death, Marbury married Bridget Dryden, about ten years younger than he, from a prominent Northampton family.
Faith, baptised 14 August 1617, married Thomas Savage, and lived in Boston, dying about 1651.
Finally, in the 20th century, she became a feminist leader, credited with terrifying the patriarchs, not because of her religious views, but because she was an assertive, highly visible woman.
The parallel is that Hutchinson was the heretic who metaphorically seduced the Puritan community, while in Hawthorne's novel Hester Prynne literally seduced the minister of her community.
There were three such witnesses, all from the Boston church: deacon John Coggeshall, lay leader Thomas Leverett, and minister John Cotton.
Historian Emery Battis, citing expert opinion, suggests that she may not have been pregnant at all during that time, but displaying acute symptoms of menopause.
It is the Lords work, and it is marvellous in our eyes.
Winship, citing the work of historian Mary Beth Norton, suggests that Hutchinson consciously decided to explain why she knew that the divines of the colony were not able ministers of the New Testament.
Mary, baptised 22 February 1627/8; Katherine, baptised 7 February 1629/30; William, baptised 28 September 1631; and Zuriel (daughter), baptised in Boston 13 March 1635/6, were all children when they went with their mother to New Netherland, and were killed during the Indian massacre in the late summer of 1643.
The only survivor was her nine-year-old daughter Susanna, who was taken captive.
The warriors then dragged the bodies into the house, along with the cattle, and set fire to the place, which burned to the ground.
During the appointed fast-day on Thursday, 19 January 1637, Wheelwright preached at the Boston church in the afternoon.
By the summer of 1637, Vane sailed back to England, never to return.
Once established, William Hutchinson continued to prosper in the cloth trade, and made land purchases and investments.
As with many other colonial American settlers, Anne Hutchinson has numerous descendants, many of whom have reached great prominence.
The time now grows late.
During the election of May 1637, Henry Vane was replaced as governor by John Winthrop; in addition, all the other Boston magistrates who supported Hutchinson and Wheelwright were voted out of office.
He was at a high point in his career, but in February 1611, when Anne was 19&nbsp;years old, he died suddenly at the age of 55.
She is honoured by Massachusetts with a State House monument calling her a "courageous exponent of civil liberty and religious toleration."
In Portsmouth, Rhode Island, Anne Hutchinson and her friend Mary Dyer, the Quaker martyr, have been remembered at Founders Brook Park with the Anne Hutchinson/Mary Dyer Memorial Herb Garden, a medicinal botanical garden set by a scenic waterfall and historical marker for the early settlement of Portsmouth.
The Hutchinsons became members of the Boston church, the most important church in the colony.
The autumn court of 1637 convened on 2 November and sentenced Wheelwright to banishment, ordering him to leave the colony within 14 days.
A nine-hour interrogation followed, in which the ministers delved into some weighty points of theology.
She is believed to have had red hair, unusual to the attackers, and perhaps because of this curiosity her life was spared.
Several of the other supporters of Hutchinson and Wheelwright were tried and given varied sentences.
Dudley reiterated that Hutchinson had told the ministers that they were not able ministers of the New Testament; Cotton replied that he did not remember her saying that.
Shepard had swayed the proceedings, with Cotton signalling that he had given up on her, and her sentence was presented by Wilson:
She also claimed that she could identify "the elect" among the colonists.
Anne, baptised 5 May 1626, married William Collins, and both of them went to New Netherland and perished in the massacre with her mother.
Ruling elder Thomas Leverett was charged with managing the examination.
Hutchinson was brought to trial on 7 November 1637, with Wheelwright banished and other court business taken care of.
Threatened with imprisonment, he made a hasty departure for New England aboard the ship ''Griffin'', taking his pregnant wife.
She told her followers that Wilson lacked "the seal of the Spirit."
They preferred to eliminate bishops appointed by the monarchs, choose their own church elders (or governors), and provide for a lay leader and two ministers—one a teacher in charge of doctrine, and the other a pastor in charge of people's souls.
While education at that time was almost exclusively offered to boys and men, one reason that Marbury may have taught his daughters is that six of his first seven children were girls; another reason may have been that the ruling class in Elizabethan England began realising that girls could be schooled, looking to the example of the queen, who spoke six foreign languages.
A map in Barr's book that appeared in the 1929 work shows the property bordering the river in an area that is now called Baychester, between two creeks called Rattlesnake Brook and Black Dog Brook.
Cotton was compelled to emigrate in 1633, and the Hutchinsons followed a year later with their 11 children, and soon became well established in the growing settlement of Boston in New England.
At the end of the first day of the trial, Winthrop recorded, "Mrs. Hutchinson, the court you see hath labored to bring you to acknowledge the error of your way that so you might be reduced.
These positions ultimately caused John Cotton, John Winthrop, and other former friends to view her as an ''antinomian heretic''.
Here they had a house built, one of the largest on the peninsula, with a timber frame and at least two stories.
Less than a year after Pocasset was settled, it suffered rifts and civil difficulties.
In that year, Cotton was removed from his ministry, and he went into hiding.
This is near the location where the Hutchinsons owned a 600-acre farm with a house, and this is where they stayed for several days in early spring 1638 while making the trip from Boston to their new home on Aquidneck Island.
In 1605, when Anne was 15, the family moved from Alford to the heart of London, where her father was given the position of vicar of the Church of Saint Martin's in the Vintry.
"You cannot Evade the Argument&nbsp;... that filthie Sinne of the Communitie of Woemen; and all promiscuous and filthie cominge togeather of men and Woemen without Distinction or Relation of Mariage, will necessarily follow&nbsp;...
(However, the Puritans themselves clearly stated that the threat which they perceived was entirely theological, and no direct mention was ever made to indicate that they were threatened by her gender.)
With this, she was accused of lying but, even at this point, Winthrop and a few of the ministers wanted her soul redeemed because of her significant evangelical work before she "set forth her owne stuffe".
Her revelation was considered not only seditious, but also in contempt of court.
Not long after the settlement of Aquidneck Island, the Massachusetts Bay Colony made some serious threats to take over the island and the entire Narragansett Bay area, causing Hutchinson and other settlers much anxiety.
In the interim, she was not allowed to return home, but was detained at the house of Joseph Weld, brother of the Reverend Thomas Weld, located in Roxbury, about two miles from her home in Boston.
By late 1636, as the controversy deepened, Hutchinson and her supporters were accused of two heresies in the Puritan church: antinomianism and familism.
She was frequently visited by various ministers, whose intent, according to LaPlante, was to reform her thinking but also to collect evidence against her.
On 28 April 1639, Gorton and a dozen other men ejected Coddington from power.
Thus the natives gave overt clues that they were displeased with the settlement being formed there.
Hutchinson was therefore taking a considerable risk in putting a permanent dwelling at this site.
2.&nbsp;That no sanctification can help to evidence to us our justification."
The close relationship between church and state in Massachusetts Bay meant that a challenge to the ministers was quickly interpreted as challenge to established authority of all kinds.
Vane was a strong supporter of Hutchinson, but he also had his own ideas about theology that were considered not only unorthodox, but radical by some.
This area of the Bronx is now highly developed; Rattlesnake Brook is extant, mostly in underground culverts, but Black Dog Brook is defunct.
Thomas Shepard was there to "collect errors", and concluded that she was a dangerous woman.
The Puritan leaders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony gloated over Hutchinson's suffering and also that of Mary Dyer, a follower who suffered the premature and stillbirth of a severely deformed infant.
The leaders classified the women's misfortunes as the judgement of God.
The outcome of her trial was uncertain following the first day's grilling, but her downfall came when she would not acknowledge that she held certain theological errors before her four-month imprisonment.
The Hutchinsons were unfortunate in the timing of their settlement in this area, and soon became victims of the local unrest.
Anne Hutchinson likewise fit into her new home with ease, devoting many hours to those who were ill or in need.
Hutchinson became the reason for all of the difficulties that the colony had gone through to Winthrop, though inaccurately portrayed and, with her departure, any other lingering issues were swept under the carpet, according to Michael Winship.
Wheelwright had been a close neighbor of the Hutchinsons in Lincolnshire, and his wife was a sister of Hutchinson's husband.
He concluded that the site of the homestead was on the west side of the Hutchinson River in Eastchester.
With the intention of soon going to New England, the Hutchinsons allowed their oldest son Edward to sail with Cotton before the remainder of the family made the voyage.
Other descendants include Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court Melville Weston Fuller and Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.; Lord Chancellor of England John Singleton Copley, Jr., who was the first Lord Lyndhurst; and President of Harvard University Charles William Eliot.
This allowed her to identify as a "mystic participant in the transcendent power of the Almighty"; such a theology was empowering to women, according to Eve LaPlante, whose status was otherwise determined by their husbands or fathers.
Six ministers had presented to the court their written versions of the October conference, and Hutchinson agreed with the substance of their statements.
Winthrop noted in his journal that at Aquidneck,
Wilson's theological views were in accord with all of the other ministers in the colony except for Cotton, who stressed "the inevitability of God's will" ("free grace") as opposed to preparation (works).
We shall therefore give you a little more time to consider of it and therefore desire that you attend the court again in the morning."
Winthrop summed up the case with genuine feeling:
Hutchinson believed that the Spirit instructed her to follow Cotton to America, "impressed by the evidence of divine providence".
Hutchinson had been ill most of the winter, with unusual weakness, throbbing headaches, and bouts of vomiting.
Anne was the third of 15 children born to this marriage, 12 of whom survived early childhood.
Winthrop moved to have her banished; in the ensuing tally, only the Boston deputies voted against conviction.
In his article on Hutchinson in ''Forerunner'' magazine, Jay Rogers articulates the view that Hutchinson's interpretations were not "antithetical to what the Puritans believed at all.
Of Hutchinson's dozen or more siblings who survived childhood, only one other came to New England; her youngest sister, Katharine, the wife of Richard Scott, came to Boston and then Providence.
During Hutchinson's imprisonment, several of her supporters prepared to leave the colony and settle elsewhere.
(The house stood until October 1711, when it was consumed in the great fire of Boston, after which the Old Corner Bookstore was built on the site.)
