"Here", he wrote, "was a fresh young damsel, that could trip and go."
In Europe, Thomas Boleyn's charm won many admirers, including Margaret of Austria, daughter of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor.
While Anne Boleyn was still King Henry's mistress in 1532, Wyatt accompanied the royal couple to Calais in France.
When it became clear that Pope Clement VII would not annul the marriage, the breaking of the power of the Catholic Church in England began.
She was beheaded four days later.
Still, Cranmer felt vulnerable because of his closeness to the queen, and so on the night before the execution, he declared Henry's marriage to Anne to have been void, like Catherine's before her.
The new queen had a larger staff of servants than Catherine.
Anne's great great great-grandparents included a Lord Mayor of London, a duke, an earl, two aristocratic ladies, and a knight.
In a 1,318 line poem, written in French, two weeks after Anne's death, Lancelot de Carle provides a moving account of her last words and their effect on the crowd:She gracefully addressed the people from the scaffold with a voice somewhat overcome by weakness, but which gathered strength as she went on.
In 1520, Wyatt married Elizabeth Cobham, who told by many accounts, was not a wife of his choosing.
There was a large wen under her chin, and therefore to hide its ugliness she wore a high dress covering her throat... She was handsome to look at, with a pretty mouth".
The Pope forbade Henry to contract a new marriage until a decision was reached in Rome, not in England.
In that history, in the chapter dealing with Elizabeth's early life, he records in the margin that Anne was born in MDVII (1507).
A number of people have claimed to have seen Anne's ghost at Hever Castle, Blickling Hall, Salle Church, the Tower of London, and Marwell Hall.
Most historians now agree that Mary was born in 1499.
Henry, fearful the dispute could be the spark to ignite civil war in Ireland, sought to resolve the matter by arranging an alliance between Piers's son, James, and Anne Boleyn.
Prior to her marriage to King Henry VIII, Anne had befriended Sir Thomas Wyatt, who was one of the greatest poets of the Tudor reign.
One evening in the autumn of 1531, Anne was dining at a manor house on the river Thames and was almost seized by a crowd of angry women.
On 7 September, she gave birth to the future Queen Elizabeth I. Henry was disappointed to have a daughter rather than a son but hoped a son would follow and professed to love Elizabeth.
Had it not been for his death from illness in 1530, he might have been executed for treason.
The ermine mantle was removed and Anne lifted off her headdress, tucking her hair under a coif.
On the morning of Friday 19 May, Anne Boleyn was executed within the Tower precincts, not upon the site of the execution memorial, but rather, according to historian Eric Ives, on a scaffold erected on the north side of the White Tower, in front of what is now the Waterloo Barracks.
Historians dispute King Henry VIII's paternity of one or both of Mary Boleyn's children born during this marriage.
There is anecdotal evidence, related to biographer George Wyatt by her former lady-in-waiting Anne Gainsford, that Anne brought to Henry's attention a heretical pamphlet, perhaps Tyndale's "The Obedience of a Christian Man" or one by Simon Fish called "Supplication for Beggars," which cried out to monarchs to rein in the evil excesses of the Catholic Church.
Cromwell did not manufacture the accusations of adultery, though he and other officials used them to bolster Henry's case against Anne.
Now the prepared letters announcing the birth of a ''prince'' had an ''s'' hastily added to them to read ''princess'' and the traditional jousting tournament for the birth of an heir was cancelled.
Mary Boleyn, Anne Boleyn's older sister, had earlier been recalled from France in late 1519, ostensibly for her affairs with the French king and his courtiers.
Both assumed an annulment could be obtained within a matter of months.
She was accused of adultery, incest, and high treason.
Henry now required his subjects to swear the oath attached to the First Succession Act, which effectively rejected papal authority in legal matters and recognised Anne Boleyn as queen.
Anne made a good impression in the Netherlands with her manners and studiousness, Margaret reported that she was well spoken and pleasant for her young age.
He was already in possession of Kilkenny Castle – the ancestral seat of the earls.
Those who refused, such as Sir Thomas More, who had resigned as Lord Chancellor, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, were then placed in the Tower of London.
However, the siblings were born in Norfolk at the Boleyn home at Blickling.
Whatever the reason, the marriage negotiations came to a complete halt.
Henry also petitioned, in the event of his becoming free, a dispensation to contract a new marriage with any woman even in the first degree of affinity, whether the affinity was contracted by lawful or unlawful connection.
When the charges were first brought against Anne, Cranmer had expressed his astonishment to Henry and his belief that "she should not be culpable."
Percy was married to Lady Mary Talbot, to whom he had been betrothed since adolescence.
With Catherine dead, Henry would be free to marry without any taint of illegality.
Dundas of the 60th Rifles regiment was quartered in the Tower of London.
At this time Henry began paying court to Jane Seymour.
One is that she was secretly buried in Salle Church in Norfolk under a black slab near the tombs of her ancestors.
Further, the most recent edition of Ives's biography admits that Anne may very well have had a personal spiritual awakening in her youth which spurred her on, not just as catalyst but expediter for Henry's Reformation, though the process took a number of years.
Historian Alice Hunt suggests that this was done because Anne's pregnancy was visible by then and she was carrying the heir who was presumed to be male.
The academic debate about Anne's birth date focuses on two key dates: 1501 and 1507.
The key piece of surviving written evidence is a letter Anne wrote sometime in 1514.
Four of the accused men were tried in Westminster on 12 May 1536.
Accompanied by two female attendants, Anne made her final walk from the Queen's House to the scaffold and she showed a "devilish spirit" and looked "as gay as if she was not going to die".
However modern lawyers have concluded that the rules of the time were not bent in order to assure Anne Boleyn's conviction; there was no need to tamper with rules that guaranteed the desired result since law at the time, like armies, was an engine of state, not a mechanism for justice.
This meant that he had been living in sin with Catherine of Aragon all these years, though Catherine hotly contested this and refused to concede that her marriage to Arthur had been consummated.
Norris denied his guilt and swore that Queen Anne was innocent; one of the most damaging pieces of evidence against Norris was an overheard conversation with Anne at the end of April, where she accused him of coming often to her chambers not to pay court to her lady-in-waiting Madge Shelton but to herself.
Anne learned to play games, such as cards, chess, and dice.
Between three and four in the afternoon, Anne gave birth to a girl, who was christened Elizabeth, probably in honour of either or both Anne's mother Elizabeth Howard and Henry's mother, Elizabeth of York.
She or her circle may have encouraged Anne's interest in reform, as well as in poetry and literature.
As he was looking out the window of his quarters, he noticed a guard below in the courtyard, in front of the lodgings where Anne had been imprisoned, behaving strangely.
As with Anne herself, it is uncertain when her two siblings were born, but it seems clear that her sister Mary was older than Anne.
Thomas Wolsey's gentleman usher, George Cavendish, maintained the two had not been lovers.
In the Queen's household, she completed her study of French and developed interests in art, fashion, illuminated manuscripts, literature, music, poetry,and religious philosophy.
Henry had Anne investigated for high treason in April 1536.
On the previous day, Anne had taken part in an elaborate procession through the streets of London seated in a litter of "white cloth of gold" that rested on two palfreys clothed to the ground in white damask, while the barons of the Cinque Ports held a canopy of cloth of gold over her head.
Sanders's description contributed to what biographer Eric Ives calls the "monster legend" of Anne Boleyn.
While she would later hold the reformist position that the papacy was a corrupting influence on Christianity, her conservative tendencies could be seen in her devotion to the Virgin Mary.
As a result of this marriage and these excommunications, the first break between the Church of England and Rome took place and the Church of England was brought under the King's control.
Anne's early education was typical for women of her class.
These began after the discovery during her embalming that her heart was blackened.
Anne Boleyn's sharp intelligence, political acumen and forward manners, although desirable in a mistress, were, at the time, unacceptable in a wife.
On 23 May 1533, Cranmer (who had been hastened, with the Pope's assent, into the position of Archbishop of Canterbury recently vacated by the death of Warham) sat in judgment at a special court convened at Dunstable Priory to rule on the validity of the King's marriage to Catherine of Aragon.
Convinced that Wolsey's loyalties lay with the Pope, not England, Anne, as well as Wolsey's many enemies, ensured his dismissal from public office in 1529.
In 1532, Henry granted Anne the Marquessate of Pembroke.
But the Pope never had empowered his deputy to make any decision.
She was then buried in an unmarked grave in the Chapel of St Peter ad Vincula.
This version of her speech is found in Foxe's, Actes and Monuments and an almost identical version in Ives (2005).
Yet Anne also had a sharp tongue and a terrible temper.
A year later, Anne Boleyn and the King were secretly married, and Wyatt served in Anne's coronation in June 1533.
Soon after returning to Dover, Henry and Anne married in a secret ceremony on November 14, 1532.
Anne's biographer Eric Ives believes that her fall and execution were primarily engineered by her former ally Thomas Cromwell.
Most of the King's Council were also present.
The spelling of the Boleyn name was variable, as common at the time.
As the Pope was, at that time, prisoner of Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, as a result of the Sack of Rome in May 1527, Knight had some difficulty obtaining access.
During this period, Margaret ruled the Netherlands on her nephew Charles's behalf and was so impressed with Boleyn that she offered his daughter Anne a place in her household.
Henry also came to an arrangement with Anne's Irish cousin and created him Earl of Ormond.
Scholars and historians hold various opinions as to how deep Anne's commitment to the Reformation was, how much she was perhaps only personally ambitious, and how much she had to do with Henry's defiance of papal power.
Eric Ives's latest version of his biography hypothesises that Anne may have had evangelistic conviction and a strong spiritual inner life.
Henry Percy, 6th Earl of Northumberland sat on the jury that unanimously found Anne guilty.
He initially denied being the Queen's lover but later confessed, perhaps tortured or promised freedom.
The romance was broken off when Percy's father refused to support their engagement.
Upon exhumation in 1876, no abnormalities were discovered.
Henry VIII's biographer J. J. Scarisbrick adds that Anne "revelled in" the attention she received from her admirers.
On 14 May, Cranmer declared Anne's marriage to Henry null and void.
Thomas Boleyn was a well respected diplomat with a gift for languages; he was also a favourite of King Henry VII, who sent him on many diplomatic missions abroad.
There she took part in an elaborate dance accompanying Henry's younger sister Mary, several other ladies of the court, and her sister.
The poem, ''Épistre Contenant le Procès Criminel Faict à l'Encontre de la Royne Anne Boullant d'Angleterre'', ''(A Letter Containing the Criminal Charges Laid Against Queen Anne Boleyn of England),'' provides a detailed account of Anne's early life and the circumstances relating to her arrest, trial and execution.
She was also strong-willed and proud, and often quarrelled with Henry.
The American historian Retha M. Warnicke writes that Anne was "the perfect woman courtier... her carriage was graceful and her French clothes were pleasing and stylish; she danced with ease, had a pleasant singing voice, played the lute and several other musical instruments well, and spoke French fluently... A remarkable, intelligent, quick-witted young noblewoman... that first drew people into conversation with her and then amused and entertained them.
It is likely that Anne may have entered through the Court Gate in the Byward Tower rather than the Traitors' Gate, according to historian and author of ''The Life and Death of Anne Boleyn'', Eric Ives.
Author Mike Ashley speculated that Anne had two stillborn children after Elizabeth's birth and before the male child she miscarried in 1536.
Three days later, Anne and George Boleyn were tried separately in the Tower of London, before a jury of 27 peers.
The conversations between Chapuys and Cromwell thereafter indicate Cromwell as the instigator of the plot to remove Anne; evidence of this is seen in the ''Spanish Chronicle'' and through letters written from Chapuys to Charles V. Anne argued with Cromwell over the redistribution of Church revenues and over foreign policy.
George Cavendish, Wolsey's chamberlain, records that the servants who waited on the king and Anne at dinner in 1529 in Grafton heard her say that the dishonour that Wolsey had brought upon the realm would have cost any other Englishman his head.
The result, historians agree, was a legal travesty.
But the birth of a girl was a heavy blow to her parents, since they had confidently expected a boy.
In 1526, King Henry became enamoured with Anne and began his pursuit.
Meanwhile, the House of Commons had forbidden all appeals to Rome and exacted the penalties of ''praemunire'' against all who introduced papal bulls into England.
For these reasons, Ives suggests, "Anne Boleyn had become a major threat to Thomas Cromwell."
There are two independent contemporary sources for the 1507 date.
He made no serious attempt to save Anne's life, although some sources record that he had prepared her for death by hearing her last private confession of sins, in which she had stated her innocence before God.
Anne's European education ended in 1521, when her father summoned her back to England.
At the time of Anne's birth, the Boleyn family was considered one of the most respected in the English aristocracy.
At the magnificent banquet to celebrate her father's elevation, Anne took precedence over the Duchesses of Suffolk and Norfolk, seated in the place of honour beside the King which was usually occupied by the Queen.
Nothing came of the issue as the royal couple reconciled and spent summer 1535 on progress.
The other form of treason alleged against her was that of plotting the king's death, with her "lovers", so that she might later marry Henry Norris.
Sir Richard Page was also accused of having a sexual relationship with the Queen, but he was acquitted of all charges after further investigation could not implicate him with Anne.
His new mistress, Jane Seymour, was quickly moved into royal quarters.
It was witnessed by Thomas Cromwell; Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk; the King's illegitimate son, Henry Fitzroy; the Lord Mayor of London, as well as aldermen, sheriffs, and representatives of the various craft guilds.
Anne's experience in France made her a devout Christian in the new tradition of Renaissance humanism.
Thus, in 1525, Wyatt charged his wife with adultery and separated from her; coincidentally, historians believe that it was also the year where his interest in Anne intensified.
It is probable that the idea of annulment (not divorce as commonly assumed) had suggested itself to Henry much earlier than this and was motivated by his desire for an heir to secure the Tudor claim to the crown.
Henry had set his hopes upon a direct appeal to the Holy See, acting independently of Cardinal Wolsey, to whom he at first communicated nothing of his plans related to Anne.
Anne was blamed for the tyranny of her husband's government and was referred to by some of her subjects as "The king's whore" or a "naughty paike prostitute".
Anne and her siblings grew up at Hever Castle in Kent.
Following the coronation of her daughter as queen, Anne was venerated as a martyr and heroine of the English Reformation, particularly through the works of John Foxe, who argued that Anne had saved England from the evils of Roman Catholicism and that God had provided proof of her innocence and virtue by making sure her daughter Elizabeth I ascended the throne.
The Venetian diarist Marino Sanuto, who saw Anne when Henry VIII met Francis I at Calais in October 1532, described her as "not one of the handsomest women in the world; she is of middling stature, swarthy complexion, long neck, wide mouth, bosom not much raised... eyes, which are black and beautiful".
Later that month, the King was unhorsed in a tournament and knocked unconscious for two hours, a worrying incident that Anne believed led to her miscarriage five days later.
She developed domestic skills such as dancing, embroidery, good manners, household management, music, needlework, and singing.
From there she signed the letter to her father as ''Anna de Boullan''.
She established an excellent rapport with the French ambassador, Gilles de la Pommeraie.
The following day, Henry and Anne wore yellow, the symbol of joy and celebration in England, from head to toe, and celebrated Catherine's death with festivities.
There were more than 250 servants to tend to her personal needs, everyone from priests to stable-boys, and more than 60 maids-of-honour who served her and accompanied her to social events.
The poem "Oh Death Rock Me Asleep" is generally believed to have been authored by Anne and reveals that she may have hoped death would end her suffering.
Many legends and fantastic stories about Anne Boleyn have survived over the centuries.
Anne's father continued his diplomatic career under Henry VIII.
Some say that Anne was accused of witchcraft but the indictments make no mention of this charge.
He and Catherine had no living sons: all Catherine's children except Mary died in infancy.
In 1960, Canon W. S. Pakenham-Walsh, vicar of Sulgrave, Northamptonshire, reported having conversations with Anne.
Their brother George was born around 1504.
Such a bold attempt by Cromwell, given the limited evidence, could have risked his office, even his life.
Anne was the daughter of Thomas Boleyn, later Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond, and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Howard, daughter of Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk.
On 1 September 1532, Henry granted her ''suo jure'' the Marquessate of Pembroke, an appropriate peerage for a future queen; as such she became a rich and important woman: the three dukes and two marquesses who existed in 1532 were the King's brother-in-law, the King's illegitimate son, and other descendants of royalty; she ranked above all other peeresses.
He died eight months later, leaving no heirs and therefore was succeeded by his nephew.
Her frame was described as delicate, approximately 5'3", with finely formed, tapering fingers.
He condemned the marriage to Anne, and in March 1534, he declared the marriage to Catherine legal and again ordered Henry to return to her.
Anne subsequently had three miscarriages, and by March 1536, Henry was courting Jane Seymour.
Cromwell insisted on filling the King's depleted coffers, while taking a cut for himself, and preferred an imperial alliance.
In 1527 William Knight, the King's secretary, was sent to Pope Clement VII to sue for the annulment of his marriage to Catherine, on the grounds that the dispensing bull of Pope Julius II permitting him to marry his brother's widow, Catherine, had been obtained under false pretences.
Anne has been called "the most influential and important queen consort England has ever had", since she provided the occasion for Henry VIII to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon, and declare his independence from Rome.
The marriage of Catherine and Henry took place in 1509, but eventually he became dubious about its validity, due to Catherine's inability to provide an heir being seen as a sign of God's displeasure.
According to Eric Ives, she was certainly of more noble birth than Jane Seymour, Catherine Howard, and Catherine Parr, Henry VIII's three other English wives.
By October, she was again pregnant.
According to Cavendish, Anne was sent from court to her family's countryside estates, but it is not known for how long.
She advocated that revenues be distributed to charitable and educational institutions; and she favoured a French alliance.
In short, her energy and vitality made her the center of attention in any social gathering."
Before Henry's father Henry VII ascended the throne, England was beset by civil warfare over rival claims to the crown and Henry wanted to avoid a similar uncertainty over the succession.
Prior to his arrest, Norris was treated kindly by the King, who offered him his own horse to use on the May Day festivities.
George Boleyn and the other accused men were executed on 17 May 1536.
This is supported by claims by a chronicler from the late 16th century, who wrote that Anne was twenty when she returned from France.
Sir Thomas Boleyn, being the son of the eldest daughter, felt the title belonged to him and protested to his brother-in-law, the Duke of Norfolk, who spoke to King Henry about the matter.
A bust of her was cast on a commemorative medallion in 1534, believed to have been struck to celebrate her second pregnancy.
She was the last queen consort of England to be crowned separately from her husband.
She soon became pregnant and, to legalise the first wedding considered to be unlawful at the time, there was a second wedding service, also private in accordance with The Royal Book, which took place in London on 25 January 1533.
In 18th-century Sicily, the peasants of the village of Nicolosi believed that Anne Boleyn, for having made Henry VIII a heretic, was condemned to burn for eternity inside Mount Etna.
Though all knowledge about Anne's experiences in the French court are conjecture, even Eric Ives, in his latest edition of the biography, conjectures that she was likely to have made the acquaintance of King Francis I's sister, Marguerite de Navarre, a patron of humanists and reformers.
On 8 January 1536, news of Catherine of Aragon's death reached the King and Anne, who were overjoyed.
After a brief farewell to her weeping ladies and a request for prayers, she kneeled down and one of her ladies tied a blindfold over her eyes.
She had a decisive role in influencing the Protestant reformer Matthew Parker to attend court as her chaplain, and prior to her death entrusted her daughter to Parker's care.
It was needless, she said, to relate why she was there, but she prayed the Judge of all the world to have compassion on those who had condemned her, and she begged them to pray for the King, in whom she had always found great kindness, fear of God, and love of his subjects.
At the court of Margaret of Austria in the Netherlands, Anne is listed as ''Boullan''.
''Henry VIII: The King and His Court'', by Alison Weir, questions the paternity of Henry Carey; Dr. G.W.
Her academic education was limited to arithmetic, her family genealogy, grammar, history, reading, spelling, and writing.
Lancelot de Carle called her "beautiful with an elegant figure", and a Venetian in Paris in 1528 also reported that she was said to be beautiful.
The most famous account of her reputed sighting has been described by paranormal researcher Hans Holzer.
In Spain, the home country of Catherine of Aragon, yellow was the colour of mourning, in addition to black.
It soon became the one absorbing object of Henry's desires to secure an annulment from Catherine.
The most influential description of Anne, but also the least reliable, was written by the Catholic propagandist and polemicist Nicholas Sanders in 1586, half a century after Anne's death: "Anne Boleyn was rather tall of stature, with black hair, and an oval face of a sallow complexion, as if troubled with jaundice.
Early in 1523 Anne was secretly betrothed to Henry Percy, son of the 5th Earl of Northumberland, but the betrothal was broken by Cardinal Wolsey in January 1524 and Anne was sent back home to Hever Castle.
When Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham died in 1532, the Boleyn family chaplain, Thomas Cranmer, was appointed, with papal approval.
Ives argues that the style of the letter and its mature handwriting prove that Anne must have been about thirteen at the time of its composition, while Warnicke argues that the numerous misspellings and grammar errors show that the letter was written by a child.
In his ''De Origine ac Progressu schismatis Anglicani'' (''The Rise and Growth of the Anglican Schism''), published in 1585, he was the first to write that Anne had six fingers on her right hand.
In what is reputed to be her last letter to King Henry, dated 6 May, she wrote:
She married William Carey, a minor noble, in February 1520, at Greenwich, with Henry VIII in attendance; soon after, Mary Boleyn became the English King's mistress.
She wore a red petticoat under a loose, dark grey gown of damask trimmed in fur and a mantle of ermine.
and told Sir Thomas Boleyn that his daughter was "so presentable and so pleasant, considering her youthful age, that I am more beholden to you for sending her to me, than you to me" (E.W.
This was followed by Anne's brother George being refused a prestigious court honour, the Order of the Garter, given instead to Sir Nicholas Carew.
During this period, Anne Boleyn played an important role in England's international position by solidifying an alliance with France.
Her father, already Viscount Rochford, was created Earl of Wiltshire.
She determined that she would yield to his embraces only as his acknowledged queen.
It soon became the one absorbing object of Henry's desires to annul his marriage to Queen Catherine so he would be free to marry Anne.
Upon her return to court, she again entered the service of Catherine of Aragon.
The Boleyn family originally came from Blickling in Norfolk,  north of Norwich.
Some say that Anne resisted the King's attempts to seduce her, refusing to become his mistress, often leaving court for the seclusion of Hever Castle.
But within a year, he proposed marriage to her, and she accepted.
On 14 May 1534, in one of the realm's first official acts protecting Protestant Reformers, Anne wrote a letter to Thomas Cromwell seeking his aid in ensuring that English merchant Richard Herman be reinstated a member of the merchant adventurers in Antwerp and no longer persecuted simply because he had helped in "setting forth of the New testament in English."
In 1513, Anne was invited to join the schoolroom of Margaret of Austria and her four wards.
Anne just managed to escape by boat.
Henry did not acknowledge either child, as he did his son Henry Fitzroy, his illegitimate son by Elizabeth Blount, Lady Talboys.
Unlike any other queen consort, Anne was crowned with St Edward's Crown, which had previously been used to crown only a monarch.
In Ives's view, this would also be around the minimum age that a girl could be a maid of honour, as Anne was to the regent, Margaret of Austria.
He thereupon declared the marriage of Henry and Catherine null and void.
Anne frequently visited her daughter at Hatfield and other residences.
In the end he had to return with a conditional dispensation, which Wolsey insisted was technically insufficient.
In 1532, Thomas Cromwell brought before Parliament a number of acts including the Supplication against the Ordinaries and Submission of the Clergy, which recognised royal supremacy over the church, thus finalising the break with Rome.
