Pheromones also are exchanged, mixed with food, and passed by trophallaxis, transferring information within the colony.
Of the species that lived in the Eocene epoch, around one in 10 genera survive to the present.
Contrary to popular belief, some ant nests have multiple queens, while others may exist without queens.
The sting of some species of ''Pseudomyrmex'' is claimed to give fever relief.
Leafcutter ants are sensitive enough to recognise the reaction of the fungus to different plant material, apparently detecting chemical signals from the fungus.
In the early 1990s, the video game SimAnt, which simulated an ant colony, won the 1992 Codie award for "Best Simulation Program".
Termites are eusocial, but differ greatly in the genetics of reproduction.
Ants are active all year long in the tropics, but, in cooler regions, they survive the winter in a state of dormancy or inactivity.
This allows other ants to detect what task group (''e.g.
Other wasps such as ''A.
Online databases of ant species, including AntBase and the Hymenoptera Name Server, help to keep track of the known and newly described species.
Workers of ''Cataulacus muticus'', an arboreal species that lives in plant hollows, respond to flooding by drinking water inside the nest, and excreting it outside.
Chemical methods include the use of insecticidal bait which is gathered by ants as food and brought back to the nest where the poison is inadvertently spread to other colony members through trophallaxis.
The female worker ants do not have wings and reproductive females lose their wings after their mating flights in order to begin their colonies.
The leader is acutely sensitive to the progress of the follower and slows down when the follower lags and speeds up when the follower gets too close.
Nearly all ant colonies also have some fertile males called "drones" and one or more fertile females called "queens".
The family Formicidae belongs to the order Hymenoptera, which also includes sawflies, bees, and wasps.
The larva is largely immobile and is fed and cared for by workers.
Ants and their larvae are eaten in different parts of the world.
In return, the ants obtain food from protein- and lipid-rich Beltian bodies.
Genera surviving today comprise 56% of the genera in Baltic amber fossils (early Oligocene), and 92% of the genera in Dominican amber fossils (apparently early Miocene).
Anteaters, aardvarks, pangolins, echidnas and numbats have special adaptations for living on a diet of ants.
The petiole forms a narrow waist between their mesosoma (thorax plus the first abdominal segment, which is fused to it) and gaster (abdomen less the abdominal segments in the petiole).
Ant bites are often said to have curative properties.
Their attractive, almost sweetmeat-like translucency possibly invited the first essays at their consumption by the human species".
Food is given to the larvae by trophallaxis, a process in which an ant regurgitates liquid food held in its crop.
Lemon ants make devil's gardens by killing surrounding plants with their stings and leaving a pure patch of lemon ant trees, (''Duroia hirsuta'').
Symbiotic bacteria on the exterior surface of the ants produce antibiotics that kill bacteria introduced into the nest that may harm the fungi.
The eggs of two species of ants are used in Mexican ''escamoles''.
Most ants are predatory and some prey on and obtain food from other social insects including other ants.
The pupa has the appendages free and not fused to the body as in a butterfly pupa.
Studies on ants have tested hypotheses in ecology and sociobiology, and have been particularly important in examining the predictions of theories of kin selection and evolutionarily stable strategies.
The Argentine ant, however, does not have this characteristic, due to lack of genetic diversity, and has become a global pest because of it.
Some species or genera commonly categorized as pests include the Argentine ant, pavement ant, yellow crazy ant, banded sugar ant, Pharaoh ant, carpenter ants, odorous house ant, red imported fire ant, and European fire ant.
Ant society has always fascinated humans and has been written about both humorously and seriously.
The larvae grow through a series of four or five moults and enter the pupal stage.
Parasitic ant species enter the colonies of host ants and establish themselves as social parasites; species such as ''Strumigenys xenos'' are entirely parasitic and do not have workers, but instead, rely on the food gathered by their ''Strumigenys perplexa'' hosts.
Like other insects, ants perceive smells with their long, thin, and mobile antennae.
Ants are distinct in their morphology from other insects in having elbowed antennae, metapleural glands, and a strong constriction of their second abdominal segment into a node-like petiole.
For example, Jerdon's jumping ant (''Harpegnathos saltator'') is able to jump by synchronising the action of its mid and hind pairs of legs.
The species include ''Paraponera clavata'' (tocandira) and ''Dinoponera'' spp.
Workers of many species have their egg-laying structures modified into stings that are used for subduing prey and defending their nests.
Army ants forage in a wide roving column, attacking any animals in that path that are unable to escape.
Males, however, are more transitory, being quite short-lived and surviving for only a few weeks.
When disturbed, workers rupture the membrane of the gaster, causing a burst of secretions containing acetophenones and other chemicals that immobilise small insect attackers.
''Formica polyctena'', among other ant species, constructs nests that maintain a relatively constant interior temperature that aids in the development of larvae.
This area of biomimetics has led to studies of ant locomotion, search engines that make use of "foraging trails", fault-tolerant storage, and networking algorithms.
Most ant species have a system in which only the queen and breeding females have the ability to mate.
Each individual hunts alone, using her large eyes instead of chemical senses to find prey.
In hot and arid regions, day-foraging ants face death by desiccation, so the ability to find the shortest route back to the nest reduces that risk.
The marked male is interpreted as an invader by worker ants and is killed.
multipicta'' defend against ants by blasting them off the nest with bursts of wing buzzing.
They also have three small ocelli (simple eyes) on the top of the head that detect light levels and polarization.
Strepsipteran parasites also manipulate their ant host to climb grass stems, to help the parasite find mates.
Some ants will raid stored food, others may damage indoor structures, some can damage agricultural crops directly (or by aiding sucking pests), and some will sting or bite.
Like other insects, ants have an exoskeleton, an external covering that provides a protective casing around the body and a point of attachment for muscles, in contrast to the internal skeletons of humans and other vertebrates.
Termites are more closely related to cockroaches and mantids.
Trap-jaw ants of the genus ''Odontomachus'' are equipped with mandibles called trap-jaws, which snap shut faster than any other predatory appendages within the animal kingdom.
Males may also patrol the nest and fight others by grabbing them with their mandibles, piercing their exoskeleton and then marking them with a pheromone.
between 1015 and 1016).
Up to half a pound (200&nbsp;g) of seeds may be collected from one ant-heap.
Some plants in fire-prone grassland systems are particularly dependent on ants for their survival and dispersal as the seeds are transported to safety below the ground.
Males will mount females in the air, but the actual mating process usually takes place on the ground.
Such individuals are sometimes called "soldier" ants because their stronger mandibles make them more effective in fighting, although they still are workers and their "duties" typically do not vary greatly from the minor or median workers.
For instance, these replete workers develop in the North American honeypot ant ''Myrmecocystus mexicanus''.
Heat makes flying easier and freshly fallen rain makes the ground softer for mated queens to dig nests.
''Camponotus anderseni'', which nests in the cavities of wood in mangrove habitats, deals with submergence under water by switching to anaerobic respiration.
A new worker spends the first few days of its adult life caring for the queen and young.
Some species specialise in preying on termites (''Megaponera'' and ''Termitopone'') while a few Cerapachyinae prey on other ants.
The smallest and largest workers in ''Pheidologeton diversus'' show nearly a 500-fold difference in their dry-weights.
The similarity of their social structure to that of ants is attributed to convergent evolution.
They continually collect leaves which are taken to the colony, cut into tiny pieces and placed in fungal gardens.
The fungus kills the ants, grows on their remains, and produces a fruiting body.
The body is then cut off and the head and mandibles remain in place to close the wound.
During the Cretaceous period, a few species of primitive ants ranged widely on the Laurasian supercontinent (the Northern Hemisphere).
Saville-Kent, in the ''Naturalist in Australia'' wrote "Beauty, in the case of the green ant, is more than skin-deep.
Species such as the bullhorn acacia (''Acacia cornigera'') in Central America have hollow thorns that house colonies of stinging ants (''Pseudomyrmex ferruginea'') who defend the tree against insects, browsing mammals, and epiphytic vines.
These tend to be island species that have evolved specialized traits and risk being displaced by introduced ant species.
The droppings of the bird are collected by other ants and fed to their young, leading to further spread of the nematode.
It has been estimated by E.O.
Some caterpillars produce vibrations and sounds that are perceived by the ants.
On the other hand, ants may become nuisances when they invade buildings, or cause economic losses.
One group was continually rewarded with prey, while it was made certain that the other failed.
Most ants are generalist predators, scavengers, and indirect herbivores, but a few have evolved specialised ways of obtaining nutrition.
Some species of ant are able to use the Earth's magnetic field for navigation.
Ant colonies may be studied by rearing or temporarily maintaining them in ''formicaria'', specially constructed glass framed enclosures.
The wound is pressed together and ants are applied along it.
Before striking, the ant opens its mandibles extremely widely and locks them in this position by an internal mechanism.
In South Africa, ants are used to help harvest rooibos (''Aspalathus linearis''), which are small seeds used to make a herbal tea.
The Australian bulldog ants are among the biggest and most basal of ants.
Here birds rest on ant nests, or pick and drop ants onto their wings and feathers; this may be a means to remove ectoparasites from the birds.
The caterpillars have a gland which secretes honeydew when the ants massage them.
The follower obtains knowledge through its leading tutor.
The ants were also observed to use their jaws as a catapult to eject intruders or fling themselves backward to escape a threat.
This behaviour was once considered mutualistic, but later studies found the birds to be parasitic.
Diurnal desert ants of the genus ''Cataglyphis'' such as the Sahara desert ant navigate by keeping track of direction as well as distance travelled.
For example, the presence of ants would be undesirable in sterile places such as hospitals or kitchens.
Taxonomic studies continue to resolve the classification and systematics of ants.
Successful trails are followed by more ants, reinforcing better routes and gradually identifying the best path.
This is also how adults share food, stored in the "social stomach".
Myrmecophilous (ant-loving) caterpillars of the butterfly family Lycaenidae (e.g., blues, coppers, or hairstreaks) are herded by the ants, led to feeding areas in the daytime, and brought inside the ants' nest at night.
These polarization detectors are sensitive in the ultraviolet region of the light spectrum.
Extreme specialists among these slave-raiding ants, such as the Amazon ants, are incapable of feeding themselves and need captured workers to survive.
These parallels with human societies have long been an inspiration and subject of study.
The parasite also alters the behaviour of the ant, causing them to carry their gasters high.
From the late 1950s through the late 1970s, ant farms were popular educational children's toys in the United States.
One study of ''Odontomachus bauri'' recorded peak speeds of between , with the jaws closing within 130 microseconds on average.
They were scarce in comparison to the populations of other insects, representing only about 1% of the entire insect population.
A variety of methods are employed to enter the nest of the host ant.
The petiole may be formed by one or two nodes (the second alone, or the second and third abdominal segments).
Also, the reason why two separate colonies of ants will attack each other even if they are of the same species is because the genes responsible for pheromone production are different between them.
Ants vary in colour; most ants are red or black, but a few species are green and some tropical species have a metallic lustre.
'', foraging or nest maintenance) other colony members belong to.
An entire generation of identical workers was divided into two groups whose outcome in food foraging was controlled.
In his ''First Summer in the Sierra'', John Muir notes that the Digger Indians of California ate the tickling, acid gasters of the large jet-black carpenter ants.
Black ants collect and store these and other seeds in their nest, where humans can gather them ''en masse''.
Brown bears (''Ursus arctos'') have been found to feed on ants.
They also are preyed on by many animals and even certain fungi.
Compared to vertebrates, most ants have poor-to-mediocre eyesight and a few subterranean species are completely blind.
These changes are sometimes fairly sudden, and define what are called temporal castes.
The paired antennae provide information about the direction and intensity of scents.
Ant eyes are good for acute movement detection, but do not offer a high resolution image.
More than 12,500 of an estimated total of 22,000 species have been classified.
Their ability to exploit resources may bring ants into conflict with humans, however, as they can damage crops and invade buildings.
Individuals may be tracked for study by marking them with dots of colours.
Energy is stored in a thick band of muscle and explosively released when triggered by the stimulation of sensory organs resembling hairs on the inside of the mandibles.
'''Ants''' are eusocial insects of the family '''Formicidae''' and, along with the related wasps and bees, belong to the order Hymenoptera.
Some ant species are considered as pests, primarily those that occur in human habitations, where their presence is often problematic.
They enlarge the nest, forage for food, and care for the other eggs.
Anthropomorphised ants have often been used in fables and children's stories to represent industriousness and cooperative effort.
All of these words come from West Germanic ''*'', and the original meaning of the word was "the biter" (from Proto-Germanic ''*'', "off, away" + ''*'' "cut").
Some species are capable of leaping.
Some ants produce sounds by stridulation, using the gaster segments and their mandibles.
Some modern authors have used the example of the ants to comment on the relationship between society and the individual.
If a particular type of leaf is found to be toxic to the fungus, the colony will no longer collect it.
Aphids and other hemipteran insects secrete a sweet liquid called honeydew, when they feed on plant sap.
The tropical wasp ''Mischocyttarus drewseni'' coats the pedicel of its nest with an ant-repellent chemical.
The largest ants cut stalks, smaller workers chew the leaves and the smallest tend the fungus.
The sugars in honeydew are a high-energy food source, which many ant species collect.
Larvae, especially in the later stages, may also be provided solid food, such as trophic eggs, pieces of prey, and seeds brought by workers.
Controlled experiments with colonies of ''Cerapachys biroi'' suggest that an individual may choose nest roles based on her previous experience.
Larger colonies consist mostly of sterile, wingless females forming castes of "workers", "soldiers", or other specialised groups.
Birds indulge in a peculiar behaviour called anting that, as yet, is not fully understood.
Workers cannot mate; however, because of the haplodiploid sex-determination system in ants, workers of a number of species can lay unfertilised eggs that become fully fertile, haploid males.
Some species (such as ''Tetramorium caespitum'') attack and take over neighbouring ant colonies.
Females of some species mate with just one male but in others they may mate with as many as ten or more different males, storing the sperm in their spermathecae.
In species that forage in groups, a forager that finds food marks a trail on the way back to the colony; this trail is followed by other ants, these ants then reinforce the trail when they head back with food to the colony.
The Australian jack jumper ant (''Myrmecia pilosula'') has only a single pair of chromosomes (with the males having just one chromosome as they are haploid), the lowest number known for any animal, making it an interesting subject for studies in the genetics and developmental biology of social insects.
The queens can live for up to 30&nbsp;years, and workers live from 1 to 3&nbsp;years.
In areas of India, and throughout Burma and Thailand, a paste of the green weaver ant (''Oecophylla smaragdina'') is served as a condiment with curry.
Drones can also mate with existing queens by entering a foreign colony.
The worker subsequently dies.
Weaver ant (''Oecophylla'' spp.)
Therefore, unlike their wasp ancestors, most ants travel by walking.
Ants also are quite popular inspiration for many science-fiction insectoids, such as the Formics of ''Ender's Game'', the Bugs of ''Starship Troopers'', the giant ants in the films ''Them!''
Ants evolved from wasp-like ancestors in the Cretaceous period, about 99 million years ago and diversified after the rise of flowering plants.
Certain species of ants have the power to drive certain wasps, such as ''Polybia occidentalis'' to extinction if they attack more than once and the wasps cannot keep up with rebuilding their nest.
South American poison dart frogs in the genus ''Dendrobates'' feed mainly on ants, and the toxins in their skin may come from the ants.
Seed dispersal by ants or myrmecochory is widespread and new estimates suggest that nearly 9% of all plant species may have such ant associations.
Fungus-growing ants that make up the tribe Attini, including leafcutter ants, cultivate certain species of fungus in the ''Leucoagaricus'' or ''Leucocoprinus'' genera of the Agaricaceae family.
Some arthropod species spend part of their lives within ant nests, either preying on ants, their larvae, and eggs, consuming the food stores of the ants, or avoiding predators.
If the egg is fertilised, the progeny will be female diploid; if not, it will be male haploid.
Some groups, such as the Leptanillinae and Martialinae, are suggested to have diversified from early primitive ants that were likely to have been predators underneath the surface of the soil.
The caterpillar is then taken into the ant nest where it feeds on the ant larvae.
Other species use pheromones to confuse the host ants or to trick them into carrying the parasitic queen into the nest.
The successful techniques used by ant colonies have been studied in computer science and robotics to produce distributed and fault-tolerant systems for solving problems, for example Ant colony optimization and Ant robotics.
Ant queens are estimated to live 100 times as long as solitary insects of a similar size.
Captured workers of the enslaved species ''Temnothorax'' have evolved a counter strategy, destroying just the female pupae of the slave-making ''Protomognathus americanus'', but sparing the males (who don't take part in slave-raiding as adults).
In Central and South America, ''Eciton burchellii'' is the swarming ant most commonly attended by "ant-following" birds such as antbirds and woodcreepers.
Others show Wasmannian mimicry, a form of mimicry seen only in inquilines.
In some species, a small pocket (infrabuccal chamber) inside the mouth stores food, so it may be passed to other ants or their larvae.
However, some ants, such as Australia's bulldog ant, have excellent vision and are capable of discriminating the distance and size of objects moving nearly a metre away.
Most ants are univoltine, producing a new generation each year.
Females of many species are known to be capable of reproducing asexually through thelytokous parthenogenesis.
Males then use visual cues to find a common mating ground, for example, a landmark such as a pine tree to which other males in the area converge.
Foraging ants travel distances of up to  from their nest  and scent trails allow them to find their way back even in the dark.
Fungi in the genera ''Cordyceps'' and ''Ophiocordyceps'' infect ants.
Mated females then seek a suitable place to begin a colony.
Ant societies have division of labour, communication between individuals, and an ability to solve complex problems.
Ants form symbiotic associations with a range of species, including other ant species, other insects, plants, and fungi.
The large heads of the soldiers of the leafcutting ant ''Atta cephalotes'' are also used by native surgeons in closing wounds.
Oleic acid has been identified as the compound released from dead ants that triggers necrophoric behaviour in ''Atta mexicana'' while workers of ''Linepithema humile'' react to the absence of characteristic chemicals (dolichodial and iridomyrmecin) present on the cuticle of their living nestmates to trigger similar behaviour.
It is suggested that many tropical wasps may build their nests in trees and cover them to protect themselves from ants.
Management is based on the species and techniques can vary according to the location and circumstance.
Many tropical tree species have seeds that are dispersed by ants.
A nematode (''Myrmeconema neotropicum'') that infects canopy ants (''Cephalotes atratus'') causes the black-coloured gasters of workers to turn red.
It has been hypothesised that a Proto-Indo-European word *morwi- was used, cf.
Larvae and pupae need to be kept at fairly constant temperatures to ensure proper development, and so often, are moved around among the various brood chambers within the colony.
Some simply fight their way into the nest.
The most extreme form involves the production of clonal offspring.
''Polyrhachis sokolova'', a species of ant found in Australian mangrove swamps, can swim and live in underwater nests.
Their long co-evolution with other species has led to mimetic, commensal, parasitic, and mutualistic relationships.
This polymorphism in morphology and behaviour of workers initially was thought to be determined by environmental factors such as nutrition and hormones that led to different developmental paths; however, genetic differences between worker castes have been noted in ''Acromyrmex'' sp.
Another example of this type of ectosymbiosis comes from the ''Macaranga'' tree, which has stems adapted to house colonies of ''Crematogaster'' ants.
Other species of ants can form chains to bridge gaps over water, underground, or through spaces in vegetation.
Ant populations are managed by a combination of approaches that make use of chemical, biological and physical methods.
Flies in the Old World genus ''Bengalia'' (Calliphoridae) prey on ants and are kleptoparasites, snatching prey or brood from the mandibles of adult ants.
As a result, members of the successful group intensified their foraging attempts while the unsuccessful group ventured out fewer and fewer times.
These inquilines may bear a close resemblance to ants.
A knowledgeable forager of ''Temnothorax albipennis'' will lead a naive nest-mate to newly discovered food by the process of tandem running.
