The largest lake, Vostok, is one of the largest sub-glacial lakes in the world.
The snow petrel is one of only three birds that breed exclusively in Antarctica.
Mount Erebus on Ross Island is the world's southernmost active volcano.
See Ocean fisheries &sect; Southern Ocean.
Antarctic fisheries in 1998–99 (1 July&nbsp;– 30 June) reported landing 119,898 tonnes.
Some environmentalists and scientists have made a call for stricter regulations for ships and a tourism quota.
Another unique spectacle is diamond dust, a ground-level cloud composed of tiny ice crystals.
Ice stream/outlet glacier (ice front or ice wall)
The mass balance of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet as a whole is thought to be slightly positive (lowering sea level) or near to balance.
The first formal use of the name "Antarctica" as a continental name in the 1890s is attributed to the Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew.
Fossil ''Nothofagus'' leaves in the Meyer Desert Formation of the Sirius Group show that intermittent warm periods allowed ''Nothofagus'' shrubs to cling to the Dominion Range as late as 3–4 Ma (mid-late Pliocene).
The research is part of the global Census of Marine Life (CoML) and has disclosed some remarkable findings.
Models also suggest that the ozone depletion/enhanced polar vortex effect also accounts for the recent increase in sea ice just offshore of the continent.
This large collection of meteorites allows a better understanding of the abundance of meteorite types in the solar system and how meteorites relate to asteroids and comets.
The claims of Britain, Australia, New Zealand, France and Norway are all recognised by each other.
This was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War.
They proposed instead that a comprehensive regime to protect the Antarctic environment be negotiated in its place.
Organisms native to Antarctica include many types of algae, bacteria, fungi, plants, protista, and certain animals, such as mites, nematodes, penguins, seals and tardigrades.
A study by Eric Steig published in 2009 noted for the first time that the continent-wide average surface temperature trend of Antarctica is slightly positive at >0.05&nbsp;°C (0.09&nbsp;°F) per decade from 1957 to 2006.
Some of Antarctica has been warming up; particularly strong warming has been noted on the Antarctic Peninsula.
Not all vessels associated with Antarctic tourism are members of IAATO, but IAATO members account for 95% of the tourist activity.
Antarctic ice serves as both the shield and the detection medium for the largest neutrino telescope in the world, built  below Amundsen–Scott station.
Several governments maintain permanent manned research stations on the continent.
He sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the Ross Ice Shelf.
Recent decades have witnessed several dramatic collapses of large ice shelves around the coast of Antarctica, especially along the Antarctic Peninsula.
The apparently simple morphology, scarcely differentiated structures, metabolic systems and enzymes still active at very low temperatures, and reduced life cycles shown by such fungi make them particularly suited to harsh environments such as the McMurdo Dry Valleys.
Ginkgo trees, conifers, bennettites, horsetails, ferns and cycads were plentiful during this period.
During the whaling era, which lasted until 1966, the population of that island varied from over 1,000 in the summer (over 2,000 in some years) to some 200 in the winter.
At a number of points in its long history, it was farther north, experienced a tropical or temperate climate, was covered in forests, and inhabited by various ancient life forms.
Robertson Land, Wilkes Land, and Victoria Land.
Ice shelf (floating ice front)
In the interior, wind speeds are typically moderate.
There are about 100 species of mosses and 25 species of liverworts, but only three species of flowering plants, all of which are found in the Antarctic Peninsula: ''Deschampsia antarctica'' (Antarctic hair grass), ''Colobanthus quitensis'' (Antarctic pearlwort) and the non-native ''Poa annua'' (annual bluegrass).
In December 1839, as part of the United States Exploring Expedition of 1838–42 conducted by the United States Navy (sometimes called the "Ex.
Weather fronts rarely penetrate far into the continent, leaving the centre cold and dry.
A total of 37,506 tourists visited during the 2006–07 Austral summer with nearly all of them coming from commercial ships.
The first child born in the southern polar region was Norwegian girl Solveig Gunbjørg Jacobsen, born in Grytviken on 8 October 1913, and her birth was registered by the resident British Magistrate of South Georgia.
Due to its location at the South Pole, Antarctica receives relatively little solar radiation.
Bacteria have been found living in the cold and dark as deep as  under the ice.
*  has formally reserved its right to make a claim.
For comparison, Antarctica is nearly twice the size of Australia.
Third, the Earth is at aphelion in July (i.e., the Earth is farthest from the Sun in the Antarctic winter), and the Earth is at perihelion in January (i.e., the Earth is closest to the Sun in the Antarctic summer).
Few terrestrial vertebrates live in Antarctica.
Argentine–UK relations had previously been damaged throughout 2012 due to disputes over the sovereignty of the nearby Falkland Islands, and the 30th anniversary of the Falklands War.
In addition, Shackleton himself and three other members of his expedition made several firsts in December 1908&nbsp;– February 1909: they were the first humans to traverse the Ross Ice Shelf, the first to traverse the Transantarctic Mountains (via the Beardmore Glacier), and the first to set foot on the South Polar Plateau.
The first semi-permanent inhabitants of regions near Antarctica (areas situated south of the Antarctic Convergence) were British and American sealers who used to spend a year or more on South Georgia, from 1786 onward.
Vegetation, where it occurs, is tundra.
In Eastern Antarctica, seed ferns or pteridosperms became abundant and large amounts of sandstone and shale were laid down at this time.
In 2002 the Antarctic Peninsula's Larsen-B ice shelf collapsed.
In the Eocene epoch, about 40&nbsp;Ma Australia-New Guinea separated from Antarctica, so that latitudinal currents could isolate Antarctica from Australia, and the first ice began to appear.
The Roman authors Hyginus and Apuleius (1–2 centuries A.D.) used for the South Pole the romanized Greek name ''polus antarcticus,'' from which derived the Old French ''pole antartike'' (modern ''pôle antarctique'') attested in 1270, and from there the Middle English ''pol antartik'' in a 1391 technical treatise by Geoffrey Chaucer (modern ''Antarctic Pole'').
Models of the changes suggest that declining CO2 levels became more important.
There is also evidence of volcanic activity, even after the ice sheet had formed, in Marie Byrd Land and Alexander Island.
McMurdo Station, which is the largest research station in Antarctica, is capable of housing more than 1,000 scientists, visitors, and tourists.
In January 2013 an  meteorite was discovered frozen in ice on the Nansen ice field by a Search for Antarctic Meteorites, Belgian Approach (SAMBA) mission.
This is partly offset by autumn cooling in East Antarctica.
Satellite images from 25 years ago seemingly show it.
Biologists, in addition to examining the wildlife, are interested in how harsh temperatures and the presence of people affect adaptation and survival strategies in a wide variety of organisms.
Meteorites from Antarctica are an important area of study of material formed early in the solar system; most are thought to come from asteroids, but some may have originated on larger planets.
If life is discovered in Lake Vostok, it would strengthen the argument for the possibility of life on Europa.
This ice is formed from the ocean water and floats in the same water and thus does not contribute to rise in sea level.
Endemic Antarctic fungi also include certain dung-inhabiting species which have had to evolve in response to the double challenge of extreme cold while growing on dung, and the need to survive passage through the gut of warm-blooded animals.
Antarctica is a ''de facto'' condominium, governed by parties to the Antarctic Treaty System that have consulting status.
Synapsids, commonly known as "mammal-like reptiles", were common in Antarctica during the Early Triassic and included forms such as ''Lystrosaurus''.
The number was predicted to increase to over 80,000 by 2010.
During the Cambrian period, Gondwana had a mild climate.
Some of these species are cryptoendoliths as a result of evolution under extreme conditions, and have significantly contributed to shaping the impressive rock formations of the McMurdo Dry Valleys and surrounding mountain ridges.
The hole was detected by scientists in 1985 and has tended to increase over the years of observation.
More than 235 marine organisms live in both polar regions, having bridged the gap of .
A census of sea life carried out during the International Polar Year and which involved some 500 researchers was released in 2010.
Because meteorites in space absorb and record cosmic radiation, the time elapsed since the meteorite hit the Earth can be determined from laboratory studies.
Integral to the story of the origin of the name "Antarctica" is how it was not named ''Terra Australis''—this name was given to Australia instead, and it was because of a mistake made by people who decided that a significant landmass would not be found farther south than Australia.
Antarctica is a frozen desert with little precipitation; the South Pole itself receives less than  per year, on average.
King penguins, chinstrap penguins, and gentoo penguins also breed in the Antarctic.
It was once believed that the lake had been sealed off for 500,000 to one million years but a recent survey suggests that, every so often, there are large flows of water from one lake to another.
*  has formally reserved its right to make a claim.
Small-scale "expedition tourism" has existed since 1957 and is currently subject to Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol provisions, but in effect self-regulated by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO).
In 1998, a compromise agreement was reached to place an indefinite ban on mining, to be reviewed in 2048, further limiting economic development and exploitation.
Positioned asymmetrically around the South Pole and largely south of the Antarctic Circle, Antarctica is the southernmost continent and is surrounded by the Southern Ocean; alternatively, it may be considered to be surrounded by the southern Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans, or by the southern waters of the World Ocean.
In 2007 The Polar Geospatial Center was founded.
This ice sheet is constantly gaining ice from snowfall and losing ice through outflow to the sea.
The climate of Antarctica does not allow extensive vegetation to form.
As of 2009, eleven children were born in Antarctica (south of the 60th parallel south): eight at the Argentine Esperanza Base and three at the Chilean Frei Montalva Station.
About 98% of Antarctica is covered by ice that averages  in thickness, which extends to all but the northernmost reaches of the Antarctic Peninsula.
On 22 December 2012, the UK ambassador to Argentina, John Freeman, was summoned to the Argentine government as protest against the claim.
In 1983 the Antarctic Treaty Parties began negotiations on a convention to regulate mining in Antarctica.
Overall, the net change is slightly positive at approximately 82 gigatonnes (Gt) per year (with significant regional variation), reducing global sea-level rise by 0.23 mm per year.
The overfishing of krill, which plays a large role in the Antarctic ecosystem, led officials to enact regulations on fishing.
Temperatures reach a minimum of between  and  in the interior in winter and reach a maximum of between  and  near the coast in summer.
Johan Berte is the leader of the station design team and manager of the project which conducts research in climatology, glaciology and microbiology.
Ice walls (resting on ground)
Ammonites were common in the seas around Antarctica, and dinosaurs were also present, though only three Antarctic dinosaur genera (''Cryolophosaurus'' and ''Glacialisaurus'', from the Hanson Formation, and ''Antarctopelta'') have been described to date.
The southern rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around the eyes, giving the appearance of elaborate eyelashes.
Among these are pieces blasted off the Moon, and probably Mars, by impacts.
Douglas Mawson, who assumed the leadership of the Magnetic Pole party on their perilous return, went on to lead several expeditions until retiring in 1931.
The extent of sea ice around Antarctica has remained roughly constant in recent decades, although the thickness changes are unclear.
Antarctica is a desert, with annual precipitation of only 200&nbsp;mm (8&nbsp;in) along the coast and far less inland.
The orbital distance contributes to a colder Antarctic winter (and a warmer Antarctic summer) but the first two effects have more impact.
Antarctic krill, which congregate in large schools, is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean, and is an important food organism for whales, seals, leopard seals, fur seals, squid, icefish, penguins, albatrosses and many other birds.
Geologically, West Antarctica closely resembles the Andes mountain range of South America.
Melting of floating ice shelves (ice that originated on the land) does not in itself contribute much to sea-level rise (since the ice displaces only its own mass of water).
The introduction of alien plants or animals can bring a criminal penalty, as can the extraction of any indigenous species.
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a treaty that came into force in 1980, requires that regulations managing all Southern Ocean fisheries consider potential effects on the entire Antarctic ecosystem.
Twelve countries signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1959, and thirty-eight have signed it since then.
The Prince Charles Mountains contain significant deposits of iron ore.
In January 2015 reports emerged of a  circular structure, supposedly a meteorite crater, on the surface snow of King Baudouin Ice Shelf.
A major concern within this committee is the risk to Antarctica from unintentional introduction of non-native species from outside the region.
According to NASA, the most widespread Antarctic surface melting of the past 30 years occurred in 2005, when an area of ice comparable in size to California briefly melted and refroze; this may have resulted from temperatures rising to as high as .
The most common rocks in West Antarctica are andesite and rhyolite volcanics formed during the Jurassic period.
This has led to speculation that, if life ever occurred on Mars, it might have looked similar to Antarctic fungi such as ''Cryomyces antarcticus'', and ''Cryomyces minteri''.
Another well-known volcano is found on Deception Island, which is famous for a giant eruption in 1970.
Many astronomical observations are better made from the interior of Antarctica than from most surface locations because of the high elevation, which results in a thin atmosphere; low temperature, which minimizes the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere; and absence of light pollution, thus allowing for a view of space clearer than anywhere else on Earth.
Astrophysicists at Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station study the celestial dome and cosmic microwave background radiation.
As a result of continued warming, the polar ice caps melted and much of Gondwana became a desert.
Antarctica is colder than the Arctic for three reasons.
The coastline measures  and is mostly characterized by ice formations, as the following table shows:
With the ban of CFCs in the Montreal Protocol of 1989, climate projections indicate that the ozone layer will return to 1980 levels between 2050 and 2070.
Travel is largely by small or medium ship, focusing on specific scenic locations with accessible concentrations of iconic wildlife.
Minor eruptions are frequent and lava flow has been observed in recent years.
There is some evidence, in the form of ice cores drilled to about  above the water line, that Lake Vostok's waters may contain microbial life.
Given the latitude, long periods of constant darkness or constant sunlight create climates unfamiliar to human beings in much of the rest of the world.
In 2006 a team of researchers from Ohio State University used gravity measurements by NASA's GRACE satellites to discover the  Wilkes Land crater, which probably formed about 250&nbsp;million years ago.
New types of meteorites and rare meteorites have been found.
Explorer Matthew Flinders, in particular, has been credited with popularizing the transfer of the name ''Terra Australis'' to Australia.
An Orthodox church—Trinity Church, opened in 2004 at the Russian Bellingshausen Station—is manned year-round by one or two priests, who are similarly rotated every year.
The passing of the Antarctic Conservation Act (1978) in the U.S. brought several restrictions to U.S. activity on Antarctica.
Geologists tend to study plate tectonics, meteorites from outer space, and resources from the breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana.
Managers and other senior officers of the whaling stations often lived together with their families.
+ '''Coastal types around Antarctica'''
In September 2006 NASA satellite data revealed that the Antarctic ozone hole was larger than at any other time on record, at .
Since the 1970s an important focus of study has been the ozone layer in the atmosphere above Antarctica.
Some species of marine animals exist and rely, directly or indirectly, on the phytoplankton.
On 6 September 2007 Belgian-based International Polar Foundation unveiled the Princess Elisabeth station, the world's first zero-emissions polar science station in Antarctica to research climate change.
The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty also restricts a struggle for resources.
All but a small portion of this region lies within the Eastern Hemisphere.
Antarctic fisheries in 2000–01 reported landing 112,934&nbsp;tonnes.
New claims on Antarctica have been suspended since 1959 although Norway in 2015 formally defined Queen Maud Land as including the unclaimed area between it and the South Pole.
The first recorded and confirmed landing was at Cape Adair in 1895.
Antarctica is the coldest of Earth's continents.
East Antarctica is geologically varied, dating from the Precambrian era, with some rocks formed more than 3&nbsp;billion years ago.
About 1,150 species of fungi have been recorded from Antarctica, of which about 750 are non-lichen-forming and 400 are lichen-forming.
In West Antarctica, coniferous forests dominated through the entire Cretaceous period (146–66&nbsp;Ma), though southern beech became more prominent towards the end of this period.
Precipitation is low (most of Antarctica is a desert) and almost always in the form of snow, which accumulates and forms a giant ice sheet which covers the land.
At , it is the fifth-largest continent in area after Asia, Africa, North America, and South America.
Although coal, hydrocarbons, iron ore, platinum, copper, chromium, nickel, gold and other minerals have been found, they have not been in large enough quantities to exploit.
Some scientific studies suggest that ozone depletion may have a dominant role in governing climatic change in Antarctica (and a wider area of the Southern Hemisphere).
However, increased ice outflow has been suggested in some regions.
East Antarctica is largely covered by the East Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Most of these meteorites have fallen onto the ice sheet in the last million years.
He justified the titling of his book ''A Voyage to Terra Australis'' (1814) by writing in the introduction:
Compared with meteorites collected in more temperate regions on Earth, the Antarctic meteorites are well-preserved.
Concerns have been raised that disruption of ice shelves may result in increased glacial outflow from the continental ice mass.
In particular, their thick-walled and strongly melanized cells make them resistant to UV light.
The amount of surface warming in West Antarctica, while large, has not led to appreciable melting at the surface, and is not directly affecting the West Antarctic Ice Sheet's contribution to sea level.
It was eventually determined that the destruction of the ozone was caused by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) emitted by human products.
On 22 January 1840, two days after the discovery of the coast west of the Balleny Islands, some members of the crew of the 1837–40 expedition of Jules Dumont d'Urville disembarked on the highest islet of a group of rocky islands about 4&nbsp;km from Cape Géodésie on the coast of Adélie Land where they took some mineral, algae and animal samples.
The number of people conducting and supporting scientific research and other work on the continent and its nearby islands varies from about 1,000 in winter to about 5,000 in the summer, giving it a population density between 70 and 350 inhabitants per million square kilometres (180 and 900 per million square miles) at these times.
The Madrid Protocol bans all mining in Antarctica, designating Antarctica a "natural reserve devoted to peace and science".
Despite the lack of precipitation over the central portion of the continent, ice there lasts for extended periods.
Sunburn is often a health issue as the snow surface reflects almost all of the ultraviolet light falling on it.
Invertebrate life includes microscopic mites like the ''Alaskozetes antarcticus'', lice, nematodes, tardigrades, rotifers, krill and springtails.
If found, these resilient creatures could further bolster the argument for extraterrestrial life in extremely cold, methane-rich environments.
*  reserved its right to make a claim in the original Antarctic Treaty.
In January 2008 British Antarctic Survey (BAS) scientists, led by Hugh Corr and David Vaughan, reported (in the journal ''Nature Geoscience'') that 2,200 years ago, a volcano erupted under Antarctica's ice sheet (based on airborne survey with radar images).
A combination of freezing temperatures, poor soil quality, lack of moisture, and lack of sunlight inhibit plant growth.
The sheet has been of recent concern because of the real, if small, possibility of its collapse.
The settlements included Grytviken, Leith Harbour, King Edward Point, Stromness, Husvik, Prince Olav Harbour, Ocean Harbour and Godthul.
However it is the outflow of the ice from the land to form the ice shelf which causes a rise in global sea level.
According to various organizations (the National Science Foundation, NASA, the University of California, San Diego, and other sources), ships captained by three men sighted Antarctica or its ice shelf in 1820: von Bellingshausen (a captain in the Imperial Russian Navy), Edward Bransfield (a captain in the Royal Navy), and Nathaniel Palmer (a sealer out of Stonington, Connecticut).
Antarctica is home to more than 70 lakes that lie at the base of the continental ice sheet.
Instead the recent increases in glacier outflow are believed to be due to an inflow of warm water from the deep ocean, just off the continental shelf.
This hole covers almost the whole continent and was at its largest in September 2008, when the longest lasting hole on record remained until the end of December.
This cooling has the effect of intensifying the westerly winds which flow around the continent (the polar vortex) and thus prevents outflow of the cold air near the South Pole.
This study also noted that West Antarctica has warmed by more than 0.1&nbsp;°C (0.2&nbsp;°F) per decade in the last 50 years, and this warming is strongest in winter and spring.
Seven hundred species of algae exist, most of which are phytoplankton.
Towards the end of the Permian period, continued warming led to a dry, hot climate over much of Gondwana.
The portion west of the Weddell Sea and east of the Ross Sea is called West Antarctica and the remainder East Antarctica, because they roughly correspond to the Western and Eastern Hemispheres relative to the Greenwich meridian.
First, much of the continent is more than  above sea level, and temperature decreases with elevation in the troposphere.
The Antarctican dollar, a souvenir item sold in the United States and Canada, is not legal tender.
The Antarctic Peninsula was formed by uplift and metamorphism of sea bed sediments during the late Paleozoic and the early Mesozoic eras.
The ice began to spread, replacing the forests that then covered the continent.
East Antarctica lies on the Indian Ocean side of the Transantarctic Mountains and comprises Coats Land, Queen Maud Land, Enderby Land, Mac.
However, there is some evidence of antarctic marine glaciation during the Cretaceous period.
The first person to sail single-handed to Antarctica was the New Zealander David Henry Lewis, in 1972, in the 10-metre steel sloop ''Ice Bird''.
The treaty was signed by twelve countries including the Soviet Union (and later Russia), the United Kingdom, Argentina, Chile, Australia, and the United States.
*  has a designated "zone of interest" that is not an actual claim.
Around 23 Ma, the Drake Passage opened between Antarctica and South America, resulting in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current that completely isolated the continent.
There is a large area of low ozone concentration or "ozone hole" over Antarctica.
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is advised on environmental and conservation issues in Antarctica by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
Other countries participating as members of the Antarctic Treaty have a territorial interest in Antarctica, but the provisions of the Treaty do not allow them to make their claims while it is in force.
Although myths and speculation about a ''Terra Australis'' ("Southern Land") date back to antiquity, Antarctica was first sighted in 1820 by the Russian expedition of Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev on ''Vostok'' and ''Mirny'', who sighted the Fimbul ice shelf.
The first women to step foot on Antarctica did so in the 1930s with Caroline Mikkelsen landing on an island of Antarctica in 1935, and  Ingrid Christensen stepping onto the mainland in 1937.
As of 2016, there are about 135 permanent residents, but anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000 people reside throughout the year at the research stations scattered across the continent.
Large animals such as some cetaceans and birds make the round trip annually.
Antarctica has no indigenous population and there is no evidence that it was seen by humans until the 19th century.
On 18 December 2012, the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office named a previously unnamed area Queen Elizabeth Land in tribute to Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee.
Military personnel or equipment are permitted only for scientific research or other peaceful purposes.
The only anomalous area of West Antarctica is the Ellsworth Mountains region, where the stratigraphy is more similar to East Antarctica.
Several Antarctic ice streams, which account for about 10% of the ice sheet, flow to one of the many Antarctic ice shelves: see ice-sheet dynamics.
On the continent itself, the large volume of ice present stores around 70% of the world's fresh water.
