The Presidency, National Assembly, Senate and Supreme Court are located here, as are 21 diplomatic missions and the headquarters of many national and international businesses and NGOs.
An additional 2,000 minibuses managed by the Ministry of Transportation run along eight lines into the neighboring suburbs.
Communications services in Antananarivo are the best in the country.
Stations like ''Fenon'ny Merina'' appeal to Merina listeners of all ages by playing traditional and contemporary music of the highlands region.
Under the French, tunnels were constructed through two of the city's largest hills, connecting disparate districts and facilitating the town's expansion.
Neonatal and antenatal care is significantly better in Antananarivo than elsewhere on the island.
In the 17th century, the plains were transformed into paddy fields to meet the population's need for rice; they were covered with housing developments as the city's population grew rapidly in the 20th century.
Before the mid-19th century, all houses and marketplaces in Antananarivo, and throughout Madagascar, were constructed of woods, grasses, reeds and other plant-based materials viewed as appropriate for structures used by the living.
In 2007, two thirds of Antananarivo residents had access to electricity, while ten percent of households owned a scooter, car or other motor vehicle.
Early Merina kings used ''fanampoana'' (statute labor) to construct a massive system of irrigated paddy fields and dikes around the city to provide adequate rice for the growing population.
Evangelical broadcasts and daily international and local news are available in Malagasy, French and English.
The neighborhood of Antaninarenina contains the historic Hôtel Colbert, numerous jewelers' shops and other luxury goods stores, and administrative offices.
This challenge is compounded by the high turnover rate of mayors and staff that frequently disrupts initiatives begun by previous CUA administrations.
Laborde also produced a wide range of industrial products at factories in the highland village Mantasoa and a foundry in the Antananarivo neighborhood Isoraka.
Among the best-known of these are the ''Centre Culturel Albert Camus'' and ''Alliance française d'Antananarivo'', both funded by the French government.
Madagascar's diverse music is reflected in the many concerts, cabarets, dance clubs and other musical venues throughout Antananarivo.
Antananarivo has suffered from debt and mismanagement.
The city hosts the diplomatic missions of 21 countries.
It was not until the royal edict on construction materials was lifted in the 1860s that stone was used to encase the royal palace.
A sister city relationship between Antananarivo and Nice, France, established in 1962, is not currently active.
The tangible and intangible cultural heritage of Antananarivo is extensive and highly significant to regional and national populations.
The CUA is divided into six numbered ''arrondissements'' (administrative sub-districts); it has historically been administered by an elected mayor and associated staff.
More affordable are performances of traditional ''vakindrazana'' or Malagasy operettas at Isotry Theater and ''hira gasy'' at the city's outdoor ''cheminots'' theater or ''Alliance française''; these performances are more popular with older and rural audiences than among urban youth.
Constructed in 2012, the stadium has a capacity of 15,000 and houses a gym and administrative offices for the team.
In Antananarivo and throughout the highlands, Merina and Betsileo families practice the ''famadihana'', an ancestor reburial ceremony.
The city hosts many private pre-primary, primary and secondary schools and the national network of public schools.
Rainilaiarivony built the Andafiavaratra Palace in 1873 as his residence and office at a site near the royal palace.
His diplomatic and military successes extended Imerina far beyond its traditional borders, bringing the lands of neighboring ethnic groups under Merina control.
LMS missionaries' first brick house was built in 1869; it bore a blend of English, Creole and Malagasy design and served as a model for a new style of house that rapidly spread throughout the capital and across the highlands.
Ivato International Airport is located approximately  from the center of the city, connecting Antananarivoto to all national airports.
In the final years of the Kingdom of Imerina, the population had recovered to between 50,000 and 75,000; most of the population were slaves who were largely captured in provincial military campaigns.
Eighty percent of households in Antananarivo own a radio; the medium is popular across social classes.
During the 77-year civil war that followed, the eastern district's capital at Ambohimanga rose in prominence.
Several national and local sports teams, including the championship-winning national rugby team, the Makis, and several basketball and football teams, are based in Antananarivo.
By the time Andrianampoinimerina's son Radama I had ascended the throne upon his father's death in 1810, Antananarivo was the largest and most economically important city on the island, with a population of over 80,000 inhabitants.
After independence in 1960, the pace of growth increased further.
Declaring it the site of his capital, Andrianjaka built a ''rova'' (fortified royal dwelling) that expanded to become the royal palaces of the Kingdom of Imerina.
These conquests were continued under his son, Radama I, whose control ultimately extended over two thirds of the island, leading him to be considered the King of Madagascar by European diplomats, with Antananarivo as the island's capital.
The nearby Andafiavaratra Palace was the home of 19th century Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony and currently contains a museum featuring historic artifacts of the Kingdom of Imerina, including items saved from the fire at the Rova.
Termed the ''trano gasy'' ("Malagasy house"), it is typically a two-story, brick building with four columns on the front that support a wooden veranda.
Most homes use charcoal for daily cooking; stocks of charcoal and rice are kept in the kitchen.
Greater Antananarivo is a continuous, urbanized area spreading beyond the city's official boundaries for  north to south between Ambohimanarina and Ankadimbahoaka, and  west to east between the Ikopa River dike and Tsiadana.
Youth-oriented stations play a blend of Western artists and Malagasy performers of Western genres, as well as fusion and coastal musical styles.
In 2005, CUA authorities partnered with the city planners of the Île-de-France to develop the ''Plan VertPlan Bleu'' strategy for creating a classification system for ''Zones de Protection du Patrimoine Architectural, Urbain et Paysager'', areas of the city benefiting from legal protection and financial support for their historic and cultural heritage.
The mayoral administration of the CUA is empowered to govern the city with ''de jure'' autonomy; a wide range of mechanisms have been established to facilitate governance, although they are of limited effectiveness.
The men's basketball teams Challenger and SOE (''Équipe du Stade olympique de l'Emyrne'') are based in Antananarivo and play in the ''Palais des Sports'' at Mahamasina.
Ivato is the hub of the national airline Air Madagascar, and is the only airport on the island hosting long-haul carriers.
In response, then-mayor Rajoelina undertook an audit that identified and sought to address long-standing procedural irregularities and corruption in the city's administration.
The tunnel opens toward Lake Anosy and the national Supreme Court buildings, and provides access to the residential neighborhood of Mahamasina and its stadium.
The French killed off many of the original inhabitants of the island and made French the native language.
The first international airport was constructed at Arivonimamo,  outside the city; this was  replaced in 1967 with Ivato International Airport approximately  from the city center.
Andohalo square was remodeled to feature a gazebo, walkways and planted landscaping.
In the latter third of the 19th century, these houses quickly replaced most of the traditional wooden houses of the city's aristocratic class.
The hill and its city retained the name Analamanga until the reign of King Andriamasinavalona (1675–1710), who renamed it ''Antananarivo'' ("City of the Thousand") in honor of Andrianjaka's soldiers.
Unlike most capital cities in southern Africa, Antananarivo was already a major city before the colonial era.
The plan, which is being implemented by the ''Institut des Métiers de la Ville'', prevents the destruction of historic buildings and other structures, and establishes construction codes that ensure new structures follow historic aesthetics.
This area is connected to Analakely by a tunnel constructed by the French in the early 20th century.
Bordering these neighborhoods are the commercial areas of Besarety and Andravoahangy.
Newer vehicles congregate near hotels and other locales frequented by foreigners willing or able to pay higher prices for better services.
The city is located  above the sea level in the center of the island, and has been the island's largest population center since at least the 18th century.
The University of Antananarivo was constructed in the Ankatso neighborhood and the Museum of Ethnology and Paleontology was also built.
Rugby Union is considered the national sport of Madagascar.
The commercial center of town, Analakely, is located on the valley floor between these two ''ville moyenne'' hill ranges.
Open air markets include Le Pochard and the artisan market at Andravoahangy.
The national rugby team is nicknamed the Makis after the local word for the indigenous ring-tailed lemur.
The model, known as ''trano gasy'' ("Malagasy house"), rapidly spread throughout the central highlands of Madagascar, where it remains the predominant house construction style.
This ''ville moyenne'' became increasingly populous under French colonial authority, which targeted them for redesign and development.
The city has numerous monuments, historic buildings, sites of significance and traditions related to the customs and history of the central highlands people.
Air pollution from vehicle exhausts, residential coal-burning stoves and other sources is worsening.
Much of this marginal land has been illegally occupied and developed by land-seeking residents, creating shantytown slums in pockets throughout the lower portions of the city.
There are more than 5,000 church buildings in the city and its suburbs, including an Anglican and a Roman Catholic cathedral.
The main presidential offices are located  south of the city.
Analamanga was established by a community of Vazimba, the island's first occupants.
The arts scene in Antananarivo is the largest and most vibrant in the country.
Thereafter, Merina sovereigns declared Antananarivo the capital of the entire island.
Uncontrolled urban sprawl has challenged the city's infrastructure, producing shortages of clean water and electricity, sanitation and public health problems, and heavy traffic congestion.
An urban master plan guides major policies for city management but personnel within the mayoral office commonly lack the urban planning and management ability to effectively implement the plan in response to long-term and immediate needs.
Processing and disposal of industrial and residential waste is inadequate.
Under the mayorship of Marc Ravalomanana (1998–2001), street lights were installed or repaired throughout the city to improve night-time safety.
In 2008, water was cut off at public pumps and there were regular brownouts of city's street lights because of 3.3 million ariary of unpaid debts to the Jirama public utilities company by the City of Antananarivo.
Formal sector job growth has not kept pace with population growth, and many residents earn their livelihood in the informal sector as street vendors and laborers.
The city skyline is a jumble of colorful, historic houses and churches.
Despite the presence of facilities and trained personnel, the high cost of health care places it beyond the reach of most residents of Antananarivo.
Only family tombs were built from stone, an inert material viewed as appropriate to use for the dead.
Andrianampoinimerina created a large marketplace in Analakely, establishing the city's economic center.
Mean temperatures range from  to .
Antananarivo also hosts the largest number of universities, nightclubs, art venues, medical services and other social service institutions of any city on the island.
Ranavalona oversaw improvements to the city's infrastructure, including the construction of the city's two largest staircases at Antaninarenina and Ambondrona, which connect ''la ville moyenne'' ("the middle town") to the central marketplace at Analakely.
The ''Avenue de l'Indépendance'' runs from the gardens of Ambohijatovo south of the market pavilions, through Analakely to the city's railroad station at Soarano.
They chose Antaninarenina as the site for the French Governor General's Residency; upon independence it was renamed Ambohitsorohitra Palace and converted into presidential offices.
In 1959, severe floods in ''la ville basse'' prompted the building of large scale embankments along the edges of the Betsimitatatra rice fields and the establishment of new ministerial complexes on newly drained land in the Anosy neighborhood.
Government television and radio broadcasting centers, and the headquarters of numerous private stations are located in Antananarivo.
The city's extensive infrastructure and its role as the economic center of the country make it a favorable location for large businesses.
It was built in 1995 by the Government of China; it regularly hosts concerts, dance and other arts performances, expositions and novelty events like monster truck rallies.
A city plan written in 1956 created suburban zones where large houses and gardens were established for the wealthy.
Limited funds and mismanagement have hampered consecutive CUA efforts to manage overcrowding and traffic, waste management, pollution, security, public water and electricity, and other challenges linked to explosive population growth.
The larger urban area surrounding the city, known as Antananarivo-Renivohitra ("Antananarivo-Mother Hill" or "Antananarivo-Capital"), is the capital of Analamanga region.
These plains are susceptible to flooding during the rainy season; they are drained by the Ikopa River, which skirts the capital to the south and west.
Around the palaces, which were destroyed in a 1995 fire but have since been partially reconstructed, lies the historic district that was formerly populated by members of the ''andriana'' (noble class); many of their homes are preserved.
In Antananarivo, access to land is guaranteed and protected by law for every resident of the city.
These problems were diminished but not eliminated under the mayoral administration of Marc Ravalomanana, who prioritized sanitation, security and public administration.
The official boundaries of the city of Antananarivo encompass an urban area of approximately .
This neighborhood was further developed under French rule and continues to serve as the capital's economic heart.
The population of the greater Antananarivo area was estimated at 3 million people in 2012; it is expected to rise to 6 million by 2030.
To the west of Soarano lies the dense commercial district of Tsaralalana; it is the only district to be built on a grid and is the center of the city's South Asian community.
The growing number of Christians in Imerina prompted the construction of stone churches throughout the highlands, as well as four memorial cathedrals on key sites of martyrdom among early Malagasy Christians under the reign of Ranavalona I.
Private licensed and unlicensed taxis are common; most vehicles are older Renaults or Citroens.
The majority of the city's residents move about Antananarivo on foot.
After expelling the Vazimba who inhabited the town at the peak of Analamanga hill, Andrianjaka chose the site for his ''rova'' (fortified royal compound), which expanded over time to enclose the royal palaces and the tombs of Merina royalty.
Successive Merina sovereigns ruled over the Kingdom of Imerina from Analamanga through King Andriamasinavalona's reign.
'''Antananarivo''' ( or ; ), then temporarily French '''Tananarive''' ( or ; ), also known by its French colonial shorthand form '''Tana''', is the capital and largest city in Madagascar.
Antananarivo has expanded gradually from the royal palaces at its center, which dominate every view from their location at the peak of a curving ridge  above the surrounding Betsimitatatra plains.
It includes the royal palace, Andafiavaratra Palacethe former residence of Prime Minister Rainilaiarivony, Andohalothe principal town square until 1897, a cathedral near Andohalo built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the city's most intact historic entrance gate and the 19th-century houses of Merina nobles.
Behoririka, to the east of Soarano, is built around a lake of the same name and abuts the sprawling Andravoahangy district at the eastern edge of the city.
Roads connecting Antananarivo to surrounding towns were expanded and paved.
Radama's subjugation of other Malagasy ethnic groups brought nearly two thirds of the island under his control.
Since the 2009 political crisis, in which the former mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, unconstitutionally seized power as head of state, the CUA has been administered by a ''délégation spéciale'' (special delegation) composed of a president and ''de facto'' mayor with the support of two vice presidents, all of whom are appointed by the President.
Other major dance schools based in the city include '' Le Club de Danse de l'Université Catholique de Madagascar'', ''Club de danse Kera arts'space à Antanimena'' and ''Le Club Mills''.
The city houses a French international school, Lycée Français de Tananarive, as well as an American school, American School of Antananarivo, and a Russian school, the Russian Embassy School in Antananarivo.
Rural migration to the capital propels this growth; the city's population exceeds that of the other five provincial capitals combined.
The city occupies a commanding position on the summit and slopes of a long, narrow, rocky ridge extending north and south for about  and rising to about  above the extensive rice fields to the west.
The city is also twinned with Vorkuta, Russia; Suzhou, China; and Montreal, Canada.
Antananarivo was originally the site of a town called ''Analamanga'', meaning "Blue Forest" in the central highlands dialect of the Malagasy language.
Frosts are rare in the city; they are more common at higher elevations.
This includes the country's oldest higher education institute, the College of Medicine established under the Merina monarchy and the University of Antananarivo, established under the French colonial administration.
The city is encircled by a ring road and connected by direct ''routes nationales'' (national highways) to Mahajanga, Toliara, Antsirabe, Fianarantsoa and Toamasina.
Claiming the island as a colony, the French administration retained Antananarivo as its capital and transcribed its name as Tananarive.
In addition to Antaninarenina, the principal neighborhoods of ''la ville moyenne'' are Ankadifotsy on the eastern hills and Ambatonakanga and Isoraka to the west, all of which are largely residential.
James Cameron introduced brickmaking to the island and created Lake Anosy to generate hydraulic power for industrial manufacturing.
Major historic landmarks and attractions in the city include the reconstructed royal palaces and the Andafiavaratra Palace, the tomb of Rainiharo, Tsimbazaza Zoo, Mahamasina Stadium, Lake Anosy, four 19th-century martyr cathedrals, and the Museum of Art and Archaeology.
Direct flights connect Antananarivo to cities in South Africa, Europe and Asia.
By the late 1990s the population of the metropolitan area had reached 1.4 million, and - while the city itself now has a population (2013) of about 1,300,000 - with suburbs lying outside the city limits it had grown to almost 2.1 million in 2013.
On 28 June 2001, Ravalomanana abolished these areas, liberalizing freedom of assembly.
King Andrianampoinimerina established the city's first marketplace on the grounds today occupied by the market's tile-roofed pavilions, constructed in the 1930s.
These interlinked bus systems served around 700,000 passengers each day.
Key industries include soap production, food and tobacco processing, brewing, textiles, and leather manufacturing, providing employment to around 5.5 percent of the workforce.
Under the Köppen-Geiger climate classification system, Antananarivo has a subtropical highland climate (Cwb) characterized by mild, dry winters and warm, rainy summers.
Antananarivo is connected by train to Toamasina to the east and Manakara to the southeast via Antsirabe and Fianarantsoa.
Modern urban planning was applied in ''la ville basse'' ("lower town"), which expanded from the base of the city's central hills into the surrounding rice fields.
Antananarivo has been the largest city on the island since at least the late 18th century, when its population was estimated at 15,000.
A mayor under former president Didier Ratsiraka created "red zones"; areas where public gathering and protests were prohibited.
To improve sanitation in the city, he constructed public latrines in densely populated and highly frequented areas.
Streets were laid with cobblestones and later paved; sewer systems and electricity infrastructure were introduced.
Owing to its increasingly high cost, consumption of meat by city residents has sharply declined since the 1970s; the urban poor eat meat on holidays only once or twice a year.
By 1810, the population had grown to 80,000 before declining dramatically between 1829 and 1842 during the reigns of Radama I and especially Ranavalona I.
Antananarivo remained the island's capital after Madagascar was colonized by the French in 1897 and remained thus after independence in 1960.
Until the mid 19th century, the city remained largely concentrated around the Rova of Antananarivo on the highest peak, an area today referred to as ''la haute ville'' or ''la haute'' ("upper town").
He increased the number of police officers on the streets, leading to a drop in crime.
, the city lacks a comprehensive strategy for reducing crime.
As the population grew, the city expanded to the west; by the late 19th century it extended to the northern hilltop neighborhood of Andohalo, an area of low prestige until British missionaries made it their preferred residential district and built one of the city's memorial churches here from 1863 to 1872.
Agriculture is the mainstay of the Malagasy economy.
For 25 years, the roofless shell dominated the skyline; its west wall collapsed in 2004.
The Betsimitatatra and other rice fields surround the city.
Other historic buildings include the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal where Ranavalona I dispensed judgement, the second residence of Rainilaiarivony with its indigenous medicinal plant garden, the recently renovated Soarano railroad station, four late 19th century memorial churches built to commemorate early Malagasy Christian martyrs, the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo, and the early 20th century pavilions of the Analakely market.
They also defined additional governance roles for the city, making it the administrative seat of the Analamanga region, the district of Antananarivo-Renivohitra and the ''Commune Urbaine d'Antananarivo'' (CUA, Antananarivo city proper).
The damage was never repaired.
Major boulevards like ''Avenue de l'Indépendance'', planned commercial areas like the arcades lining either side of the Avenue, large parks, city squares and other landmark features were built.
Antananarivo is the political, economic, educational and cultural heart of Madagascar.
He obtained funds from international donors to establish garbage collection and disposal systems, restore dilapidated infrastructure such as roads and marketplaces, and replant public gardens.
A railway system connecting Soarano station at one end of the ''Avenue de l'Indépendance'' in Antananarive with Toamasina and Fianarantsoa was established in 1897.
The ''Palais des Sports'' in the Mahamasina neighborhood is the country's only indoor performance space built to international standards.
The city's other main commercial and administrative neighborhoods, which spread out from Analakely and extend into the adjacent plain, were established by the French, who drained and filled in the extant rice fields and swampland to create much of the area's current design and infrastructure.
Antananarivo is the see city of Madagascar's Roman Catholic Archdiocese.
Conservation and reconstruction work at the site is ongoing.
The French military invaded Antananarivo in September 1894, prompting the queen's surrender after a cannon shell blasted a hole through a building at the Rova, causing major casualties.
Business owners are drivers of growth for the city; in 2010, 60 percent of all new buildings in the country were located in Antananarivo, most of which were built for commercial purposes.
The Museum of Art and Archaeology in the Isoraka neighborhood features exhibits on the history and cultures of Madagascar's diverse ethnic groups.
The city's neighborhoods emerge from historic ethnic, religious and caste divisions.
According to oral history, he deployed a garrison of 1,000 soldiers to successfully capture and guard the site.
Land is used for the cultivation of rice and other crops, raising of zebu and other livestock, the fabrication of bricks and other traditional livelihoods.
Under this plan, 19th-century sites, like the Ambatondrafandrana tribunal and the second residence of Rainilaiarivony, have been renovated.
Isoraka also houses the tomb of Prime Minister Rainiharo (1833–1852), whose sons and later Prime Ministers Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony are buried with him.
He moved the kingdom's political capital back to Antananarivo in 1794, and declared Ambohimanga the kingdom's spiritual capital, a role it still maintains.
Antananarivo is the capital of Madagascar and the federal governance structures, including the Senate, National Assembly, the Supreme Court and the presidential office are housed there.
Performances of classical, jazz and other foreign musical genres, modern and contemporary dance, theater and other arts occur at cultural arts centers funded by foreign governments or private entities.
By 2008, the city's treasury had accumulated 8.2 billion Malagasy ''ariary''approximately in debts under previous mayors.
Radama opened the city to the first European settlers, artisan missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) who arrived in 1820 and opened the city's first public schools.
It was founded  above sea level at the apex of three hill ranges that converge in a Y form,  above the surrounding Betsimitatatra paddy fields and the grassy plains beyond.
The western slopes and plains, being best protected from cyclone winds originating over the Indian Ocean, were settled before those to the east.
Relatives, friends and neighbors are invited to take part in the music, dancing and feasting that accompanies the event.
Running water was installed in fewer than 25 percent of homes, small restaurants and businesses in 2007, necessitating the collection of water from household wells or neighborhood pumps and the use of outdoor pit toilets detached from the main building.
This period saw a major expansion of ''la ville moyenne'', which spread along the lower hilltops and slopes of the city centered around the French Residency.
It also provides for awareness raising campaigns in favor of historic preservation and undertakes projects to restore dilapidated historic buildings and sites.
The city expanded rapidly after World War II; by 1950 its population had grown to 175,000.
The city's principal railway station is centrally located at Soarano at one end of the ''Avenue de l'Indépendance''.
The market caused traffic congestion and safety hazards prompting government officials to divide and relocate the Friday merchants to several other districts in 1997.
The bordering neighborhood of Anosy was developed in the 1950s to house most of the national ministries and the Senate.
Antananarivo has two dedicated cinemas, the Rex and the Ritz, both of which were built in the colonial era.
The city is located centrally along the north-south axis of the country, and east of center along the east-west axis.
Under Ravalomanana, construction in the capital increased sharply; twelve new supermarkets were constructed in two years.
It replaces their former home, Malacam Stadium, which had a capacity of approximately 3,000 that was regularly exceeded by the number of attendees.
Police and ''gendarmes'' assist in regulating traffic at peak periods in the morning and evening, or around special events and holidays.
The recent increase in crime and the inadequate response from the CUA has prompted the growth of private security firms in the city.
The metropolitan area is thus home to 10 percent of the island's residents.
The city is managed by the ''Commune Urbaine d'Antananarivo'' (CUA) under the direction of its President of the Special Delegation, Ny Havana Andriamanjato, appointed in March 2014.
Since 1993, the ''Commune urbaine d'Antananarivo'' (CUA) has increasingly sought to protect and restore the city's architectural and cultural heritage.
The city lacks a dedicated classical music performance space, and concerts by international artists are infrequent.
Upon Andriamasinavalona's death in 1710, Imerina split into four warring quadrants and Antananarivo was made the capital of the southern district.
The residents of urban areasin particular Antananarivohave been hardest hit by economic downturns and economic policy shifts.
Antananarivo has established sister city agreements with four cities.
