So instead he studied English language and literature there between 1937 and 1940, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts.
''Beard's Roman Women'' was revealing on a personal level, dealing with the death of his first wife, his bereavement, and the affair that led to his second marriage.
Burgess attained fluency in Malay, spoken and written, achieving distinction in the examinations in the language set by the Colonial Office.
In Martin Seymour-Smith's ''Novels and Novelists: A Guide to the World of Fiction,'' Burgess related that he would often prepare a synopsis with a name-list before beginning a project.
With financial assistance provided by Lynne's father the couple were able to put a down payment on a cottage in the village of Adderbury, close to Banbury.
His 1970 ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' entry on the novel (under "Novel, the") is regarded as a classic of the genre.
''M/F'' (1971) was listed by the writer himself as one of the works of which he was most proud.
These became known as ''The Malayan Trilogy'' and were later published in one volume as ''The Long Day Wanes''.
or ''The Bawdy Bard'' about Shakespeare, based on the novel ''Nothing Like The Sun''.
Burgess believed he was resented by his father, Joseph Wilson, for having survived, when his mother and sister did not.
A variety of the music he wrote there was influenced by the country, notably Sinfoni Melayu for orchestra and brass band, which included cries of Merdeka (independence) from the audience.
He was known in childhood as Jack, Little Jack, and Johnny Eagle.
Vidal recounts that Greene apparently regarded a willingness to appear on television as something that ought to be beneath a writer's dignity.
Good grades resulted in a place at Xaverian College (1928–1937).
His ashes were inurned at the Monaco Cemetery.
He organised a number of amateur theatrical events in his spare time.
After the death of his mother, Burgess was raised by his maternal aunt, Ann Bromley, in Crumpsall with her two daughters.
He began using the pen name '''Anthony Burgess''' upon the publication of his 1956 novel ''Time for a Tiger''.
She reportedly claimed to be a distant relative of Christopher Isherwood, although the Lewis and Biswell biographies dispute this.
By 1982 all national primary and secondary schools in Malaysia would have been teaching with Bahasa Melayu as a base language (see Harold Crouch, ''Government and Society in Malaysia'', Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1996).
His sister Muriel had died four days earlier on 15 November from influenza, broncho-pneumonia, and cardiac failure, aged eight.
In the sultanate, Burgess sketched the novel that, when it was published in 1961, was to be entitled ''Devil of a State'' and, although it dealt with Brunei, for libel reasons the action had to be transposed to an imaginary East African territory similar to Zanzibar, named Dunia.
''Nothing Like the Sun'' is a fictional recreation of Shakespeare's love-life and an examination of the supposedly partly syphilitic sources of the bard's imaginative vision.
Burgess started his career as a critic.
He attended St. Edmund's Elementary School before moving on to Bishop Bilsborrow Memorial Elementary School, both Catholic schools, in Moss Side.
Burgess played a key role in "The British Way and Purpose" programme, designed to reintroduce members of the forces to the peacetime socialism of the post-war years in Britain.
Seymour-Smith wrote: "Burgess believes overplanning is fatal to creativity and regards his unconscious mind and the act of writing itself as indispensable guides.
However, Malay had been installed as the National Language with the passing of the Language Act of 1967.
Six months later, in September 1968, Burgess married Liana, acknowledging her four-year-old boy as his own, although the birth certificate listed Roy Halliday, Liana's former partner, as the father.
Burgess's repatriate years (c. 1960–69) produced ''Enderby'' and ''The Right to an Answer,'' which touches on the theme of death and dying, and ''One Hand Clapping,'' a satire on the vacuity of popular culture.
His dystopian novel ''A Clockwork Orange'' was published in 1962.
He devoted some of his free time in Malaya to creative writing "as a sort of gentlemanly hobby, because I knew there wasn't any money in it," and published his first novels: ''Time for a Tiger'', ''The Enemy in the Blanket'' and ''Beds in the East''.
Burgess' biographers attribute the incident to the author's notorious mythomania.
"He talks about his books", Vidal quotes an exasperated Greene as saying.
On hearing rumours of a mafia plot to kidnap Paolo-Andrea while the family was staying in Rome, Burgess decided to move to Monaco in 1975.
Burgess and Jones were married on 22 January 1942.
His estate was worth $3 million, and left a large European property portfolio of houses and apartments.
Burgess was born at 91 Carisbrook Street in Harpurhey, a suburb of Manchester, to Catholic parents (his mother was a convert), Joseph and Elizabeth Wilson.
The couple lived first in an apartment in Hove, near Brighton.
Burgess was co-writer of the script for the TV series ''Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson'' (1980).
It was Burgess's ambition to become "the true fictional expert on Malaya."
Burgess operated more in the mode of Orwell, who had a good command of Urdu and Burmese (necessary for Orwell's work as a police officer) and Kipling, who spoke Hindi (having learnt it as a child).
The young anti-hero, Alex, captured after a short career of violence and mayhem, undergoes a course of aversion therapy treatment to curb his violent tendencies.
I think possibly for political reasons that were disguised as clinical reasons."
Burgess was invalided home in 1959 and relieved of his position in Brunei.
The phrase has several connotations.
He may also have wished for a pretext to abandon teaching and get going full-time as a writer, having made a late start.
He lectured on the novel at the University of Iowa in 1975.
As he put it, the scions of the sultans and of the élite in Brunei "did not wish to be taught", because the free-flowing abundance of oil guaranteed their income and privileged status.
Several of his pieces were broadcast during his lifetime on BBC Radio.
Burgess wrote: "I shall die somewhere in the Mediterranean lands, with an inaccurate obituary in the Nice-Matin, unmourned, soon forgotten."
Stanley Kubrick's film adaptation of ''A Clockwork Orange'' was based on the American edition, and thus helped to perpetuate the loss of the last chapter.
His Malayan trilogy ''The Long Day Wanes'' was Burgess's first published fiction.
On discharge, benefiting from a sum of money which Lynne Burgess had inherited from her father, together with their savings built up over six years in the East, he decided to become a full-time writer.
When Burgess announced to his family that he wanted to be a composer, they objected as "there was no money in it."
On 18 April 1938, Joseph Wilson died from cardiac failure, pleurisy, and influenza at the age of 55, leaving no inheritance despite his apparent business success.
In addition to his teaching duties, he was a housemaster in charge of students of the preparatory school, who were housed at a Victorian mansion known as "King's Pavilion".
Although Burgess lived not far from Graham Greene, whose house was in Antibes, Greene became aggrieved shortly before his death by comments in newspaper articles by Burgess, and broke off all contact.
He spent some time in the neurological ward of a London hospital (see ''The Doctor is Sick'') where he underwent cerebral tests that found no illness.
His mother Elizabeth (née Burgess) died at the age of 30 at home on 19 November 1918, during the 1918 flu pandemic.
He wrote the Joyce studies ''Here Comes Everybody: An Introduction to James Joyce for the Ordinary Reader'' (also published as ''Re Joyce'') and ''Joysprick: An Introduction to the Language of James Joyce''.
A versatile linguist, Burgess lectured in phonetics, and translated ''Cyrano de Bergerac'', ''Oedipus the King'' and the opera ''Carmen'', among others.
''The Worm and the Ring'' (1961) had to be withdrawn from circulation under the threat of libel action from one of Burgess's former colleagues, a school secretary.
His first place of residence after leaving England was Lija, Malta (1968–70).
In his autobiography ''Little Wilson and Big God'' (1987) Burgess wrote:''"This novel was, is, about Brunei, which was renamed Naraka, Malay-Sanskrit for 'hell.'
In this period, he wrote novels and produced film scripts for Lew Grade and Franco Zeffirelli.
At his stationing in Gibraltar, which he later wrote about in ''A Vision of Battlements'', he worked as a training college lecturer in speech and drama, teaching alongside Ann McGlinn in German, French and Spanish.
He created ''Blooms of Dublin'' in 1982, an operetta based on James Joyce's ''Ulysses'' (televised for the BBC) and wrote a libretto for Weber's ''Oberon'', performed by the Edinburgh-based Scottish Opera.
He later reflected: "When I went to school I was able to read.
Burgess produced numerous other novels, including the Enderby quartet, and ''Earthly Powers'', regarded by most critics as his greatest novel.
"21 is the symbol of human maturity, or used to be, since at 21 you got to vote and assumed adult responsibility," Burgess wrote in a foreword for a 1986 edition.
Music was not taught at his school, but at about age 14 he taught himself to play the piano.
A sea voyage the couple took with the Baltic Line from Tilbury to Leningrad in June 1961 resulted in the novel ''Honey for the Bears''.
I was one despised&nbsp;... Ragged boys in gangs would pounce on the well-dressed like myself."
At his confirmation, the name Anthony was added and he became John Anthony Burgess Wilson.
Burgess wrote full-length critical studies of William Shakespeare, Ernest Hemingway and D. H. Lawrence, as well as ''Ninety-nine Novels: The Best in English since 1939''.
In late 1950 he began working as a secondary school teacher at Banbury Grammar School (now Banbury School) teaching English literature.
As a young child he did not care about music, until he heard on his home-built radio "a quite incredible flute solo", which he characterised as "sinuous, exotic, erotic," and became spellbound.
I had to change the setting from Brunei to an East African one.
No score, however, is extant.
The structure of ''Napoleon Symphony: A Novel in Four Movements'' (1974) was modelled on Beethoven's Eroica symphony, while ''Mozart and the Wolf Gang'' (1991) mirrors the sound and rhythm of Mozartian composition, among other things attempting a fictional representation of Symphony No.40.
Lewis claimed that during production in Malaysia of the BBC documentary ''A Kind of Failure'' (1982), Burgess's supposedly fluent Malay was not understood by waitresses at a restaurant where they were filming.
Heinemann, my publisher, was doubtful about publishing it: it might be libellous.
In the neighbouring Spanish town of La Línea de la Concepción he was arrested for insulting General Franco but released from custody shortly after the incident.
3 in C was premiered by the University of Iowa orchestra in Iowa City in 1975.
Burgess's interest in language was reflected in the invented, Anglo-Russian teen slang of ''A Clockwork Orange'' (Nadsat), and in the movie ''Quest for Fire'' (1981), for which he invented a prehistoric language (''Ulam'') for the characters.
Though Burgess lapsed from Catholicism early in his youth, the influence of the Catholic "training" and worldview remained strong in his work all his life.
The event may have contributed to her subsequent miscarriage.
Many of his unpublished compositions are listed in ''This Man and Music''.
(Stuart Cooper, 1985).
He added "the film made it easy for readers of the book to misunderstand what it was about, and the misunderstanding will pursue me till I die."
During their travels through France and across the Alps, Burgess wrote in the back of the van as Liana drove.
Upon the death of Burgess's father-in-law, the couple used their inheritance to decamp to a terraced town house in Chiswick.
Burgess described his ''Sinfoni Melayu'' as an attempt to "combine the musical elements of the country into a synthetic language which called on native drums and xylophones."
Burgess wrote the screenplays for ''Moses the Lawgiver'' (Gianfranco De Bosio 1974), ''Jesus of Nazareth'' (Franco Zeffirelli 1977), and ''A.D.''
He followed this with ''The Novel To-day'' (Longmans, 1963) and ''The Novel Now: A Student's Guide to Contemporary Fiction'' (New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 1967).
The late novel ''Any Old Iron'' is a generational saga of two families, one Russian-Welsh, the other Jewish, encompassing the sinking of the Titanic, World War I, the Russian Revolution, the Spanish Civil War, World War II, the early years of the State of Israel, and the rediscovery of Excalibur.
In 1942 he asked to be transferred to the Army Educational Corps and despite his loathing of authority he was promoted to sergeant.
It is Burgess's initials forwards and backwards; part of the rhyme scheme for the Petrarchan sonnet; and the title of Burgess's 22nd novel, concerning the death of Keats.
Eventually he settled in Monaco in 1976, where he was active in the local community, becoming a co-founder in 1984 of the Princess Grace Irish Library, a centre for Irish cultural studies.
The novel, which drew on Edgar I. Fripp's 1938 biography ''Shakespeare, Man and artist,'' won critical acclaim and placed Burgess among the first rank novelists of his generation.
Encouraged by the success of ''Tremor of Intent'' (a parody of James Bond adventures), Burgess wrote a screenplay for ''The Spy Who Loved Me'', also rejected, although the huge submarine silo seen in the finished film was reportedly Burgess's inspiration.
He was an instructor for the Central Advisory Council for Forces Education of the Ministry of Education.
Beethoven's Symphony No.
Burgess had written ''A Clockwork Orange'' with twenty-one chapters, meaning to match the age of majority.
In 1954, Burgess joined the British Colonial Service as a teacher and education officer in Malaya, initially stationed at Kuala Kangsar in Perak, in what were then known as the Federated Malay States.
Lewis may not have been fully aware of the fact that a quarter of Malaysia's population is made up of Hokkien- and Cantonese-speaking Chinese.
Lynne Burgess died from cirrhosis of the liver, on 20 March 1968.
He said  "Looking back now I see that I was driven out of the Colonial Service.
He went on to teach creative writing at Columbia University and was writer-in-residence at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1969) and at the University at Buffalo (1976).
During his service he was unpopular and was involved in incidents such as knocking off a corporal's cap and polishing the floor of a corridor to make people slip.
Burgess penned many unpublished scripts, including ''Will!''
Needing money and thinking that the publisher was "being charitable in accepting the work at all," Burgess accepted the deal and allowed ''A Clockwork Orange'' to be published in the US with the twenty-first chapter omitted.
Here he taught at the ''Malay College'' (now Malay College Kuala Kangsar – MCKK), modeled on English public school lines.
He had already earned their displeasure, he told Swaim, by writing articles in the newspaper in support of the revolutionary opposition party the Parti Rakyat Brunei, and for his friendship with its leader Dr. Azahari.
After a brief period of leave in Britain during 1958, Burgess took up a further Eastern post, this time at the Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddin College in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei.
Its three books are ''Time for a Tiger,'' ''The Enemy in the Blanket'' and ''Beds in the East.''
Burgess's published translations include two different versions of ''Cyrano de Bergerac'', ''Oedipus the King'' and ''Carmen''.
Taylor, wrote: "Bright ideas insufficient to conceal lack of knowledge."
This results in making him defenceless against other people and unable to enjoy some of his favourite music that, besides violence, had been an intense pleasure for him.
Brunei had been a British protectorate since 1888, and was not to achieve independence until 1984.
During his years in Malaya, and after he had mastered Jawi, the Arabic script adapted for Malay, Burgess taught himself the Persian language, after which he produced a translation of Eliot's ''The Waste Land'' into Persian (unpublished).
Also published was ''A Shorter 'Finnegans Wake'',' Burgess's abridgement.
His interest is reflected in his characters.
In the non-fiction book ''Flame into Being'' (1985) Burgess described ''A Clockwork Orange'' as "a jeu d'esprit knocked off for money in three weeks, it became known as the raw material for a film which seemed to glorify sex and violence."
Burgess was also motivated to move to the tax haven of Monaco as the country did not level income tax and widows were exempt from death duties, a form of taxation on their husband's estates.
He was rewarded with a salary increase for his proficiency in the language.
Burgess died on 22 November 1993 from lung cancer, at the Hospital of St John & St Elizabeth in London.
Burgess was given just a year to live, prompting him to write several novels to get money to provide for his widow.
It was claimed that the documentary's director deliberately kept these moments intact in the film to expose Burgess's linguistic pretensions.
In ''Napoleon Symphony,'' Burgess brought Bonaparte to life by shaping the novel's structure to Beethoven's ''Eroica'' symphony.
Burgess lived for two years in the United States, working as a visiting professor at Princeton University with the creative writing program (1970) and as a distinguished professor at the City College of New York (1972).
The couple also had a villa in Provence, in Callian, Var, France, and an apartment just off Baker Street, London.
He believed that socialism for the most part was "ridiculous" but did "concede that socialized medicine is a priority in any civilized country today."
He gave a different account, however,  to Jeremy Isaacs in a ''Face to Face'' interview on the BBC ''The Late Show'' (21 March 1989).
He described his background as lower middle class; growing up during the Great Depression, the Wilsons were fairly well off, as the demand for their tobacco and alcohol wares remained constant .
It was inspired initially by an incident during the Second World War in which his wife Lynne was robbed, assaulted and violated by deserters from the US Army in London during the blackout.
He returned to Twickenham, an outer suburb of London, where he owned a house, to await death.
The film treatments he produced include ''Amundsen'', ''Attila'', ''The Black Prince'', ''Cyrus the Great'', ''Dawn Chorus'', ''The Dirty Tricks of Bertoldo'', ''Eternal Life'', ''Onassis'', ''Puma'', ''Samson and Delilah'', ''Schreber'', ''The Sexual Habits of the English Middle Class'', ''Shah'', ''That Man Freud'' and ''Uncle Ludwig''.
1, Sonatina and 'Tre Pezzetti'  have been included on a major CD release from recorder player John Turner and pianist Harvey Davies; the double album also includes related music from 15 other composers and is titled 'Anthony Burgess – The Man and his Music' (Metier records, release September 2013).
Burgess' stepmother died of a heart attack in 1940.
Geoffrey Grigson writes, He was, however, suffering from the effects of prolonged heavy drinking (and associated poor nutrition), of the often oppressive south-east Asian climate, of chronic constipation, and of overwork and professional disappointment.
In ''The Doctor is Sick'', Dr Edwin Spindrift is a lecturer in linguistics who escapes from a hospital ward which is peopled, as the critic Saul Maloff put it in a review, with "brain cases who happily exemplify varieties of English speech."
Burgess cut his journalistic teeth in Adderbury, writing several articles for the local newspaper, the ''Banbury Guardian''.
"Burgess's linguistic training", wrote Raymond Chapman and Tom McArthur in ''The Oxford Companion to the English Language'', "is shown in dialogue enriched by distinctive pronunciations and the niceties of register."
Liana died in 2007.
At the Manchester elementary school I attended, most of the children could not read, so I was&nbsp;... a little apart, rather different from the rest."
He does not produce a draft of a whole novel but prefers to get one page finished before he goes on to the next, which involves a good deal of revision and correction."
After his father married the landlady of this pub, Margaret Dwyer, in 1922, Burgess was raised by his father and stepmother.
Burgess and his wife had occupied a noisy apartment where privacy was minimal, and this caused resentment.
The causes listed on her death certificate were influenza, acute pneumonia, and cardiac failure.
Burgess kept working through his final illness and was writing on his deathbed.
In early 1958, ''The Enemy in the Blanket'' appeared and at once provoked a libel suit."''
Reports from his former students and colleagues indicate that he cared deeply about teaching.
On the BBC's ''Desert Island Discs'' radio programme in 1966, Burgess chose as his favourite music Purcell's "Rejoice in the Lord Alway"; Bach's ''Goldberg Variations'' No.
In fact he died in the country of his birth.
The depth of Burgess's multilingual proficiency came under discussion in Roger Lewis's 2002 biography.
Though completed in 1958, the work was not published until 1961, for what it was worth it was made a choice of the book society.
During these years Burgess became a regular drinking partner of the novelist William S. Burroughs.
Like many of his fellow English expatriates in Asia, Burgess had excellent spoken and written command of his operative language(s), both as a novelist and speaker, including Malay.
13; Elgar's Symphony No.
The affair was hidden from Burgess's now-alcoholic wife, whom he refused to leave for fear of offending his cousin (by Burgess's stepmother, Margaret Dwyer Wilson), George Patrick Dwyer, then the Roman Catholic Bishop of Leeds.
He alluded to this in an interview with Don Swaim, explaining that his wife Lynne had said something "obscene" to the British Queen's consort, the Duke of Edinburgh, during an official visit, and the colonial authorities turned against him.
Burgess produced a translation of Bizet's ''Carmen'' which was performed by the English National Opera, and wrote for the 1973 Broadway musical ''Cyrano'', using his own adaptation of the original Rostand play as his basis.
He wrote librettos and screenplays, including for the 1977 TV mini-series ''Jesus of Nazareth''.
''The Times'' obituary heralded the author as "a great moralist."
Little invention was needed to contrive a large cast of unbelievable characters and a number of interwoven plots.
A letter from David Wallace that appeared in the magazine of the London ''Independent on Sunday'' newspaper on 25 November 2002 shed light on the affair.
In 1971 it was adapted into a highly controversial film by Stanley Kubrick, which Burgess said was chiefly responsible for the popularity of the book.
Eulogies at his memorial service at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London in 1994 were delivered by the journalist Auberon Waugh and the novelist William Boyd.
Liliana Macellari, an Italian translator twelve years younger than Burgess, came across his novels ''Inside Mr. Enderby'' and ''A Clockwork Orange'', while writing about English fiction.
Burgess' flair for languages was noticed by army intelligence and he took part in debriefings of Dutch expatriates and Free French who found refuge in Gibraltar during the war.
The negative reaction from a lecture that Burgess delivered to an audience of Catholic priests in Malta precipitated a move by the couple to Italy.
Gore Vidal revealed in his 2006 memoir ''Point to Point Navigation'' that Greene disapproved of Burgess's appearance on various European television stations to discuss his (Burgess') books.
The Burgesses maintained a flat in Rome, a country house in Bracciano, and a property in Montalbuccio.
In these works, Burgess was working in the tradition established by Kipling for British India, and Conrad and Maugham for Southeast Asia.
Paolo Andrea (also known as Andrew Burgess Wilson) died in London in 2002, aged 37.
It means "Father, father" in Aramaic, Arabic, Hebrew and other Semitic languages.
About this time Burgess collapsed in a Brunei classroom while teaching history and was diagnosed as having an inoperable brain tumour.
His thesis concerned Marlowe's ''Doctor Faustus'', and he graduated with an upper second-class honours, which he found disappointing.
9 features prominently in ''A Clockwork Orange'' (and in Stanley Kubrick's film version of the novel).
Eight minutes later the announcer told him he had been listening to ''Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune'' by Claude Debussy.
Wallace's letter read, in part:
He named the cottage "Little Gidding" after one of Eliot's ''Four Quartets''.
He wrote in his autobiographical ''You've Had Your Time'' (1990), that in re-learning Russian at this time, he found inspiration for the Russian-based slang Nadsat that he created for ''A Clockwork Orange'', going on to note "I would resist to the limit any publisher's demand that a glossary be provided."
Burgess spent six weeks in 1940 as an army recruit in Eskbank before becoming a Nursing Orderly Class 3 in the Royal Army Medical Corps.
The epitaph on Burgess's marble memorial stone, reads "Abba Abba."
He referred to this as a "psychedelic moment&nbsp;... a recognition of verbally inexpressible spiritual realities."
Burgess was a Conservative (though, as he clarified in an interview with ''The Paris Review'', his political views could be considered "a kind of anarchism" since his ideal of a "Catholic Jacobite imperial monarch" wasn't practicable), a (lapsed) Catholic and Monarchist, harbouring a distaste for all republics.
He worked on an anthology of the best of English literature translated into Malay, which failed to achieve publication.
At City College he was a close colleague and friend of Joseph Heller.
In the 1980s, religious themes began to feature heavily (''The Kingdom of the Wicked,'' ''Man of Nazareth,'' ''Earthly Powers'').
They later moved to a semi-detached house called "Applegarth" in Etchingham, approximately a mile from the Jacobean house where Rudyard Kipling had lived in Burwash, and one mile from the Robertsbridge home of Malcolm Muggeridge.
This provided convenient access to the White City BBC television studios where he later became a frequent guest.
Heinemann was right to be timorous.
He wrote a good deal of music for recorder as his son played the instrument.
Burgess had originally hoped to study music at university, but the music department at the Victoria University of Manchester turned down his application because of poor grades in physics.
Their meetings took place in London and Tangiers.
Burgess has said of his largely solitary childhood: "I was either distractedly persecuted or ignored.
An accomplished musician, Burgess composed regularly throughout his life, and once said, "I wish people would think of me as a musician who writes novels, instead of a novelist who writes music on the side."
