Antioxidant vitamins
Low-temperature oils
In food science, the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) used to be the industry standard for antioxidant strength of whole foods, juices and food additives.
The free radicals then react with oxygen to produce peroxy radicals which cause yet further damage, often in a chain reaction.
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
This removes the free radical intermediates and prevents the propagation reaction from continuing.
Industrial antioxidants have diverse uses, such as food and cosmetics preservatives and inhibitors of rubber or gasoline deterioration.
Typically,  this involves some transition-series metal such as copper or iron as catalyst.
During exercise, oxygen consumption can increase by a factor of more than 10.
Consequently, organisms contain a complex network of antioxidant metabolites and enzymes that work together to prevent oxidative damage to cellular components such as DNA, proteins and lipids.
Indeed, a 2009 review of experiments in mice concluded that almost all manipulations of antioxidant systems had no effect on aging.
This species is produced from hydrogen peroxide in metal-catalyzed redox reactions such as the Fenton reaction.
2,4-dimethyl-6-tert-butylphenol
Here, its cofactor is oxidised by one molecule of hydrogen peroxide and then regenerated by transferring the bound oxygen to a second molecule of substrate.
This reaction produces oxidised α-tocopheroxyl radicals that can be recycled back to the active reduced form through reduction by other antioxidants, such as ascorbate, retinol or ubiquinol.
Antioxidants are used as food additives to help guard against food deterioration.
There also exists a third form of SOD in extracellular fluids, which contains copper and zinc in its active sites.
These oxidants can damage cells by starting chemical chain reactions such as lipid peroxidation, or by oxidizing DNA or proteins.
This meta-analysis was later repeated and extended by the same authors, with the new analysis published by the Cochrane Collaboration; confirming the previous results.
Antioxidant preservatives are also added to fat based cosmetics such as lipstick and moisturizers to prevent rancidity.
Some fatty foods such as olive oil are partially protected from oxidation by their natural content of antioxidants, but remain sensitive to photooxidation.
Glutathione has antioxidant properties since the thiol group in its cysteine moiety is a reducing agent and can be reversibly oxidized and reduced.
The effects of cooking and food processing are complex, as these processes can also increase the bioavailability of antioxidants, such as some carotenoids in vegetables.
The functions of the other forms of vitamin E are even less well-understood, although γ-tocopherol is a nucleophile that may react with electrophilic mutagens, and tocotrienols may be important in protecting neurons from damage.
Melatonin, once oxidized, cannot be reduced to its former state because it forms several stable end-products upon reacting with free radicals.
Some research suggests that supplementation with amounts as high as  of vitamin C inhibits recovery.
Supplementation with selenium or vitamin E does not reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.
In addition, the glutathione ''S''-transferases show high activity with lipid peroxides.
However, although these enzymes can produce oxidants, the relative importance of the electron transfer chain to other processes that generate peroxide is unclear.
Some compounds contribute to antioxidant defense by chelating transition metals and preventing them from catalyzing the production of free radicals in the cell.
Here, the superoxide released by processes such as oxidative phosphorylation is first converted to hydrogen peroxide and then further reduced to give water.
As one of the enzymes needed to make ascorbic acid has been lost by mutation during primate evolution, humans must obtain it from the diet; it is therefore a vitamin.
This effect may involve a reduction in oxidative stress.
It has been claimed that the α-tocopherol form is the most important lipid-soluble antioxidant, and that it protects membranes from oxidation by reacting with lipid radicals produced in the lipid peroxidation chain reaction.
Other studies indicated that antioxidant supplementation may attenuate the cardiovascular benefits of exercise.
Melatonin is a powerful antioxidant.
However, reactive oxygen species also have useful cellular functions, such as redox signaling.
Relatively strong reducing acids can have antinutrient effects by binding to dietary minerals such as iron and zinc in the gastrointestinal tract and preventing them from being absorbed.
Redox cycling may allow other antioxidants (such as vitamin C) to act as pro-oxidants and promote free radical formation.
This detoxification pathway is the result of multiple enzymes, with superoxide dismutases catalysing the first step and then catalases and various peroxidases removing hydrogen peroxide.
Consequently, the ORAC method, derived only from ''in vitro'' experiments, is no longer considered relevant to human diets or biology.
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
However, the roles and importance of the various forms of vitamin E are presently unclear, and it has even been suggested that the most important function of α-tocopherol is as a signaling molecule, with this molecule having no significant role in antioxidant metabolism.
β-carotene: 0.5&nbsp;– 1
α-Tocopherol (vitamin E)
Antioxidants are classified into two broad divisions, depending on whether they are soluble in water (hydrophilic) or in lipids (lipophilic).
To balance the oxidative state, plants and animals maintain complex systems of overlapping antioxidants, such as glutathione and enzymes (e.g., catalase and superoxide dismutase) produced internally or the dietary antioxidants, vitamin A, vitamin C and vitamin E.
Ascorbic acid is required for the conversion of the procollagen to collagen by oxidizing proline residues to hydroxyproline.
Catalase is an unusual enzyme since, although hydrogen peroxide is its only substrate, it follows a ping-pong mechanism.
The different antioxidants are present at a wide range of concentrations in body fluids and tissues, with some such as glutathione or ubiquinone mostly present within cells, while others such as uric acid are more evenly distributed (see table below).
protect DNA from oxidative stress.
A low calorie diet extends median and maximum lifespan in many animals.
That is, paradoxically, agents which are normally considered antioxidants can act as conditional pro-oxidants and actually increase oxidative stress.
Oxidative stress is thought to contribute to the development of a wide range of diseases including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, the pathologies caused by diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and neurodegeneration in motor neuron diseases.
N,N'-di-2-butyl-1,4-phenylenediamine
This is in line with findings showing that α-tocopherol, but not water-soluble antioxidants, efficiently protects glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)-deficient cells from cell death.
Another example is glutathione, which is made from amino acids.
In addition to its direct antioxidant effects, ascorbic acid is also a substrate for the redox enzyme ascorbate peroxidase, a function that is particularly important in stress resistance in plants.
Jet fuels and gasolines, including aviation gasolines
These harmful effects may also be seen in non-smokers, as a recent meta-analysis including data from approximately 230,000 patients showed that β-carotene, vitamin A or vitamin E supplementation is associated with increased mortality but saw no significant effect from vitamin C. No health risk was seen when all the randomized controlled studies were examined together, but an increase in mortality was detected when only high-quality and low-bias risk trials were examined separately.
This effect is partly offset by the involvement of carotenoids in photoinhibition, and in algae and cyanobacteria, by large amount of iodide and selenium, which involves these antioxidants reacting with over-reduced forms of the photosynthetic reaction centres to prevent the production of reactive oxygen species.
Turbine oils, transformer oils, hydraulic fluids, waxes, and greases
The possible mechanisms of action of antioxidants were first explored when it was recognized that a substance with anti-oxidative activity is likely to be one that is itself readily oxidized.
In its active state, thioredoxin acts as an efficient reducing agent, scavenging reactive oxygen species and maintaining other proteins in their reduced state.
Randomized clinical trials including supplements of beta-carotene, vitamin A and vitamin E singly or in different combinations found no effect on mortality rate and cancer risk, or may even increase cancer risk.
Vegetable oils, nuts and seeds
Subsequent studies confirmed these adverse effects.
Carotenoids (carotenes as provitamin A)
The glutathione system includes glutathione, glutathione reductase, glutathione peroxidases and glutathione ''S''-transferases.
The hydroxyl radical is particularly unstable and will react rapidly and non-specifically with most biological molecules.
Oxidation and UV degradation are also frequently linked, mainly because UV radiation creates free radicals by bond breakage.
After being oxidized, the active thioredoxin is regenerated by the action of thioredoxin reductase, using NADPH as an electron donor.
These two publications are consistent with some previous meta-analyzes that also suggested that Vitamin E supplementation increased mortality, and that antioxidant supplements increased the risk of colon cancer.
Exposure to oxygen and sunlight are the two main factors in the oxidation of food, so food is preserved by keeping in the dark and sealing it in containers or even coating it in wax, as with cucumbers.
Ascorbic acid is present at high levels in all parts of plants and can reach concentrations of 20&nbsp;millimolar in chloroplasts.
Particularly important is the ability to sequester iron, which is the function of iron-binding proteins such as transferrin and ferritin.
More seriously, very high doses of some antioxidants may have harmful long-term effects.
Ascorbic acid is a redox catalyst which can reduce, and thereby neutralize, reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide.
Plants, such as ''Arabidopsis thaliana,'' have a particularly great diversity of isoforms.
Beta-carotene may also increase lung cancer.
Although large amounts of sulfur-containing amino acids such as acetylcysteine can increase glutathione, no evidence exists that eating high levels of these glutathione precursors is beneficial for healthy adults.
The amount of protection provided by any one antioxidant will also depend on its concentration, its reactivity towards the particular reactive oxygen species being considered, and the status of the antioxidants with which it interacts.
As the majority of these low-bias trials dealt with either elderly people, or people with disease, these results may not apply to the general population.
This system is found in animals, plants and microorganisms.
Antioxidant vitamins are found in vegetables, fruits, eggs, legumes and nuts.
Research into how vitamin E prevents the process of lipid peroxidation led to the identification of antioxidants as reducing agents that prevent oxidative reactions, often by scavenging reactive oxygen species before they can damage cells.
However, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) withdrew these ratings in 2012 as biologically invalid, stating that no physiological proof ''in vivo'' existed to support the free-radical theory, especially for polyphenols.
Oxidation is a chemical reaction that can produce free radicals, leading to chain reactions that may damage cells.
Cocoa bean and chocolate, spinach, turnip and rhubarb.
The potential role of the pro-oxidant role of uric acid in (e.g.)
By itself, UA-related risk of gout at high levels (415–530 μmol/L) is only 0.5% per year with an increase to 4.5% per year at UA supersaturation levels (535+ μmol/L).
Originally, the term antioxidant specifically referred to a chemical that prevented the consumption of oxygen.
Damage to DNA can cause mutations and possibly cancer, if not reversed by DNA repair mechanisms, while damage to proteins causes enzyme inhibition, denaturation and protein degradation.
In general, water-soluble antioxidants react with oxidants in the cell cytosol and the blood plasma, while lipid-soluble antioxidants protect cell membranes from lipid peroxidation.
In cells, glutathione is maintained in the reduced form by the enzyme glutathione reductase and in turn reduces other metabolites and enzyme systems, such as ascorbate in the glutathione-ascorbate cycle, glutathione peroxidases and glutaredoxins, as well as reacting directly with oxidants.
Fresh or frozen fruits and vegetables
The evolutionary reasons for this loss of urate conversion to allantoin remain the topic of active speculation.
In plants, SOD isozymes are present in the cytosol and mitochondria, with an iron SOD found in chloroplasts that is absent from vertebrates and yeast.
These compounds may be synthesized in the body or obtained from the diet.
They can be protected by antiozonants.
Uric acid (UA) is an antioxidant oxypurine produced from xanthine by the enzyme xanthine oxidase, and is an intermediate product of purine metabolism.
These enzymes share the same basic catalytic mechanism, in which a redox-active cysteine (the peroxidatic cysteine) in the active site is oxidized to a sulfenic acid by the peroxide substrate.
However, no benefits for physical performance to athletes are seen with vitamin E supplementation and 6 weeks of vitamin E supplementation had no effect on muscle damage in ultramarathon runners.
2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol
Consequently, packaging of fresh fruits and vegetables contains an ~8% oxygen atmosphere.
Fruit, vegetables and eggs
In other cells, it is maintained in its reduced form by reaction with glutathione, which can be catalysed by protein disulfide isomerase and glutaredoxins.
Antioxidants are an especially important class of preservatives as, unlike bacterial or fungal spoilage, oxidation reactions still occur relatively rapidly in frozen or refrigerated food.
There are at least four different glutathione peroxidase isozymes in animals.
Jet fuels and gasolines, including aviation gasolines
Unlike other antioxidants, melatonin does not undergo redox cycling, which is the ability of a molecule to undergo repeated reduction and oxidation.
5 (human, total carotenoids)
The use of oxygen as part of the process for generating metabolic energy produces reactive oxygen species.
Thus, the function of antioxidant systems is not to remove oxidants entirely, but instead to keep them at an optimum level.
Processed food contains fewer antioxidant vitamins than fresh and uncooked foods, as preparation exposes food to heat and oxygen.
Since oxidized lipids are often discolored and usually have unpleasant tastes such as metallic or sulfurous flavors, it is important to avoid oxidation in fat-rich foods.
Glutathione peroxidase 1 is the most abundant and is a very efficient scavenger of hydrogen peroxide, while glutathione peroxidase 4 is most active with lipid hydroperoxides.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, extensive study concentrated on the use of antioxidants in important industrial processes, such as the prevention of metal corrosion, the vulcanization of rubber, and the polymerization of fuels in the fouling of internal combustion engines.
Thus, these foods are rarely preserved by drying; instead, they are preserved by smoking, salting or fermenting.
The reactive oxygen species produced in cells include hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hypochlorous acid (HClO), and free radicals such as the hydroxyl radical (·OH) and the superoxide anion (O2−).
It has been proposed that polymorphisms in these enzymes are associated with DNA damage and subsequently the individual's risk of cancer susceptibility.
Studies of high altitude acclimatization support the hypothesis that urate acts as an antioxidant by mitigating the oxidative stress caused by high-altitude hypoxia.
Notable examples are oxalic acid, tannins and phytic acid, which are high in plant-based diets.
Measurement of antioxidant content in food is not a straightforward process, as this is a diverse group of compounds with different reactivities to various reactive oxygen species.
Reducing acid present
Peroxiredoxins seem to be important in antioxidant metabolism, as mice lacking peroxiredoxin 1 or 2 have shortened lifespan and suffer from hemolytic anaemia, while plants use peroxiredoxins to remove hydrogen peroxide generated in chloroplasts.
Antioxidants are frequently added to industrial products.
In contrast, the mice lacking copper/zinc SOD (Sod1) are viable but have numerous pathologies and a reduced lifespan (see article on superoxide), while mice without the extracellular SOD have minimal defects (sensitive to hyperoxia).
They are widely used to prevent the oxidative degradation of polymers such as rubbers, plastics and adhesives that causes a loss of strength and flexibility in these materials.
Oxidative damage in DNA can cause cancer.
However, it was the identification of vitamins A, C, and E as antioxidants that revolutionized the field and led to the realization of the importance of antioxidants in the biochemistry of living organisms.
Due to its high concentration and its central role in maintaining the cell's redox state, glutathione is one of the most important cellular antioxidants.
N,N'-di-2-butyl-1,4-phenylenediamine
Foods containing high levels of antioxidant vitamins
However, this catechol group undergoes extensive metabolism upon uptake in the human body, for example by Catechol-O-methyl transferase, and is therefore no longer able to act as electron acceptor.
Catalases are enzymes that catalyse the conversion of hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen, using either an iron or manganese cofactor.
Superoxide dismutase enzymes contain metal ion cofactors that, depending on the isozyme, can be copper, zinc, manganese or iron.
Early research on the role of antioxidants in biology focused on their use in preventing the oxidation of unsaturated fats, which is the cause of rancidity.
Some antioxidants are only found in a few organisms and these compounds can be important in pathogens and can be virulence factors.
In humans, the copper/zinc SOD is present in the cytosol, while manganese SOD is present in the mitochondrion.
Glutathione peroxidase is an enzyme containing four selenium-cofactors that catalyzes the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide and organic hydroperoxides.
Moreover, the administration of UA is therapeutic in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of MS." In sum, while the mechanism of UA as an antioxidant is well-supported, the claim that its levels affect MS risk is still controversial, and requires more research.
GPx4 is the only known enzyme that efficiently reduces lipid-hydroperoxides within biological membranes.
The relative importance of the antioxidant and pro-oxidant activities of antioxidants is an area of current research, but vitamin C, which exerts its effects as a vitamin by oxidizing polypeptides, appears to have a mostly antioxidant action in the human body.
Vitamin E (tocopherols, tocotrienols)
The term "antioxidant" is mainly used for two different groups of substances:  industrial chemicals which are added to products to prevent oxidation, and natural chemicals found in foods and body tissue which are said to have beneficial health effects.
Diets high in fruit and vegetables, and so possibly being rich in antioxidant vitamins, have no established effect on status of health or aging, yet may have more subtle physiological effects, such as modifying cell-to-cell communication.
As part of their adaptation from marine life, terrestrial plants began producing non-marine antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C), polyphenols and tocopherols.
Most other animals are able to produce this compound in their bodies and do not require it in their diets.
Jet fuels and gasolines, including aviation gasolines
2,4-dimethyl-6-tert-butylphenol
Studies of UA's antioxidant mechanism support this proposal.
Many polyphenols may have non-antioxidant roles in minute concentrations that affect cell-to-cell signaling, receptor sensitivity, inflammatory enzyme activity or gene regulation.
Calcium and iron deficiencies are not uncommon in diets in developing countries where less meat is eaten and there is high consumption of phytic acid from beans and unleavened whole grain bread.
The mode of cracking varies between oxygen and ozone attack, the former causing a "crazy paving" effect, while ozone attack produces deeper cracks aligned at right angles to the tensile strain in the product.
The relative importance and interactions between these different antioxidants is a very complex question, with the various metabolites and enzyme systems having synergistic and interdependent effects on one another.
The most common molecules attacked by oxidation are unsaturated fats; oxidation causes them to turn rancid.
A paradox in metabolism is that, while the vast majority of complex life on Earth requires oxygen for its existence, oxygen is a highly reactive molecule that damages living organisms by producing reactive oxygen species.
Peroxide is also produced from the oxidation of reduced flavoproteins, such as complex I.
Another example is the postulated role of homocysteine in atherosclerosis.
Whole grains, maize, legumes.
Over-oxidation of this cysteine residue in peroxiredoxins inactivates these enzymes, but this can be reversed by the action of sulfiredoxin.
In animal studies that investigate diseases facilitated by oxidative stress, introduction of UA both prevents the disease or reduces it, leading researchers to propose this is due to UA's antioxidant properties.
Particularly important is the reduction of coenzyme Q in complex III, since a highly reactive free radical is formed as an intermediate (Q'''·'''−).
Hypothetically, free radicals induce an endogenous response that protects against exogenous radicals (and possibly other toxic compounds).
The mitochondrial isozyme seems to be the most biologically important of these three, since mice lacking this enzyme die soon after birth.
Jet fuels and gasolines, widely approved for aviation fuels
Glutathione is a cysteine-containing peptide found in most forms of aerobic life.
In this process, the superoxide anion is produced as a by-product of several steps in the electron transport chain.
Antioxidants such as thiols or ascorbic acid (vitamin C) terminate these chain reactions.
In plants, algae,  and cyanobacteria, reactive oxygen species are also produced during photosynthesis, particularly under conditions of high light intensity.
Vitamins A, C, and E can be destroyed by long-term storage or prolonged cooking.
With respect to multiple sclerosis,  Gwen Scott explains the significance of uric acid as an antioxidant by proposing that "Serum UA levels are inversely associated with the incidence of MS in humans because MS patients have low serum UA levels and individuals with hyperuricemia (gout) rarely develop the disease.
This unstable intermediate can lead to electron "leakage", when electrons jump directly to oxygen and form the superoxide anion, instead of moving through the normal series of well-controlled reactions of the electron transport chain.
The active site of thioredoxin consists of two neighboring cysteines, as part of a highly conserved CXXC motif, that can cycle between an active dithiol form (reduced) and an oxidized disulfide form.
SOD enzymes are present in almost all aerobic cells and in extracellular fluids.
Solid polymer products start to crack on exposed surfaces as the material degrades and the chains break.
Polyphenols, which often have antioxidant properties in vitro, are not necessarily antioxidants in vivo due to extensive metabolism.
Common pharmaceuticals (and supplements) with antioxidant properties may interfere with the efficacy of certain anticancer medication and radiation.
atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke is considered above.
Even less fatty foods such as fruits are sprayed with sulfurous antioxidants prior to air drying.
Other polymers susceptible to oxidation include polypropylene and polyethylene.
As with antioxidant metabolites, the contributions of these enzymes to antioxidant defenses can be hard to separate from one another, but the generation of transgenic mice lacking just one antioxidant enzyme can be informative.
They are divided into three classes: typical 2-cysteine peroxiredoxins; atypical 2-cysteine peroxiredoxins; and 1-cysteine peroxiredoxins.
However, less data is available for other dietary antioxidants, such as vitamin E, or the polyphenols.
The thioredoxin system contains the 12-kDa protein thioredoxin and its companion thioredoxin reductase.
Some antioxidant supplements may promote disease and increase mortality in humans under certain conditions.
2,6-di-tert-butylphenol
While antioxidant supplementation is widely used in attempts to prevent the development of cancer, antioxidants may interfere with cancer treatments, since the environment of cancer cells causes high levels of oxidative stress, making these cells more susceptible to the further oxidative stress induced by treatments.
Turbine oils, transformer oils, hydraulic fluids, waxes, greases, and gasolines
Overall, the large number of clinical trials carried out on antioxidant supplements suggest that either these products have no effect on health, or that they cause a small increase in mortality in elderly or vulnerable populations.
Melatonin easily crosses cell membranes and the blood–brain barrier.
Here, low density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation appears to trigger the process of atherogenesis, which results in atherosclerosis, and finally cardiovascular disease.
Free radicals may increase life span.
These preservatives include natural antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (AA, E300) and tocopherols (E306), as well as synthetic antioxidants such as propyl gallate (PG, E310), tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ), butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA, E320) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT, E321).
Despite its apparent importance in hydrogen peroxide removal, humans with genetic deficiency of catalase&nbsp;— "acatalasemia"&nbsp;— or mice genetically engineered to lack catalase completely, suffer few ill effects.
The beta-carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial (CARET) study of lung cancer patients found that smokers given supplements containing beta-carotene and vitamin A had increased rates of lung cancer.
Likewise,  UA has the highest concentration of any blood antioxidant and provides over half of the total antioxidant capacity of human serum.
Superoxide dismutases (SODs) are a class of closely related enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of the superoxide anion into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.
This created a revenue of circa 3.7 billion US-dollars (2.4 billion Euros).
