For a large portion of Antigua history, the island was considered Britain's "Gateway to the Caribbean".
On 27 February 2009, Pendergest-Holt was arrested by federal agents in connection with the alleged fraud.
No researcher has conclusively proven any of these causes as the real reason for the destruction of West Indian natives.
Antigua's obligations to the US in respect of patents, copyright, and trademarks are affected.
Another staple, ''fungi'' (), is a cooked paste made of cornmeal and water.
Allen Stanford's move into banking utilized funds he had made in real estate in Houston, Texas, in the early 1980s.
Other leading population settlements are All Saints (3,412) and Liberta (2,239), according to the 2001 census.
Colonists took them to Europe, and from there, they spread around the world.
They also cultivated:
The growing medical school and its students also add much to the economy.
During Antigua Sailing Week, at the end of April and beginning of May, the annual world-class regatta brings many sailing vessels and sailors to the island to play sports.
The country was then led by what many describe as an elected family dynasty, with Vere C. Bird, the first prime minister, having been succeeded in 1993 by Lester B. Bird, his son, who retained the post until 2004.
This argument was brought before World Trade Organization and was deemed incorrect.
In the last decade, Spanish-speaking immigrants from the Dominican Republic and from other African-Caribbean immigrants from Guyana and Dominica have been added to this ethnic mosaic.
The Americans were at this time trading with our islands, taking advantage of the register of their ships, which had been issued while they were British subjects.
It is the site of a restored British colonial naval station called "Nelson's Dockyard" after Captain Horatio Nelson.
These groups succumbed easily to disease and/or malnutrition, and died by the thousands.
Stanford International Bank was formed by Allen Stanford in 1986 in Montserrat where it was called Guardian International Bank.
antiguae'', now occupies only 0.1 per cent of its historical range.
Lord Horatio Nelson, a major figure in Antigua history, arrived in the late 18th century to preserve the island's commercial shipping prowess.
As a result, he was unable to get a promotion for some time after his stint on the island.
Those who remained were raided by the Carib coming from Venezuela.
For example, a popular Antiguan dish, ''dukuna'' (), is a sweet, steamed dumpling made from grated sweet potatoes, flour and spices.
The Country consists of immigrants from other countries, particularly Dominica, Guyana, Jamaica, Dominican Republic, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.
Conte and Clapton served as the Centre's first two board members with Conte being chairman.
Codrington guided development on the island as a profitable sugar colony.
Mulattoes were lighter in shade than the masses of Africans.
At the same time, public opinion in Great Britain gradually turned against slavery.
As they entered this hierarchy, Africans were profoundly racialised.
In fact, the slaves thrived physically and also provided medical services, and skilled labour, such as carpentry for their masters.
All four have undergone severe range reductions; at least two subspecies are extinct and another, ''A.
Antigua and Barbuda became an independent state within the Commonwealth of Nations on 1 November 1981.
''The Catholic Encyclopedia'' does note that the European invaders had difficulty identifying and differentiating between the various native peoples they encountered.
There is also a significant population of American citizens estimated at 4500 people, one of the largest American citizen populations in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean.
The majority of the white population is ethnically Irish and British, and Portuguese.
All development of the facility was performed by officers and employees of these two companies.
The country's official currency is the East Caribbean dollar.
They developed complex ideologies of shade to legitimate their claims to higher status.
Some of the vegetables listed, such as corn and sweet potatoes, still are staples of Antiguan cuisine.
Both football (soccer) and basketball are becoming popular among the island youth.
Catholicism is the other significant denomination, with the remainder being other Protestants: including Methodists, Moravians, Pentecostals, Seventh-Day Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses.
The EC dollar is pegged to the US dollar at a varied rate and average about $1&nbsp;US&nbsp;=&nbsp;$2.7169&nbsp;EC.
Richards scored the fastest Test century at the Antigua Recreation Ground, it was also the venue at which Brian Lara twice broke the world record for an individual Test innings (375 in 1993/94, 400 not out in 2003/04).
The only regular service to Barbuda flies from VC Bird Airport.
As new immigrants often fleeing poverty and political unrest, they have entered at the bottom of the hierarchy.
Being surrounded by water, sailing has been one of the most popular sports for years with Antigua Sailing Week and Antigua Classic Yacht Regatta being two of the regions most reputable sailing competitions.
Mulattoes gradually distinguished themselves from the masses of enslaved Africans.
According to ''A Brief History of the Caribbean'', European diseases, malnutrition and slavery eventually destroyed the vast majority of the Caribbean's native population.
The island's single airport is served by several major airlines, including Virgin Atlantic, British Airways, American Airlines, United Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Caribbean Airlines, Air Canada, WestJet, LIAT,and JetBlue.
Given the dominance of tourism, many prices in tourist-oriented businesses are shown in US dollars.
The Antiguan racer is among the rarest snakes in the world.
Some white fathers had their sons educated or trained in crafts.
Kitesurfing or kite-boarding is very popular at Jabbawock Beach.
It is found on both islands.
He came from Barbados, bringing the latest sugar technology with him.
The native-identified populations in the West Indies maintain a pride in their heritage.
The unit was inactivated due to US government budget cuts.
Slaveholders often counted as 'married' only those slaves with mates on the estate."
"Traveling&nbsp;... at slavery's end, Joseph Sturge and Thomas Harvey (1838&nbsp;...) found few married slaves residing together or even on the same estate.
Its population was 80,161 (at the 2011 Census).
On 21 December 2007 an Article 22 arbitration panel ruled that the United States' failure to comply with WTO rules would attract a US$21 million sanction.
Southey then quotes Nelson as saying that "The Antiguan Colonists are as great rebels as ever were in America, had they the power to show it."
Windsurfing was very popular until kite-surfing came to the island with a big splash.
Island Academy International, the sole international school in the country, is in Buckleys, Saint John Parish.
The bank was later sued by the United States for failure to release forfeited funds from one of its account holders.
In the 20th century, the colonial hierarchy gradually began to come apart as a result of universal education and better economic opportunity.
The economy is mainly reliant on tourism, with the agricultural sector serving the domestic market.
They sometimes benefited them in other ways, which led to the development of a separate class.
Transitional put up all working capital during the development phase and the facility was initially owned ⅔ by Transitional and ⅓ by Clapton.
Among themselves, there were divisions between British Antiguans and non-creolised British.
Due to information obtained from other slaves, colonists discovered the plot and suppressed it.
Crossroads Centre is a drug and alcohol addiction rehabilitation centre located on Antigua, founded by guitarist Eric Clapton and Richard Conte, CEO of The Priory Hospitals Group (London) and Transitional Hospitals Corporation (Nevada).
Antigua was the location of a 2007 Cricket World Cup site, on a new Recreation Ground constructed on an old cane field in the north of the island.
Following the foundation of the Ulotrichian Universal Union, a friendly society which acted as a trade union (which were banned), the sugar cane workers were ready to confront the plantation owners when they slashed their wages.
The island's circumference is roughly  and its area .
Sugar became Antigua's main crop in about 1674, when Christopher Codrington (c 1640-1698) settled at Betty's Hope plantation.
Software company SlySoft was based in Antigua, allowing it to avoid nations with laws that are tough on anti-circumvention of technological copyright measures, in particular the DMCA in the United States.
Enslaved and forcefully transported, Africans started arriving in Antigua and Barbuda in large numbers during the 1670s.
These acts prohibited trade with the newly formed United States of America.
The following quote from ''The Life of Horatio Lord Nelson'' by Robert Southey sums up his views about the controversial Navigation Acts:
Most of the Arawak left Antigua about A.D. 1100.
Starting as itinerant traders, they soon worked their way into the middle strata of the society.
Nelson knew that, by the Navigation Act, no foreigners, directly or indirectly, are permitted to carry on any trade with these possessions.
Non-Christian religions practiced on the islands include Hinduism, Rastafari, Islam, Judaism, and Baha'i.
Very quickly they came to constitute the majority of the population.
Antigua was one of the very first nations to legalize, license, and regulate online gambling and is a primary location for incorporation of online gambling companies.
Unlike the Antiguan merchants, Nelson had a positive view of the Navigation Acts.
In 2006 the United States Congress voted to approve the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act which criminalized the operations of offshore gambling operators which take wagers from American-based gamblers.
Since March 2004 to June 12, 2014 Baldwin Spencer led the country.
Antigua may thus disregard the WIPO treaty on intellectual property rights, and therefore the US implementation of that treaty (the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, or DMCA)—at least up to the limit of compensation.
As a result, the number and types of ethnic/tribal/national groups at the time were likely more varied and numerous than the two mentioned in this article.
This was a prima facie violation of the GATS treaty obligations enforced by the WTO, resulting in a series of rulings unfavorable to the US.
In particular, Berne Convention copyright is in question, and also material NOT covered by the Berne convention, including TRIPS accord obligations to the US.
Today English Harbour and the neighbouring village of Falmouth are internationally famous as a yachting and sailing destination and provisioning centre.
Although Middle Easterners came from a variety of areas in the Middle East, as a group they are usually referred to as Syrians.
English Harbour on the south-eastern coast is famed for its protected shelter during violent storms.
On that day the SEC said that Stanford and his accomplices operated a "massive Ponzi scheme", misappropriated billions of investors' money and falsified the Stanford International Bank's records to hide their fraud.
Swiss American Bank was founded by Bruce Rappaport.
The cane workers went on strike and rioted when their leaders were arrested.
Betty's Hope, Antigua's first full-scale sugar plantation, was so successful that other planters turned from tobacco to sugar.
Today, collectors prize the uniquely designed "colonial" furniture built by West Indian slaves.
On 17 February 2009, the SEC charged Allen Stanford, Pendergest-Holt and Davis with fraud in connection with the bank's US$8 billion certificate of deposit (CD) investment scheme that offered "improbable and unsubstantiated high interest rates".
On 13 April 2012, AOB was placed into receivership by the government of Antigua.
According to ''The Catholic Encyclopedia'', the Caribs' superior weapons and seafaring prowess allowed them to defeat most Arawak nations in the West Indies.
Immediately below the British, were the mulattoes, a mixed-race group resulting from unions between, generally, white European males and enslaved African women, many of which took place in the years before the expansion of enslaved African population.
Sir Vivian ("Viv") Richards is one of the most famous Antiguans, who played for, and captained, the West Indies team.
The Lesser Antilles are home to four species of racers.
Most of the merchants in Antigua depended upon American trade, so many of them despised Captain Nelson.
These included the rare, but not unprecedented, right to disregard intellectual property obligations to the US.
A colonial framework was established by the English soon after their initial settlement of Antigua in 1623.
The Arawak were the first well-documented group of indigenous people to settle Antigua.
During his tenure, he tried to enforce the Navigation Acts.
Many hotels and resorts are located around the coastline.
It was located on the major sailing routes among the region's resource-rich colonies.
Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson (who was created Viscount Nelson 1801) was Senior Naval Officer of the Leeward Islands from 1784 to 1787 on H.M.S.
Prince Klaas and four accomplices were caught and executed by the breaking wheel.
The American War of Independence in the late 18th century disrupted the Caribbean sugar trade.
In fact, some historians believe that the psychological stress of slavery may also have played a part in the massive number of native deaths while in servitude.
As a result, the Arawak and Carib populated much of the South American and the Caribbean islands.
Local Antiguan Andre Phillip is one of the most famous kite-surfers in the world and spends much of his time training in Antigua and Barbuda.
Antigua is therefore able to recoup some of the claimed loss of trade by hosting (and taxing) companies whose business model depends on immunity from TRIPS provisions.
In 1736, a slave called "Prince Klaas" (whose real name was Court) planned an uprising in which whites would be massacred.
The slaves lived in wretched and overcrowded conditions, and could be mistreated or even killed by their owners with impunity.
Sport Fishing is also a very popular sport with several big competitions held yearly.
Fifth and finally were the African-Antiguans and Barbudans who were located at the bottom of this hierarchy.
Below the Portuguese were the Middle Easterners, who began migrating to Antigua and Barbuda around the turn of the 20th century.
The indigenous people of the West Indies made excellent sea vessels, which they used to sail the Atlantic and Caribbean.
Others believe that the reportedly abundant, but starchy, low-protein diet may have contributed to severe malnutrition of the "Indians" who were used to a diet fortified with protein from sealife.
''Antigua'' means "ancient" in Spanish  after an icon in Seville Cathedral, "Santa Maria de la Antigua"St. Mary of the Old Cathedral.
Great Britain abolished the slave trade in 1807, and all existing slaves were emancipated in 1834.
Some countries, most notably the United States, argue that if a particular gambling transaction is initiated outside the country of Antigua then that transaction is governed by the laws of the country where the transaction was initiated.
This process gave rise to Africans reaching the highest strata of society and government.
There are several golf courses in Antigua.
General elections were held and the leader of the opposition Hon.
Hundreds of yachts from around the world compete around Antigua each year.
They enslaved some and cannibalised others.
This led the federal government to freeze the assets of the bank and other Stanford entities.
Until July 7, 2015, the United States Air Force maintained a small base near the airport, designated Detachment 1, 45th Operations Group, 45th Space Wing (known as Antigua Air Station).
According to ''A Brief History of the Caribbean'', many West Indian colonists initially tried to use locals as slaves.
In 1729, a slave named Hercules was hanged, drawn and quartered, and three others burnt alive, for conspiring to kill the slave owner Crump and his family.
* Sweet potatoes (white with firmer flesh than the bright orange "sweet potato" used in the United States.)
The ethnic distribution consist of 91% African, Mulatto and mixed African/Amerindian, 4.4% Other Mixed Race, 1.7% White, 2.9% Other (primarily East Indian and Asian).
It is one of the Leeward Islands in the Caribbean region and the main island of the country of Antigua and Barbuda.
A majority of Antiguans are Christians (74%), with the Anglican Church (about 44%) being the largest denomination.
Stanford relocated its operations to Antigua.
The bank's portfolio was overseen by an investment committee consisting of Allen Stanford; his father; Laura Pendergest-Holt, Stanford Financial Groups' Chief Investment Officer; James M. Davis (Allen Stanford's college roommate), CFO of Stanford International Bank; and a resident of Mexia, Texas (where Stanford's US interests were based) with cattle ranching and car sales experience.
Gaston Browne's Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party won 14 of the 17 parliamentary seats.
Among Portuguese Antiguans and Barbudans, status differences move along a continuum of varying degrees of assimilation into the Anglicised practices of the dominant group.
The WTO ruling was notable in two respects:
Eventually, the Arawak migrated from the mainland, followed by the Carib.
Gaston Browne was sworn in as the fifth Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda by Governor General, Dame Louise Lake-Tack on Friday, 13 June 2014.
Six slaves were hanged in chains and starved to death, and another 58 were burned at the stake.
The mission provided high rate telemetry data for the Eastern Range and its space launches.
From that point on, Antigua history took a dramatic turn.
"Stanford International Bank's financial statements, including its investment income, are fictional," the SEC said.
Behind the late 20th century reviving and re-specifying of the place of African-Antiguans and Barbudans in the cultural life of the society, is a history of race/ethnic relations that systematically excluded them.
In addition, the bank placed a 60-day moratorium on early redemptions of its CDs.
Their descendants live throughout South America, particularly Brazil, Venezuela and Colombia.
Many established small businesses and joined the ranks of what was by then the mulatto middle class.
The British never really considered Portuguese as their equals, so they were not allowed into their ranks.
Former prime minister Lester Bird of Antigua was integrally involved by Transitional and arranged for the government of Antigua's assistance with roads, utilities and a favourable land purchase price.
Sir Christopher Codrington, an Englishman, established the first permanent European settlement.
There are also Christian Levantine Arabs (primarily of Syrian, Lebanese and Palestinian descent) and a small population of Asians and Sephardic Jews.
Among other crops, they cultivated the now noted Antiguan "Black" pineapple.
The capital is situated in the north-west and has a deep harbour which is able to accommodate large cruise ships.
Mixed-race relationships and later immigration resulted by the late 19th century in the emergence of five distinct and carefully ranked race/ethnic groups.
These ideologies of shade paralleled in many ways British ideologies of white supremacy.
It is endemic to Antigua and Barbuda.
The University of Health Sciences Antigua (UHSA) and the American University of Antigua (AUA) College of Medicine teach aspiring doctors.
The site of these executions is now the Antiguan Recreation Ground.
He knew, also, that the Americans had made themselves foreigners with regard to England; they had disregarded the ties of blood and language when they acquired the independence which they had been led on to claim, unhappily for themselves, before they were fit for it; and he was resolved that they should derive no profit from those ties now.
Swiss American Bank Ltd., later renamed Global Bank of Commerce, Ltd, was formed in April 1983 and became the first International Financial institution governed by the International Business Corporations, Act of 1982 licensed bank in Antigua.
A dockyard started in 1725, to provide a base for a squadron of British ships whose main function was to patrol the West Indies and thus maintain Britain's sea power, was later named "Nelson's Dockyard" in his honour.
'''Antigua''' ( ), also known as '''Waladli''' or '''Wadadli''' by the native population, is an island in the West Indies.
In 1632, a group of English colonists left St. Kitts to settle on Antigua.
Foreigners they had made themselves, and as foreigners they were to be treated.
Next in this hierarchy were the Portuguese— 2500 of whom migrated as workers from Madeira between 1847 and 1852 because of a severe famine.
Since there is no appeal to the WTO from an Arbitration panel of this kind, it represents the last legal word from the WTO on the matter.
Antigua Overseas Bank (AOB) was part of the ABI Financial Group and was a licensed bank in Antigua.
Second, a rider to the arbitration ruling affirmed the right of Antigua to take retaliatory steps in view of the prior failure of the US to comply with GATS.
The Arawak introduced agriculture to Antigua and Barbuda.
The name ''Waladli'' comes from the indigenous inhabitants and means approximately "our own".
Christopher Columbus was the first European to visit Antigua, in 1493.
The Slave Act of 1723 made arbitrary murder of slaves a crime, but did not do much to ease their lives.
Prior to European colonialism, the first residents were the Guanahatabey people.
Over 32,000 people live in the capital city, St. John's, at .
According to ''A History of Antigua'' by Brian Dyde, by the mid-1770s, the number of slaves had increased to 37,500, up from 12,500 in 1713, whereas the white population had fallen from 5,000 to below 3,000.
Unrest among the slaves became increasingly common.
Antigua's economy is reliant upon tourism, and it promotes the island as a luxury Caribbean escape.
Griswold's ameiva (''Ameiva griswoldi'') is a species of lizard in the genus Ameiva.
In 1968, with Barbuda and the tiny island of Redonda as dependencies, Antigua became an associated state of the Commonwealth, and in 1981 it was disassociated from Britain.
They paddled to the island by canoe (''piragua'') from present-day Venezuela, pushed out by the Carib, another indigenous people.
First, although technically a victory for Antigua, the $21 million was far less than the US$3.5 billion which had been sought; one of the three arbitrators was sufficiently bothered by the propriety of this that he issued a dissenting opinion.
Conte's wife is credited with naming the facility and his associate Lester Keizer of Transitional was the 'point man' on the project.
This resulted in their importing slaves to work the sugar cane crops.
Many of these works feature what are now considered "traditional" motifs, such as pineapples, fish and stylized serpents.
They ceased being Ashantee, Ewe, Yoruba and became Negroes or blacks.
Court was crowned "King of the Coromantees" in a pasture outside the capital of St. John's, in what appeared to be just a colourful spectacle, but was for the slaves a ritual declaration of war on the whites.
While Nelson was stationed on Antigua, he frequently visited the nearby island of Nevis, where he met and married a young widow, Fanny Nisbet, who had previously married the son of a plantation family on Nevis.
The African slaves adapted well to the new environment and thus became the number one choice of unpaid labour.
