Another important plant was sotol.
Hunting often had elaborate preparations, such as fasting and religious rituals performed by medicine men before and after the hunt.
The most important plant food used by the Chiricahua was the Century plant (also known as mescal or agave).
For example, a person's maternal grandmother will be called ''-chú'' and that maternal grandmother will also call that person ''-chú'' as well (i.e.
A hide, suspended at the entrance, is fixed on a cross-beam so that it may be swung forward or backward.
in certain Pueblo cultures like the Hopi and Zuni) and considered to be snake-like (an evil animal) in physical appearance.
Lesser game included: cottontail rabbits (but not jack rabbits), opossums, squirrels, surplus horses, surplus mules, wapiti (elk), wild cattle, wood rats.
The Apache tribes fought the invading Spanish and Mexican peoples for centuries.
Many books were written on the stories of hunting and trapping during the late 19th century.
Also eaten were mulberries, narrowleaf yucca blossoms, narrowleaf yucca stalks, nipple cactus fruit, one-seed juniper berries, onions, pigweed seeds, pinyon nuts, pitahaya fruit, prickly pear fruit, prickly pear juice, raspberries, screwbean (or tornillo) fruit, saguaro fruit, spurge seeds, strawberries, sumac (''Rhus trilobata'') berries, sunflower seeds, tule rootstocks, tule shoots, pigweed tumbleweed seeds, unicorn plant seeds, walnuts, western yellow pine inner bark (used as a sweetener), western yellow pine nuts, whitestar potatoes (''Ipomoea lacunosa''), wild grapes, wild potatoes (''Solanum jamesii''), wood sorrel leaves, and yucca buds (unknown species).
Modern Apache people today, and the US government, maintain use of the Spanish term to describe themselves and tribal functions.
To build it, long fresh poles of oak or willow are driven into the ground or placed in holes made with a digging stick.
Band organization was strongest among the Chiricahua and Western Apache, while among the Lipan and Mescalero, it was weak.
The trek resulted in the loss of several hundred lives.
This period is sometimes called the Apache Wars.
The Navajo practiced the most crop cultivation, the Western Apache, Jicarilla, and Lipan less.
Willem de Reuse finds linguistic evidence supporting only three major groupings: White Mountain, San Carlos, and Dilzhe’e (Tonto).
Various hunting strategies were used.
younger sister or brother)".
All people in the Apache tribe lived in one of three types of houses.
At the end of June and beginning of July, saguaro, prickly pear, and cholla fruits were gathered.
The term ''Apachean'' includes the related  Navajo people.
Many Apache peoples joined together several local groups into "bands".
The people were held there in internment for 25 years while white settlers took over their land.
Archaeologists are finding ample evidence of an early proto-Apache presence in the Southwestern mountain zone in the 15th century and perhaps earlier.
The Western Apache system differs slightly from the other two systems, and it has some similarities to the Navajo system.
Some Pinaleño were referred to as the ''Gila Apache''.
same-sex father's brother's child or mother's sister's child)", ''-´-láh'' "opposite-sex sibling or opposite parallel cousin (i.e.
Recent advances have been made in the regard in the far southern portion of the American Southwest.
**'''Arivaipa''' (also Aravaipa) is a band of the San Carlos Apache.
These were similar in nature to those involving the Stolen Generations of Australia.
Thus sites where early Southern Athabaskans may have lived are difficult to locate and even more difficult to firmly identify as culturally Southern Athabaskan.
A similar method involved chasing the prey down a steep cliff.
Particular types of foods eaten by a group depending upon their respective environment.
He believes San Carlos is the most divergent dialect, and that Dilzhe’e is a remnant, intermediate member of a dialect continuum that previously spanned from the Western Apache language to the Navajo.
The Apache presence on both the Plains and in the mountainous Southwest indicate that the people took multiple early migration routes.
When the U.S. claimed former territories of Mexico in 1846, ''Mangas Coloradas'' signed a peace treaty with the nation, respecting them as conquerors of the Mexicans' land.
Other times a band would leave without permission, to raid, return to their homeland to forage, or to simply get away.
Distant cousins and a subgroup of the Apache, generally, are the Navajo Peoples who in their own language refer to themselves as the ''Diné''.
Other historians note that Coronado reported that Pueblo women and children had often been evacuated by the time his party attacked their dwellings, and that he saw some dwellings had been recently abandoned as he moved up the Rio Grande.
* '''Pelones''' ("Bald Ones") lived far from San Antonio and far to the northeast of the Ypandes near the Red River of the South of North-Central Texas, although able to field 800 warriors, more than the ''Ypandes'' and ''Natagés'' together, they were described as less warlike because they had fewer horses than the Plains Lipan, their population were estimated between 1,600 and 2,400 persons, were the ''Forest Lipan'' division (''Chishį́į́hį́į́'', ''Tcici'', ''Tcicihi'' - "People of the Forest", after 1760 the name Pelones was never used by the Spanish for any Texas Apache group, the Pelones had fled for the Comanche south and southwest, but never mixed up with the Plains Lipan division - retaining their distinct identity, so that Morris Opler was told by his Lipan informants in 1935 that their tribal name was "People of the Forest")
The first Apache raids on Sonora appear to have taken place during the late 17th century.
In May, the Western Apache baked and dried agave crowns that were pounded into pulp and formed into rectangular cakes.
An uneasy peace between the Apache and the new citizens of the United States held until the 1850s.
Numerous plants were used for medicine and religious ceremonies in addition their nutritional usage.
In 1875, United States military forced the removal of an estimated 1500 Yavapai and Dilzhe’e Apache (better known as ''Tonto Apache'') from the Rio Verde Indian Reserve and its several thousand acres of treaty lands promised to them by the United States government.
However, formerly ‘they had no permanent homes, so they didn't bother with cleaning.’ The dome-shaped dwelling or wickiup, the usual home type for all the Chiricahua bands, has already been described.... Said a Central Chiricahua informant.
The Western Apache, located in Arizona, is divided into several reservations, which crosscut cultural divisions.
It was just thrown together.
The terms are also used of a grandparent's siblings according to sex.
These poles, which form the framework, are arranged at one-foot intervals and are bound together at the top with yucca-leaf strands.
**'''Coyotero''' refers to a southern pre-reservation White Mountain group of the Western Apache, but has also been used more widely to refer to the Apache in general, Western Apache, or an Apache band in the high plains of Southern Colorado to Kansas.
'''Lipan''' (also Ypandis, Ypandes, Ipandes, Ipandi, Lipanes, Lipanos, Lipaines, Lapane, Lipanis, etc.)
Two terms are used for same-sex and opposite-sex siblings.
Tonto is one of the major dialects of the Western Apache language.
At the orders of the Indian Commissioner, L.E.
In April 1541, while traveling on the plains east of the Pueblo region, Francisco Coronado referred to the people "dog nomads."
A competing theory posits their migration south, through the Rocky Mountains, ultimately reaching the American Southwest by the 14th century or perhaps earlier.
When Juan José Compà, the leader of the Copper Mines Mimbreño Apaches, was killed for bounty money in 1837, ''Mangas Coloradas'' (Red Sleeves) or ''Dasoda-hae'' (He just sits there) became the principal chief and war leader; in the same 1837 Soldado Fiero (aka Fuerte), leader of the Warm Springs Mimbreño Apaches, was killed by Mexican soldiers near Janos, and his son ''Cuchillo Negro'' (Black Knife) became the principal chief and war leader.
Their job was keeping the various bands on the reservations by finding and returning those who left.
Other Spanish explorers first mention "Querechos" living west of the Rio Grande in the 1580s.
They may be used for human purposes through ritual ceremonies.
A smoke hole opens above a central fireplace.
Any of the various powers may be acquired by man and, if properly handled, used for a variety of purposes.
Additionally, there are separate words for cross-cousins: ''-zeedń'' "cross-cousin (either same-sex or opposite-sex of speaker)", ''-iłnaaʼaash'' "male cross-cousin" (only used by male speakers).
* '''White Mountain''' are the easternmost group of the Western Apache, according to Goodwin, who included the Eastern White Mountain and Western White Mountain Apache.
The primary game of the Chiricahua was the deer followed by pronghorn.
The main food of the Lipan was the buffalo with a three-week hunt during the fall and smaller scale hunts continuing until the spring.
Although the Western Apache usually practiced matrilocal residence, sometimes the eldest son chose to bring his wife to live with his parents after marriage.
However, in certain activities, such as the gathering of heavy agave crowns, men helped, although the men's job is usually to hunt animals such as deer, buffalo, and small game.
Anthropologists believe the use of masks and sandpainting are examples of cultural diffusion from neighboring Pueblo cultures.
Medicine men learn the ceremonies, which can also be acquired by direct revelation to the individual.
The final housing is the hogan, an earthen structure in the desert area that was good for cool keeping in the hot weather of northern Mexico.
For waterproofing, pieces of hide are thrown over the outer hatching, and in rainy weather, if a fire is not needed, even the smoke hole is covered.
::: ''...When we settled down, we used the wickiup; when we were moving around a great deal, we used this other kind...''"
The major groups speak several different languages and developed distinct and competitive cultures.
The Navajo, Western Apache, Jicarilla, and Lipan have an emergence or Creation Story, while this is lacking in the Chiricahua and Mescalero.
The term ''diyí’'' refers to one or all of a set of abstract and invisible forces which are said to derive from certain classes of animals, plants, minerals, meteorological phenomena, and mythological figures within the Western Apache universe.
Also the slaughter of animals must be performed following certain religious guidelines (many of which are recorded in religious stories) from prescribing how to cut the animals, what prayers to recite, and proper disposal of bones.
In early 20th century Parisian society, the word ''Apache'' was adopted into French, essentially meaning an outlaw.
Below is a description of Chiricahua wickiups recorded by anthropologist Morris Opler:
:: "The home in which the family lives is made by the women and is ordinarily a circular, dome-shaped brush dwelling, with the floor at ground level.
Other names for them include Ná’įįsha, Ná’ęsha, Na’isha, Na’ishandine, Na-i-shan-dina, Na-ishi, Na-e-ca, Ną’ishą́, Nadeicha, Nardichia, Nadíisha-déna, Na’dí’į́shą́ʼ, Nądí’įįshąą, and Naisha.
The Chiricahua language has four different words for grandparent: ''-chú'' "maternal grandmother", ''-tsúyé'' "maternal grandfather", ''-chʼiné'' "paternal grandmother", ''-nálé'' "paternal grandfather".
In Lipan culture, since deer were protected by Mountain Spirits, great care was taken in Mountain Spirit rituals in order to ensure smooth deer hunting.
Whistles were sometimes used to lure animals closer.
The abundant agave (mescal) was also important to the Mescalero, who gathered the crowns in late spring after reddish flower stalks appeared.
The Plains migration theory associates the Apache peoples with the Dismal River culture, an archaeological culture known primarily from ceramics and house remains, dated 1675–1725, which has been excavated in Nebraska, eastern Colorado, and western Kansas.
It had a place for a fire in the center.
Over the centuries, many Spanish, French and English-speaking authors did not differentiate between Apache and other semi-nomadic non-Apache peoples who might pass through the same area.
There are two terms for each parent.
There are also three sibling terms based on the age relative to the speaker: ''-ndádéé'' "older sister", ''-´-naʼá̱á̱'' "older brother", ''-shdá̱zha'' "younger sibling (i.e.
There are several hypotheses concerning Apache migrations.
Apache men practiced varying degrees of "avoidance" of his wife's close relatives, a practice often most strictly observed by distance between mother-in-law and son-in-law.
In addition, an Apache individual has different ways of identification with a group, such as a band or clan, as well as the larger tribe or language grouping, which can add to the difficulties in an outsider comprehending the distinctions.
The Plains Apache have a significant Southern Plains cultural influence.
Other plants include: acorns, agarita berries, amole stalks (roasted and peeled), aspen inner bark (used as a sweetener), bear grass stalks (roasted and peeled), box elder inner bark (used as a sweetener), banana yucca fruit, banana yucca flowers, box elder sap (used as a sweetener), cactus fruits (of various varieties), cattail rootstocks, chokecherries, currants, dropseed grass seeds (used for flatbread), elderberries, gooseberries (''Ribes leptanthum'' and ''R.
Also used along with ''Coyotero'' to refer more generally to one of two major Western Apache divisions.
They left behind a more austere set of tools and material goods than other Southwestern cultures.
The current post-colonial division of Apache groups includes Western Apache, Chiricahua, Mescalero, Jicarilla, Lipan, and Plains Apache (also known as the Kiowa-Apache).
Most Chiricahua and Mescalero ceremonies were learned through the transmission of personal religious visions, while the Jicarilla and Western Apache used standardized rituals as the more central ceremonial practice.
Only a few hundred ever returned to their lands.
:: "A house form that departs from the more common dome-shaped variety is recorded for the Southern Chiricahua as well:
These beaded designs historically resembled that of the Great Basin Paiute and is characterized by linear patterning.
The Arivaipa are known as ''Tsézhiné'' ("Black Rock") in the Western Apache language.
The smaller sotol crowns were also important.
Local groups were headed by a chief, a male who had considerable influence over others in the group due to his effectiveness and reputation.
In 1900, the U.S. government classified the members of the Apache tribe in the United States as Pinal Coyotero, Jicarilla, Mescalero, San Carlos, Tonto, and White Mountain Apache.
* '''Querechos''' referred to by Coronado in 1541, possibly Plains Apaches, at times maybe Navajo.
Furthermore, the grandparent terms are reciprocal, that is, a grandparent will use the same term to refer to their grandchild in that relationship.
The doorway may face in any direction.
When the United States went to war against Mexico in 1846, many Apache bands promised U.S. soldiers safe passage through their lands.
Eating certain animals was taboo.
live in Western Texas today.
Historically, they followed the Kiowa.
The Chiricahua-type system is used by the Chiricahua, Mescalero, and Western Apache.
The most important plant food used by the Lipan was agave (mescal).
Recent experiments show these dogs may have pulled loads up to 50 lb (20&nbsp;kg) on long trips, at rates as high as two or three miles per hour (3 to 5&nbsp;km/h).
The tepee type was just made of brush.
There is a single word for grandchild (regardless of sex): ''-tsóyí̱í̱''.
The Western Apache hunted deer and pronghorns mostly in the ideal late fall season.
The '''Apache''' and '''Navajo''' tribal groups of the North American Southwest speak related languages of the Athabaskan language family.
Influenced by the Plains Indians, Western Apaches wore animal hide decorated with seed beads for clothing.
The Mescalero primarily hunted deer.
The gathering of plants and other foods was primarily done by women.
Important standardized ceremonies include the puberty ceremony (Sunrise Dance) of young women, Navajo chants, Jicarilla "long-life" ceremonies, and Plains Apache "sacred-bundle" ceremonies.
If a family member lived in a wickiup and they died, the wickiup would be burned.
The most common hunting weapon before the introduction of European guns was the bow and arrow.
Apache groups live in Oklahoma and Texas and on reservations in Arizona and New Mexico.
The Western Apache and Navajo also had a system of matrilineal "clans" that were organized further into ''phratries'' (perhaps influenced by the western Pueblo).
The different groups were located in Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma.
By the 1640s, they applied the term to southern Athabaskan peoples from the Chama on the east to the San Juan on the west.
Another technique was the relay method where hunters positioned at various points would chase the prey in turns in order to tire the animal.
In general, the recently arrived Spanish colonists, who settled in villages, and Apache bands developed a pattern of interaction over a few centuries.
A parent's child is classified with their same-sex sibling's or same-sex cousin's child: ''-zhácheʼe'' "daughter, same-sex sibling's daughter, same-sex cousin's daughter", ''-gheʼ'' "son, same-sex sibling's son, same-sex cousin's son".
Burros and horses were only eaten in emergencies.
In a detailed study of New Mexico Catholic Church records, David M. Brugge identifies 15 tribal names which the Spanish used to refer to the Apache.
Beavers, minks, muskrats, and weasels were also hunted for their hides and body parts but were not eaten.
These two terms can also be used for cross-cousins.
::: ''Both the teepee and the oval-shaped house were used when I was a boy.
Western Apache include Northern Tonto, Southern Tonto, Cibecue, White Mountain and San Carlos groups.
Other hunted animals were badgers, bears, beavers, fowls, geese, opossums, otters, rabbits and turtles.
In the 1930s, the anthropologist Grenville Goodwin classified the Western Apache into five groups (based on his informants' views of dialect and cultural differences): White Mountain, Cibecue, San Carlos, North Tonto, and South Tonto.
Although different cultures had different taboos, some common examples of taboo animals included bears, peccaries, turkeys, fish, snakes, insects, owls, and coyotes.
The traditional and sometimes treacherous relationships continued between the villages and bands with the independence of Mexico in 1821.
The first known written record in Spanish is by Juan de Oñate in 1598.
Both crowns of both plants were baked and dried.
The most widely accepted origin theory suggests ''Apache'' was borrowed and transliterated from the Zuni word ''ʔa·paču'' meaning "Navajos" (the plural of ''paču'' "Navajo").
A parent's siblings are classified together regardless of sex: ''-ghúyé'' "maternal aunt or uncle (mother's brother or sister)", ''-deedééʼ'' "paternal aunt or uncle (father's brother or sister)".
While these subgroups spoke the same language and had kinship ties, Western Apaches considered themselves as separate from each other, according to Goodwin.
The chief was the closest societal role to a leader in Apache cultures.
On the larger level, the Western Apache organized bands into what Grenville Goodwin called "groups".
Other plants utilized by the Lipan include: agarita, blackberries, cattails, devil's claw, elderberries, gooseberries, hackberries, hawthorn, juniper, Lamb's-quarters, locust, mesquite, mulberries, oak, palmetto, pecan, pinyon, prickly pears, raspberries, screwbeans, seed grasses, strawberries, sumac, sunflowers, Texas persimmons, walnuts, western yellow pine, wild cherries, wild grapes, wild onions, wild plums, wild potatoes, wild roses, yucca flowers, and yucca fruit.
Other plants utilized by the Chiricahua include: agarita (or algerita) berries, alligator juniper berries, anglepod seeds, banana yucca (or datil, broadleaf yucca) fruit, chili peppers, chokecherries, cota (used for tea), currants, dropseed grass seeds, Gambel oak acorns, Gambel oak bark (used for tea), grass seeds (of various varieties), greens (of various varieties), hawthorne fruit, Lamb's-quarters leaves, lip ferns (used for tea), live oak acorns, locust blossoms, locust pods, maize kernels (used for tiswin), and mesquite beans.
The Spanish first used the term "Apachu de Nabajo" (Navajo) in the 1620s, referring to people in the Chama region east of the San Juan River.
The Apaches participate in many religious dances, including the rain dance, dances for the crop and harvest, and a spirit dance.
They made buckskin shirts, ponchos, skirts and moccasins and decorated them with colorful beadwork.
Another theory suggests the term comes from Yavapai ''ʔpačə'' meaning "enemy".
Many of the historical names of Apache groups that were recorded by non-Apache are difficult to match to modern-day tribes or their subgroups.
The majority moved to the Mescalero Reservation and form, with the larger Mescalero political group, the Mescalero Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Apache Reservation, along with the Lipan Apache.
This might indicate the semi-nomadic Southern Athabaskan had advance warning about his hostile approach and evaded encounter with the Spanish.
Numerous other fruits, vegetables, and tuberous roots were also used.
Records of the period seem to indicate that relationships depended upon the specific villages and specific bands that were involved with each other.
They were first mentioned in 1718 records as being near the newly established town of San Antonio, Texas.)
As tensions between the Apache and settlers increased, the Mexican government passed laws offering cash rewards for Apache scalps.
They traveled from the Pecos River in Eastern New Mexico to the upper Colorado River, San Saba River and Llano River of central Texas across the Edwards Plateau southeast to the Gulf of Mexico.
The Jicarilla type, which is similar to the Dakota–Iroquois kinship systems, is used by the Jicarilla, Navajo, Lipan, and Plains Apache.
The Western Apache criteria for evaluating a good chief included: industriousness, generosity, impartiality, forbearance, conscientiousness, and eloquence in language.
Additionally, the terms are used according to the sex of the speaker (unlike the English terms ''brother'' and ''sister''): ''-kʼis'' "same-sex sibling or same-sex cousin", ''-´-ląh'' "opposite-sex sibling or opposite-sex cousin".
The other two Chiricahua bands and the Plains Apache did not grow any crops.
Another story is of a hidden ball game, where good and evil animals decide whether or not the world should be forever dark.
pinetorum''), grapes, hackberries, hawthorne fruit, and hops (used as condiment).
Tonto Apache speakers are traditionally bilingual in Western Apache and Yavapai.
:: "The woman not only makes the furnishings of the home but is responsible for the construction, maintenance, and repair of the dwelling itself and for the arrangement of everything in it.
The principal quarry animals of the Jicarilla were bighorn sheep, buffalo, deer, elk and pronghorn.
These were drawn from records of about 1000 baptisms from 1704 to 1862.
Apache groups are politically autonomous.
This is north of Phoenix, north of the Verde River.
Both types were common even before my time....''
Other writers have used this term to refer to all non-Navajo Apachean peoples living west of the Rio Grande (thus failing to distinguish the Chiricahua from the other Apacheans).
These terms also refer to that parent's same-sex sibling: ''-ʼnííh'' "mother or maternal aunt (mother's sister)", ''-kaʼéé'' "father or paternal uncle (father's brother)".
Some taboos were a regional phenomena, such as of eating fish, which was taboo throughout the southwest (e.g.
Different Apache cultures had different views of ceremonial practice.
They were close allies of the Natagés.
Europeans often did not learn what the peoples called themselves, their autonyms.
The Jicarilla grouped their bands into "moieties", perhaps influenced by the example of the northeastern Pueblo.
Apacheria, their collective homelands, consists of high mountains, sheltered and watered valleys, deep canyons, deserts, and the southern Great Plains.
** '''Pinal''' (also ''Pinaleños'').
These terms are not reciprocal.
The military usually had forts nearby.
Other animals hunted include: bighorn sheep, buffalo (for those living closer to the plains), cottontail rabbits, elk, horses, mules, opossums, pronghorn, wild steers and wood rats.
They were also called Plains Lipan (Golgahį́į́, Kó'l kukä'ⁿ, "Prairie Men"), not to be confused with ''Lipiyánes'' or ''Le Panis'' (French for the Pawnee).
An example of taboo differences: the black bear was a part of the Lipan diet (although not as common as buffalo, deer, or antelope), but the Jicarilla never ate bear because it was considered an evil animal.
The Jicarilla are headquartered in Dulce, New Mexico, while the Mescalero are headquartered in Mescalero, New Mexico.
Feelings of individuals concerning this practice spoke of social obligation and spontaneous generosity.
When war happened between the two, the Spanish would send troops, after a battle both sides would "sign a treaty," and both sides would go home.
Other early Spanish might have also called them Vaquereo or Llanero.
Schroeder has suggested that the Tonto are originally Yavapais who assimilated Western Apache culture.
Chiricahua cousins are not distinguished from siblings through kinship terms.
Another type of housing is the wickiup, an  frame of wood held together with yucca fibers and covered in brush usually in the Apache groups in the highlands.
