The purpose of the negotiations was to pave the way for talks towards a peaceful transition of power.
The 1980s became a period of considerable political unrest, with the government becoming increasingly dominated by Botha's circle of generals and police chiefs (known as securocrats), who managed the various States of Emergencies.
The state broadcaster, the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC), provided propaganda in support of the government.
De Klerk also made his first public commitment to release Nelson Mandela, to return to press freedom and to suspend the death penalty.
This was due mostly to the intense rivalry between the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) and the ANC and the eruption of some traditional tribal and local rivalries between the Zulu and Xhosa historical tribal affinities, especially in the Southern Natal provinces.
In 1967, he offered technological and financial aid to any African state prepared to receive it, asserting that no political strings were attached, aware that many African states needed financial aid despite their opposition to South Africa's racial policies.
Interracial contact in sport was frowned upon, but there were no segregatory sports laws.
Although Verwoerd tried to bond these different blocs, the subsequent ballot illustrated only a minor swell of support, indicating that a great many English speakers remained apathetic, and that Verwoerd had not succeeded in uniting the white population, and a divide between Anglo and Afrikaner whites remained.
In 1979 black trade unions were legalised and could engage in collective bargaining, although strikes were still illegal.
In 1958 the Promotion of Black Self-Government Act was passed, and border industries and the Bantu Investment Corporation were established to promote economic development and the provision of employment in or near the homelands.
The expressions "so-called Coloured" (Afrikaans ''sogenaamde Kleurlinge'') and "brown people" (''bruinmense'') acquired a wide usage in the 1980s.
More overtly, a group of white intellectuals met the ANC in Senegal for talks.
These meetings were successful in laying down the preconditions for negotiationsdespite the considerable tensions still abounding within the country.
However, the white chamber had a large majority on this cabinet, ensuring that effective control of the country remained in white hands.
Each House handled laws pertaining to its racial group's "own affairs", including health, education and other community issues.
Sport has long been an important part of life in South Africa, and the boycotting of games by international teams had a profound effect on the white population, perhaps more so than the trade embargoes did.
On his return to Australia, Bradman released a one sentence statement:
This unity process accelerated in the late 1980s and led to the creation, in December 1991, of an incorporated South African Football Association.
Nigeria also led the 32-nation boycott of the 1986 Commonwealth Games because of British prime minister Margaret Thatcher's ambivalent attitude towards sporting links with South Africa, significantly affecting the quality and profitability of the Games and thus thrusting apartheid into the international spotlight.
This was the first time a predominantly white nation had taken the side of multiracial sport, producing an unsettling resonance that more "White" boycotts were coming.
This led to a resumption of negotiations.
Nevertheless, internal organisations of many countries, as well as the South African government, lobbied for their recognition.
In the 1980s, as the oppressive system was slowly collapsing the ANC and National Party started negotiations on the end of apartheid.
The Angolan civil war developed into a conventional war with South Africa and UNITA on one side against the MPLA government, the Soviet Union, the Cubans and SWAPO on the other.
Colonialism and apartheid had a major impact on black and coloured women, since they suffered both racial and gender discrimination.
In addition, Jan Smuts, as a strong advocate of the United Nations, lost domestic support when South Africa was criticised for its colour bar and continued mandate of South West Africa by other UN member states.
Non-white political representation was abolished in 1970, and starting in that year black people were deprived of their citizenship, legally becoming citizens of one of 10 tribally based self-governing homelands called ''bantustans'', four of which became nominally independent states.
In 1970, Malawian president Hastings Banda made his first and most successful official stopover in South Africa.
The leader of the movement, Steve Biko, was taken into custody on 18 August 1977 and was beaten to death in detention.
Persistent violence added to the tension during the negotiations.
Whites reacted negatively to the changes, allowing the Herenigde Nasionale Party (or simply National Party) to convince a large segment of the voting bloc that the impotence of the United Party in curtailing the evolving position of nonwhites indicated that the organisation had fallen under the influence of Western liberals.
The commission concluded that integration would bring about a "loss of personality" for all racial groups.
Weeks later, tensions came to a head in the Sharpeville Massacre, resulting in more international condemnation.
Investing in South Africa by Americans and others was coming to an end and an active policy of disinvestment ensued.
The American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), a conservative lobbying organisation, actively campaigned against divesting from South Africa throughout the 1980s.
* An unsuccessful South African organised coup in the Seychelles on 25 November 1981.
While football was plagued by racism, it also played a role in protesting apartheid and its policies.
In the homelands, much of the land belonged to a "tribe", where the local chieftain would decide how the land had to be used.
The Senate Act was contested in the Supreme Court, but the recently enlarged Appeal Court, packed with government-supporting judges, upheld the act, and also the Act to remove coloured voters.
By extension, the term is currently used for forms of systematic segregation established by the state authority in a country against the social and civil rights of a certain group of citizens due to ethnic prejudices.
There were practically no cinemas in black areas.
Apartheid reforms in the 1980s failed to quell the mounting opposition, and in 1990 President Frederik Willem de Klerk began negotiations to end apartheid, culminating in multi-racial democratic elections in 1994, won by the African National Congress under Nelson Mandela.
This response helped to further elevate Mandela's status in the eyes of those, both internationally and domestically, who opposed apartheid.
He claimed that the only difference now was between those who supported apartheid and those in opposition to it.
In the 1970s the state spent ten times more per child on the education of white children than on black children within the Bantu Education system (the education system in black schools within white South Africa).
Israel categorically denied these allegations and claimed that the documents were minutes from a meeting which did not indicate any concrete offer for a sale of nuclear weapons.
Examples of African states with black leaders and white minorities existed in Kenya and Zimbabwe.
Legislation of 1967 allowed the government to stop industrial development in "white" cities and redirect such development to the "homelands".
The Land Act was brought to an end.
Since Asians had never been allowed to vote, this resulted in whites being the sole enfranchised group.
Afrikaner nationalists proclaimed that they offered the voters a new policy to ensure continued white domination.
Britain's significant economic involvement in South Africa may have provided some leverage with the South African government, with both the UK and the US applying pressure and pushing for negotiations.
From 1990 to 1996 the legal apparatus of apartheid was abolished.
The Immorality Amendment Act 21 of 1950 (as amended in 1957 by Act 23) forbade "unlawful racial intercourse" and "any immoral or indecent act" between a white and a black, Indian or coloured person.
In the same year they introduced the Senate Act, which increased the Senate from 49 seats to 89.
At the first meeting, the NP and ANC discussed the conditions for negotiations to begin.
Apartheid sparked significant internal resistance, violence, and a long arms and trade embargo against South Africa.
Until then, most settlements had people of different races living side by side.
By 1989, a bipartisan Republican/Democratic initiative in the US favoured economic sanctions (realised as the ''Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act'' of 1986), the release of Nelson Mandela and a negotiated settlement involving the ANC.
The government punished political offenders brutally.
During his visit to Zimbabwe, he called for economic sanctions against South Africa's government.
Ironically, these reforms served only to trigger intensified political violence through the remainder of the eighties as more communities and political groups across the country joined the resistance movement.
The Mahlabatini Declaration of Faith, signed by Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Harry Schwarz in 1974, enshrined the principles of peaceful transition of power and equality for all.
The convention was adopted with a vote of 91 for, and 4 (Portugal, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States) against the convention.
Sotho, Tswana, Pedi and Venda speakers were placed at the newly founded University College of the North at Turfloop, while the University College of Zululand was launched to serve Zulu students.
Church leaders were not immune to prosecution, and certain faith-based organisations were banned, but the clergy generally had more freedom to criticise the government than militant groups did.
This caused difficulty, especially for coloured people, separating their families when members were allocated different races.
During this state of emergency about 2,436 people were detained under the Internal Security Act.
To a large extent the political ideology of apartheid had emerged from the colonisation of Africa by European powers which institutionalised racial discrimination and exercised a paternal   philosophy of "civilising inferior natives."
", and 52 percent voted "Yes".
The meeting was held at Groote Schuur, the President's official residence.
Marriage law and births were also controlled by the government and the pro-apartheid Dutch Reformed Church, which tried to restrict black and coloured birth rates.
The NP wanted to retain a strong position in a transitional government, and the power to change decisions made by parliament.
Blacks were prohibited from attending white churches under the Churches Native Laws Amendment Act of 1957, but this was never rigidly enforced and churches were one of the few places races could mix without the interference of the law.
In addition, "petty apartheid" laws were passed.
India had become a republic within the Commonwealth in 1950, but it became clear that African and Asian member states would oppose South Africa due to its apartheid policies.
Botha's white regime was worried about the Soviet Union helping revolutionaries in South Africa, and the economy had slowed down.
The more conservative English-speakers gave support to Verwoerd; others were troubled by the severing of ties with Britain and remained loyal to the Crown.
The changes were initiated, and in January 1963, the South African Non-Racial Olympic Committee (SANROC) was set up.
This pattern of forced removal and destruction was to repeat itself over the next few years, and was not limited to black South Africans alone.
The president could rule by decree without referring to the constitution or to parliament.
Voting rights were denied to Coloureds in the same way that they were denied to Blacks from 1950 to 1983.
This conflict deepened after Angola gained its independence in 1975 under the leadership of the leftist Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) aided by Cuba.
It censured apartheid and demanded sanctions against South Africa.
In the days of slavery, slaves required passes to travel away from their masters.
This convention has however only been ratified by 107 of the 193 member states as of August 2008.
Violence persisted right up to the 1994 elections.
Two years later, President Machel was killed in an air crash in mountainous terrain in South Africa near the Mozambican border after returning from a meeting in Zambia.
Legislation classified inhabitants into four racial groups"black", "white", "coloured", and "Indian", the last two of which were divided into several sub-classificationsand residential areas were segregated.
Some 40,000 whites were also forced to move when land was transferred from "white South Africa" into the black homelands.
By the late 1980s, with the tide of the Cold War turning and no sign of a political resolution in South Africa, Western patience began to run out.
South Africa's policies were subject to international scrutiny in 1960, when Macmillan criticised them during his celebrated Wind of Change speech in Cape Town.
The vestiges of apartheid still shape South African politics and society.
As well as deciding the national government, the election decided the provincial governments, and the ANC won in seven of the nine provinces, with the NP winning in the Western Cape and the IFP in KwaZulu-Natal.
People's courts were set up, and residents accused of being government agents were dealt extreme and occasionally lethal punishments.
This was followed by Ordinance 3 in 1848, which introduced an indenture system for Xhosa that was little different from slavery.
Meanwhile, about 200,000 members of the National Union of Mineworkers commenced the longest strike (three weeks) in South African history.
During the 1980s the government, led by P.W.
However, western influence also helped end apartheid.
The two had a friendly discussion, with Mandela comparing the African National Congress' rebellion with that of the Afrikaner rebellion and talking about everyone being brothers.
Verwoerd came to believe in the granting of independence to these homelands.
Starting in the 1950s, a series of popular uprisings and protests resulted in a retaliatory ban of all opposition, and the imprisonment of anti-apartheid leaders.
On 25 June 1993, the AWB used an armoured vehicle to crash through the doors of the Kempton Park World Trade Centre where talks were still going ahead under the Negotiating Council, though this did not derail the process.
There were fears that the change of power would be violent.
Nearly 600,000 coloured, Indian and Chinese people were moved under the Group Areas Act.
In 1966 B. J. Vorster became Prime Minister.
Apartheid pervaded culture as well as the law, and was entrenched by most of the mainstream media.
Serious political violence was a prominent feature from 1985 to 1989, as black townships became the focus of the struggle between anti-apartheid organisations and the Botha government.
Almost twenty years later, on his release from prison, Nelson Mandela asked a visiting Australian statesman if Donald Bradman, his childhood hero, was still alive (Bradman lived until 2001).
Alongside apartheid the NP government implemented a programme of social conservatism.
CODESA adopted a Declaration of Intent and committed itself to an "undivided South Africa".
After 1976 unions and workers are considered to have played an important role in the struggle against apartheid, filling the gap left by the banning of political parties.
The second pillar of grand apartheid was the Group Areas Act of 1950.
Public swimming pools, some pedestrian bridges, drive-in cinema parking spaces, graveyards, parks, and public toilets were segregated.
It called for a systematic effort to organise the relations, rights, and privileges of the races as officially defined through a series of parliamentary acts and administrative decrees.
IV c. 73) abolished slavery throughout the British Empire and overrode the Cape Articles of Capitulation.
Government agents assassinated opponents within South Africa and abroad; they undertook cross-border army and air-force attacks on suspected ANC and PAC bases.
Blacks were not allowed to run businesses or professional practices in areas designated as "white South Africa" unless they had a permit.
These passes were to be issued for Coloureds and Khoikhoi, but not for other Africans, who were still forced to carry passes.
The primary subject in question was the handling of South African Indians, a great cause of divergence between South Africa and India.
In 1976, leading up to a United States House of Representatives resolution urging the President to not recognise Transkei, the South African government intensely lobbied lawmakers to oppose the bill.
The General Assembly announced 21 March as the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in memory of the Sharpeville massacre.
A 68 per cent majority gave its support, and the victory instilled in de Klerk and the government a lot more confidence, giving the NP a stronger position in negotiations.
By the 1980s, Israel was South Africa's only close ally amongst developed countries, but ties were broken, beginning in 1987 (see Israel–South Africa relations).
From 1960 the ANC began a campaign of armed struggle of which there would later be a charge of 193 acts of terrorism from 1961 to 1963, mainly bombings and murders of civilians.
As time progressed, international standing with South Africa would continue to be strained.
Blacks earning 360 rand a year or more had to pay taxes while the white threshold was more than twice as high, at 750 rand a year.
Immediately after the vote, the Senate was restored to its original size.
From 1964 the US and Britain discontinued their arms trade with South Africa.
Many had opposed a republic, leading to a majority "no" vote in Natal.
* A full-scale intervention into Angola: this was partly in support of UNITA, but was also an attempt to strike at SWAPO bases.
Citizens of the nominally autonomous homelands also had their South African citizenship circumscribed, meaning they were no longer legally considered South African.
Bantustans within the borders of South Africa were classified as "self-governing" or "independent".
The government justified its plans on the basis that "(the) government's policy is, therefore, not a policy of discrimination on the grounds of race or colour, but a policy of differentiation on the ground of nationhood, of different nations, granting to each self-determination within the borders of their homelandshence this policy of separate development".
In January 1985, Botha addressed the government's House of Assembly and stated that the government was willing to release Mandela on condition that Mandela pledge opposition to acts of violence to further political objectives.
Cheap labour was the basis of the economy and this was taken from what the state classed as peasant groups and the migrants.
Apartheid developed by racism of colonial factors and due to South Africa's "unique industrialization".
It had been decided that, once the temporary constitution had come into effect, the homelands would be incorporated into South Africa, but Mangope did not want this to happen.
The Tricameral reforms led to the formation of the (anti-apartheid) United Democratic Front as a vehicle to try to prevent the co-option of Coloureds and Indians into an alliance with Whites.
As a consequence of this change of status, South Africa needed to reapply for continued membership of the Commonwealth, with which it had privileged trade links.
A pass was issued only to a black with approved work.
The government amended the Public Security Act, including the right to declare "unrest" areas, allowing extraordinary measures to crush protests in these areas.
They released information about their nuclear program and accounted for all of their warheads.
After much debate, by the late 1980s the United States, the United Kingdom, and 23 other nations had passed laws placing various trade sanctions on South Africa.
First to desert the United Party were Afrikaner farmers, who wished to see a change in influx control due to problems with squatters, as well as higher prices for their maize and other produce in the face of the mineowners' demand for cheap food policies.
Economist Thomas Sowell wrote that basic supply and demand led to violations of Apartheid "on a massive scale" throughout the nation, simply because there were not enough white South African business owners to meet the demand for various goods and services.
South Africa's isolation in sport began in the mid-1950s and increased throughout the 1960s.
Official teams or boards were established to come to a conclusion on those people whose race was unclear.
The act defined Communism and its aims so sweepingly that anyone who opposed government policy risked being labelled as a Communist.
Many were also tied to South Africa economically because of their migrant labour population working on the South African mines.
The state of emergency continued until 1990, when it was lifted by State President F.W.
Black buses stopped at black bus stops and white buses at white ones.
In 1797 the Landdrost and Heemraden of Swellendam and Graaff-Reinet extended pass laws beyond slaves and ordained that all Khoikhoi (designated as ''Hottentots'') moving about the country for any purpose should carry passes.
Vorster said that the side had been chosen only to prove a point, and not on merit.
In the same year a Special Committee Against Apartheid was established to encourage and oversee plans of action against the regime.
The Franchise and Ballot Act of 1892 instituted limits based on financial means and education to the black franchise, and the Natal Legislative Assembly Bill of 1894 deprived Indians of the right to vote.
Football associations also discussed the formation of a single, non-racial controlling body.
Two days before the elections, a car bomb exploded in Johannesburg, killing nine.
Led by the Reverend Allan Boesak and Albertina Sisulu, the UDF called for the government to abandon its reforms and instead abolish apartheid and eliminate the homelands completely.
International observers agreed that the elections were free and fair.
By the mid-1950s, Black South Africans would also use media to challenge the "racialisation" of sports in South Africa; anti-apartheid forces had begun to pinpoint sport as the "weakness" of white national morale.
In 1978, the defence minister of the NP, Pieter Willem Botha, became Prime Minister.
Lack of funds to provide proper equipment would be noticeable in regards to black amateur football matches; this revealed the unequal lives black South Africans were subject to, in contrast to Whites, who were obviously much better off financially.
In the following years several student organisations were formed to protest against apartheid, and these organisations were central to urban school boycotts in 1980 and 1983 and rural boycotts in 1985 and 1986.
In 1978 and 1983 the UN condemned South Africa at the World Conference Against Racism.
Right-wing violence also added to the hostilities of this period.
Being without a valid pass made a person subject to arrest and trial for being an illegal migrant.
In the 1960s, South Africa experienced economic growth second only to that of Japan.
African states agreed to aid the liberation movements in their fight against apartheid.
The ANC won 62.65 percent of the vote, less than the 66.7 percent that would have allowed it to rewrite the constitution.
Pope John Paul II was an outspoken opponent of apartheid.
The Mozambican government also made an unproven allegation that the accident was caused intentionally by a false radio navigation beacon that scrambled the aircraft's navigational system.
The population was classified into four groups: Black, White, Indian, and Coloured (capitalised to denote their legal definitions in South African law).
The battles between the UDF and the NP government from 1983 to 1989 were to become the most intense period of struggle between left-wing and right-wing South Africans.
South Africa agreed to cease supporting anti-government forces, while the MK was prohibited from operating in Mozambique.
They were required to move to the black "homelands" and set up businesses and practices there.
It caused a split in the United Party that ultimately realigned opposition politics in South Africa, with the formation of the Progressive Federal Party in 1977.
Also spelt ''dompass'' or ''dom pass''.
Cinemas, shops selling alcohol and most other businesses were forbidden from operating on Sundays.
Disorderly gatherings were banned, as were certain organisations that were deemed threatening to the government.
Subsequent judicial inquiries found the evidence of the witnesses to be unreliable or discredited, and that there was no evidence of National Party or police involvement in the massacre.
According to official reports 23 people were killed, but the number of people who died is usually given as 176, with estimates of up to 700.
Sporting and cultural boycotts did not have the same impact as economic sanctions, but they did much to lift consciousness amongst normal South Africans of the global condemnation of apartheid.
In particular, it expressed disquiet that "no international observers had been allowed to be present at the crucial stage of the count when party representatives negotiated over disputed ballots."
South Africa was becoming an outlaw in the world community of nations.
Black labour unions were legitimised, the government recognised the right of blacks to live in urban areas permanently and gave blacks property rights there.
Under the homelands system, blacks would no longer be citizens of South Africa, becoming citizens of the independent homelands who worked in South Africa as foreign migrant labourers on temporary work permits.
The government could implement curfews controlling the movement of people.
It did not rebuff South Africa entirely, though, adopting an appeasing manner towards the apartheid government, and even recognising its autonomy.
In 1971, Vorster altered his policies even further by distinguishing multiracial from multinational sport.
In theory, self-governing Bantustans had control over many aspects of their internal functioning but were not yet sovereign nations.
In 1967, the two states set out their political and economic relations, and, in 1969, Malawi became the only country at the assembly which did not sign the Lusaka Manifesto condemning South Africa' apartheid policy.
As industry in Johannesburg grew, Sophiatown became the home of a rapidly expanding black workforce, as it was convenient and close to town.
The government then introduced the High Court of Parliament Bill (1952), which gave Parliament the power to overrule decisions of the court.
Strijdom, Malan's successor as Prime Minister, moved to strip voting rights from black and coloured residents of the Cape Province.
The Asiatic Registration Act (1906) required all Indians to register and carry passes.
The Coloured group included people regarded as being of mixed descent, including of Bantu, Khoisan, European and Malay ancestry.
The vast majority had committed political offences and were lashed ten times for their crime.
The anniversary of the elections, 27 April, is celebrated as a public holiday known as Freedom Day.
The Suppression of Communism Act of 1950 banned any party subscribing to Communism.
