Two caudal vertebrae are seamlessly fused along the entire articulating surface of the bone, including the arches of the neural spines.
In 2015 Emanuel Tschopp, Octávio Mateus, and Roger Benson released a paper on diplodocoid systematics, and proposed that genera could be diagnosed by 13 differing characters, and species separated based on 6.
louisae'' was found, and a complete skull just a few meters away from the front of the neck.
The family includes some of the longest creatures ever to walk the earth, including ''Diplodocus'', ''Supersaurus'', and ''Barosaurus''.
They said that by using growth lines and length-to-mass ratios, ''Apatosaurus'' would have grown to 25 t (25 long tons; 28 short tons) in 15 years, with growth peaking at 5,000&nbsp;kg (11,000&nbsp;lb) in a single year.
The name ''Apatosaurus ajax'' was coined in 1877 by Othniel Charles Marsh, Professor of Paleontology at Yale University, based on a nearly complete skeleton (holotype, YPM 1860) discovered the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Gunnison County, Colorado.
Some skulls of ''Apatosaurus'' have been found still in articulation with their teeth.
Its specimens all come from the late Kimmeridgian of Dinosaur National Monument.
It was believed throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries that sauropods like ''Apatosaurus'' were too massive to support their own weight on dry land.
BYU 601–17328 weighed , reached sexual maturity at 19 years, and died aged 31.
Another smaller skeleton of ''A.
They state the feeding ranges for sauropods like ''Diplodocus'' were smaller than previously believed and the animals may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could browse vegetation.
YPM 1861 is the holotype of ''"Atlantosaurus" immanis'', which means it might be a junior synonym of ''A.
Past estimates have put the creature's mass as high as .
Within Apatosaurinae, the scapula of ''Apatosaurus louisae'' is intermediate in morphology between those of ''A.
argued that ''Apatosaurus excelsus'', originally classified as ''Brontosaurus excelsus'', had enough morphological differences from other species of ''Apatosaurus'' that it warranted being reclassified as a separate genus again.
Long-bone histology enables researchers to estimate the age that a specific individual reached.
Marsh named as many species as he could, which resulted in many being based upon fragmentary and indistinguishable remains.
*'''''Apatosaurus ajax''''' was named by Marsh in 1877 after Ajax, a hero from Greek mythology.
However, the humeri of ''Brontosaurus'' and ''A.
They assumed sauropods had a reptilian respiratory system.
ajax'' was immature, and thus the features distinguishing the genera were not valid.
Trackways of sauropods like ''Apatosaurus'' show that they may have had a range of around  per day, and they could potentially reach a top speed of  per hour.
''Apatosaurus'' had a single claw on each forelimb and three on each hindlimb.
According to them, many skulls long thought to pertain to ''Diplodocus'' might instead be those of ''Apatosaurus''.
The skull was accepted as belonging to the ''Apatosaurus'' specimen by Douglass and Carnegie Museum director William H. Holland, although other scientists—most notably Osborn—rejected this identification.
While the subfamily Apatosaurinae was named in 1929, the group was not used validly until an extensive 2015 study.
Their analysis was revised and expanded with many additional diplodocid specimens in 2015, which resolved the relationships of ''Apatosaurus'' slightly differently, and also supported separating ''Brontosaurus'' from ''Apatosaurus''.
Compared with most sauropods, a relatively large amount of juvenile material is known from ''Apatosaurus''.
found the type specimen of ''Apatosaurus laticollis'' to nest closely with CM 3018, meaning the former is likely a junior synonym of ''A.
Paladino calculates its tidal volume (the amount of air moved in or out during a single breath) at  with an avian respiratory system,  if mammalian, and  if reptilian.
'''''Apatosaurus''''' (; meaning "deceptive lizard") is a genus of extinct sauropod dinosaurs that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic period.
In 2005, Paul Upchurch and colleagues published a study that analyzed the species and specimen relationships of ''Apatosaurus''.
While some thought Holland was attempting to avoid conflict with Osborn, others suspected Holland was waiting until an articulated skull and neck were found to confirm the association of the skull and skeleton.
Wedel says that an avian system would have allowed it to dump more heat.
The specimen was found in Cactus Park Quarry of western Colorado.
One suggestion is that they were used for defense, but their shape and size makes this unlikely.
Based on comparisons with other species proposed to belong to ''Apatosaurus'', Riggs also determined that the Field Columbian Museum specimen was likely most similar to ''A.
Holland defended his view in 1914 in an address to the Paleontological Society of America, yet he left the Carnegie Museum mount headless.
''Apatosaurus'' also had very long ribs compared to most other diplodocids, giving it an unusually deep chest.
He classified this group within Sauropoda, a group he erected in the same study.
In 2005, many specimens in addition to the holotype were found assignable to ''A.
Kent Stevens and Michael Parrish (1999 and 2005) state ''Apatosaurus'' had a great feeding range; its neck could bend into a U-shape laterally.
ajax'', YPM 1840, NSMT-PV 20375, YPM 1861, and AMNH 460.
Additional ''Apatosaurus'' remains are known from similarly aged or slightly younger rocks, but they have not been identified as any particular species, and thus may instead belong to ''Brontosaurus.
In addition, a sculpted model of what the museum thought the skull of this massive creature might look like was made.
Like that of other diplodocids, its tail may have been used as a whip to create loud noises.
The foot of ''Apatosaurus'' has three claws on the innermost digits; the digit formula is 3-4-5-3-2.
''Apatosaurus'' had a single large claw on each forelimb, a feature shared by all sauropods more derived than ''Shunosaurus''.
They found that though he never published his opinion, Holland was almost certainly correct, that ''Apatosaurus'' had a ''Diplodocus''-like skull.
Current estimates are similar, which find the individual was  long and had a mass of .
Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common.
The specimens exhibit features that distinguish ''Apatosaurus'' from its relatives, and thus likely belong to the genus.
They reassigned multiple skulls to ''Apatosaurus'' based on associated and closely associated vertebrae.
louisae'' was the most basal species, followed by FMNH P25112, and then a polytomy of ''A.
louisae'' differ in 12 characters, and ''Diplodocus carnegiei'' and ''D.
Stevens and Parish (2005) speculate that these sauropods fed from riverbanks on submerged water plants.
A trackway of a juvenile has led some to believe that they were capable of bipedalism, though this is disputed.
''Supersaurus'' has a greater total length and is the greatest of all sauropods from the Morrison Formation.
However, the 2015 study concluded that ''Brontosaurus'' was a valid genus of sauropod distinct from ''Apatosaurus''.
A pathology has been identified on the tail of ''Apatosaurus'', caused by a growth defect.
Only ''Brontosaurus'' is also in the subfamily, with the other genera being considered as synonyms or reclassified as diplodocines.
The specimens date from the late Kimmeridgian to the early Tithonian ages.
excelsus'' in 1903.
No ''Apatosaurus'' skull was mentioned in literature until the 1970s when John Stanton McIntosh and David Berman redescribed the skulls of ''Diplodocus'' and ''Apatosaurus''.
In 1903, Elmer S. Riggs said the name Sauropoda would be a junior synonym of earlier names; he grouped ''Apatosaurus'' within Opisthocoelia.
Two years later, Marsh announced the discovery of a larger and more complete specimen at Como Bluff, Wyoming.
louisae'', especially because of the incomplete nature of the holotype.
The conclusions of Cobley et al.
*'''''Apatosaurus louisae''''' was named by Holland in 1916, being first known from a partial skeleton that was found in Utah.
Othniel Charles Marsh described and named the first-known species, '''''A.
Dinosaurs known from the Morrison Formation include the theropods ''Allosaurus'', ''Ceratosaurus'', ''Ornitholestes'', ''Saurophaganax'' and ''Torvosaurus''; the sauropods ''Brontosaurus'', ''Brachiosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', and ''Diplodocus''; and the ornithischians ''Camptosaurus'', ''Dryosaurus'', and ''Stegosaurus''.
hallorum'' differ in 11 characters.
The mount construction was overseen by Adam Hermann, who failed to find ''Apatosaurus'' skulls.
A study by Eva Griebeler et al.
louisae''''', was discovered and named by William H. Holland in 1916.
After Holland's death in 1934, museum staff placed a cast of a ''Camarasaurus'' skull on the mount.
The neck's range of movement would have also allowed the head to feed at the level of the feet.
On this basis, its respiratory system would likely have been parabronchi, with multiple pulmonary air sacs as in avian lungs, and a flow-through lung.
The jaws are lined with spatulate (chisel-like) teeth suited to a herbivorous diet.
Those of ''Apatosaurus ajax'' are known exclusively from the upper Brushy Basin Member, about 152–151 mya.
Because of this, Riggs recombined ''Brontosaurus excelsus'' as ''Apatosaurus excelsus''.
louisae'' fossils are rare, known only from one site in the upper Brushy Basin Member; they date to the late Kimmeridgian stage, about 151 mya.
This formation is similar in age to the Lourinhã Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania.
This defect might have been caused by the lack or inhibition of the substance that forms intervertebral disks or joints.
The tibia and fibula bones are different from the slender bones of ''Diplodocus'', but are nearly indistinguishable from those of ''Camarasaurus''.
In addition, they support cervical ribs that extend farther towards the ground than in diplodocines, and have the vertebrae and ribs narrower towards the top of the neck, making the neck nearly triangular in cross-section.
Because of  this decision the name ''Brontosaurus'' was commonly used outside of scientific literature for what Riggs considered ''Apatosaurus'', and the museum's popularity meant that ''Brontosaurus'' became one of the best known dinosaurs, even though it was invalid throughout nearly all of the 20th and early 21st centuries.
Given the large body mass and long neck of sauropods like ''Apatosaurus'', physiologists have encountered problems determining how these animals breathed.
The species is less studied then ''Brontosaurus'' and ''A.
''Apatosaurus'', like its close relative ''Supersaurus'', has neural tall spines, which make up more than half the height of the individual bones of its vertebrae.
The dorsal ribs are not fused or tightly attached to their vertebrae, instead being loosely articulated.
Various uses for the single claw on the forelimb of sauropods have been proposed.
OMNH juvenile material is from at least two different age groups and based on overlapping bones likely comes from more than three individuals.
These skulls were likely those of ''Camarasaurus'', the only other sauropod for which good skull material was known at the time.
In ''Apatosaurus louisae'', the atlas-axis complex of the first cervicals is nearly fused.
However, YPM 1861 and NSMT-PV 20375 only differed in a few characteristics, and cannot be distinguished specifically or generically from ''A.
James Spotila et al.
(2013) examined long bone histological data and concluded the ''Apatosaurus'' sp.
louisae'' is 15 cervicals, 10 dorsals, 5 sacrals, and 82 caudals.
The skull also included forward-pointing nasals—something different to any dinosaur—and fenestrae differing from the drawing and other skulls.
''Apatosaurus'' is commonly found at the same sites as ''Allosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', ''Diplodocus'', and ''Stegosaurus''.
Even though they supported Holland, it was noted that ''Apatosaurus'' might have possessed a ''Camarasaurus''-like skull, based on a disarticulated ''Camarasaurus''-like tooth found at the precise site where an ''Apatosaurus'' specimen was found years before.
Therefore, Tschopp ''et al.''
Thus, 13 characters were chosen to validate the separation of genera.
The vertebral formula for the holotype of ''A.
This specimen, CMC VP 7180, was found to differ in both skull and neck features from ''A.
The cladogram below is the result of an analysis by Tschopp, Mateus, and Benson (2015).
The tail was held above the ground during normal locomotion.
''Allosaurus'' accounted for 70–75% of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web.
In 1936, Charles Gilmore noted that previous reconstructions of ''Apatosaurus'' forelimbs erroneously proposed that the radius and ulna could cross; in life they would have remained parallel.
A 1999 microscopic study of ''Apatosaurus'' and ''Brontosaurus'' bones concluded the animals grew rapidly when young and reached near-adult sizes in about 10 years.
(1997) estimate the animal would need to consume only about  of water per day.
This was first noted in 1903 and again in 1936.
Myhrvold carried out a computer simulation of the tail, which in diplodocids like ''Apatosaurus'' was a very long, tapering structure resembling a bullwhip.
Some features proposed to separate ''Brontosaurus'' from ''Apatosaurus'' include: posterior dorsal vertebrae with the centrum longer than wide; the scapula rear to the acromial edge and the distal blade being excavated; the acromial edge of the distal scapular blade bears a rounded expansion; and the ratio of the proximodistal length to transverse breadth of the astragalus is 0.55 or greater.
''Apatosaurus'', like ''Diplodocus'', would have held its neck angled upwards with the head pointing downwards in a resting posture.
The snout of ''Apatosaurus'' and similar diplodocoids are squared, with only ''Nigersaurus'' having a squarer skull.
It was also possible they were for feeding, but the most probable use for the claw was grasping objects such as tree trunks when rearing.
ajax'' and ''Brontosaurus excelsus''.
Sauropoda is still used as the group name.
The former two consist of a vertebral column; the latter two consist of a skull and a nearly complete skeleton, respectively.
The same growth model indicated ''Apatosaurus'' sp.
A phylogenetic analysis found that the braincase had a similar morphology to those of other diplodocoids.
The Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which, according to radiometric dating, dates from between 156.3 mya at its base, and 146.8 mya at the top, placing it in the late Oxfordian, Kimmeridgian, and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period.
The arm bones are stout, so the humerus of ''Apatosaurus'' resembles that of ''Camarasaurus'', as well as ''Brontosaurus''.
The cervical vertebrae of ''Apatosaurus'' are less elongated and more heavily constructed than those of ''Diplodocus'', a diplodocid like ''Apatosaurus'', and the bones of the leg are much stockier despite being longer, implying that ''Apatosaurus'' was a more robust animal.
As such, they might have spent more time foraging to meet their minimum energy needs.
The fibula is longer and more slender than the tibia.
The slow locomotion of sauropods may be due to their minimal muscling, or to recoil after strides.
Another well-preserved skull is Brigham Young University specimen 17096, a well preserved skull and skeleton, with a preserved braincase.
The skull of ''Apatosaurus'' was confused with that of ''Camarasaurus'' and ''Brachiosaurus'' until 1909, when the holotype of ''A.
Nevertheless, not all paleontologists agree with this division.
According to the rules of the ICZN (which governs the scientific names of animals), the name ''Apatosaurus'', having been published first, has priority as the official name; ''Brontosaurus'' was considered a junior synonym and was therefore long discarded from formal use.
ajax''''' in 1877, and a second species, '''''A.
As it existed in North America during the late Jurassic, ''Apatosaurus'' would have lived aside dinosaurs such as ''Allosaurus'', ''Camarasaurus'', ''Diplodocus'', and ''Stegosaurus''.
In 2011, the first specimen of ''Apatosaurus'' where a skull was found articulated with its cervical vertebrae was described.
excelsus'' were in fact sufficiently distinct for the latter to merit a separate genus.
The Morrison Basin, where dinosaurs lived, stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan; it was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west.
The cervical vertebrae of ''Apatosaurus'' and ''Brontosaurus'' are stouter and more robust than those of other diplodocids, were found to be most similar to ''Camarasaurus'' by Charles Whitney Gilmore.
During excavation and transportation, the bones of the holotype skeleton were mixed with those of another ''Apatosaurus'' individual originally described as ''Atlantosaurus immanis''; as a consequence, some elements cannot be ascribed to either specimen with confidence anymore.
Most size estimates are based on specimen CM 3018, the type specimen of ''A.
The first metatarsal is the stoutest, a feature shared among diplodocids.
Despite this, at least one paleontologist—Robert T. Bakker—argued in the 1990s that ''A.
The minimum number for generic separation was chosen based on the fact that ''A.
The phalangeal formula is 2-1-1-1-1, meaning the innermost finger (phalanx) on the forelimb has two bones and the next has one.
To lighten its vertebrae, ''Apatosaurus'' had air sacs that made the bones internally full of holes.
are disputed by Taylor, who analyzed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of ''Apatosaurus'' and ''Diplodocus''.
''Apatosaurus'' was the second-commonest sauropod in the Morrison Formation ecosystem, after ''Camarasaurus''.
Paleontologist Michael D'Emic made a critique.
Since ''Apatosaurus'' was the earlier name, ''Brontosaurus'' should be considered a junior synonym of ''Apatosaurus''.
Hermann was forced to sculpt a stand-in skull by hand.
An article published in 1997 reported research of the mechanics of ''Apatosaurus'' tails by Nathan Myhrvold and paleontologist Philip J. Currie.
The pelvic girdle includes the robust ilia, and the fused (co-ossified) pubes and ischia.
All specimens currently considered ''Apatosaurus'' were from the Morrison Formation, the location of the excavations of Marsh and his rival Edward Drinker Cope.
An avian respiratory system would need a lung volume of about  compared with a mammalian requirement of , which would exceed the space available.
''Apatosaurus'' had an average length of , and an average mass of .
The Morrison Formation records a time when the local environment was dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs.
Others suggest that the near-horizontal posture of the head and neck would have eliminated the problem of supplying blood to the brain because it would not have been elevated.
It has been proposed that the whips could have been used in combat, but the tails of diplodocids were quite light and narrow compared to ''Shunosaurus'' and mamenchisaurids, and thus to injure another animal with the tail would severely injure the tail itself.
The first three toes had claws on each hindlimb.
A few specimens indicate a maximum length of 11–30% greater than average and a mass of .
The limb bones are also very robust.
It was theorized that they lived partly submerged in water, perhaps in swamps.
It may have eaten ferns, cycadeoids, seed ferns, horsetails, and algae.
A study of diplodocid snouts showed that the square snout, large proportion of pits, and fine, subparallel scratches of the teeth of ''Apatosaurus'' suggests it was a ground-height, nonselective browser.
The single manual claw bone (ungual) is slightly curved and squarely truncated on the anterior end.
One of the first identified growth factors of ''Apatosaurus'' was the number of sacral vertebrae, which increased to five by the time of the creatures' maturity.
Evidence for the avian system in ''Apatosaurus'' and other sauropods is also present in the pneumaticity of the vertebrae.
The overall thoracic volume of ''Apatosaurus'' has been estimated at , allowing for a , four-chambered heart and a  lung capacity.
(2013) dispute this, finding that large muscles and cartilage would have limited movement of the neck.
Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are of the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the Lourinhã Formation —mainly ''Allosaurus'', ''Ceratosaurus'', and ''Torvosaurus''—or have a close counterpart—''Brachiosaurus'' and ''Lusotitan'', ''Camptosaurus'' and ''Draconyx'', ''Apatosaurus'' and ''Dinheirosaurus''.
The authors analyzed most diplodocid type specimens separately to deduce which specimen belonged to which species and genus.
''Apatosaurus'' was a generalized browser that likely held its head elevated.
''Brontosaurus'' has long been considered a junior synonym of ''Apatosaurus''; its only species was reclassified as ''A.
(1991) concludes that the large body size of sauropods would have made them unable to maintain high metabolic rates because they would not be able to release enough heat.
Riggs thought that the deposits were similar in age to those of the Como Bluff in Wyoming, from which Marsh described ''Brontosaurus''.
Marsh decided to give this specimen a new name, because conventions and the relative sparse fossil record at that time meant that features then used to distinguish genera and species have now been found to be more widespread among sauropods.
''Apatosaurus'' may have been more solitary than other Morrison Formation dinosaurs.
The skull was found a short distance from a skeleton (specimen CM 3018) identified as the new species ''Apatosaurus louisae'', named after Louise Carnegie, wife of Andrew Carnegie who funded field research to find complete dinosaur skeletons in the American West.
''Apatosaurus'' fossils have only been found in the upper levels of the formation.
Until 1970, ''Apatosaurus'' skeletons were mounted with speculative skull casts, when McIntosh showed that more robust skulls assigned to ''Diplodocus'' were more likely from ''Apatosaurus''.
That would allow about  for the necessary tissue.
Marsh distinguished the new genus ''Apatosaurus'' from ''Atlantosaurus'' on the basis of the number of sacral vertebrae, with ''Apatosaurus'' possessing three and ''Atlantosaurus'' four.
''Apatosaurus'' is a genus in the family Diplodocidae.
In 2011, John Whitlock published a study that placed ''Apatosaurus'' a more basal diplodocid, sometimes less basal than ''Supersaurus''.
Beginning with the assumption that like crocodilians, ''Apatosaurus'' did not have a diaphragm, the dead-space volume (the amount of unused air remaining in the mouth, trachea and air tubes after each breath) has been estimated at about  for a  specimen.
The holotype is CM 3018, with referred specimens including CM 3378, CM 11162, and LACM 52844.
The femora of ''Apatosaurus'' are very stout; some of the most robust femora of any member of Sauropoda.
The skull is small in comparison with the size of the animal.
As in other diplodocids, the tail transformed into a whip-like structure towards its end.
An alternative method, using limb length and body mass, found ''Apatosaurus'' grew  per year, and reached its full mass before it was about 70 years old.
This was not a delicate skull like that of ''Diplodocus''—which was later found to be more accurate—but was based on "the biggest, thickest, strongest skull bones, lower jaws and tooth crowns from three different quarries".
Matthew Cobley et al.
In 1878, Marsh raised his family to the rank of suborder, including ''Apatosaurus'', ''Atlantosaurus'', ''Morosaurus'' (=''Camarasaurus'') and ''Diplodocus''.
The 6 differing features for specific separation were chosen by counting the number of differing features in separate specimens generally agreed to represent one species, with only one differing character in ''D.
Palaeontologist Donald Prothero criticized the mass media reaction to this study as superficial and premature, concluding:
Like those of other sauropods, the neck vertebrae are deeply bifurcated; they carried neural spines with a large trough in the middle, resulting in a wide, deep neck.
Most of the skeleton was found, and after comparison with both ''Brontosaurus'' and ''Apatosaurus ajax'', Riggs realized that the holotype of ''A.
carnegiei'' and ''A.
