frontotemporal dementia / Pick Complex Motor neuron disease, Progressive supranuclear palsy, and Alzheimer's disease, which is the gradual process of progressively losing the ability to think.
Once a theoretical framework has been established, the functioning of each module can then be assessed using a specific test or set of tests.
Either they will replace the desired word with another that sounds or looks like the original one or has some other connection or they will replace it with sounds.
Caused either by a cerebral vascular accident (CVA), which is also known as a stroke, or head trauma such as with a concussion, aphasia can cause impairments in speech and language modalities.
Therapy for Aphasia during this time facilitates an even greater level of recovery than if no intervention was given at this time.
Patients react differently to intense treatment in the acute phase (0–3 months post stroke), sub-acute phase (3–6 months post stroke), or chronic phase (6+ months post stroke).
In contrast, the use of formulaic expressions in everyday communication is often preserved.
Facial communication is a significant portion of how animals interact with each other.
Level of intensity also depends on therapy goals; for certain goals non-intensive therapy is more beneficial.
* inability to follow or understand simple requests
Patients with transcortical sensory and mixed transcortical aphasia have poor comprehension and unawareness of their errors.
In the clinical setting, use of this model usually involves conducting a battery of assessments, each of which tests one or a number of these modules.
CIAT places high demands on the patient by restricting use of the strongest areas of the patient’s brain and requiring the weakest areas to work harder.
The main advantage of using computers is that it can greatly increase intensity of therapy.
Finally, certain chronic neurological disorders, such as epilepsy or migraine, can also include transient aphasia as a prodromal or episodic symptom.
These mirror neurons are important in giving an individual the ability to mimic movements of hands.
Mirror neurons become activated when an animal is acting in a particular way or watching another individual act in the same manner.
The term "aphasia" implies that one or more communication modalities have been damaged and are therefore functioning incorrectly.
Collins (1991) suggests therapy targeting attainable goals that will have the greatest impact on an individual’s daily life, such as getting reliable yes/no answers or providing the patient gestures.
Intense and frequent speech-language therapy had been shown to be more effective, with the addition of daily homework.
drawing as a way of communicating, trained conversation partners
If a patient has no underlying health problems, and is young, then they have better outcomes than someone who is older, has severe health issues (such as: obesity, heart disease, cancer, high blood pressure, etc.)
Therapy for Expressive Aphasia (nonfluent) is beneficial, even for patients with severe nonfluent aphasia.
Patients with conduction aphasia typically have good language comprehension, but poor speech repetition and mild difficulty with word retrieval and speech production.
*Visual Action Therapy (VAT) - typically treats individuals with global aphasia to train the use of hand gestures for specific items
There have been many instances showing that there is a form of aphasia among deaf individuals.
Wernicke’s is considered a more severe form of aphasia, and is more commonly seen in older populations.
These programs consist of a large variety of exercises and can be done at home in addition to face-to-face treatment with a therapist.
Sign language is, after all, a form of communication that has been shown to use the same areas of the brain as verbal forms of communication.
The four communication modalities are auditory comprehension, verbal expression, reading and writing, and functional communication.
An ischemic stroke happens when a person’s artery, which supplies blood to different areas of the brain, becomes blocked with a blood clot.
A minimum of two–three hours per week has been specified to produce positive results.
The patient's age directly impacts the neuroplasticity the brain can allow, the younger the patient is, the greater plasticity is.
* Speaking gibberish
Although localizationist approaches provide a useful way of classifying the different patterns of language difficulty into broad groups, one problem is that a sizeable number of individuals do not fit neatly into one category or another.
Most classifications of the aphasias tend to divide the various symptoms into broad classes.
Another problem is that the categories, particularly the major ones such as Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia, still remain quite broad.
However, no such broad-based grouping has proven fully adequate.
Gradual loss of language function occurs in the context of relatively well-preserved memory, visual processing, and personality until the advanced stages.
After the onset of Aphasia, there is approximately a six-month period of spontaneous recovery.
Symptoms usually begin with word-finding problems (naming) and progress to impaired grammar (syntax) and comprehension (sentence processing and semantics).
While combining these facial movements with speech, a more full form of language is created which enables the species to interact with a much more complex and detailed form of communication.
in conjunction with aphasia.
Aphasia does not refer to damage to the brain that results in motor or sensory deficits, as it is not related to speech (which is the verbal aspect of communicating) but  rather the individual's language.
These patients self-monitor, are aware of their communicative impairments, and frequently try to repeat or attempt repairs.
Neuroplaticity underlies normal processes such as: typical development, learning & maintaining performance while aging, and the brain's response to a severe injury.
Patients with sub-acute aphasia also respond well to intensive therapy of 100 hours over 62 weeks.
MIT is used to help people with aphasia vocalize themselves through speech song, which is then transferred as a spoken word.
A study conducted by Marangolo and co-workers (2013) administered conversational therapy to patients with severe nonfluent aphasia.
Results of the study concluded significant increases in the participant’s expressive language.
Transcortical aphasias include transcortical motor aphasia, transcortical sensory aphasia, and mixed transcortical aphasia.
Even though individuals with global aphasia will not become competent speakers, listeners, writers, or readers, goals can be created to improve the individual’s quality of life.
It is characterized by a gradual loss in language functioning while other cognitive domains are mostly preserved, such as memory and personality.
People with aphasia may experience any of the following behaviors due to an acquired brain injury, although some of these symptoms may be due to related or concomitant problems such as dysarthria or apraxia and not primarily due to aphasia.
Most acute cases of aphasia recover some or most skills by working with a speech-language pathologist.
For example, non-intensive therapy has been found to be more effective than intensive therapy when targeting naming accuracy in patients with anomia.
* difficulty in naming
Intensive therapy has been found to be effective for patients with nonfluent and fluent chronic aphasia, but less effective for patients with acute aphasia.
The difficulties of people with aphasia can range from occasional trouble finding words to losing the ability to speak, read, or write; intelligence, however, is unaffected.
During this time, the brain is attempting to recover and repair the damaged neurons.
Improvement has also been shown when the individual was attentive, motivated, and information was presented in multiple ways.
* inability to repeat a phrase
Aphasia is also listed as a rare side-effect of the fentanyl patch, an opioid used to control chronic pain.
Several treatment techniques include the following:
There is no one treatment proven to be effective for all types of aphasias.
However, since aphasia presents differently among individuals, these programs must be dynamic and flexible in order to adapt to the variability in impairments.
Once a diagnosis is reached as to the skills/modules where the most significant impairment lies, therapy can proceed to treat these skills.
This type of stroke happens 20% of the time and is very serious.
The authors suggested that an intensive conversational therapy program should be considered for patients with moderately severe nonfluent aphasia in order to enhance the patient's quality of life and improve their language expression.
When caused by brain tumor, infection, or dementia, it develops more slowly.
These individuals find tremendous difficulty in being able to actually sign the linguistic concepts they are trying to express.
Patients with conduction aphasia are typically aware of their errors.
Conduction aphasia is caused by damage to the arcuate fasciculus.
Positive outcomes are most prominent when neuroplasticity is maximized for the aphasic patient, and is predicted by the patient's response to the other stated outcomes.
Current research suggests that intense treatment is effective, although the definition of “intense” is variable.
With each of these though, unlike some aphasias, functionality within daily life remains intact.
The area and extent of brain damage or atrophy will determine the type of aphasia and its symptoms.
The blood clot may form in the blood vessel,l which is called a thrombus, or the blood clot can travel from somewhere else in the blood system that is called an embolus.
Recovery also depends on the patient's age, health, motivation, handedness, and educational level.
Aphasia can also sometimes be caused by damage to subcortical structures deep within the left hemisphere, including the thalamus, the internal and external capsules, and the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia.
Overall health status also greatly impacts outcomes in aphasic patients.
A person could potentially have difficulty with just one module, or with a number of modules.
Aphasia is most often caused by stroke, but any disease or damage to the parts of the brain that control language can cause aphasia.
A very small number of people can experience aphasia after damage to the right hemisphere only.
The reason that there is no universal treatment for aphasia is because of the nature of the disorder and the various ways it is presented, as explained in the above sections.
As such, patients with jargon aphasia often use neologisms, and may perseverate if they try to replace the words they cannot find with sounds.
Melodic Intonation Therapy is used to treat non-fluent aphasia and has proved to be effective in some cases.
*Visual Communication Therapy (VIC) - the use of index cards with symbols to represent various components of speech
Some patients cannot tolerate therapy directly after a stroke due to confusion or exhaustion, but may tolerate therapy better later.
Most importantly, intensity of treatment should be determined on a case by case basis and should depend upon recency of stroke and the patient’s stamina, tolerance for therapy, motivation, overall health status, and treatment goals.
These facial movement forms of communication come from the same areas of the brain.
Substitutions commonly involve picking another (actual) word starting with the same sound (e.g., clocktower - colander), picking another semantically related to the first (e.g., letter - scroll), or picking one phonetically similar to the intended one (e.g., lane - late).
'''Aphasia''' is an inability to comprehend and formulate language because of dysfunction in specific brain regions.
One study found that when given intensive CIAT therapy, participant performance in verbal communication in everyday life significantly improved.
SP-I-R-IT focuses heavily on speech production strategies and intervention.
Similarly, there is a module that stores phonemes that the person is planning to produce in speech, and this module is critical for any task involving the production of long words or long strings of speech.
#Direct Treatment Model - an approach that targets deficits with specific exercises
Anomic aphasia is the mildest form of aphasia, indicating a likely possibility for better recovery.
Intensive therapy can be alternatively characterized by the magnitude of the demands placed on a client within a session.
Each individual with aphasia will present with their own particular combination of language strengths and weaknesses.
Patients with transcortical motor aphasia typically have intact comprehension and awareness of their errors, but poor word finding and speech production.
It has been suggested that these individuals may have had an unusual brain organization prior to their illness or injury, with perhaps greater overall reliance on the right hemisphere for language skills than in the general population.
Improvement varies widely, depending on the aphasia's cause, type, and severity.
Often those with aphasia will try to hide their inability to name objects by using words like ''thing''.
Results showed significant improvements in oral and written noun and sentence production, naming actions, and daily communication.
The results of the study demonstrated a significant increase in the patient’s expressive language.
* incomplete sentences
So when asked to name a pencil they may say it is a thing used to write.
This rehabilitation can take two or more years and is most effective when begun quickly.
* inability to comprehend language
Also, it is perhaps best suited to milder cases of aphasia: If the person has little expressive or receptive language ability, sometimes test performance can be difficult to interpret.
* dysprosody (alterations in inflexion, stress, and rhythm)
Aphasia also affects visual language such as sign language.
Despite his global deficits, he made a full recovery after 30 months.
Although all of the diseases listed above are potential causes, aphasia will generally only result when there is substantial damage to the left hemisphere (responsible for language function) of the brain, either the cortex (outer layer) and/or the underlying white matter.
Individuals can show a form of Wernicke's aphasia with sign language and they show deficits in their abilities in being able to produce any form of expressions.
Some of these can include brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, and progressive neurological disorders.
Consequently, it is a major challenge just to document the various difficulties that can occur in different people, let alone decide how they might best be treated.
In this kind of therapy the focus is on pragmatic communication rather than treatment itself.
*Copy and Recall Therapy (CART) - repetition and recall of targeted words within therapy may strengthen orthographic representations and improve single word reading, writing, and naming
Due to the limited research on outcomes for the specific subtypes of these aphasias, it is more important to focus on the other factors and severity of deficits in order to predict a reasonable outcome.
Studies have shown that, although there is no consistency on treatment methodology in literature, there is a strong indication that treatment in general has positive outcomes.
The preceding factors discussed correlate with a good prognosis for patients with Broca’s aphasia.
If the patient is not motivated to make positive outcomes in their life after being diagnosed with any type of aphasia, their prognosis to make great improvements is much less than someone who is highly motivated to make positive changes in their life.
However, the most important factor affecting the outcomes of a patient with aphasia is a patient's motivation.
Patients are asked to communicate a given message to their therapists by means of drawing, making hand gestures or even pointing to an object
Additionally, a case study completed on a 54-year-old man with a large infarct in the arcuate fasciculus indicated that severe conduction aphasia can be successfully treated.
* inability to form words
Overall, people experience bleeding inside or around brain tissue.
There are several outcomes that contribute to a patient's overall outcomes once diagnosed with aphasia including: neuroplasticity, age, overall health status, and patient motivation.
Though some cases of Wernicke’s aphasia has shown greater improvements than more mild forms of aphasia, people with Wernicke’s aphasia may not reach as high of a level of speech abilities as those with mild forms of aphasia.
Group therapy allows individuals to work on their pragmatic and communication skills with other individuals with aphasia, which are skills that may not often be addressed in individual one-on-one therapy sessions.
* excessive creation and use of personal neologisms
Another barrier is the capability of computer programs to imitate normal speech and keep up with the speed of regular conversation.
This type of approach requires a framework or theory as to what skills/modules are needed to perform different kinds of language tasks.
In practice, the cognitive neuropsychological approach can be unwieldy due to the wide variety of skills that can potentially be tested.
An individual's "language" is the socially shared set of rules as well as the thought processes that go behind verbalized speech.
Aphasia is rarely exhibited identically, implying that treatment needs to be catered specifically to the individual.
Each participant in the study also showed improvement on at least one subtest within the Aachen Aphasia Test; which assesses language performance and comprehension in aphasia patients.
The researchers found that patients who received intensive therapy of 100 treatment hours over 62 weeks scored higher on language measures than the control group who received less intensive therapy.
In one study, 23 individuals that had previously received speech-language therapy, but had been dismissed because further recovery was not expected, participated in intense speech-language therapy.
Therapy for aphasia ranges from increasing functional communication to improving speech accuracy, depending on the person's severity, needs and support of family and friends.
The word ''aphasia'' comes from the word ἀφασία ''aphasia'', in Ancient Greek, which means "speechlessness", derived from ἄφατος ''aphatos'', "speechless" from ἀ- ''a-'', "not, un" and φημί ''phemi'', "I speak".
Aphasia symptoms can vary based on the location of damage in the brain.
In acute disorders, such as head injury or stroke, aphasia usually develops quickly.
Patients with Broca’s aphasia may also have difficulty with word retrieval, or anomia.
In rare cases, aphasia may also result from herpesviral encephalitis.
Progressive Jargon Aphasia is a fluent or receptive aphasia in which the patient's speech is incomprehensible, but appears to make sense to them.
Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA), while its name can be misleading, is actually a form of dementia that has some symptoms closely related to several forms of aphasia.
Since these same areas of the brain are being used for sign language, these same, at least very similar, forms of aphasia can show in the Deaf community.
One prevalent deficit in the aphasias is anomia, which is a deficit in word finding ability.
*Melodic Intonation Therapy (MIT) - aims to use the intact melodic/prosodic processing skills of the right hemisphere to help cue retrieval of words and expressive language
The awareness of errors and the milder nature of conduction aphasia compared to other types contributes to a positive outcome.
People suffering from PPA may have difficulties comprehending what others are saying.
There are three classifications of Primary Progressive Aphasia : Progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), Semantic Dementia (SD), and Logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA)
In addition, patients with Broca’s aphasia comprehend spoken and written language better than they can speak or write.
A common approach is to distinguish between the fluent aphasias (where speech remains fluent, but content may be lacking, and the person may have difficulties understanding others), and the nonfluent aphasias (where speech is very halting and effortful, and may consist of just one or two words at a time).
Each individual reacts differently to treatment intensity and is able to tolerate treatment at different times post-stroke.
*Functional Communication Treatment (FCT) - focuses on improving activities specific to functional tasks, social interaction, and self-expression
For example, the model of Max Coltheart identifies a module that recognizes phonemes as they are spoken, which is essential for any task involving recognition of words.
* limited verbal output
Typically, the spontaneous speech of a person with anomic aphasia is fluent and grammatically correct but contains many word retrieval failures.
* agrammatism (inability to speak in a grammatically correct fashion)
There is a huge variation among patients within the same broad grouping, and aphasias can be highly selective.
* paraphasia (substituting letters, syllables or words)
Broca's aphasia shows up in some patients, as well.
A key indication for good prognosis is treatment intensity.
Intensity of treatment should be individualized based on the recency of stroke, therapy goals, and other patient-specific characteristics such as age, size of lesion, overall health status, and motivation.
Signs and symptoms may or may not be present in individuals with aphasia and may vary in severity and level of disruption to communication.
There are two types of strokes: ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke.
Specifically, these patients relearned to correctly produce the problematic words after one to three hours of speech-language therapy.
Aphasia is from Greek ''a-'' ("without") + ''phásis'' (''φάσις'', "speech").
In addition, although Anomic Aphasia is seen to be less severe than other aphasias, therapy is still imperative to help decrease the patient’s word finding deficits.
* inability to speak spontaneously
An alternative explanation is that the efficacy of MIT depends on neural circuits involved in the processing of rhythmicity and formulaic expressions (examples taken from the MIT manual: “I am fine,” “how are you?” or “thank you”); while rhythmic features associated with melodic intonation may engage primarily left-hemisphere subcortical areas of the brain, the use of formulaic expressions is known to be supported by right-hemisphere cortical and bilateral subcortical neural networks.
More research needs to be done to examine the optimal time for providing intense therapy to all aphasic patients.
The first recorded case of aphasia is from an Egyptian papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which details speech problems in a person with a traumatic brain injury to the temporal lobe.
Wernicke’s aphasia has shown a high recovery rate and frequent evolution to other forms of aphasia.
Therefore, although there is a general consensus that intense treatment encourages more improvement, there is not a straightforward definition of “intense” treatment.
For instance, patients with naming deficits (anomic aphasia) might show an inability only for naming buildings, or people, or colors.
The primary goal is to help the individual and those closest to them adjust to changes and limitations in communication.
The most common cause of hemorrhagic stroke is an aneurysm.
Overall, treatment is considered more intense when total therapy hours per week are increased, and on average, research suggests more intense therapy leads to better outcomes.
* inability to read
Aphasia is best thought of as a collection of different disorders, rather than a single problem.
Under this definition, intensive therapy includes a few specific techniques such as Constraint Induced Aphasia Therapy (CIAT) and Speech Intensive Rehabilitation Intervention (SP-I-R-IT).
Consequently, even amongst individuals who meet the criteria for classification into a subtype, there can be enormous variability in the types of difficulties they experience.
Therefore, computer technology seems to be limited in a communicative setting, however is effective in producing improvements in communication training.
Many patients with an acute onset of Broca’s aphasia, eventually progress to milder forms of aphasia, such as conduction or anomic.
The term, Anomic Aphasia, usually refers to patients whose only prevalent symptom is impaired word retrieval in speech and writing.
To be diagnosed with aphasia, a person's speech or language must be significantly impaired in one (or several) of the four communication modalities following acquired brain injury or have significant decline over a short time period (progressive aphasia).
* inability to pronounce, not due to muscle paralysis or weakness
Sign language also uses these facial movements and emotions along with the primary hand movement way of communicating.
PPA usually initiates with sudden word-finding difficulties in an individual and progresses to a reduced ability to formulate grammatically correct sentences (syntax) and impaired comprehension.
All of these outcomes contribute to success in Wernicke's, Broca's, Global, and Conduction aphasia, and are detailed below:
Broca's area of speech production has been shown to contain several of these mirror neurons resulting in significant similarities of brain activity between sign language and vocal speech communication.
As we age language can become more difficult to process resulting in slowing of verbal comprehension, reading abilities and more likely word finding difficulties.
Humans use facial movements to create, what other humans perceive, to be faces of emotions.
In order to be successful, regardless of the contributing outcomes, the patient must be highly motivated in order to make the most efficient outcomes.
Research suggests that intense treatment is most beneficial in the sub-acute or chronic phase, rather than directly post stroke.
