:''    Rhopalosiphum padi''
Most aphids have a pair of cornicles (or "siphunculi"), abdominal tubes through which they exude droplets of a quick-hardening defensive fluid containing triacylglycerols, called cornicle wax.
The life cycle is complex.
Often, the visible fungus is not the type of fungus that killed the aphid, but a secondary fungus.
These aphids are capable of eating both hosts.
The aphids range in colour from grey to brown or black and are less than 5&nbsp;mm long.
and Auchenorrhyncha (e.g., cicadas, leafhoppers, treehoppers, planthoppers, etc.)
Despite the apparent loss of transcription factors in the reduced genome, gene expression is highly regulated, as shown by the ten-fold variation in expression levels between different genes under normal conditions.
Aphids can be easily killed by unfavourable weather, such as late spring freezes.
In heteroecious species, the aphids spend winter on tree or bush primary hosts; in summer, they migrate to their secondary host on a herbaceous plant, then the gynoparae return to the tree in autumn.
They feed themselves through sucking mouthparts called stylets, enclosed in a sheath called a rostrum, which is formed from modifications of the mandible and maxilla of the insect mouthparts.
From a zoological standpoint they are a highly successful group of organisms.
Once a phloem vessel is punctured, the sap, which is under high pressure, is forced into the aphid's food canal.
This process iterates throughout the summer, producing multiple generations that typically live 20 to 40&nbsp;days.
The carotene pigments in aphids form a layer close to the surface of the cuticle, where it is ideally placed to absorb sunlight.
The embryos develop within the mothers' ovarioles, which then give live birth to first-instar female nymphs (viviparous).
Thus, one female hatched in spring may produce thousands of descendants.
The original contamination occurred in a common ancestor  and has enabled aphids to exploit a new ecological niche, phloem-sap feeding on vascular plants.
When host plant quality becomes poor or conditions become crowded, some aphid species produce winged offspring, "alates", that can disperse to other food sources.
In plants which produce the phytoestrogen coumestrol, such as alfalfa, damage by aphids is linked with higher concentrations of coumestrol.
For the alate exules the same factors apply as for emigrants EXCEPT that crowding is more important.
In the nest, the ants feed the caterpillars, who in return produce honeydew for the ants.
It will only kill aphids on contact and has no residual action against aphids that arrive after application.
The oldest known aphid fossil is of the species ''Triassoaphis cubitus'' from the Triassic.
When a sophisticated reproductive strategy is used, only females are present in the population at the beginning of the seasonal cycle (although a few species of aphids have been found to have both male and female sexes).
They can migrate great distances, mainly through passive dispersal by riding on winds.
Other defensive compounds can also be produced by some types of aphids.
Aphids of most species feed in groups and are usually attended by ants, which feed on the droplets of excreted liquid.
In a nitrogen poor environment, this could provide an advantage to an infested plant over a noninfested plant.
Aphids also are often infected by bacteria, viruses, and fungi.
Many species are green but other commonly occurring species may be white and wooly or black.
In reality the only cost effective situation in which mass release of natural enemies makes sense is in closed or semi closed environments such as glasshouses or polytunnels.
* Emigrants (heteroecious only) are produced on primary hosts and migrate to secondary hosts; this is once again due to quality of food decreasing and to a lesser extent overcrowding.
Adelgids are sometimes described as aphids, but are more properly classified as aphid-like insects, because they have no cauda or cornicles.
The pea aphid has a primary host of a perennial vetch and secondary of the annual pea.
There are various insecticides that can be used to control aphids, including synthetic insecticides and plant extracts/products that are thought to be more eco-friendly.
* Fundatrigeniae (daughter clones)
It was felt that the excess honeydew would nourish soil micro-organisms, including nitrogen fixers.
'', Eriosomatidae), and many old subfamilies were elevated to family rank.
A number of galling aphid species are known to produce specialised "soldier" forms, sterile nymphs with defensive features which defend the gall from invasion.
For example, Shreth ''et al.''
Eggs are blackish and are laid singly or in rows on the needles.
In the spring, the ants carry the newly hatched aphids back to the plants.
All aphids overwinter in the egg stage.
* Many host-alternating species are the biggest aphid pests:
The soldiers of gall forming aphids also carry out the job of cleaning the gall.
Carotenoids may absorb solar energy and convert it to ATP, the first example of photoheterotrophy in animals.
As "Galla Chinensis", Chinese galls are used in Chinese medicine to treat coughs, diarrhoea, night sweats, dysentery and to stop intestinal and uterine bleeding.
The removal of sap creates a lack of vigour in the plant, and aphid saliva is toxic to plants.
Aphids frequently transmit disease-causing organisms like plant viruses to their hosts.
Most aphids have soft bodies, which may be green, black, brown, pink, or almost colourless.
Six generations in 1 year are not unusual in Canada, with succeeding generations often moving to new sites on the tree, including the roots, as the season progresses.
A hypothesis that insect feeding may improve plant fitness was floated in the mid-1970s by Owen and Wiegert.
'''Heteroecious – host alternating'''
They are affected by the weather, such as precipitation, temperature and wind.
Aphids have antennae with as many as six segments.
Aphids contributed to the spread of late blight (''Phytophthora infestans'') among potatoes in the Irish potato famine of the 1840s.
The eggs endure the winter and emerge as winged or wingless females the following spring.
When the caterpillars reach full size, they crawl to the colony entrance and form cocoons.
The males are genetically identical to their mothers except they have one fewer sex chromosome.
Sexual females and males mate, and females lay eggs that develop outside the mother.
* Fundatrix specialisation – host alternation is a constraint imposed by specialized feeding requirements of the fundatrix morph as the heteroecious lifecycle is not the optimal one.
An interesting variation in ant–aphid relationships involves lycaenid butterflies and ''Myrmica'' ants.
For example, ''Niphanda fusca'' butterflies lay eggs on plants where ants tend herds of aphids.
* Alate exules are produced on secondary host if heteroecious, if autoecious will be produced on host anyway.
A change in photoperiod and temperature, or perhaps a lower food quantity or quality, causes females to parthenogenetically produce sexual females and males.
* Apterous exule (wingless female)
As they feed, aphids often transmit plant viruses to the plants, such as to potatoes, cereals, sugarbeets, and citrus plants.
They vary in length from .
Four types of alate (winged) aphid morphs exist, known as polymorphisms:
* Increasing chance of new clones produced
Their long feeding tubes pierce the bark to take up sap from shoots, twigs, branches, stems, and roots.
Though aphids cannot fly for most of their life cycle, they can escape predators and accidental ingestion by herbivores by dropping off the plant they are on.
Her offspring then proceed to grow and produce emigrants which develop on the bird cherry before flying to the oat species where they continue feeding.
In fact, honeydew secretions are produced from the anus of the aphid, while cornicles mostly produce defensive chemicals such as waxes.
** Heteroecious (decreases chance of meeting self therefore mating with different clone) - better oviposition sites on trees than herbaceous plants as herbaceous plants are annual and die in winter.
It was common at one time to suggest that the cornicles were the source of the honeydew, and this was even included in the ''Shorter Oxford English Dictionary'' and the 2008 edition of the ''World Book Encyclopedia''.
Aphids have a tail-like protrustion called a cauda above their rectal apertures.
The bird cherry-oat aphid is an example of a host-alternating species (as implied by the double name), that starts its lifecycle with a large, highly fecund fundatrix.
Cotton aphids (''Aphis gossypii'') often infect sugarcane, papaya and peanuts with viruses.
Some species of dairying ants (such as the European yellow meadow ant, ''Lasius flavus'') manage large herds of aphids that feed on roots of plants in the ant colony.
* Gynoparae (heteroecious only and produced on secondary host in response to longer nights and falling temperature).
The most recent authoritative classifications place all extant taxa into a single large family Aphididae.
Queens leaving to start a new colony take an aphid egg to found a new herd of underground aphids in the new colony.
* Oviposition and rendezvous sites
As xylem sap ingestion has been observed following a dehydration period, aphids are thought to consume xylem sap to replenish their water balance; the consumption of the dilute sap of xylem permitting aphids to rehydrate.
For example, Alexander's horned aphids are a type of soldier aphid that has a hard exoskeleton and pincer-like mouthparts.
After about 3&nbsp;days, the aphid dies and the fungus releases more spores into the air.
So far, the role of only some of the secondary symbionts has been described; ''Regiella insecticola'' plays a role in defining the host-plant range, ''Hamiltonella defensa'' provides resistance to parasitoids, and ''Serratia symbiotica'' prevents the deleterious effects of heat.
These spores stick to the aphid, germinate, and penetrate the aphid's skin.
The cabbage aphid, ''Brevicoryne brassicae'', stores and releases chemicals that produce a violent chemical reaction and strong mustard oil smell to repel predators.
Other than the two-spotted spider mites aphids are the only known member of the animal kingdom with the ability to synthesise carotenoids.
Aphids can live inside the gall, which provides protection from predators and the elements.
* Alate exule  (winged female)
This is, for example, the lifecycle of the rose aphid (''Macrosiphum rosae'', or less commonly ''Aphis rosae''), which may be considered typical of the family.
Problem: survival rate of autoecious vs heteroecious is similar
Some plant species are known to be sensitive to soap sprays.
Thus, a female's diet can affect the body size and birth rate of more than two generations (daughters and granddaughters).
'''Aphids''', also known as '''plant lice''' and in Britain and the Commonwealth as '''greenflies''', '''blackflies''', or '''whiteflies''' (not to be confused with "jumping plant lice" or true whiteflies), are small sap-sucking insects, and members of the superfamily '''Aphidoidea'''.
This allows otherwise green aphids to be coloured red.
For example, the currant-lettuce aphid, ''Nasonovia ribisnigri'', is believed to have spread from New Zealand to Tasmania in this way.
'''Aphid reproduction terminology:'''
Oligasaccharides are then excreted through honeydew, explaining its high sugar concentrations, which can then be used by other animals such as ants.
The damage they do to plants has made them enemies of farmers and gardeners the world over.
The overwintering eggs that hatch in the spring result in females, called fundatrices.
* Enemy escape – using the same host plants all year round increases the risk of predators discovering the aphids.
* Sexuparae (Parthenogenetic viviparous females of aphids giving rise to the sexual generation and usually developing on the secondary host, the alate forms migrating to the primary host at the end of the summer (holocyclic and heteroecious aphids).)
The eggs hatch as caterpillars which feed on the aphids.
The damage of plants, and in particular commercial crops, has resulted in large amounts of resources and efforts being spent attempting to control the activities of aphids.
The fungus grows in the aphid hemolymph (i.e., the counterpart of blood for aphids).
The cherry aphid or black cherry aphid, ''Myzus cerasi'', is responsible for some leaf curl of cherry trees.
For example, the apple aphid (''Aphis pomi''), after producing many generations of wingless females on its typical food plant, gives rise to winged forms which fly away and settle on grass or corn stalks.
Of these, only 0.6% of autumn alate migrants find host plants, i.e.
However, rain cannot be relied on for aphid control.
Aphids are soft-bodied, and have a wide variety of insect predators.
Aphids probably appeared around , in the early Permian period.
All these processes function synergetically, and enable aphids to feed on high-sucrose-concentration plant sap, as well as to adapt to varying sucrose concentrations.
* Temperature tolerance – morphs adapted to part temperature
There also is evidence of cornicle wax attracting aphid predators in some cases.
Some species interact with plant tissues forming a gall, an abnormal swelling of plant tissue.
Organs like the cornicles did not appear until the Cretaceous period.
* Induced host-plant defenses - plants abscise galled tissue; evidence shows that some plants selectively drop galled leaves earlier than ungalled ones.
* Oviparae (sexual females that mate with the males)
In contrast to many taxa, aphid species diversity is much lower in the tropics than in the temperate zones.
''Buchnera aphidicola'' gene transcription, although not well understood, is thought to be regulated by a small number of global transcriptional regulators and/or through nutrient supplies from the aphid host.
These farming ants protect the aphids by fighting off aphid predators.
Aphids brush against the microscopic spores.
However, in warm environments, such as in the tropics or in a greenhouse, aphids may go on reproducing asexually for many years.
Early 21st-century reclassifications substantially rearranged the families within Aphidoidea: some old families were reduced to subfamily rank (''e.g.
For example, adults of the intermediate summer generations consist of females only, some winged and others wingless, which produce tiny nymphs rather than eggs.
Aphids are distributed worldwide, but are most common in temperate zones.
Their success is due in part to the asexual reproductive capabilities of some species.
These sexual aphids may lack wings or even mouthparts.
Xylem sap consumption may be related to osmoregulation.
Rain prevents winged aphids from dispersing, and knocks aphids off plants and thus kills them from the impact or by starvation.
However, if alates move to other hosts, they and their offspring can circumvent them for a time.
The number of species was small, but increased considerably with the appearance of angiosperms .
About 4,400 species are known, all included in the family Aphididae.
Angiosperms allowed aphids to specialise.
Late 20th-century reclassification within the Hemiptera reduced the old taxon "Homoptera" to two suborders: Sternorrhyncha (e.g., aphids, whiteflies, scales, psyllids, etc.)
Essential amino acids are provided to aphids by bacterial endosymbionts, harboured in special cells, bacteriocytes.
Chinese galls are also an important source of tannins.
Aphids that form closed galls use the plant's vascular system for their plumbing: the inner surfaces of the galls are highly absorbent and wastes are absorbed and carried away by the plant.
Some species of ants farm aphids, protecting them on the plants they eat, eating the honeydew the aphids release from the terminations of their alimentary canals.
Similarly, adelgids also feed on plant phloem.
Reasons aphids alternate hosts:
High osmotic pressure in the stomach, caused by high sucrose concentration, can lead to water transfer from the hemolymph to the stomach, thus resulting in hyperosmotic stress and eventually to the death of the insect.
Aphids are in the superfamily Aphidoidea in the Sternorrhyncha division of the order Hemiptera.
As a result, the size of the ''B.
The subsequent apterous exules feed solely on the oats and eventually lead to growth of gynoparae which will return to the bird cherry, where they will produce males and oviparae, which in turn will reproduce, giving eggs for the next year.
Around 250 species are serious pests for agriculture and forestry as well as an annoyance for gardeners.
A number of species of aphids of the genus ''Cinara'' feed on spruce and fir in North America, but do not cause noticeable injury (Rose and Lindquist 1985).
They are vertically transmitted, although some studies demonstrated the possibility of horizontal transmission (from one lineage to another and possibly from one species to another).
Some bees in coniferous forests also collect aphid honeydew to make forest honey.
Aphids are among the most destructive insect pests on cultivated plants in temperate regions.
It is unclear why aphids should find it necessary to develop this source of energy when their diet provides them with an excess of sugars.
For example, one large, heavily infested rose bush may take two applications of 1500 beetles each.
* Gynoparae (produce sexual females)
Fungi that attack aphids include ''Neozygites fresenii'', ''Entomophthora'', ''Beauveria bassiana'', ''Metarhizium anisopliae'', and entomopathogenic fungi such as ''Lecanicillium lecanii''.
The mouthparts or eyes are smaller or missing in some species and forms.
Males occur only in the late fall generation, which produces the overwintering eggs.
Some species of aphids have acquired the ability to synthesise red carotenoids by horizontal gene transfer from fungi.
These symbionts recycle glutamate, a metabolic waste of their host, into essential amino acids.
* Fundatrix (foundress from the first egg)
Some species produce winged females in the summer, sometimes in response to low food quality or quantity.
** Autoecious (increase likelihood to meet same individual)
Plants exhibiting aphid damage can have a variety of symptoms, such as decreased growth rates, mottled leaves, yellowing, stunted growth, curled leaves, browning, wilting, low yields and death.
Furthermore, water is transferred from the hindgut, where osmotic pressure has already been reduced, to the stomach to dilute stomach content.
Plant sap is an unbalanced diet for aphids, as it lacks essential amino acids, which aphids, like all animals, cannot synthesise, and possesses a high osmotic pressure due to its high sucrose concentration.
Honeydew produced by aphids has been observed to reduce the effectiveness of fungicides as well.
This is likely due to the decline of food quality in trees during the summer, as well as overcrowding amongst aphids which they sense when they bump into each other too often.
Xylem sap is under negative hydrostatic pressure and requires active sucking, suggesting an important role in aphid physiology.
These dairying ants milk the aphids by stroking them with their antennae.
For small backyard infestations, simply spraying the plants thoroughly with a strong water jet every few days may be sufficient protection for roses and other plants.
Eventually, aphids consume xylem sap to dilute the stomach osmotic pressure.
with the suborder Heteroptera containing a large group of insects known as the true bugs.
This suggests aphids, and potentially, all the phloem-sap feeding species of the order Hemiptera, consume xylem sap for another reason than replenishing water balance.
For example, some species of cabbage aphids (like ''Brevicoryne brassicae'') can produce up to 41 generations of females.
However, since adult lady beetles tend to fly away within 48 hours after release, without laying eggs, it requires repeated application of large numbers of lady beetles to be effective.
:''Metopolophium dirhodum ''
This can easily be distinguished from 'leaf curl' caused by Taphrina fungus species due to the presence of aphids beneath the leaves.
Some aphid colonies also harbour other bacterial symbionts, referred to as secondary symbionts due to their facultative status.
Some farming ant species gather and store the aphid eggs in their nests over the winter.
The green peach aphid, ''Myzus persicae'', is a vector for more than 110 plant viruses.
Sucrose concentration is directly reduced by assimilating sucrose toward metabolism and by synthesizing oligosaccharides from several sucrose molecules, thus reducing the solute concentration and consequently the osmotic pressure.
Natural enemies include predatory ladybugs, hoverfly larvae, parasitic wasps, aphid midge larvae, crab spiders, lacewings, and entomopathogenic fungi such as ''Lecanicillium lecanii'' and the Entomophthorales.
Aphids have also been spread by human transportation of infested plant materials.
These viruses can sometimes kill the plants.
Aphids may also be controlled by the release of natural enemies, in particular lady beetles and parasitic wasps.
Eggs are parthenogenetically produced without meiosis and the offspring are clonal to their mother.
suggested use of neem and lantana products to protect plants against aphids.
At this point the ants will attack the butterfly but the butterfly has a sticky wool like substance on their wings that disable the ants jaws meaning it can take flight without being ripped apart by the ants.
The heteroecious lifecycle (which is mainly linked to consumption of angiosperms and represents 10% of all aphids) is believed to have evolved from the ancestral autoecious form (on conifers); this is believed to have reverted to the ancestral form in some species that were once heteroecious.
Aphids passively feed on sap of phloem vessels in plants, as do many of their fellow members of Hemiptera such as scale insects and cicadas.
One of the problems with this is the individual plants hosting the wingless aphids that have been "left behind" will have large numbers of predators which have discovered them and feed on them.
Insects that attack aphids include predatory Coccinellidae (lady bugs or ladybirds), hoverfly larvae (Diptera: Syrphidae), parasitic wasps, aphid midge larvae, "aphid lions" (the larvae of green lacewings),  and lacewings (Neuroptera: Chrysopidae), and arachnid such as crab spiders.
* Emigrant (winged female; in spring, winged aphids migrating from primary hosts infest Poaceae)
Infestation of a variety of Chinese trees by Chinese sumac aphids (''Melaphis chinensis'') can create a "Chinese gall" which is valued as a commercial product.
'''Autoecious – single host'''
Aphids are also known to defend themselves from attack by parasitoid wasps by kicking.
