It was in this way that Apollo had become recognised as the god of music.
The artists in Plato's time moved away from his theories and art tends to be a mixture of naturalism with stylization.
Apollo's cult was already fully established when written sources commenced, about 650 BCE.
After they each performed, both were deemed equal until Apollo decreed they play and sing at the same time.
Apollo flayed Marsyas alive in a cave near Celaenae in Phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god.
Apollo is the son of Zeus and Leto, and has a twin sister, the chaste huntress Artemis.
Things as we see them, and as they really are, are one, that each stresses the nature of the other in a single unity.
Sacrifices and prayers on the Palatine to Apollo and Diana formed the culmination of the Secular Games, held in 17 BCE to celebrate the dawn of a new era.
In classical Greece he was the god of light and of music, but in popular religion he had a strong function to keep away evil.
Apollo was worshipped at Mauvières (Indre).
For the Greeks, Apollo was all the Gods in one and through the centuries he acquired different functions which could originate from different gods.
Several instances of popular etymology are attested from ancient authors.
When Zeus' wife Hera discovered that Leto was pregnant and that Zeus was the father, she banned Leto from giving birth on "terra firma".
He writes that the Cretan seer Epimenides purified Athens after the pollution brought by the Alcmeonidae, and that the seer's expertise in sacrifices and reform of funeral practices were of great help to Solon in his reform of the Athenian state.
The Greeks created the legalism, the supervision of the orders of the gods, and the demand for moderation and harmony.
The Homeric hymn adds that Apollo appeared as a dolphin and carried Cretan priests to Delphi, where they evidently transferred their religious practices.
In classical times, his strong function in popular religion was to keep away evil, and was therefore called "apotropaios" (, "divert", "deter", "avert") and "alexikakos" (from v.  + n. , "defend from evil").
The Delos sanctuary was primarily dedicated to Artemis, Apollo's twin sister.
Here we have an apotropaic situation, where a god originally bringing the plague was invoked to end it.
This kind of art goes back to the Minoan period, when its main theme was the representation of motion in a specific moment.
According to some scholars the words are derived from the Doric word ''apella'' (), which originally meant "wall," "fence for animals" and later "assembly within the limits of the square."
The conventions of this representation, head tilted, lips slightly parted, large-eyed, curling hair cut in locks grazing the neck, were developed in the 3rd century BCE to depict Alexander the Great.
* Atymnius, otherwise known as a beloved of Sarpedon
Horses were, in the Celtic world, closely linked to the sun.
This is the Greek ideal of moderation and a virtue that opposes gluttony.
Apollo complained to Maia that her son had stolen his cattle, but Hermes had already replaced himself in the blankets she had wrapped him in, so Maia refused to believe Apollo's claim.
Some of the earliest temples, especially in Crete, don't belong to any Greek order.
Hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented.
Apollo has ominous aspects aside from his plague-bringing, death-dealing arrows: Marsyas was a satyr who challenged Apollo to a contest of music.
Plato describes the priestesses of Delphi and Dodona as frenzied women, obsessed by "mania" (, "frenzy"), a Greek word he connected with ''mantis'' (, "prophet").
To the Romans, he was known in this capacity as '''Averruncus''' ( ; from Latin ''āverruncare'', "to avert").
The improvement of the old Anatolian god, and his elevation to an intellectual sphere, may be considered an achievement of the Greek people.
In discussion of the arts, a distinction is sometimes made between the Apollonian and Dionysian impulses where the former is concerned with imposing intellectual order and the latter with chaotic creativity.
Zeus intervened and, claiming to have seen the events, sided with Apollo.
The emphasis is given in anatomy, and it is one of the first attempts to represent a kind of motion, and beauty relative to proportions, which appear mostly in post-Archaic art.
Their vivid anecdotal qualities have made some of them favorites of painters since the Renaissance, the result being that they stand out more prominently in the modern imagination.
The contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives Apollonian and Dionysian.
However, while usually Greek festivals were celebrated at the full moon, all the feasts of Apollo were celebrated at the seventh day of the month, and the emphasis given to that day (''sibutu'') indicates a Babylonian origin.
According to the Greek tradition the Dipylon master was named Daedalus, and in his statues the limbs were freed from the body, giving the impression that the statues could move.
Just as in the arts the Greeks sought some reality behind appearances, so in mathematics they sought permanent principles which could be applied wherever the conditions were the same.
Frenzied women like Sibyls from whose lips the god speaks are recorded in the Near East as Mari in the second millennium BC.
Her tears formed the river Achelous.
However, the Greeks thought of the two qualities as complementary: the two gods are brothers, and when Apollo at winter left for Hyperborea, he would leave the Delphic oracle to Dionysus.
The statue throws some light on an artistic centre which, with an independently developed harder, simpler, and heavier style, restricts Ionian influence in Athens.
Such statues were found across the Greek speaking world, the preponderance of these were found at the sanctuaries of Apollo with more than one hundred from the sanctuary of ''Apollo Ptoios'', Boeotia alone.
The magicians were also called "seer-doctors" (), and they used an ecstatic prophetic art which was used exactly by the god Apollo at the oracles.
According to the ''Biblioteca'', the "library" of mythology mis-attributed to Apollodorus, he fathered the Corybantes on the Muse Thalia.
As a quintessentially Greek god, Apollo had no direct Roman equivalent, although later Roman poets often referred to him as '''Phoebus'''.
There was a tradition that the Delphic oracle was consulted as early as the period of the kings of Rome during the reign of Tarquinius Superbus.
Apollo's role as the slayer of the Python led to his association with battle and victory; hence it became the Roman custom for a paean to be sung by an army on the march and before entering into battle, when a fleet left the harbour, and also after a victory had been won.
The forms on earth are imperfect duplicates of the intellectual celestial ideas.
The bay laurel plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at these games.
The first statues are certainly still and formal.
* Hippolytus of Sicyon (not the same as Hippolytus, the son of Theseus)
When first informed he disbelieved the crow and turned all crows black (where they were previously white) as a punishment for spreading untruths.
The cult centers of Apollo in Greece, Delphi and Delos, date from the 8th century BCE.
Amongst the god's custodial charges, Apollo became associated with dominion over colonists, and as the patron defender of herds and flocks.
After receiving them, Apollo cornered Python in the sacred cave at Delphi.
Apollo gives an order through the Oracle at Delphi that Agamemnon's son, Orestes, is to kill Clytemnestra and Aegisthus, her lover.
The artists tried also to represent motion in a specific moment (Myron), which may be considered as the reappearance of the dormant Minoan element.
* Branchus (alternately, a son of Apollo)
Other male lovers of Apollo include:
The Pythian Games were held in Apollo's honor every four years at Delphi.
This island later became sacred to Apollo.
A fine example is the statue of the ''Sacred gate Kouros'' which was found at the cemetery of Dipylon in Athens (Dipylon Kouros).
He was worshipped as '''Acraephius''' ( ; , ''Akraiphios'', literally "Acraephian") or '''Acraephiaeus''' ( ; , ''Akraiphiaios'', literally "Acraephian") in the Boeotian town of Acraephia (), reputedly founded by his son Acraepheus; and as '''Smintheus''' ( ; , ''Smintheus'', "Sminthian"—that is, "of the town of Sminthos or Sminthe") near the Troad town of Hamaxitus.
Orestes and Pylades carry out the revenge, and consequently Orestes is pursued by the Erinyes (Furies, female personifications of vengeance).
Apollo was the immortal god of ''ideal balance and order''.
An oracle prophesied that Troy would not be defeated as long as Troilus reached the age of twenty alive.
* Leucates, who threw himself off a rock when Apollo attempted to carry him off
This was the spring which emitted vapors that caused the oracle at Delphi to give her prophecies.
Acesius was the epithet of Apollo worshipped in Elis, where he had a temple in the agora.
The epithet "Smintheus" has historically been confused with , "mouse", in association with Apollo's role as a god of disease.
Hesychius connects the name Apollo with the Doric  (''apella''), which means "assembly", so that Apollo would be the god of political life, and he also gives the explanation  (''sekos''), "fold", in which case Apollo would be the god of flocks and herds.
* '''Apollo Atepomarus''' ("the great horseman" or "possessing a great horse").
The older tales mentioned two dragons who were perhaps intentionally conflated.
He had found an aulos on the ground, tossed away after being invented by Athena because it made her cheeks puffy.
It is more probable that this art was introduced later from Anatolia and regenerated an existing oracular cult that was local to Delphi and dormant in several areas of Greece.
Zeus had turned all the people of Thebes to stone and so no one buried the Niobids until the ninth day after their death, when the gods themselves entombed them.
Mythographers agree that Artemis was born first and then assisted with the birth of Apollo, or that Artemis was born one day before Apollo, on the island of Ortygia and that she helped Leto cross the sea to Delos the next day to give birth to Apollo.
Greek art puts into '''Apollo''' the highest degree of power and beauty that can be imagined.
Cassandra, was daughter of Hecuba and Priam, and Troilus' half-sister.
It is considered that he created also the ''New York kouros'', which is the oldest fully preserved statue of ''Kouros'' type, and seems to be the incarnation of the god himself.
In literary contexts, Apollo represents harmony, order, and reason—characteristics contrasted with those of Dionysus, god of wine, who represents ecstasy and disorder.
Animals sacred to Apollo included wolves, dolphins, roe deer, swans, cicadas (symbolizing music and song), hawks, ravens, crows, snakes (referencing Apollo's function as the god of prophecy), mice and griffins, mythical eagle–lion hybrids of Eastern origin.
* '''Apollo Maponus'''.
Clytia, jealous of her sister because she wanted Apollo for herself, told Orchamus the truth, betraying her sister's trust and confidence in her.
It is also stated that Hera kidnapped Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to prevent Leto from going into labor.
Apollo Vindonnus had a temple at Essarois, near Châtillon-sur-Seine in present-day Burgundy.
The ritualism belonged to Apollo from the beginning.
Creusa left Ion to die in the wild, but Apollo asked Hermes to save the child and bring him to the oracle at Delphi, where he was raised by a priestess.
The statue is the "thing in itself", and his slender face with the deep eyes express an intellectual eternity.
Polykleitos in his ''Canon'' wrote that beauty consists in the proportion not of the elements (materials), but of the parts, that is the interrelation of parts with one another and with the whole.
The Siphnian Treasury in Delphi was one of the first Greek buildings utilizing the solution to put the dominating form in the middle, and to complete the descending scale of height with other figures sitting or kneeling.
He was also called '''Agyieus''' ( ; , ''Aguīeus'', from , "street") for his role in protecting roads and homes; and '''Nomius''' ( ; , ''Nomios'', literally "pastoral") and '''Nymphegetes''' ( ; , ''Numphēgetēs'', from , "Nymph", and , "leader") for his role as a protector of shepherds and pastoral life.
He was a god of healing, especially of the eyes.
Percy Bysshe Shelley composed a "Hymn of Apollo" (1820), and the god's instruction of the Muses formed the subject of Igor Stravinsky's ''Apollon musagète'' (1927–1928).
He is pictured as a terrible god, less trusted by the Greeks than other gods.
Both orders were abandoned for the Corinthian order gradually during the Hellenistic age, and under Rome.
The formality of their stance seems to be related with the Egyptian precedent, but it was accepted for a good reason.
On the occasion of a pestilence in the 430s BCE, Apollo's first temple at Rome was established in the Flaminian fields, replacing an older cult site there known as the "Apollinare".
However, the Greek tradition is referring to the existence of vapours and chewing of laurel-leaves, which seem to be confirmed by recent studies.
A number of non-Greek etymologies have been suggested for the name, The Hittite form ''Apaliunas'' (''d'') is attested in the Manapa-Tarhunta letter, perhaps related to Hurrian (and certainly the Etruscan) ''Aplu'', a god of plague, in turn likely from Akkadian ''Aplu Enlil'' meaning simply "the son of Enlil", a title that was given to the god Nergal, who was linked to Shamash, Babylonian god of the sun.
This led some scholars to the conclusion that Pythia carried on the rituals in a consistent procedure through many centuries, according to the local tradition.
A god known from inscriptions in Britain.
Another contender for the birthplace of Apollo is the Cretan islands of Paximadia.
The role of Apollo as god of plague is evident in the invocation of Apollo Smintheus ("mouse Apollo") by Chryses, the Trojan priest of Apollo, with the purpose of sending a plague against the Greeks (the reasoning behind a god of the plague becoming a god of healing is of course apotropaic, meaning that the god responsible for bringing the plague must be appeased in order to remove the plague).
Unusually among the Olympic deities, Apollo had two cult sites that had widespread influence: Delos and Delphi.
While each scene has its own character and completeness it must fit into the general sequence to which it belongs.
Paeοn is probably connected with the Mycenean ''pa-ja-wo-ne'' (Linear B: ),  but this is not certain.
The inspiration oracular cult was probably introduced into Greece from Anatolia, which is the origin of Sibyl, and where existed some of the oldest oracular shrines.
To protect his mother, Apollo begged Hephaestus for a bow and arrows.
In the ''Iliad'', Apollo is the healer under the gods, but he is also the bringer of disease and death with his arrows, similar to the function of the terrible Vedic god of disease Rudra.
The myth explains the connection of Apollo with δάφνη (''daphnē''), the laurel whose leaves his priestess employed at Delphi.
Marsyas could not do this, as he only knew how to use the flute and could not sing at the same time.
Ranking from the very few bronzes survived to us is the masterpiece bronze Piraeus Apollo.
The double-axe, labrys, was the holy symbol of the Cretan labyrinth.
As Apollo played the lyre, this was easy to do.
Hermes created the lyre for him, and the instrument became a common attribute of Apollo.
The earliest examples of life-sized statues of Apollo, may be two figures from the Ionic sanctuary on the island of Delos.
In the time of Augustus, who considered himself under the special protection of Apollo and was even said to be his son, his worship developed and he became one of the chief gods of Rome.
The infant Hermes stole a number of his cows and took them to a cave in the woods near Pylos, covering their tracks.
The Hittite testimony reflects an early form '''', which may also be surmised from comparison of Cypriot  with Doric .
Spiritual life is incorporated in matter, when it is given artistic form.
R. S. P. Beekes rejected the connection of the theonym with the noun ''apellai'' and suggested a Pre-Greek proto-form *''Apalyun''.
A title given to Apollo at a shrine at Nettleton Shrub, Wiltshire.
Apollo aided Paris in the killing of Achilles by guiding the arrow of his bow into Achilles' heel.
These free-standing statues were usually marble, but also the form rendered in limestone, bronze, ivory and terracotta.
The god who sends a disease can also prevent from it; therefore, when it stops, they make a purifying ceremony and offer him a hecatomb to ward off evil.
It probably comes from north-eastern Peloponnesus.
'''Apollo''' (Attic, Ionic, and Homeric Greek: , ''Apollōn'' ( ); Doric: , ''Apellōn''; Arcadocypriot: , ''Apeilōn''; Aeolic: , ''Aploun''; ) is one of the most important and complex of the Olympian deities in classical Greek and Roman religion and Greek and Roman mythology.
In Euripides' play ''Ion'', Apollo fathered Ion by Creusa, wife of Xuthus.
This type served certain religious needs and was first proposed for what was previously thought to be depictions of ''Apollo''.
Omens, symbols, purifications, and exorcisms appear in old Assyro-Babylonian texts, and these rituals were spread into the empire of the Hittites.
Oracular sanctuaries to Apollo were established in other sites.
The conception that diseases and death come from invisible shots sent by supernatural beings, or magicians is common in Germanic and Norse mythology.
Homer interprets Apollo as a terrible god () who brings death and disease with his arrows, but who can also heal, possessing a magic art that separates him from the other Greek gods.
Apollo was born on the seventh day (, ''hebdomagenes'') of the month Thargelion —according to Delian tradition—or of the month Bysios—according to Delphian tradition.
The palm tree was also sacred to Apollo because he had been born under one in Delos.
However the Indo-European component of Apollo does not explain his strong relation with omens, exorcisms, and with the oracular cult.
The story is told in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes.
Apollo and Helios/Sol remained separate beings in literary and mythological texts until the 3rd century CE.
An etiology in the ''Homeric hymns'' associated the epithet "Delphinius" with dolphins.
During this time he served as shepherd for King Admetus of Pherae in Thessaly.
Apollo also had a lyre-playing contest with Cinyras, his son, who committed suicide when he lost.
A crow informed Apollo of the affair.
The statue originally held the bow in its left hand, and a cup of pouring libation in its right hand.
In the ''Iliad'', when Diomedes injured Aeneas, Apollo rescued him.
Apollo was called '''Ismenius''' ( ; , ''Ismēnios'', literally "of Ismenus") after Ismenus, the son of Amphion and Niobe, whom he struck with an arrow.
In 1978, the Canadian band Rush released an album with songs "Apollo: Bringer of Wisdom"/"Dionysus: Bringer of Love".
The naked bodies of the statues are associated with the cult of the body that was essentially a religious activity.
The Greeks used standard types, because they believed  that the world of objects was a series of typical forms which could be represented in several instances.
The Greek sculptors considered the senses more important, and the proportions were used to unite the sensible with the intellectual.
"In the 3rd century, Apollo fell silent.
For this he was also known as '''Parnopius''' ( ; , ''Parnopios'', from , "locust") and to the Romans as '''Culicarius''' ( ; from Latin ''culicārius'', "of midges").
Apollo is known in Greek-influenced Etruscan mythology as ''Apulu''.
He dissented and questioned the justice of the award.
In this respect, the Romans called him '''Coelispex''' ( ; from Latin ''coelum'', "sky", and ''specere'', "to look at").
Anatomy and geometry are fused in one, and each does something to the other.
Apollo as a handsome beardless young man, is often depicted with a kithara (as Apollo Citharoedus) or bow in his hand, or reclining on a tree (the Apollo Lykeios and Apollo Sauroctonos types).
The Roman worship of Apollo was adopted from the Greeks.
Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, Midas, who happened to be present.
Then Apollo struck the strings of his lyre.
Marpessa was kidnapped by Idas but was loved by Apollo as well.
He used one of the cow's intestines and the tortoise shell and made the first lyre.
May have been a god of healing.
From the earliest times there were certain rules strictly observed in rectangular peripteral and prostyle buildings.
The pediment shows the story of Heracles stealing Apollo's tripod that was strongly associated with his oracular inspiration.
Apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer, and caused them to become the ears of a donkey.
Hera then sent the giant Tityos to rape Leto.
In Latin texts, on the other hand, Joseph Fontenrose declared himself unable to find any conflation of Apollo with Sol among the Augustan poets of the 1st century, not even in the conjurations of Aeneas and Latinus in ''Aeneid'' XII (161–215).
In the last oracle is mentioned that the "water which could speak", has been lost for ever.
Hermes ran to Thessaly, where Apollo was grazing his cattle.
Once Pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of Apollo, and to challenge Apollo, the god of the kithara, to a trial of skill.
Artists and sculptors tried to find this ideal order in relation with mathematics, but they believed that this ideal order revealed itself not so much to the dispassionate intellect, as to the whole sentient self.
She gave birth there and was accepted by the people, offering them her promise that her son would be always favourable toward the city.
Julian the Apostate (359 - 61) tried to revive the Delphic oracle, but failed."
He then nailed Marsyas' shaggy skin to a nearby pine-tree.
In spaceflight, the NASA program for landing astronauts on the Moon was named Apollo.
Thales searched for a simple material-form directly perceptible by the senses, behind the appearances of things, and his theory is also related to the older animism.
It seems that he was influenced by the theories of Pythagoras.
The name of Apollo's mother Leto has Lydian origin, and she was worshipped on the coasts of Asia Minor.
Apollo was worshipped as '''Actiacus''' ( ; , ''Aktiakos'', literally "Actian"), '''Delphinius''' ( ; , ''Delphinios'', literally "Delphic"), and '''Pythius''' ( ; , ''Puthios'', from Πυθώ, ''Pythō'', the area around Delphi), after Actium () and Delphi (Δελφοί) respectively, two of his principal places of worship.
Love affairs ascribed to Apollo are a late development in Greek mythology.
Their two figures hold the centre.
The sculptors derived this from observations on human beings, but they also embodied in concrete form, issues beyond the reach of ordinary thought.
Pregnant with Asclepius, Coronis fell in love with Ischys, son of Elatus.
About the 4th century BCE, the paean became merely a formula of adulation; its object was either to implore protection against disease and misfortune, or to offer thanks after such protection had been rendered.
During the Second Punic War in 212 BCE, the ''Ludi Apollinares'' ("Apollonian Games") were instituted in his honor, on the instructions of a prophecy attributed to one Marcius.
In Ovid's Metamorphoses, Phoebus Apollo chaffs Cupid for toying with a weapon more suited to a man, whereupon Cupid wounds him with a golden dart; simultaneously, however, Cupid shoots a leaden arrow into Daphne, causing her to be repulsed by Apollo.
* '''Apollo Vindonnus''' ('clear light').
Acantha, was the spirit of the acanthus tree, and Apollo had one of his other liaisons with her.
The epithet "Loxias" has historically been associated with , "ambiguous".
It probably is a cognate to the Doric month ''Apellaios'' (), and the offerings apellaia () at the initiation of the young men during the  family-festival apellai ().
Homer illustrated Paeon the god, and the song both of apotropaic thanksgiving or triumph.
The marble is a Hellenistic or Roman copy of a bronze original by the Greek sculptor Leochares, made between 350 and 325 BCE.
The evolution of the Greek sculpture can be observed in his depictions from the almost static formal Kouros type in early archaic period, to the representation of motion in a relative harmonious whole in late archaic period.
Apollo gave him a tame deer as a companion but Cyparissus accidentally killed it with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth.
Parnassos, which was then named after her.
In cult practice, Delian Apollo and Pythian Apollo (the Apollo of Delphi) were so distinct that they might both have shrines in the same locality.
