Ironically, just such a failure happened on Apollo 13 when an oxygen tank explosion left the CSM without electrical power.
Wiesner blurted out "No, that's no good" in front of the press, during a presentation by von Braun.
But even after NASA reached internal agreement, it was far from smooth sailing.
These flights validated the Service Module engine and the Command Module heat shield.
On May 25, 1961, twenty days after the first US manned spaceflight Freedom 7, Kennedy proposed the manned Moon landing in a ''Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs'':
The following March, LM flight, rendezvous and docking were successfully demonstrated in Earth orbit on Apollo 9, and Schweickart tested the full lunar EVA suit with its Portable Life Support System (PLSS) outside the LM.
Because the CSM design was started early before the selection of lunar orbit rendezvous, the service propulsion engine was sized to lift the CSM off of the Moon, and thus was oversized to about twice the thrust required for translunar flight.
Some documents prove this theory was discussed before and after the method was chosen.
Apollo stimulated many areas of technology, leading to over 1,800 spinoff products as of 2015.
The S-IC first stage burned RP-1/LOX for a rated thrust of , which was upgraded to  .
Astronauts would continue to use the CSM as a ferry to the station.
A "plugs-out" test was planned for January, which would simulate a launch countdown on LC-34 with the spacecraft transferring from pad-supplied to internal power.
While the determination of responsibility for the accident was complex, the review board concluded that "deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship and quality control."
We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard; because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills; because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win ... .
*Apollo spacecraft: $7,945.0 million
NASA announced the selection of Grumman as the LEM contractor in November 1962.
We choose to go to the Moon.
* '''Earth Orbit Rendezvous (EOR):''' Multiple rocket launches (up to 15 in some plans) would carry parts of a Direct Ascent spacecraft and propulsion units for translunar injection (TLI).
On the extended lunar missions, an orbital scientific instrument package was carried.
Up to the election of 1960, Kennedy had been speaking out against the "missile gap" that he and many other senators felt had formed between the Soviets and themselves due to the inaction of President Eisenhower.
One of the moonwalkers was a trained geologist.
Construction began in November 1962.
Landing men on the Moon by the end of 1969 required the most sudden burst of technological creativity, and the largest commitment of resources ($24 billion) ever made by any nation in peacetime.
In the summer it had become clear that the LM would not be ready in time.
The traditional visor helmet was replaced with a clear "fishbowl" type for greater visibility, and the lunar surface EVA suit would include a water-cooled undergarment.
The Apollo program has been called the greatest technological achievement in human history.
Apollo ran from 1961 to 1972, with the first manned flight in 1968.
A 1964 MSC study concluded, "The LM as lifeboat ... was finally dropped, because no single reasonable CSM failure could be identified that would prohibit use of the SPS."
The Block II crew positions were titled Commander (CDR) Command Module Pilot (CMP) and Lunar Module Pilot (LMP).
The June 11, 1962, decision to use lunar orbit rendezvous enabled the Saturn V to replace the Nova, and the MSFC proceeded to develop the Saturn rocket family for Apollo.
The two newest launch complexes were already being built for the Saturn I and IB rockets at the northernmost end: LC-34 and LC-37.
File:apollo11-15.png|Atmospheric drag slows the CM.
The flight computer design used in both the Lunar and Command Modules was, along with the Polaris and Minuteman missile systems, the driving force behind early research into integrated circuits (IC).
NASA announced the final crew selection for AS-204 on March 21, 1966, with the backup crew consisting of Gemini veterans James McDivitt and David Scott, with rookie Russell L. "Rusty" Schweickart.
A planned Centaur (S-V) third stage with two RL-10 engines, never flew on Saturn I.
The second and third stages burned liquid hydrogen, and the third stage was a modified version of the S-IVB, with thrust increased to  and capability to restart the engine for translunar injection after reaching a parking orbit.
The damage to the third stage engine was more severe, preventing it from restarting for trans-lunar injection.
This design would have required development of the extremely powerful Nova launch vehicle.
The Apollo program also affected environmental activism in the 1970s due to photos taken by the astronauts.
Many show signs of being subjected to high pressure shock waves that are generated during impact events.
File:apollo11-16.png|Parachutes are deployed, slowing the CM for a splashdown in the Pacific Ocean.
Two Block I CSMs were launched from LC-34 on suborbital flights in 1966 with the Saturn IB.
The video was processed to remove random noise and camera shake without destroying historical legitimacy.
Twenty-four of these left Earth’s orbit and flew around the Moon between December 1968 and December 1972 (three of them twice).
Apollo 13's Fra Mauro mission was reassigned to Apollo 14, commanded in February 1971 by Mercury veteran Alan Shepard, with Stuart Roosa and Edgar Mitchell.
The first, an automated vehicle carrying propellant for the return to Earth, would land on the Moon, to be followed some time later by the manned vehicle.
The first, AS-201 launched on February 26, reached an altitude of  and splashed down  downrange in the Atlantic Ocean.
Dissenters including John Houbolt at Langley Research Center emphasized the important weight reductions that were offered by the LOR approach.
The list of types covered follow-on lunar exploration to include '''H''' lunar landings, '''I''' for lunar orbital survey missions, and '''J''' for extended-stay lunar landings.
On November 28, 1961, it was announced that North American Aviation had won the contract, although its bid was not rated as good as Martin's.
In 2008, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency's SELENE probe observed evidence of the halo surrounding the Apollo 15 Lunar Module blast crater while orbiting above the lunar surface.
* '''Lunar Surface Rendezvous:''' Two spacecraft would be launched in succession.
An Extended Lunar Module weighed over , and allowed surface stays of over 3 days.
Five subsequent Apollo missions also landed astronauts on the Moon, the last in December 1972.
NASA discontinued the manned Block I program, using the Block I spacecraft only for unmanned Saturn V flights.
It also became clear that Apollo would outgrow the Canaveral launch facilities in Florida.
*Tracking and data acquisition: $664.1 million
When Kennedy's newly appointed NASA Administrator James E. Webb requested a 30 percent budget increase for his agency, Kennedy supported an acceleration of NASA's large booster program but deferred a decision on the broader issue.
The contract for design and construction of the Lunar Module was awarded to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation, and the project was overseen by Thomas J. Kelly.
The LOC also included an Operations and Checkout Building (OCB) to which Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were initially received prior to being mated to their launch vehicles.
Bypassing the NASA hierarchy, he sent a series of memos and reports on the issue to Associate Administrator Robert Seamans; while acknowledging that he spoke "somewhat as a voice in the wilderness," Houbolt pleaded that LOR should not be discounted in studies of the question.
NASA awarded all 32 of these astronauts its highest honor, the Distinguished Service Medal, given for "distinguished service, ability, or courage", and personal "contribution representing substantial progress to the NASA mission".
Scott and Irwin landed on July 30 near Hadley Rille, and spent just under 2 days, 19 hours on the surface.
*Mission support: $1,432.3 million
After the first landing, sufficient flight hardware remained for nine follow-on landings with a plan for extended lunar geological and astrophysical exploration.
The  payload capacity would have severely limited the systems which could be included, so the decision was made in October 1963 to use the uprated Saturn IB for all manned Earth orbital flights.
The Command Module Pilot was Gemini veteran Richard F. Gordon, Jr. Conrad and Bean carried the first lunar surface color television camera, but it was damaged when accidentally pointed into the Sun.
The initial LM model weighed approximately , and allowed surface stays up to around 34 hours.
The most ambitious plan called for using an empty S-IVB as an interplanetary spacecraft for a Venus fly-by mission.
These would be assembled into a single spacecraft in Earth orbit.
The rocks collected from the Moon are extremely old compared to rocks found on Earth, as measured by radiometric dating techniques.
The plugs-out test began on the morning of January 27, 1967, and immediately was plagued with problems.
Armstrong and Aldrin performed the first landing at the Sea of Tranquility at 20:17:40 UTC on July 20, 1969.
Propellant would have to be transferred from the automated vehicle to the manned vehicle.
Also, there was no provision for docking with the Lunar Module.
This committee recognized that the chosen mode was an important part of the launch vehicle choice, and recommended in favor of a hybrid EOR-LOR mode.
Office of Management and Budget Deputy Director Caspar Weinberger was opposed to this, and persuaded Nixon to keep the remaining missions.
The Moon landing data was recorded by a special Apollo TV camera which recorded in a format incompatible with broadcast TV.
A size bigger than the NAA Little Joe would be required, so the Little Joe II was built by General Dynamics/Convair.
It took up the majority of NASA's budget while it was being developed.
Before the Apollo program began, Wernher von Braun and his team of rocket engineers had started work on plans for very large launch vehicles, the Saturn series, and the even larger Nova series.
To remedy the causes of the fire, changes were made in the Block II spacecraft and operational procedures, the most important of which were use of a nitrogen/oxygen mixture instead of pure oxygen before and during launch, and removal of flammable cabin and space suit materials.
Not designed to fly through the Earth's atmosphere or return to Earth, its fuselage was designed totally without aerodynamic considerations, and was of an extremely lightweight construction.
The Apollo moon landing hoax claims helped propel conspiracy theories into a quasi-political narrative.
This included all research and development costs; the procurement of 15 Saturn V rockets, 16 Command/Service Modules, 12 Lunar Modules, plus program support and management costs; construction expenses for facilities and their upgrading, and costs for flight operations.
Seamans' establishment of an ad-hoc committee headed by his special technical assistant Nicholas E. Golovin in July 1961, to recommend a launch vehicle to be used in the Apollo program, represented a turning point in NASA's mission mode decision.
*Launch vehicle engine development: $854.2 million
The LM engines were successfully test-fired and restarted, despite a computer programming error which cut short the first descent stage firing.
The cutbacks forced mission planners to reassess the original planned landing sites in order to achieve the most effective geological sample and data collection from the remaining four missions.
The first flight with a live S-IV was launched from LC-37.
The workshop was to be supplemented by the Apollo Telescope Mount, which could be attached to the ascent stage of the lunar module via a rack.
But an even bigger facility would be needed for the mammoth rocket required for the manned lunar mission, so land acquisition was started in July 1961 for a Launch Operations Center (LOC) immediately north of Canaveral at Merritt Island.
Although at least three pads were planned, only two, designated A and B, were completed in October 1965.
The crew that flew the first Earth orbital test mission Apollo 7, Walter M. Schirra, Donn Eisele, and Walter Cunningham, were awarded the lesser NASA Exceptional Service Medal, because of discipline problems with the Flight Director's orders during their flight.
* '''Lunar Orbit Rendezvous (LOR):''' A single Saturn V could launch a spacecraft that was composed of a mother ship which would remain in orbit around the Moon, while a smaller, two-stage lander would carry two astronauts to the surface, return to dock with the mother ship, and then be discarded.
Thirty-two astronauts were assigned to fly missions in the Apollo program.
So Gilruth was given authority to grow his organization into a new NASA center, the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC).
With a budget of $230,000, the surviving original lunar broadcast data from Apollo 11 was compiled by Nafzger and assigned to Lowry Digital for restoration.
Webb also reassigned Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (ASPO) Manager Joseph Francis Shea, replacing him with George Low.
The Saturn V experienced pogo oscillation, a problem caused by non-steady engine combustion, which damaged fuel lines in the second and third stages.
The second stage replaced the S-IV with the S-IVB-200, powered by a single J-2 engine burning liquid hydrogen fuel with LOX, to produce  of thrust.
Schmitt participated in the lunar geology training of all of the Apollo landing crews.
In July 1960, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced the Apollo program to industry representatives at a series of Space Task Group conferences.
Grissom, White, and Chaffee decided to name their flight Apollo 1 as a motivational focus on the first manned flight.
In these six spaceflights, twelve men walked on the Moon.
The Apollo Extension Series (''Apollo X'',) proposed up to 30 flights to Earth orbit, using the space in the Spacecraft Lunar Module Adapter (SLA) to house a small orbital laboratory (workshop).
The astronauts returned safely on July 24.
Kennedy's science advisor Jerome Wiesner, who had expressed his opposition to manned spaceflight to Kennedy before the President took office, and had opposed the decision to land men on the Moon, hired Golovin, who had left NASA, to chair his own "Space Vehicle Panel", ostensibly to monitor, but actually to second-guess NASA's decisions on the Saturn V launch vehicle and LOR by forcing Shea, Seamans, and even Webb to defend themselves, delaying its formal announcement to the press on July 11, 1962, and forcing Webb to still hedge the decision as "tentative".
It would return, leaving its landing stage on the Moon.
The Apollo astronauts were chosen from the Project Mercury and Gemini veterans, plus from two later astronaut groups.
Debus was named the LOC's first Director.
His memo concluded that a manned Moon landing was far enough in the future that it was likely the United States would achieve it first.
While the Mercury capsule could only support one astronaut on a limited Earth orbital mission, Apollo would carry three astronauts.
Deke Slayton, the grounded Mercury astronaut who became Director of Flight Crew Operations for the Gemini and Apollo programs, selected the first Apollo crew in January 1966, with Grissom as Command Pilot, White as Senior Pilot, and rookie Donn F. Eisele as Pilot.
File:apollo11-08.png|'''Powered descent''' At perilune, the descent engine fires again to start the descent.
NASA's yearly budget also began to shrink in light of the successful landing, and NASA also had to make funds available for the development of the upcoming Space Shuttle.
All of the U. S. flags left on the Moon during the Apollo missions were found to still be standing, with the exception of the one left during the Apollo 11 mission, which was blown over during that mission's lift-off from the lunar surface and return to the mission Command Module in lunar orbit; the degree to which these flags retain their original colors remains unknown.
This resulted in lunar footage that had to be converted for the live television broadcast and stored on magnetic telemetry tapes.
The crew returned to Earth safely by using the Lunar Module as a "lifeboat" for these functions.
The medals were awarded posthumously to Grissom, White, and Chaffee in 1969, then to the crews of all missions from Apollo 8 onward.
The program returned  of lunar rocks and soil to Earth, greatly contributing to the understanding of the Moon's composition and geological history.
This was followed by five launches of boilerplate CSMs (designated AS-101 through AS-105) into orbit in 1964 and 1965.
MSFC designed the heavy lift-class Saturn launch vehicles, which would be required for Apollo.
Apollo 8 was planned to be the D mission in December 1968, crewed by McDivitt, Scott and Schweickart, launched on a Saturn V instead of two Saturn IBs.
*Operation of installations: $2,420.6 million
A single Saturn V launch in 1969 cost up to $375 million, compared to the National Science Foundation's fiscal year 1970 budget of $440 million.
Despite Kennedy's rhetoric, he did not immediately come to a decision on the status of the Apollo program once he became president.
The S-IB first stage increased the thrust to  by uprating the H-1 engine.
Beyond military power, Kennedy used aerospace technology as a symbol of national prestige, pledging to make the US not "first but, first and, first if, but first period."
According to ''The Economist'', Apollo succeeded in accomplishing President Kennedy's goal of taking on the Soviet Union in the Space Race, and beat it by accomplishing a singular and significant achievement, and thereby showcased the superiority of the capitalistic, free-market system as represented by the US.
''The Space Review'' estimated in 2010 the cost of Apollo from 1959 to 1973 as $20.4 billion, or $109 billion in 2010 dollars.
The design, development and construction of the center was conducted by Kurt H. Debus, a member of Dr. Wernher von Braun's original V-2 rocket engineering team.
Preliminary specifications were laid out for a spacecraft with a ''mission module'' cabin separate from the ''command module'' (piloting and re-entry cabin), and a ''propulsion and equipment module''.
The CDR takes over manual control after pitchover for a vertical landing.
Two S-II engines shut down prematurely, but the remaining engines were able to compensate.
The second, AS-202 on August 25, reached  altitude and was recovered  downrange in the Pacific Ocean.
During the following years, a magnetic tape shortage prompted NASA to remove massive numbers of magnetic tapes from the National Archives and Records Administration to be recorded over with newer satellite data.
In 2009, NASA held a symposium on project costs which presented an estimate of the Apollo program costs in 2005 dollars as roughly $170 billion.
They used Faget's design as the specification for another competition for spacecraft procurement bids in October 1961.
Apollo 15 had been planned to be the last of the H series missions, but since there would be only two subsequent missions left, it was changed to the first of three J missions.
In 2009, NASA's robotic Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, while orbiting  above the Moon, began photographing the remnants of the Apollo program left on the lunar surface, and photographed each site where manned Apollo flights landed.
Webb held firm, and issued a request for proposal to candidate Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) contractors.
Many samples appear to be pitted with micrometeoroid impact craters, which is never seen on Earth rocks, due to the thick atmosphere.
In November 1969, Gemini veteran Charles "Pete" Conrad and rookie Alan L. Bean made a precision landing on Apollo 12 within walking distance of the Surveyor 3 unmanned lunar probe, which had landed in April 1967 on the Ocean of Storms.
Based on the good performance of Apollo 6 and identification of satisfactory fixes to the Apollo 6 problems, NASA declared the Saturn V ready to fly men, cancelling a third unmanned test.
They spent a total of 21 hours, 36 minutes on the surface, and spent 2 hours, 31 minutes outside the spacecraft, walking on the surface, taking photographs, collecting material samples, and deploying automated scientific instruments, while continuously sending black-and-white television back to Earth.
Also, the Block II spacesuit was revised for the extended missions to allow greater flexibility and visibility for driving the LRV.
The S-IV second stage used six liquid hydrogen-fueled Pratt & Whitney RL-10 engines with  of thrust.
The LOC included Launch Complex 39, a Launch Control Center, and a 130 million cubic foot (3.7 million cubic meter) Vertical Assembly Building (VAB) in which the space vehicle (launch vehicle and spacecraft) would be assembled on a Mobile Launcher Platform and then moved by a transporter to one of several launch pads.
As such, they represent samples from a very early period in the development of the Solar System, that are largely absent on Earth.
Apollo also spurred advances in many areas of technology incidental to rocketry and manned spaceflight, including avionics, telecommunications, and computers.
Saturn IB launch vehicles and flights were designated with an AS-200 series number, "AS" indicating "Apollo Saturn" and the "2" indicating the second member of the Saturn rocket family.
In September 1967, Mueller approved a sequence of mission types which had to be successfully accomplished in order to achieve the manned lunar landing.
It consisted of separate descent and ascent stages, each with its own engine.
Phillips' superior officer Bernard A. Schriever agreed to loan Phillips to NASA, along with a staff of officers under him, on the condition that Phillips be made Apollo Program Director.
The Saturn IB was an upgraded version of the Saturn I.
Under Webb's reorganization, the directors of the Manned Spacecraft Center (Gilruth) Marshall Space Flight Center (von Braun) and the Launch Operations Center (Debus) effectively reported to Mueller.
The Soviet Union had sent animals around the Moon on September 15, 1968, aboard Zond 5, and it was believed they might soon repeat the feat with human cosmonauts.
File:apollo11-14.png|The SM is jettisoned just before reentry, and the CM turns 180° to face its blunt end forward for reentry.
Landing only a small part of the spacecraft on the Moon and returning an even smaller part to lunar orbit minimized the total mass to be launched from the Earth.
Webb's estimate shocked many at the time (including the President) but ultimately proved to be reasonably accurate.
Kennedy was circumspect in his response to the news, refusing to make a commitment on America's response to the Soviets.
The S-IVB orbital workshop was the only one of these plans to make it off the drawing board.
At the insistence of NASA Administrator Webb, North American removed Harrison Storms as Command Module program manager.
A restartable version of the S-IVB was used as the third stage of the Saturn V. The Saturn IB could send over  into low Earth orbit, sufficient for a partially fueled CSM or the LM.
Kennedy's goal was accomplished on the Apollo 11 mission when astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed their Lunar Module (LM) on July 20, 1969, and walked on the lunar surface, while Michael Collins remained in lunar orbit in the Command/Service Module (CSM), and all three landed safely on Earth on July 24.
At a meeting of the US House Committee on Science and Astronautics one day after Gagarin's flight, many congressmen pledged their support for a crash program aimed at ensuring that America would catch up.
The descent stage contained storage for the descent propellant, surface stay consumables, and surface exploration equipment.
In a November 16, 2009 editorial, ''The New York Times'' opined:
Shepard and Mitchell spent 33 hours and 31 minutes on the surface, and completed two EVAs totalling 9 hours 24 minutes, which was a record for the longest EVA by a lunar crew at the time.
Mueller agreed, and Phillips managed Apollo from January 1964, until it achieved the first manned landing in July 1969, after which he returned to Air Force duty.
Dr. Harrison Schmitt, a geologist, was the first NASA scientist astronaut to fly in space, and landed on the Moon on the last mission, Apollo 17.
The images were from tapes in Australia, the CBS News archive, and kinescope recordings made at Johnson Space Center.
Stan Lebar, who led the team that designed and built the lunar television camera at Westinghouse Electric Corporation, also worked with Nafzger to try to locate the missing tapes.
Pressure rose high enough from the fire that the cabin inner wall burst, allowing the fire to erupt onto the pad area and frustrating attempts to rescue the crew.
The contracted batch of 15 Saturn Vs were enough for lunar landing missions through Apollo 20.
* '''Direct Ascent:''' The spacecraft would be launched as a unit and travel directly to the Moon and land.
Even some NASA employees doubted whether Kennedy's ambitious goal could be met.
All samples returned from the Moon are highly brecciated as a result of being subjected to multiple impact events.
The Apollo program, or certain missions, have been dramatized in ''Apollo 13'' (1995), ''Apollo 11'' (1996), ''From the Earth to the Moon'' (1998), ''The Dish'' (2000), ''Space Race'' (2005), and ''Moonshot'' (2009).
Of the 32, Gus Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger Chaffee were killed during a ground test in preparation for their Apollo 1 mission.
Its capability grew to  for the later advanced lunar landings.
The CSM and LM separate; the CMP visually inspects the LM, then the LM crew move a safe distance away and fire the descent engine for '''Descent orbit insertion''', which takes it to a perilune of about .
These missions would also carry the Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV) increasing the exploration area and allowing televised liftoff of the LM.
The Apollo program was conceived during the Eisenhower administration in early 1960, as a follow-up to Project Mercury.
On one, they walked to the Surveyor, photographed it, and removed some parts which they returned to Earth.
*Saturn IB launch vehicles: $1,131.2 million
KREEP and the anorthositic samples have been used to infer that the outer portion of the Moon was once completely molten (see lunar magma ocean).
Why choose this as our goal?
McDivitt, Scott and Schweickart were promoted to the prime AS-258 crew, and Schirra, Eisele and Cunningham were reassigned as the Apollo 1 backup crew.
A 1964 program definition study concluded that the initial design should be continued as Block I which would be used for early testing, while Block II, the actual lunar spacecraft, would incorporate the docking equipment and take advantage of the lessons learned in Block I development.
Phillips documented his findings in a December 19 letter to NAA president Lee Atwood, with a strongly worded letter by Mueller, and also gave a presentation of the results to Mueller and Deputy Administrator Robert Seamans.
The program laid the foundation for NASA's current human spaceflight capability, and funded construction of its Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center.
NASA publicized a preliminary list of eight more planned landing sites, with plans to increase the mass of the CSM and LM for the last five missions, along with the payload capacity of the Saturn V. These final missions would combine the I and J types in the 1967 list, allowing the CMP to operate a package of lunar orbital sensors and cameras while his companions were on the surface, and allowing them to stay on the Moon for over three days.
The Senior Pilot would assume navigation duties, while the Pilot would function as a systems engineer.
Its Saturn IB was allocated to the dual mission, now redesignated AS-205/208 or AS-258, planned for August 1967.
By 1963, Apollo was using 60 percent of the United States' production of ICs.
In August 1971, just after conclusion of the Apollo 15 mission, President Richard Nixon proposed canceling the two remaining lunar landing missions, Apollo 16 and 17.
The problems with North American were severe enough in late 1965 to cause Manned Space Flight Administrator George Mueller to appoint program director Samuel Phillips to head a "tiger team" to investigate North American's problems and identify corrections.
Since Apollo, like Mercury, would require a launch escape system (LES) in case of a launch failure, a relatively small rocket was required for qualification flight testing of this system.
