A landmark survey of the region in the following decade by the United States Department of Agriculture defined the region as consisting of 206 counties in 6 states.
Murder stories, such as Omie Wise and John Hardy, are popular subjects for Appalachian ballads.
While most church-goers in Appalachia attend fairly well organized churches affiliated with regional or national bodies, small unaffiliated congregations are not uncommon in rural mountain areas.
The first major logging ventures in Appalachia transported logs using mule teams or rivers, the latter method sometimes employing splash dams.
Important heritage tourism attractions in the region include the Biltmore Estate and the Eastern Band of the Cherokee reservation in North Carolina, Cades Cove in Tennessee, and Harpers Ferry in West Virginia.
English Baptists—most of whom had been influenced by the Separate Baptist and Regular Baptist movements—were also common on the Appalachian frontier, and today are represented in the region by groups such as the Free Will Baptists, the Southern Baptists, Missionary Baptists, and "old-time" groups such as the United Baptists and Primitive Baptists.
For much of the region's history, education in Appalachia has lagged behind the rest of the nation due in part to struggles with funding from respective state governments and an agrarian-oriented population that often failed to see a practical need for formal education.
In the years following World War I, British folklorist Cecil Sharp brought attention to Southern Appalachia when he noted that its inhabitants still sang hundreds of English and Scottish ballads that had been passed down to them from their ancestors.
Regional writers from this period such as Mary Noailles Murfree and Horace Kephart liked to focus on such sensational aspects of mountain culture, leading readers outside the region to believe they were more widespread than in reality.
*''The Trail of the Lonesome Pine'', ''The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come'', and other early 20th-century novels of John Fox, Jr., set in the Appalachian town of Big Stone Gap, Virginia, and surrounding areas, gave readers an image of frontier life in Appalachia and were made into popular films.
In the early 19th century, Washington Irving proposed renaming the United States either Appalachia or Alleghania.
Other McCarthy novels set in Appalachia include ''The Orchard Keeper'' (1968) and ''Child of God'' (1973).
*The fictional television program, ''Justified'', is set in the eastern hills of Kentucky in and around Harlan County and was filmed in the Pittsburgh area originally.
The Cherokee taught the region's early European pioneers how to plant and cultivate crops such as corn and squash and how to find edible plants such as ramps.
The transition from an agrarian society to an industrial society and its effects on Appalachia are captured in works such as Olive Tilford Dargan's ''Call Home to the Heart'' (1932), James Still's ''The River of Earth'' (1940), Harriette Simpson Arnow's ''The Dollmaker'' (1954), and Harry Caudill's ''Night Comes to the Cumberlands'' (1962).
As states in the southern United States moved toward secession, a majority of Southern Appalachians still supported the Union.
In the decades following the Great Depression and World War II, many Appalachian residents moved to industrial cities in the north and west in a migration that became known as the "Hillbilly Highway".
Along with the above-mentioned, some of Appalachia's best known writers include James Agee (''A Death in the Family''), Anne W. Armstrong (''This Day and Time''), Wendell Berry (''Hannah Coulter'', ''The Unforeseen Wilderness: An Essay on Kentucky's Red River Gorge'', ''Selected Poems of Wendell Berry''), Jesse Stuart (''Taps for Private Tussie'', ''The Thread That Runs So True''), Denise Giardina (''The Unquiet Earth'', ''Storming Heaven''), Lee Smith (''Fair and Tender Ladies'', ''On Agate Hill''), Silas House (''Clay's Quilt'', ''A Parchment of Leaves''), Wilma Dykeman (''The Far Family'', ''The Tall Woman''), Maurice Manning (''Bucolics'', ''A Companion for Owls''), Anne Shelby (''Appalachian Studies'', ''We Keep a Store''), George Ella Lyon (''Borrowed Children'', ''Don't You Remember?
*Big Stone Gap also is the setting for the early 21st-century ''Big Stone Gap'' series by Adriana Trigiani.
Lyndon B. Johnson declared a "War on Poverty" while standing on the front porch of an Inez, Kentucky home whose residents had been suffering from a long ignored problem.
Beginning in the 1930s, the federal government sought to alleviate poverty in the Appalachian region with a series of New Deal initiatives, such as the construction of dams to provide cheap electricity and the implementation of better farming practices.
In America, these people are often grouped under the single name "Scotch-Irish" or "Scots-Irish".
Since the 1960s the Point Pleasant, West Virginia legend of Mothman has originated and been explored in popular culture including the 2002 film ''The Mothman Prophecies'' loosely retelling the original tale.
Other stories involve wild animals, such as hunting tales.
McCarthy's ''Suttree'' (1979) is an intense vision of the squalidness and brutality of life along the Tennessee River, in the heart of Appalachia.
U.S. Steel, founded in Pittsburgh in 1901, was the world's first corporation with more than a billion dollars in initial capitalization.
As early as the 18th century, Appalachia (then known simply as the "backcountry") began to distinguish itself from its wealthier lowland and coastal neighbors to the east.
In the early 20th century, Appalachian farmers were struggling to mechanize, and abusive farming practices had over the years left much of the already-limited farmland badly eroded.
More recently, the Youngstown, Ohio, region was declared part of Appalachia by the ARC due to the collapse of the steel industry in the region in the early 1980s and the continuing unemployment problems in the region since, though aside from Columbiana County, Ohio, the Youngstown DMA isn't traditionally or culturally considered part of the region.
Native Americans, the region's original inhabitants, are only a small percentage of the region's present population, their most notable concentration being the reservation of the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians in North Carolina.
The Southern Appalachian dialect is considered part of the Southern American dialect, although the two are distinguished by the rhotic nature of the Appalachian dialect.
*Author Catherine Marshall wrote ''Christy'', loosely based on her mother's years as a teacher in the Appalachian region.
By the mid 18th century the French had outposts such as Fort Duquesne and Fort Le Boeuf controlling the access points of the Allegheny River valley and upper Ohio valley after exploration by Celeron de Bienville.
The manufacturing industry in Appalachia is rooted primarily in the ironworks and steelworks of early Pittsburgh and in the textile mills that sprang up in North Carolina's Piedmont region in the mid-19th century.
While with annual earnings of $55,000, Appalachian miners make more than most other local workers, Appalachian coal mining employed just under 50,000 in 2004.
Protestantism is the most dominant denomination in Appalachia, although there is a significant Roman Catholic presence in the northern half of the region and in urban areas.
An estimated 90% of Appalachia's earliest European settlers originated from the Anglo-Scottish border country— namely the English counties of Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, County Durham, Lancashire and Yorkshire, and the Lowland Scottish counties of Ayrshire, Dumfriesshire, Roxburghshire, Berwickshire and Wigtownshire.
The film series "West Virginia", produced during the term of Governor Gaston Caperton, makes the point that at least on some level images of poverty were contrived.
The Scopes Trial—the nation's most publicized debate over the teaching of the theory of evolution—took place in Dayton, Tennessee in southern Appalachia in 1925.
Frontiersmen often bickered with lowland and tidewater "elites" over taxes, sometimes to the point of armed revolts such as the Regulator Movement (1767–1771) in North Carolina.
Now spelled "Appalachian", it is the fourth oldest surviving European place-name in the U.S.  After the de Soto expedition in 1540, Spanish cartographers began to apply the name of the tribe to the mountains themselves.
Recent research suggests, however, that while the dialect has a stronger Scottish influence than other American dialects, most of its distinguishing characteristics are American in origin.
Graham gave the work its name; her ballet told the story of a young couple living on the frontier in western Pennsylvania.
Travellers' accounts published in 19th-century magazines gave rise to Appalachian local color, which reached its height with George Washington Harris's Sut Lovingood character of the 1860s and native novelists such as Mary Noailles Murfree.
Most of these were from families who had been resettled in the Ulster Plantation in northern Ireland in the 17th century, but some came directly from the Anglo-Scottish border region.
The establishment of national parks in the 1930s brought an explosion of tourist traffic to the region, but created problems with urban sprawl in the various host communities.
The one exception was the so-called Free and Independent State of Scott.
The poor roads, lack of railroads, and general inaccessibility of the region, however, prevented large-scale logging in most of the region throughout much of the 19th century.
Regional folk heroes such as the railroad worker John Henry and frontiersmen Davy Crockett, Mike Fink and Johnny Appleseed are examples of real-life figures that evolved into popular folk tale subjects.
Such discrimination has prompted some to seek redress under prevailing federal and state civil rights laws.
Religion in Appalachia is characterized by a sense of independence and a distrust of religious hierarchies, both rooted in the evangelical tendencies of the region's pioneers, many of whom had been influenced by the "New Light" movement in England.
The earliest discovered site is the Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Washington County, Pennsylvania which some scientists claim is pre-Clovis culture.
Germans were a major pioneer group to migrate to Appalachia, settling mainly in western Pennsylvania and Southwest Virginia.
In the industrial areas of Western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia the composite Joe Magarac steelworker story has been handed down.
Since the creation of the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC) in 1965, the region has seen dramatic progress.
In the southern part of the region WSB-AM Atlanta and WSM-AM Nashville, flagship of the ''Grand Ole Opry'', were major stations for the region's population during the 20th century, and remain strong in the sub-region.
Since its recognition as a distinctive region in the late 19th century, Appalachia has been a source of enduring myths and distortions regarding the isolation, temperament, and behavior of its inhabitants.
The Cherokee also passed along their knowledge of the medicinal properties of hundreds of native herbs and roots, and how to prepare tonics from such plants.
Depictions of Appalachia and its inhabitants in popular media are typically negative, making the region an object of humor, derision, and social concern.
Appalachian music saw a resurgence in popularity during the American folk music revival of the 1960s, when musicologists such as Mike Seeger, John Cohen, and Ralph Rinzler traveled to remote parts of the region in search of musicians unaffected by modern music.
Apples have been grown in the region since the late 18th-century, their cultivation being aided by the presence of thermal belts in the region's mountain valleys.
One of the region's oldest industries, tourism became a more important part of the Appalachian economy in the latter half of the 20th century as mining and manufacturing steadily declined.
New roads, schools, health care facilities, water and sewer systems, and other improvements have brought a better life to many Appalachian residents.
*The 1972 film ''Deliverance'' takes place in southern Appalachia.
Scattered Mennonite colonies exist throughout the region.
De Soto indicated that much of the region west of the mountains was part of the domain of Coosa, a paramount chiefdom centered around a village complex in northern Georgia.
The mining industry was vulnerable to economic downturns, however, and booms and busts were frequent, with major booms occurring during World War I and II, and the worst bust occurring during the Great Depression.
Most of the coal mined is bituminous coal, although significant anthracite deposits exist on the fringe of the region in central Pennsylvania.
Traditional Appalachian music is derived primarily from the English and Scottish ballad tradition and Irish and Scottish fiddle music.
In 1911, Congress passed the Weeks Act, giving the federal government authority to create national forests and control timber harvesting.
During the same period, New England forester Benton MacKaye led the movement to build the  Appalachian Trail, stretching from Georgia to Maine.
Jack tales, which tend to revolve around the exploits of a simple-but-dedicated figure named "Jack," are popular at story-telling festivals.
While endowed with abundant natural resources, Appalachia has long struggled and been associated with poverty.
The region is home to one of the world's most well-known hiking trails (the Appalachian Trail), the nation's most-visited national park (the Great Smoky Mountains National Park), and the nation's most visited national parkway (the Blue Ridge Parkway).
Cattle, mainly the Hereford, Angus, and Charolais breeds, are now the region's chief livestock.
A number of 18th and 19th-century religious traditions are still practiced in parts of Appalachia, including natural water (or "creek") baptism, rhythmically chanted preaching, congregational shouting, snake handling, and foot washing.
Another photojournalist, Shelby Lee Adams, has been photographing Appalachian families and lifestyle for decades.
Faulkner's hometown of Oxford, Mississippi is on the borderlands of what is considered Appalachia, but his fictional Yoknapatawpha should be considered part of the region.
Smaller numbers of Germans were also among the initial wave of migrants to the southern mountains.
However former Ohio governor Bob Taft has stated that "What is good for Appalachia is good for all of Ohio."
The coal mining and manufacturing boom in the late-19th and early-20th centuries brought large numbers of Italians and Eastern Europeans to Appalachia, although most of these families left the region when the Great Depression shattered the economy in the 1930s.
When the Commission was established, counties were added based on economic need, however, rather than any cultural parameters.
In 1841, Tennessee state senator (and later U.S. president) Andrew Johnson introduced legislation in the Tennessee Senate calling for the creation of a separate state in East Tennessee.
At the time, however, the United States had already reached far beyond the greater Appalachian region, but the "magnificence" of Appalachia Poe considered enough to rechristen the nation with a name that would be unique to its own character.
The early settlers also brought cattle and sheep to the region, which they would typically graze in highland meadows known as balds during the growing season when bottomlands were needed for crops.
A competing and often more popular name was the "Allegheny Mountains", "Alleghenies", and even "Alleghania."
Another instrument known in Appalachian culture was the Appalachian dulcimer which, in a practical way, is a guitar shaped instrument laid on its side with a flat bottom and the strings are plucked in a manner to make alternating notes.
Circuit riders such as Francis Asbury helped spread Methodism to Appalachia in the early 19th century, and today 9.2% of the region's population is Methodist, represented by such bodies as the United Methodist Church, the Free Methodist Church, and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church.
Since the late 20th century, tourism and second-home developments have assumed an increasingly major role.
The last of these treaties culminated in the removal of the bulk of the Cherokee population (as well as Choctaw, Chickasaw and others) from the region via the Trail of Tears from 1831 until 1838.
For instance, parts of Alabama and Mississippi were included in the commission because of problems with unemployment and poverty similar to those in Appalachia proper, and the ARC region extends into Northeastern states, which are never considered part of Appalachia culturally.
In 1987, there were 4,810 lumber firms operating in the region.
In 2000–2001, tourism in Appalachia accounted for nearly $30 billion and over 600,000 jobs.
In its summary the report stated that "over 55,000 parcels of property in 80 counties were studied, representing some 20,000,000 acres of land and mineral rights..." It found that 41% of the 20 million acres of land and minerals...are held by only 50 private owners and 10 government agencies.
This left large parts of the region virtually isolated and slowing economic growth.
The film perpetuated extremely negative stereotypes of subhumanity.
In 1832, bickering between western Virginia and eastern Virginia over the state's constitution led to calls on both sides for the state's separation into two states.
The region's early Lowland and Ulster Scot immigrants brought Presbyterianism to Appalachia, eventually organizing into bodies such as the Cumberland Presbyterian Church.
In the late 1990s, the Appalachian lumber industry was a multibillion-dollar industry, employing 50,000 people in Tennessee, 26,000 in Kentucky, and 12,000 in West Virginia alone.
In 1921, John C. Campbell published ''The Southern Highlander and His Homeland'' in which he modified Frost's map to include 254 counties in 9 states.
''), Pamela Duncan (''Moon Women'', ''The Big Beautiful''), Chris Offutt (''No Heroes'', ''The Good Brother''), Charles Frazier (''Cold Mountain'', ''Thirteen Moons''), Sharyn McCrumb (''The Hangman's Beautiful Daughter''), Robert Morgan (''Gap Creek''), Jim Wayne Miller (''The Brier Poems''), Gurney Norman (''Divine Right's Trip'', ''Kinfolks''), Ron Rash (''Serena''), Elizabeth Madox Roberts ("The Great Meadow, "The Time of Man"), Thomas Wolfe (''Look Homeward Angel'', ''You Can't Go Home Again''), Rachel Carson (''The Sea Around Us'', ''Silent Spring''; Presidential Medal of Freedom), and
Ghost stories native to the region include the story of the Greenbrier Ghost, which is rooted in a Greenbrier County, West Virginia murder.
As told by Eastern Band Cherokee and Western North Carolina storyteller Jerry Wolfe, these creatures include the chipmunk, also known as "seven stripes" from an angry bear scratching him down the back—four claw marks and the spaces in between making seven—and the copperhead who sneaks and thieves his way into becoming venomous.
Today, residents of Appalachia are viewed by many Americans as uneducated and unrefined, resulting in culture-based stereotyping and discrimination in many areas, including employment and housing.
The mountain terrain—with its accompanying scenery and outdoor recreational opportunities—provide the region's primary attractions.
Companies such as Champion Fibre and Bowater established large pulp operations in Canton, North Carolina and Greenville, South Carolina, respectively, although the former was dogged by battles with environmentalists throughout the 20th century.
The novel was highly popular and became the basis of a short-lived television series of the same name in 1994.
Beginning in the 1930s, federal agencies such as the Tennessee Valley Authority began investing in the Appalachian region.
Like Johnson, President Bill Clinton brought attention to the remaining areas of poverty in Appalachia.
Although logging in Appalachia declined as the industry shifted focus to the Pacific Northwest in the 1950s, rising overseas demand in the 1980s brought a resurgence in Appalachian logging.
Pentecostal movements within the region include the Church of God (based in Cleveland, Tennessee) and the Assemblies of God.
Ledford writes, "Always part of the mythical South, Appalachia continues to languish backstage in the American drama, still dressed, in the popular mind at least, in the garments of backwardness, violence, poverty, and hopelessness."
In the northern half of the region, the lowland "elites" consisted largely of industrial and business interests, whereas in the parts of the region south of the Mason–Dixon Line, the lowland elites consisted of large-scale land-owning planters.
In the late 19th century, the post-Civil War Industrial Revolution and the expansion of the nation's railroads brought a soaring demand for coal, and mining operations expanded rapidly across Appalachia.
The name was not commonly used for the whole mountain range until the late 19th century.
Appalachia as an academic interest was the product of a critical scholarship that emerged across the disciplines in the 1960s and 1970s.
The infamous Hatfield-McCoy Feud of the 19th century was the best known of these family feuds.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, service organizations such as Pi Beta Phi and various religious organizations established settlement schools and mission schools in the region's more rural areas.
About two-thirds of Appalachia's coal is produced by underground mining, the rest by surface mining.
Several other Archaic period (8000–1000 BC) archaeological sites have been identified in the region, such as the St. Albans site in West Virginia and the Icehouse Bottom site in Tennessee.
This caused great difficulty for the new Unionist state government in Wheeling, both during and after the war.
As the nationwide demand for lumber skyrocketed, lumber firms turned to the virgin forests of southern Appalachia, using sawmill and logging railroad innovations to reach remote timber stands.
While exploring inland along the northern coast of Florida in 1528, the members of the Narváez expedition, including Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, found a Native American village near present-day Tallahassee, Florida, whose name they transcribed as ''Apalchen'' or ''Apalachen'' ().
The ARC's wide scope also grew out of the "pork barrel" phenomenon, as politicians from outside the traditional Appalachia area saw a new way to bring home federal money to their areas.
The study found that the extractive industries, i.e., timber, coal, etc., were "greatly underassessed for property tax purposes.
The states selected were Alabama (15 counties), Kentucky (12 counties), North Carolina (12 counties), Tennessee (14 counties), Virginia (12 counties), and West Virginia (15 counties).
In Appalachia, severe poverty and desolation were paired with the necessity for careful cultural sensitivity.
Today, dozens of annual music festivals held throughout the region preserve the Appalachian music tradition.
Although Pittsburgh's KDKA was a 50 kilowatt clear channel station that dated back to the early 1920s (as well as spanning all the east coast in signal strength), WWVA prided itself on rural and farm programming that appealed to a wider audience in the rural region.
With the exception of the October 1, 1940 opening of the Pennsylvania Turnpike the region's mountainous terrain continuously thwarted major federal intervention attempts at major road construction until the 1970s.
Urban Appalachians are people from Appalachia who are living in metropolitan areas outside the Appalachian region.
Thousands of German-speaking Swiss migrated to Appalachia in the second half of the 19th century, and their descendants remain in places such as East Bernstadt, Kentucky, and Gruetli-Laager, Tennessee.
A typical depiction of an Appalachian pioneer involves a hunter wearing a coonskin cap and buckskin clothing, and sporting a long rifle and shoulder-strapped powder horn.
Arnold finds that starting with World War II Capp increasingly emphasized sex and violence.
* Alan Hovhaness in 1985 composed a tone poem named ''To the Appalachian Mountains'' (Symphony no.
On July 5, 1999, he made a public statement concerning the situation in Tyner, Kentucky.
Large tunnels were built through mountain slopes at Cumberland Gap to speed up travel along U.S. Route 25E.
Appalachia, and especially Kentucky, became nationally known for its violent feuds, especially in the remote mountain districts.
Others included Germans from the Palatinate region and English settlers from the Anglo-Scottish border country.
The federal government owns 1,133,587 acres in West Virginia, 7.4% of the total state acreage of 15,410,560 acres.
Environmental restrictions, such as those placed on high-sulfur coal in the 1980s, brought further mine closures.
Before the introduction of modern agricultural techniques in the region in the 1930s and 1940s, many Appalachian farmers followed the Biblical tradition of planting by "the signs," such as the phases of the moon, or when certain weather conditions occurred.
More distant cities like Detroit and Chicago attracted migrants from many states.
The Appalachian mining industry also saw some of the nation's bloodiest labor strife between the 1890s and the 1930s.
Edgar Allan Poe later took up the idea, and considered Appalachia a much better name than America or Alleghania; he thought it better defined the United States as a distinct geographical entity, separate from the rest of the Americas, and he also thought it did honor to both Irving and the natives who the Appalachian Mountains had been named after.
Many Appalachian people feared that the birth of a new modernized Appalachia would lead to a death of their traditional values and heritage.
The proposed state would have been known as "Frankland" and would have invited like-minded mountain counties in Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama to join it.
Arguably the most successful logging firm in Appalachia was the Georgia Hardwood Lumber Company, established in 1927 and renamed Georgia-Pacific in 1948 when it expanded nationally.
Between 1790 and 1840, a series of treaties with the Cherokee and other Native American tribes opened up lands in north Georgia, north Alabama, the Tennessee Valley, the Cumberland Plateau regions, and the Great Smoky Mountains along what is now the Tennessee-North Carolina border.
Thomas Walker's discovery of Cumberland Gap in 1750 and the end of the French and Indian War in 1763 lured settlers deeper into the mountains, namely to upper east Tennessee, northwestern North Carolina, upstate South Carolina, and central Kentucky.
The mountains and valleys of Appalachia once contained what seemed to be an inexhaustible supply of timber.
In 11 counties the top ten absentee landowners own 41% to almost 72% of the private land in each county.
The Tri-Cities area of Tennessee and Virginia and the Kanawha Valley of West Virginia became major petrochemical production centers.
Mining-related injuries and deaths were not uncommon, and ailments such as black lung disease afflicted miners throughout the 20th century.
Logging firms' rapid devastation of the forests of southern Appalachia sparked a movement among conservationists to preserve what remained and allow the land to "heal".
The commission is a partnership of federal, state, and local governments, and was created to promote economic growth and improve the quality of life in the region.
Railroad construction between the 1880s and early 20th century gave the greater nation access to the vast coalfields in central Appalachia, making the economy in that part of the region practically synonymous with coal mining.
The region's vast coalfield covers  between northern Pennsylvania and central Alabama, mostly along the Cumberland Plateau and Allegheny Plateau regions.
Subsistence farming was the backbone of the Appalachian economy throughout much of the 19th century, and while economies in places such as western Pennsylvania, the Great Valley of Virginia, and the upper Tennessee Valley in east Tennessee, transitioned to a large-scale farming or manufacturing base around the time of the Civil War, subsistence farming remained an important part of the region's economy until the 1950s.
Both central and southern Appalachia suffered tremendous violence and turmoil during the American Civil War.
Transportation has been the most challenging and expensive issue in Appalachia since the arrival of the first European settlers in the 18th century.
As many of these early settlers were living on Native American lands, attacks from Native American tribes were a continuous threat until the 19th century.
Large numbers of livestock were killed (grazing was an important part of Appalachia's economy), and numerous farms were destroyed, pillaged, or neglected.
On March 9, 1965, the Appalachian Regional Commission was created to further alleviate poverty in the region, mainly by diversifying the region's economy and helping to provide better health care and educational opportunities to the region's inhabitants.
The ARC is a planning, research, advocacy and funding organization; it does not have any governing powers.
By the 1880s, these stands had been exhausted, and a spike in the demand for lumber forced logging firms to seek out the virgin forests of Appalachia.
The commission's efforts helped to stem the tide of outmigration and diversify the region's economies.
*The book ''Prodigal Summer'' by Barbara Kingsolver explores the ecology of the region and how the removal of the predators, wolves and coyotes, affected the environment.
In 1861, a Minnesota newspaper identified 161 counties in Southern Appalachia—which the paper called "Alleghenia"—where Union support remained strong, and which might provide crucial support for the defeat of the Confederacy.
The region as defined by the ARC includes 420 counties, including all of West Virginia; counties in 13 other states: Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia; and also eight cities in Virginia, where state law makes cities administratively separate from counties.
The Pittsburgh coal seam, which has produced 13 billion tons of coal since the early 19th century, has been called the world's most valuable mineral deposit.
As of 2000, the per capita income in Martin County was $10,650, and 37% of its residents lived below the poverty line.
The name was soon altered by the Spanish to Apalachee and used as a name for the tribe and region spreading well inland to the north.
In southern Appalachia, abolitionists still constituted a radical minority, although several smaller opposition parties (most of which were both pro-Union and pro-slavery) were formed to oppose the planter-dominated Southern Democrats.
Historian John Alexander Williams, in his 2002 book ''Appalachia: A History'', distinguished between a "core" Appalachian region consisting of 164 counties in West Virginia, Kentucky, Virginia, Tennessee, North Carolina, and Georgia, and a greater region defined by the ARC.
Logging in Appalachia reached its peak in the early 20th-century, when firms such as the Ritter Lumber Company cut the virgin forests on an alarming scale, leading to the creation of national forests in 1911 and similar state entities to better manage the region's timber resources.
Cincinnati's WLW also was relied on by many in the central and northern areas of Appalachia.
*Composer Frederick Delius wrote a theme and variations entitled ''Appalachia''; he first composed Appalachia, subtitled "Variations on an Old Slave Song with final chorus."
The Quecreek Mine Rescue in 2002 and continuing mine subsidence problems in abandoned coal mines in western Pennsylvania as well as the Sago Mine disaster and Upper Big Branch Mine disaster in West Virginia and other regions have also been highlighted in recent times.
The ARC's geographic range of coverage was defined broadly so as to cover as many economically underdeveloped areas as possible; it extends well beyond the area usually thought of as "Appalachia".
Appalachian music is one of the best-known manifestations of Appalachian culture.
People in Appalachia began to feel slighted over what they considered unfair taxation methods and lack of state funding for improvements (especially for roads).
The study covered 80 counties in six states approximating the area designated "Southern Appalachia" as defined by Thomas R. Ford's 1962 work.
During the same period, many of the region's institutions of higher education were established or greatly expanded.
*Chelsea Wolfe's album ''Unknown Rooms: A Collection of Acoustic Songs'' fourth track is called Appalachia.
The effect, essentially, is to produce a situation in which a) the small owners carry a disproportionate share of the tax burden; b) counties depend upon federal and state funds to provide revenues, while the large, corporate and absentee owners of the regions's resources go relatively tax-free; and c) citizens face a poverty of needed services despite the presence in their counties of taxable property wealth, especially in the form of coal and other natural resources."
Pánfilo de Narváez's expedition first entered Apalachee territory on June 15, 1528 and applied the name.
Appalachia also serves as the origin point for the kid, the protagonist of McCarthy's Western masterpiece, ''Blood Meridian''.
The region defined by the Commission currently includes 420 counties and eight independent cities in 13 states, including all of West Virginia, 14 counties in New York, 52 in Pennsylvania, 32 in Ohio, 3 in Maryland, 54 in Kentucky, 25 counties and 8 cities in Virginia, 29 in North Carolina, 52 in Tennessee, 6 in South Carolina, 37 in Georgia, 37 in Alabama, and 24 in Mississippi.
In 1778, at the height of the American Revolution, backwoodsmen from Pennsylvania, Virginia, and what is now Kentucky took part in George Rogers Clark's Illinois campaign.
He returned home to the Cumberland Mountains of Tennessee to write his stories because of poor health.
Poverty had plagued Appalachia for many years but was not brought to the attention of the rest of the United States until 1940, when James Agee and Walker Evans published ''Let Us Now Praise Famous Men,'' a book that documented families in Appalachia during the Great Depression in words and photos.
The government held lands are tax exempt but the government makes a payment in lieu of taxes, which is usually less than the normal tax rates.
Early Appalachian farmers grew both crops introduced from their native Europe as well as crops native to North America (such as corn and squash).
"Taken together, the failure to tax minerals adequately, the underassessment of surface lands, and the revenue loss from concentrated federal holdings has a marked impact on local governments in Appalachia.
The end of World War I (which opened up travel opportunities to Europe) and the arrival of the automobile (which changed the nation's vacation habits) led to the demise of all but a few of the region's spa resorts.
The effort to connect Appalachia with the outside world has required numerous civil engineering feats.
Mountaintop removal, a form of surface mining, is a highly controversial mining practice in central Appalachia due to its negative impacts on the environment and health of local residents.
While there were two major theaters of operation in the region— namely the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia (and present-day West Virginia) and the Chattanooga area along the Tennessee-Georgia border— much of the violence was caused by bushwhackers and guerrilla war.
Hogs, which could free range in the region's abundant forests, often on chestnuts, were the most popular livestock among early Appalachian farmers.
