Western competitions include cutting, reining, roping and O-Mok-See sports such as barrel racing (known as the Camas Prairie Stump Race in Appaloosa-only competition) and pole bending (called the Nez Percé Stake Race at breed shows).
There are several American horse breeds with leopard coloring and Appaloosa ancestry.
Up to 25&nbsp;percent of all horses with ERU may be Appaloosas.
The ApHC does not accept horses with draft, pony, Pinto, or Paint breeding, and requires mature Appaloosas to stand, unshod, at least .
A small number of dedicated breeders preserved the Appaloosa as a distinct breed until the Appaloosa Horse Club (ApHC) was formed as the breed registry in 1938.
Gradually, the name evolved into "Appaloosa".
Appaloosa stallions have been exported to Denmark, to add new blood to the Knabstrup breed.
By "pied", Lewis may have been referring to leopard-spotted patterns seen in the modern Appaloosa, though Lewis also noted that "much the larger portion are of a uniform colour".
Horses with the varnish roan and snowflake patterns are especially prone to show very little color pattern at birth, developing more visible spotting as they get older.
The battle—and the war—was over.
While the Nez Perce originally had many solid-colored horses and only began to emphasize color in their breeding some time after the visit of Lewis and Clark, by the late 19th century they had many spotted horses.
Roan blanket with spots
But breeder experience had shown that some solid Appaloosas could throw a spotted foal in a subsequent generation, at least when bred to a spotted Appaloosa.
A significant crossbreeding influence used to revitalize the Appaloosa was the Arabian horse, as evidenced by early registration lists that show Arabian-Appaloosa crossbreeds as ten of the first fifteen horses registered with the ApHC.
Because such crossbred offspring are not eligible for ApHC registration, their owners have formed breed registries for horses with leopard complex patterns and gaited ability.
A white horse with dark spots that flow out over the entire body.
By the 1950s, "Appaloosa" was regarded as the correct spelling.
Appaloosa bloodlines have influenced other horse breeds, including the Pony of the Americas, the Nez Perce Horse, and several gaited horse breeds.
Appaloosa markings have several pattern variations.
Many current breeders also attempt to breed away from the sparse, "rat tail" trait, and therefore modern Appaloosas have fuller manes and tails.
The American Appaloosa Association was founded in 1983 by members opposed to the registration of plain-colored horses, as a result of the color rule controversy.
The Appaloosa is "a breed defined by ApHC bloodline requirements and preferred characteristics, including coat pattern".
Darker areas may appear along the edges of the frontal bones of the face as well and also on the legs, stifle, above the eye, point of the hip and behind the elbow.
There is a possible genetic link between the leopard complex and sparse mane and tail growth, although the precise relationship is unknown.
Appaloosas are not strictly a "color breed".
This form of night blindness has been linked with the leopard complex since the 1970s, and in 2007 a "significant association" between LP and CSNB was identified.
The ApHC is by far the largest Appaloosa horse registry, and it hosts one of the world's largest breed shows.
At a time when ordinary horses could be purchased for $15, non-Indians who had purchased Appaloosa horses from the Nez Perce turned down offers of as much as $600.
After the formation of the Appaloosa Horse Club in 1938, a more modern type developed after the addition of American Quarter Horse and Arabian bloodlines.
The original Appaloosa tended to have a convex facial profile that resembled that of the warmblood-Jennet crosses first developed in the 16th century during the reign of Charles V. The old-type Appaloosa was later modified by the addition of draft horse blood after the 1877 defeat of the Nez Perce, when U.S. Government policy forced the Indians to become farmers and provided them with draft horse mares to breed to existing stallions.
In the late 20th century, they began a program to develop a new horse breed, the Nez Perce horse, with the intent to resurrect their horse culture, tradition of selective breeding, and horsemanship.
The color pattern of the Appaloosa is of interest to those who study equine coat color genetics, as it and several other physical characteristics are linked to the leopard complex mutation (LP).
Patterns sometimes change over the course of the horse's life although some, such as the blanket and leopard patterns, tend to be stable.
It is this unique group of spotting patterns, collectively called the "leopard complex", that most people associate with the Appaloosa horse.
It is an inherited disorder, present from birth, and does not progress over time.
Examples include "Cojo Rojo" in the Marlon Brando film ''The Appaloosa'', "Zip Cochise" ridden by John Wayne in the 1966 film ''El Dorado'' and "Cowboy", the mount of Matt Damon in ''True Grit''.
Roan blanket or Frost
Appaloosas are prone to develop equine recurrent uveitis and congenital stationary night blindness; the latter has been linked to the leopard complex.
These include the Pony of the Americas and the Colorado Ranger.
Spots overlay darker skin, and are often surrounded by a "halo", where the skin next to the spot is also dark but the overlying hair coat is white.
Haines had performed extensive research, traveling with a friend and Appaloosa aficionado named George Hatley, visiting numerous Nez Perce villages, collecting history, and taking photographs.
In other words, the Appaloosa is a distinct breed from limited bloodlines with distinct physical traits and a desired color, referred to as a "color preference".
There are three other distinctive, "core" characteristics: mottled skin, striped hooves, and eyes with a white sclera.
The Spanish probably obtained spotted horses through trade with southern Austria and Hungary, where the color pattern was known to exist.
Although a remnant population of Appaloosa horses remained after 1877, they were virtually forgotten as a distinct breed for almost 60&nbsp;years.
Not every Appaloosa exhibits visible coat spotting, but even apparently solid-colored horses that carry at least one dominant LP allele will exhibit characteristics such as vertically striped hooves, white sclera of the eye, and mottled skin around the eyes, lips, and genitalia.
Chief Joseph considered military resistance futile, and by June 14, 1877, had gathered about 600 people at a site near present-day Grangeville, Idaho.
The Nez Perce were ultimately settled on reservation lands in north central Idaho, were allowed few horses, and were required by the Army to crossbreed to draft horses in an attempt to create farm horses.
The article generated strong interest in the horse breed, and led to the founding of the Appaloosa Horse Club (ApHC) by Claude Thompson and a small group of other dedicated breeders in 1938.
Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TRPM1 gene have been identified as closely associated with the LP mutation, although the mechanism by which the pattern is produced remains unclear.
The original Appaloosas frequently had a sparse mane and tail, but that was not a primary characteristic as many early Appaloosas did have full manes and tails.
They are common in endurance riding competitions, as well as in casual trail riding.
The ApHC's decision in 1982 to allow solid-colored or "non-characteristic" Appaloosas to be registered resulted in substantial debate within the Appaloosa breeding community.
In 1983 a number of Appaloosa breeders opposed to the registration of solid-colored horses formed the American Appaloosa Association, a breakaway organization.
The original "old time" or "old type" Appaloosa was a tall, narrow-bodied, rangy horse.
The Nez Perce who refused to give up their land under the 1863 treaty included a band living in the Wallowa Valley of Oregon, led by Heinmot Tooyalakekt, widely known as Chief Joseph.
French paintings from the 16th and 17th centuries show horses with spotted coats being used as riding horses, and other records indicate they were also used as coach horses at the court of Louis XIV of France.
They are generally used for middle-distance racing at distances between  and ; an Appaloosa holds the all-breed record for the  distance, set in 1989.
LP is an autosomal incomplete dominant mutation in the TRPM1 gene located at horse chromosome 1 (ECA 1).
Foals of AQHA-registered stallions and mares born on or after January 1, 2007 that carry HYPP will be required to be HYPP tested and have their HYPP status designated on their registration papers.
The '''Appaloosa''' is an American horse breed best known for its colorful spotted coat pattern.
A mostly white horse with a bit of color remaining around the flank, neck and head.
The horses were originally called  "Palouse horses" by settlers, a reference to the Palouse River that ran through the heart of what was once Nez Perce country.
Uveitis in horses has many causes, including eye trauma, disease, and bacterial, parasitic and viral infections, but ERU is characterized by recurring episodes of uveitis, rather than a single incident.
Idaho also offers a custom license plate featuring an Appaloosa, the first state to offer a plate featuring a state horse.
The dark points over bony areas are called "varnish marks" and distinguish this pattern from a traditional roan.
The addition of Quarter Horse lines produced Appaloosas that performed better in sprint racing and in halter competition.
Appaloosas that are homozygous for the leopard complex (LP) gene are also at risk for congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB).
One horse with snowflake patterning was listed with the 16 horses brought to Mexico by Cortez, and additional spotted horses were mentioned by Spanish writers by 1604.
A white blanket which has dark spots within the white.
The only exception to the bloodline requirements is in the case of Appaloosa-colored geldings or spayed mares with unknown pedigrees; owners may apply for "hardship registration" for these non-breeding horses.
All horses with at least one copy of LP show leopard characteristics, and it is hypothesized that LP acts together with other patterning genes (PATN) that have not yet been identified to produce the different coat patterns.
On the other side of the controversy, several major stock horse registries that sanction their own shows, including the American Quarter Horse Association, American Paint Horse Association, and the Palomino Horse Breeders of America, allow acetazolamide and furosemide to be used within 24&nbsp;hours of showing under certain circumstances.
The sclera is the part of the eye surrounding the iris; although all horses show white around the eye if the eye is rolled back, to have a readily visible white sclera with the eye in a normal position is a distinctive characteristic seen more often in Appaloosas than in other breeds.
A solid white area normally over, but not limited to, the hip area with a contrasting base color.
It is not always easy to predict a grown Appaloosa's color at birth.
However, the ApHC does not allow pony or draft breeding.
Eighty&nbsp;percent of all uveitis cases are found in Appaloosas with physical characteristics including roan or light-colored coat patterns, little pigment around the eyelids and sparse hair in the mane and tail denoting the most at-risk individuals.
Solid-colored Appaloosas are restricted in breeding.
The ApHC did accept cropout horses that exhibited proper Appaloosa traits, while cropout pintos became the core of the American Paint Horse Association.
All ApHC-registered Appaloosas must be the offspring of two registered Appaloosa parents or a registered Appaloosa and a horse from an approved breed registry, which includes Arabian horses, Quarter Horses, and Thoroughbreds.
Peace with the United States dated back to an alliance arranged by Lewis and Clark, but the encroachment of gold miners in the 1860s and settlers in the 1870s put pressure on the Nez Perce.
On one side, it is argued that the United States Equestrian Federation (USEF), which sponsors show competition for many different horse breeds, and the International Federation for Equestrian Sports (FEI), which governs international and Olympic equestrian competition, ban the use of furosemide.
Today, the Appaloosa is one of the most popular breeds in the United States; it was named the official state horse of Idaho in 1975.
Each horse's color pattern is genetically the result of various spotting patterns overlaid on top of one of several recognized base coat colors.
Horses with roaning over the croup and hips.
A horse with white spots, flecks, on a dark body.
A fewspot leopard that is completely white with only mottled skin showing.
The use of the word "complex" is used to refer to the large group of visible patterns that may occur when LP is present.
Famous Appaloosas who were cropouts included Colida, Joker B, Bright Eyes Brother and Wapiti.
For example, one of Claude Thompson's major herd sires was Ferras, an Arabian stallion bred by W.K.
The Appaloosa Museum foundation was formed in 1975 to preserve the history of the Appaloosa horse.
The Conquistadors and Spanish settlers then brought some vividly marked horses to the Americas when they first arrived in the early 16th century.
Miles had led an infantry-cavalry column from Fort Keogh in pursuit.
Appaloosas may also exhibit sabino or pinto type markings, but because pinto genes may cover-up or obscure Appaloosa patterns, pinto breeding is discouraged by the ApHC, which will deny registration to horses with excessive white markings.
After several small battles in Idaho, more than 800&nbsp;Nez Perce, mostly non-warriors, took 2000 head of various livestock including horses and fled into Montana, then traveled southeast, dipping into Yellowstone National Park.
Domesticated horses with leopard complex spotting patterns have been depicted in art dating as far back as Ancient Greece, Ancient Persia, and the Han Dynasty in China; later depictions appeared in 11th-century France and 12th-century England.
As the Appaloosa is one of the few horse breeds to exhibit skin mottling, this characteristic "...is a very basic and decisive indication of an Appaloosa."
Unbeknownst to the Nez Perce, Colonel Nelson A.
Appaloosas are crossbred with gaited horse breeds in an attempt to create a leopard-spotted ambling horse.
In 2007 the ApHC implemented new drug rules allowing Appaloosas to show with the drugs furosemide, known by the trade name of Lasix, and acetazolamide.
Considered an extension of a blanket to cover the whole body.
Others were used in circuses and related forms of entertainment, such as Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show.
With most of the war chiefs dead, and the noncombatants cold and starving, Joseph declared that he would "fight no more forever".
Appaloosas are used extensively for both Western and English riding.
The Appaloosa Horse Club has 33,000 members as of 2010, circulation of the ''Appaloosa Journal'', which is included with most types of membership, was at 32,;00 in 2008.
Striped hooves are a common trait, quite noticeable on Appaloosas, but not unique to the breed.
Other "Appaloosa" registries have been founded for horses with leopard complex genetics that are not affiliated with the ApHC.
In 1983 the ApHC reduced the number of allowable outcrosses to three main breeds: the Arabian horse, the American Quarter Horse and the Thoroughbred.
Foals of any breed tend to be born with coats that darken when they shed their baby hair.
Modern horse breeds in Europe today that have leopard complex spotting include the Knabstrupper and the Pinzgau, or Noriker horse.
The ApHC recommends that Appaloosas that trace to certain American Quarter Horse bloodlines be tested for HYPP, and owners have the option to choose to place HYPP testing results on registration papers.
In 1995 the Nez Perce tribe began a program to develop a new and distinct horse breed, the Nez Perce Horse, based on crossbreeding the Appaloosa with the Akhal-Teke breed from Central Asia.
Furosemide is used to prevent horses who bleed from the nose when subjected to strenuous work from having bleeding episodes when in competition, and is widely used in horse racing.
They then moved northeast and attempted to seek refuge with the Crow Nation; rebuffed, they headed for safety in Canada.
Skin mottling is usually seen around the muzzle, eyes, anus, and genitalia.
The coat color of an Appaloosa is a combination of a base color with an overlaid spotting pattern.
From 1938 to 2007 more than 670,000&nbsp;Appaloosas were registered by the ApHC.
The Nez Perce lost most of their horses after the Nez Perce War in 1877, and the breed fell into decline for several decades.
An Appaloosa horse is part of the controversial mascot team for the Florida State Seminoles, Chief Osceola and Renegade, even though the Seminole people were not directly associated with Appaloosa horses.
In mid-18th-century Europe, there was a great demand for horses with the leopard complex spotting pattern among the nobility and royalty.
Certain other characteristics are used to determine if a horse receives "regular" registration: striped hooves, white sclera visible when the eye is in a normal position, and mottled (spotted) skin around the eyes, lips, and genitalia.
The ''Western Horseman'' magazine, and particularly its longtime publisher, Dick Spencer, continued to support and promote the breed through many subsequent articles.
The Nez Perce people lived in what today is eastern Washington, Oregon, and western Idaho, where they engaged in agriculture as well as horse breeding.
The genes that create these different patterns can all be present in the same horse.
Others arrived in the western hemisphere when spotted horses went out of style in late 18th-century Europe, and were shipped to Mexico, California and Oregon.
In one 1948 book, the breed was called the "Opelousa horse", described as a "hardy tough breed of Indian and Spanish horse" used by backwoodsmen of the late 18th century to transport goods to New Orleans for sale.
The journey came to an end when they stopped to rest near the Bears Paw Mountains in Montana,  from the Canada–US border.
A small number of Nez Perce fighters, probably fewer than 200, successfully held off larger forces of the U.S. Army in several skirmishes, including the two-day Battle of the Big Hole in southwestern Montana.
The Appaloosa is best known for its distinctive, preferred leopard complex-spotted coat.
Ferras sired Red Eagle, a prominent Appaloosa stallion added to the Appaloosa Hall of Fame in 1988.
Acet is only allowed for horses that test positive for HYPP and have HYPP status noted on their registration papers.
In all cases, one parent must always be a regular registered Appaloosa.
Lewis did note spotting patterns, saying, "... some of these horses are pided pied with large spots of white irregularly scattered and intermixed with the black brown bey  or some other dark colour".
On October 5, 1877, after a five-day fight, Joseph surrendered.
Studies in 2008 and 2010 indicate that both CSNB and leopard complex spotting patterns are linked to TRPM1.
Then, 18th-century European bloodlines were added, particularly those of the "pied" horses popular in that period and shipped ''en masse'' to the Americas once the color had become unfashionable in Europe.
The modern breed maintains bloodlines tracing to the foundation bloodstock of the registry; its partially open stud book allows the addition of some Thoroughbred, American Quarter Horse and Arabian blood.
If not treated, ERU can lead to blindness, which occurs more often in Appaloosas than in other breeds.
Tensions rose, and in May 1877, General Oliver Otis Howard called a council and ordered the non-treaty bands to move to the reservation.
In addition, Appaloosa foals do not always show classic leopard complex characteristics.
The Nez Perce tribe never regained its former position as breeders of Appaloosas.
Affiliate Appaloosa organizations exist in many South American and European countries, as well as South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Mexico and Israel.
Based in Missouri, it has a membership of more than 2,000 as of 2008.
Appaloosas have been used in many movies; an Appaloosa is the mascot for the Florida State Seminoles.
A horse that meets bloodline requirements but is born without the recognized color pattern and characteristics can still be registered with the ApHC as a "non-characteristic" Appaloosa.
It is best known as a stock horse used in a number of western riding disciplines, but is also a versatile breed with representatives seen in many other types of equestrian activity.
CSNB is a disorder that causes an affected animal to lack night vision, although day vision is normal.
Other early variations of the name included "Appalucy", "Apalousey" and "Appaloosie".
If a horse has excessive white markings not associated with the Appaloosa pattern (such as those characteristic of a pinto) it cannot be registered unless it is verified through DNA testing that both parents have ApHC registration.
For a considerable time, until DNA testing could verify parentage, the AQHA refused to register such horses.
They were one of the few tribes that actively used the practice of gelding inferior male horses and trading away poorer stock to remove unsuitable animals from the gene pool, and thus were notable as horse breeders by the early 19th century.
Horses that are heterozygous for LP tend to be darker than homozygous horses, but this is not consistent.
As white settlers moved into traditional Nez Perce lands, a successful trade in horses enriched the Nez Perce, who in 1861 bred horses described as "elegant chargers, fit to mount a prince."
Artwork depicting prehistoric horses with leopard spotting exists in prehistoric cave paintings in Europe.
The Nez Perce first obtained horses from the Shoshone around 1730.
Many cutting and reining horses resulted from old-type Appaloosas crossed on Arabian bloodlines, particularly via the Appaloosa foundation stallion Red Eagle.
Appaloosas have an eightfold greater risk of developing Equine Recurrent Uveitis (ERU) than all other breeds combined.
The base colors recognized by the Appaloosa Horse Club include bay, black, chestnut, palomino, buckskin, cremello or perlino, roan, gray, dun and grulla.
Appaloosa&nbsp;roan,&nbsp;marble  &nbsp;&nbsp;or varnish roan
Acetazolamide ("Acet") is used for treating horses with the genetic disease hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP), and prevents affected animals from having seizures.
When the U.S. 7th Cavalry accepted the surrender of Chief Joseph and the remaining Nez Perce, they immediately took more than 1,000 of the tribe's horses, sold what they could and shot many of the rest.
But on that day a small group of warriors staged an attack on nearby white settlers, which led to the Nez Perce War.
There is a wide range of body types within the breed, stemming from the influence of multiple breeds of horses throughout its history.
The Appaloosa Project, a genetic study group, has researched the interactions of Appaloosa and pinto genes and how they affect each other.
Appaloosas were once referred to by settlers as the "Palouse horse", possibly after the Palouse River, which ran through the heart of Nez Perce country.
A commercially available DNA based test is likely to be developed in the near future, which breeders can use to determine if LP is present in horses that do not have visible Appaloosa characteristics.
The Appaloosa Horse Club estimates that only about ten percent of the horses owned by the Nez Perce at the time were spotted.
The spots are usually the same color as the horse's base color.
Located in Moscow, Idaho, the ApHC is the principal body for the promotion and preservation of the Appaloosa breed and is an international organization.
The body style reflected a mix that started with the traditional Spanish horses already common on the plains of America before 1700.
The ApHC also recognizes the concept of a "solid" horse, which has a base color "but no contrasting color in the form of an Appaloosa coat pattern".
These registries tend to have different foundation breeding and histories than the North American Appaloosa.
During the 1940s and 1950s, when both the Appaloosa Horse Club (ApHC) and the American Quarter Horse Association (AQHA) were in their formative years, minimally marked or roan Appaloosas were sometimes used in Quarter Horse breeding programs.
The Appaloosa came to the attention of the general public in January 1937 in ''Western Horseman'' magazine when Francis D. Haines, a history professor from Lewiston, Idaho, published an article describing the breed's history and urging its preservation.
Until then, a foal of Appaloosa parents that had insufficient color was often denied registration, although non-characteristic Appaloosas were allowed into the registry.
Appaloosas are often used in Western movies and television series.
Both drugs are controversial, in part because they are considered drug maskers and diuretics that can make it difficult to detect the presence of other drugs in the horse's system.
In the late 1970s, the color controversy went in the opposite direction within the Appaloosa registry.
The registry was originally housed in Moro, Oregon; but in 1947 the organization moved to Moscow, Idaho, under the leadership of George Hatley.
Later, Thoroughbred and Quarter Horse lines were added, as well as crosses from other breeds, including Morgans and Standardbreds.
Base colors are overlain by various spotting patterns, which are variable and often do not fit neatly into a specific category.
Throughout this journey of about  the Nez Perce relied heavily on their fast, agile and hardy Appaloosa horses.
By 1978 the ApHC was the third largest horse registry for light horse breeds.
Early Nez Perce horses were considered to be of high quality.
Kellogg from horses imported from the Crabbet Arabian Stud of England.
They took advantage of the fact that they lived in excellent horse-breeding country, relatively safe from the raids of other tribes, and developed strict breeding selection practices for their animals, establishing breeding herds by 1750.
Appaloosas born with visible coat pattern, or mottled skin and at least one other characteristic, are registered with "regular" papers and have full show and breeding privileges.
Spotting occurs in several overlay patterns on one of several recognized base coat colors.
But a significant population of horses had been left behind in the Wallowa valley when the Nez Perce began their retreat, and additional animals escaped or were abandoned along the way.
Typically the white spots increase in number and size as the horse ages.
Any horse that shows Appaloosa core characteristics of coat pattern, mottled skin, striped hooves, and a visible white sclera, carries at least one allele of the dominant "leopard complex" (LP) gene.
Meriwether Lewis of the Lewis and Clark Expedition wrote in his February 15, 1806, journal entry:  "Their horses appear to be of an excellent race; they are lofty, eligantly  formed, active and durable: in short many of them look like fine English coarsers  and would make a figure in any country."
Horses with two ApHC parents but no "identifiable Appaloosa characteristics" are registered as "non-characteristic," a limited special registration status.
An infusion of Thoroughbred blood was added during the 1970s to produce horses more suited for racing.
These horses were similar to a tall, slim Thoroughbred-Andalusian type of horse popular in Bourbon-era Spain.
English disciplines they are used in include eventing, show jumping, and fox hunting.
Gradually, the name evolved into "Apalouse", and then "Appaloosa".
In addition, many horses with a solid coat exhibited secondary characteristics such as skin mottling, the white sclera, and striped hooves.
A horse with a roan blanket that has white and/or dark spots within the roan area.
