Atalanta, also of Greek mythology, raced all her suitors in an attempt to avoid marriage.
Improved transportation of fresh apples by train and road replaced the necessity for storage.
Otherwise, there is generally low content of essential nutrients (table).
Apples have been acclimatized in Ecuador at very high altitudes, where they provide crops twice per year because of constant temperate conditions year-round.
Source: FAOSTAT of the United Nations
Commercially popular apple cultivars are soft but crisp.
Image:Golden delicious apple.jpg|'''Golden delicious'''
* In the UK, a toffee apple is a traditional confection made by coating an apple in hot toffee and allowing it to cool.
Extremely sweet apples with barely any acid flavor are popular in Asia and especially Indian Subcontinent .
Worldwide production of apples in 2013 was 80.8 million tonnes, with China accounting for 49% of the total.
Commercially, apples can be stored for some months in controlled-atmosphere chambers to delay ethylene-induced ripening.
* Apples are eaten with honey at the Jewish New Year of Rosh Hashanah to symbolize a sweet new year.
Image:Malus-Ananasrenette.jpg|'''Ananasrenette'''
Breeding efforts have yet to produce a hypoallergenic fruit suitable for either of the two forms of apple allergy.
''The tree originated in Central Asia, where its wild ancestor, ''Malus sieversii'', is still found today.
The tree of the forbidden fruit is called "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil" in , and the Latin for "good and evil" is ''bonum et malum''.
This form of apple allergy also includes OAS, but often has more severe symptoms, such as vomiting, abdominal pain and urticaria, and can be life-threatening.
Through distillation, various alcoholic beverages can be produced, such as applejack, Calvados, and apfelwein.
Apples are an important ingredient in many desserts, such as apple pie, apple crumble, apple crisp and apple cake.
There are four to seven pollination groups in apples, depending on climate:
Hippomenes knew that he could not win in a fair race, so he used three golden apples (gifts of Aphrodite, the goddess of love) to distract Atalanta.
Allergic reactions are triggered by a protein in apples that is similar to birch pollen, and people affected by this protein can also develop allergies to other fruits, nuts, and vegetables.
Varieties that yield their crop in the summer include Gala, Golden Supreme, McIntosh, Transparent, Primate, Sweet Bough, and Duchess; fall producers include Fuji, Jonagold, Golden Delicious, Red Delicious, Chenango, Gravenstein, Wealthy, McIntosh, Snow, and Blenheim; winter producers include Winesap, Granny Smith, King, Wagener, Swayzie, Greening, and Tolman Sweet.
Other major producers with 5% or less of the world total were the United States, Turkey, Poland and Italy.
Phlorizin is a flavonoid that is found in apple trees, particularly in the leaves, and in only small amounts if at all in other plants, even other species of the ''Malus'' genus or related plants such as pear trees.
Dwarf rootstocks for apple trees can be traced as far back as 300 BC, to the area of Persia and Asia Minor.
Most new apple cultivars originate as seedlings, which either arise by chance or are bred by deliberately crossing cultivars with promising characteristics.
It took all three apples and all of his speed, but Hippomenes was finally successful, winning the race and Atalanta's hand.
* Group E – Late flowering, 16 to 18 May (Braeburn, Reinette d'Orléans)
File:Aroma äpplen i korg.jpeg|'''Aroma'''
The  flowers are white with a pink tinge that gradually fades, five petaled, with an inflorescence consisting of a cyme with 4–6 flowers.
The Greek goddess of discord, Eris, became disgruntled after she was excluded from the wedding of Peleus and Thetis.
Apples are harvested using three-point ladders that are designed to fit amongst the branches.
Orchard mason bees are also used as supplemental pollinators in commercial orchards.
In retaliation, she tossed a golden apple inscribed Καλλίστη (''Kalliste'', sometimes transliterated ''Kallisti'', 'For the most beautiful one'), into the wedding party.
Further, Davidson points out the "strange" phrase "Apples of Hel" used in an 11th-century poem by the skald Thorbiorn Brúnarson.
This new understanding of the apple genome will help scientists in identifying genes and gene variants that contribute to resistance to disease and drought, and other desirable characteristics.
Image:Apple 03.jpg|'''Pacific rose'''
Apple varieties brought as seed from Europe were spread along Native American trade routes, as well as being cultivated on Colonial farms.
In the 20th century, irrigation projects in Eastern Washington began and allowed the development of the multibillion-dollar fruit industry, of which the apple is the leading product.
Image:Red Delicious.jpg|'''Red Delicious'''
The apple as symbol of sexual seduction has been used to imply human sexuality, possibly in an ironic vein.
They are often eaten baked or stewed, and they can also be dried and eaten or reconstituted (soaked in water, alcohol or some other liquid) for later use.
The variety of apple, maturity and storage conditions can change the amount of allergen present in individual fruits.
For instance, in Greek mythology, the Greek hero Heracles, as a part of his Twelve Labours, was required to travel to the Garden of the Hesperides and pick the golden apples off the Tree of Life growing at its center.
Reactions, which entail oral allergy syndrome (OAS), generally involve itching and inflammation of the mouth and throat, but in rare cases can also include life-threatening anaphylaxis.
English scholar H. R. Ellis Davidson links apples to religious practices in Germanic paganism, from which Norse paganism developed.
Apples were introduced to North America by colonists in the 17th century, and the first apple orchard on the North American continent was planted in Boston by Reverend William Blaxton in 1625.
Apples are also made into apple butter and apple jelly.
In 2010, an Italian-led consortium announced they had sequenced the complete genome of the apple in collaboration with horticultural genomicists at Washington State University, using the Golden delicious variety.
Until the 20th century, farmers stored apples in frostproof cellars during the winter for their own use or for sale.
Freshly harvested, over-ripe fruits tend to have the highest levels of the protein that causes this reaction.
In other areas, such as the Mediterranean, some individuals have adverse reactions to apples because of their similarity to peaches.
Three goddesses claimed the apple: Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite.
The juice can be fermented to make cider (called hard cider in North America), ciderkin, and vinegar.
In the 19th century and early 20th, the phrase evolved to “an apple a day, no doctor to pay” and “an apple a days sends the doctor away”, while the phrasing now commonly used was first recorded in 1922.
* Group A – Early flowering, 1 to 3 May in England (Gravenstein, Red Astrachan)
The apple was thus considered, in ancient Greece, to be sacred to Aphrodite, and to throw an apple at someone was to symbolically declare one's love; and similarly, to catch it was to symbolically show one's acceptance of that love.
The apple is a deciduous tree, generally standing  tall in cultivation and up to  in the wild.
Different cultivars vary in their propensity to brown after slicing and the genetically engineered Arctic Apples do not brown.
Image:Jonagold.jpg|'''Jonagold'''
In the wild, apples grow readily from seeds.
* Group C – Mid-season flowering, 8 to 11 May (Granny Smith, Cox's Orange Pippin)
Further, Davidson notes that the potentially Germanic goddess Nehalennia is sometimes depicted with apples and that parallels exist in early Irish stories.
The skin is covered in a protective layer of epicuticular wax, The flesh is generally pale yellowish-white, though pink or yellow flesh is also known.
A trend in orchard management is the use of organic methods.
The skin may also be wholly or partly russeted i.e.
* Group B – 4 to 7 May (Idared, McIntosh)
Young apple trees are also prone to mammal pests like mice and deer, which feed on the soft bark of the trees, especially in winter.
Individuals with this form of allergy can also develop reactions to other fruits and nuts.
File:Discovery apples.jpg|'''Discovery'''
Apples are self-incompatible; they must cross-pollinate to develop fruit.
An 1845 United States apples nursery catalogue sold 350 of the "best" varieties, showing the proliferation of new North American varieties by the early 19th century.
The majority of the rootstocks used today to control size in apples were developed in England in the early 1900s.
Alexander the Great is credited with finding dwarfed apples in Kazakhstan in 328 BCE; those he brought back to Macedonia might have been the progenitors of dwarfing root stocks.
Varieties bred for raw consumption are termed dessert or table apples.
* Apple scab: Apple scab causes leaves to develop olive-brown spots with a velvety texture that later turn brown and become cork-like in texture.
It is cultivated worldwide as a fruit tree, and is the most widely grown species in the genus ''Malus.
Image:Malus Goldrenette F. v. Berlepsch.jpg|'''Goldrenette''', (Reinette)
and pectin may also be produced.
Generally apple varieties are propagated by grafting onto rootstocks, which control the size of the resulting tree.
Winter apples, picked in late autumn and stored just above freezing, have been an important food in Asia and Europe for millennia.
Production (millions of tonnes)
Aphids feed on foliage using needle-like mouth parts to suck out plant juices.
They are also used (cooked) in meat dishes.
Apple scab is spread through fungus growing in old apple leaves on the ground and spreads during warm spring weather to infect the new year's growth.
Apples are commonly stored in chambers with higher concentrations of carbon dioxide and high air filtration.
Renaissance painters may also have been influenced by the story of the golden apples in the Garden of Hesperides.
Preliminary research is investigating whether nutrients and/or phytochemicals in apples may affect the risk of some types of cancer.
Trees grafted on dwarfing rootstocks will bear about  of fruit per year.
Commercial growers aim to produce an apple that is  in diameter, due to market preference.
File:Berlinwohnung 03.01.2014 13-45-13.JPG|'''Ambrosia'''
Honey bees are most commonly used.
Image:Sampion cultivar.jpg|'''Sampion''' (Shampion)
Dwarf rootstocks can be used to produce very small trees (less than  high at maturity), which bear fruit earlier in their life cycle than full size trees.
When cooked, some apple varieties easily form a puree known as apple sauce.
In the United Kingdom, old cultivars such as 'Cox's Orange Pippin' and 'Egremont Russet' are still commercially important even though by modern standards they are low yielding and susceptible to disease.
Rootstocks marked with an "MM" prefix are Malling-series varieties later crossed with trees of the Northern Spy variety in Merton, England.
One form of apple allergy, often found in northern Europe, is called birch-apple syndrome, and is found in people who are also allergic to birch pollen.
Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Asia and Europe, and were brought to North America by European colonists.
A wide range of pests and diseases can affect the plant; three of the more common diseases/pests are mildew, aphids and apple scab.
Some differ sufficiently from the parent tree to be considered new cultivars.
The rootstock used for the bottom of the graft can be selected to produce trees of a large variety of sizes, as well as changing the winter hardiness, insect and disease resistance, and soil preference of the resulting tree.
The leaves are alternately arranged dark green-colored simple ovals with serrated margins and slightly downy undersides.
Trees and fruit are prone to a number of fungal, bacterial and pest problems, which can be controlled by a number of organic and non-organic means.
The genome sequence also provided proof that ''Malus sieversii'' was the wild ancestor of the domestic apple—an issue that had been long-debated in the scientific community.
The East Malling Research Station conducted extensive research into rootstocks, and today their rootstocks are given an "M" prefix to designate their origin.
Alexander the Great sent samples of dwarf apple trees to Aristotle's Lyceum.
They are milled or pressed to produce apple juice, which may be drunk unfiltered (called apple cider in North America), or filtered.
It had about 57,000 genes, the highest number of any plant genome studied to date and more genes than the human genome (about 30,000).
Apple trees are large if grown from seed.
File:Aliceapple.JPG|'''Alice'''
Since the 1930s, the Excelsior Experiment Station at the University of Minnesota has introduced a steady progression of important apples that are widely grown, both commercially and by local orchardists, throughout Minnesota and Wisconsin.
Image:Granny smith closeup.jpg|'''Granny Smith'''
Most North Americans and Europeans favor sweet, subacid apples, but tart apples have a strong minority following.
The core is often not eaten and is discarded.
Significant exchange with ''Malus sylvestris'', the crabapple, resulted in current populations of apples being more related to crabapples than to the more morphologically similar progenitor ''Malus sieversii''.
Apples appear in many religious traditions, often as a mystical or forbidden fruit.
Modern apples are generally sweeter than older cultivars, as popular tastes in apples have varied over time.
Some bud sports turn out to be improved strains of the parent cultivar.
In Norse mythology, the goddess Iðunn is portrayed in the ''Prose Edda'' (written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson) as providing apples to the gods that give them eternal youthfulness.
The apple tree was perhaps the earliest tree to be cultivated, and its fruits have been improved through selection over thousands of years.
Long storage times can increase the amount of proteins that cause birch-apple syndrome.
Old cultivars are often oddly shaped, russeted, and have a variety of textures and colors.
The whole fruit including the skin is suitable for human consumption except for the seeds, which may affect some consumers.
Paris of Troy was appointed to select the recipient.
The words 'seedling', 'pippin', and 'kernel' in the name of an apple cultivar suggest that it originated as a seedling.
* Group D – Mid/late season flowering, 12 to 15 May (Golden Delicious, Calville blanc d'hiver)
As a result, in the story of Adam and Eve, the apple became a symbol for knowledge, immortality, temptation, the fall of man into sin, and sin itself.
Cultivation of the species, most likely beginning on the forested flanks of the Tian Shan mountains, progressed over a long period of time and permitted secondary introgression of genes from other species into the open-pollinated seeds.
Though the forbidden fruit of Eden in the Book of Genesis is not identified, popular Christian tradition has held that it was an apple that Eve coaxed Adam to share with her.
This is because seedling apples are an example of "extreme heterozygotes", in that rather than inheriting DNA from their parents to create a new apple with those characteristics, they are instead significantly different from their parents.
Some cultivars, if left unpruned, will grow very large, which allows them to bear much more fruit, but makes harvesting very difficult.
Some find them to have a better flavor than modern cultivars, but they may have other problems which make them commercially unviable from low yield, disease susceptibility, poor tolerance for storage or transport, or just being the 'wrong' size.
Triploid varieties have an additional reproductive barrier in that 3 sets of chromosomes cannot be divided evenly during meiosis, yielding unequal segregation of the chromosomes (aneuploids).
* Mildew: which is characterized by light grey powdery patches appearing on the leaves, shoots and flowers, normally in spring.
Image:Arkansas Black apples.jpg|'''Arkansas Black'''
Similar treats in the U.S. are candy apples (coated in a hard shell of crystallized sugar syrup), and caramel apples, coated with cooled caramel.
Cooking does not break down the protein causing this particular reaction, so affected individuals can eat neither raw nor cooked apples.
When cultivated, the size, shape and branch density are determined by rootstock selection and trimming method.
This can be treated in a manner not dissimilar from treating Botrytis; eliminating the conditions which caused the disease in the first place and burning the infected plants are among the recommended actions to take.
Varieties are sometimes classified by the day of peak bloom in the average 30-day blossom period, with pollenizers selected from varieties within a 6-day overlap period.
Apples are often eaten raw.
Image:Red Apple.jpg|'''Gala '''
Sliced apple consumption tripled in the US from 2004 to 2014 to 500 million apples annually due to its convenience.
A light coating of kaolin, which forms a physical barrier to some pests, also helps prevent apple sun scalding.
The UK's national fruit collection database contains a wealth of information on the characteristics and origin of many apples, including alternative names for what is essentially the same 'genetic' apple variety.
* Farms with apple orchards may open them to the public, so consumers may themselves pick the apples they will purchase.
Codling moths and apple maggots are two other pests which affect apple trees.
Because apples do not breed true when planted as seeds, grafting is generally used to produce new apple trees.
There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples.
Ingesting small amounts of apple seeds will cause no ill effects, but in extremely large doses can cause adverse reactions.
Dwarf rootstocks became common by the 15th century, and later went through several cycles of popularity and decline throughout the world.
The UK's National Fruit Collection, which is the responsibility of the Department of Environment Food and Rural Affairs, includes a collection of over 2,000 varieties of apple tree in Kent.
However, like most perennial fruits, apples are ordinarily propagated asexually by grafting.
Organic apples are commonly produced in the United States.
The original phrase, Taggart said, was: "Eat an apple on going to bed, and you’ll keep the doctor from earning his bread".
Many unusual and locally important cultivars with their own unique taste and appearance exist; apple conservation campaigns have sprung up around the world to preserve such local cultivars from extinction.
The aphid species can be identified by their color, the time of year when they are present and by differences in the cornicles, which are small paired projections from the rear of aphids.
A few old cultivars are still produced on a large scale, but many have been preserved by home gardeners and farmers that sell directly to local markets.
In the 21st century, long-term storage again came into popularity, as "controlled atmosphere" facilities were used to keep apples fresh year-round.
She points out that buckets of apples were found in the Oseberg ship burial site in Norway, and that fruit and nuts (Iðunn having been described as being transformed into a nut in ''Skáldskaparmál'') have been found in the early graves of the Germanic peoples in England and elsewhere on the continent of Europe, which may have had a symbolic meaning, and that nuts are still a recognized symbol of fertility in southwest England.
A typical apple serving weighs 242 grams and provides 126 calories with a moderate content of dietary fiber (table).
Some types, including the Granny Smith and Fuji, can be stored up to a year without significant degradation.
After being bribed by both Hera and Athena, Aphrodite tempted him with the most beautiful woman in the world, Helen of Sparta.
The proverb "''An apple a day keeps the doctor away''", addressing the health effects of the fruit, dates from 19th century Wales, according to Caroline Taggart, author of “An Apple a Day: Old-Fashioned Proverbs and Why They Still Work”.
She states this may imply that the apple was thought of by Brúnarson as the food of the dead.
File:Malus-Boskoop organic.jpg|'''Belle de Boskoop'''
Image:McIntosh with sticker by Lars Zapf 2006-03-30 cropped.jpg|'''McIntosh'''
Controlled atmosphere facilities use high humidity, low oxygen, and controlled carbon dioxide levels to maintain fruit freshness.
These prohibit the use of synthetic pesticides, though some older pesticides are allowed.
Image:Lobo cultivar.jpg|'''Lobo'''
One of the problems identifying apples in religion, mythology and folktales is that the word "apple" was used as a generic term for all (foreign) fruit, other than berries, including nuts, as late as the 17th century.
File:Malus-James-Grieve.jpg|'''James Grieve'''
The only apples native to North America are crab apples, which were once called "common apples".
Among the most serious disease problems are fireblight, a bacterial disease; and ''Gymnosporangium'' rust, and black spot, two fungal diseases.
The University of Reading's work is part of the European Cooperative Programme for Plant Genetic Resources of which there are 38 countries participating in the Malus/Pyrus work group.
The larynx in the human throat has been called Adam's apple because of a notion that it was caused by the forbidden fruit remaining in the throat of Adam.
Apple trees are susceptible to a number of fungal and bacterial diseases and insect pests.
Image:Yellow Transparent.jpg|'''Yellow Transparent'''
Sliced fruit can be treated with acidulated water to prevent this effect.
Sliced apples turn brown with exposure to air due to the conversion of natural phenolic substances into melanin upon exposure to oxygen.
The University of Reading, which is responsible for developing the UK national collection database, provides access to search the national collection.
The flowers will turn a creamy yellow color and will not develop correctly.
File:Malus-Cox-Pomona.jpg|'''Cox Pomona'''
An epigram claiming authorship by Plato states:
Organic production is difficult in Europe, though a few orchards have done so with commercial success, using disease-resistant cultivars.
For home storage, most varieties of apple can be held for approximately two weeks when kept at the coolest part of the refrigerator (i.e.
Organic methods include, for instance, introducing its natural predator to reduce the population of a particular pest.
Apple production – 2013
Different cultivars are available for temperate and subtropical climates.
The original wild ancestor of ''Malus pumila'' was ''Malus sieversii'', found growing wild in the mountains of Central Asia in southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Xinjiang, China.
The center of diversity of the genus ''Malus'' is in eastern present-day Turkey.
File:Malus-Cripps-Pink.jpg|'''Pink Lady'''
Cider apples are typically too tart and astringent to eat fresh, but they give the beverage a rich flavor that dessert apples cannot.
This prevents ethylene concentrations from rising to higher amounts and preventing ripening from occurring too quickly.
In 2010, the fruit's genome was sequenced as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production.
Cultivars vary in their yield and the ultimate size of the tree, even when grown on the same rootstock.
Davidson concludes that in the figure of Iðunn "we must have a dim reflection of an old symbol: that of the guardian goddess of the life-giving fruit of the other world."
Other desired qualities in modern commercial apple breeding are a colorful skin, absence of russeting, ease of shipping, lengthy storage ability, high yields, disease resistance, common apple shape, and developed flavor.
