As of 2015, more than 30,000 apprentices are being trained in 2,751 industries in 276 trades across Pakistan.
Providers are usually private training companies but might also be Further Education colleges, voluntary sector organisations, Chambers of Commerce or employers themselves.
This will provide them with the skills and qualifications needed for their career and allow entry (if desired) to a Higher Apprenticeship or degree level qualification;
The City and Guilds diploma of fellowship is awarded to individuals who are nationally recognized through peer review as having achieved the very highest level in competency based achievement.
The involved procedures, titles and traditions still strongly reflect the medieval origin of the system.
Often referred to as the "Golden Age" of work and employment for bright young people, the traditional technical apprenticeship framework was open to young people who had a minimum of 4 GCE "O" Levels to enroll in an Ordinary National Certificate or Diploma or a City & Guilds engineering technician course.
It regulates the programme of training of apprentices in the industry so as to conform to the syllabi, period of training etc.
Education officials in the U.S., based largely on school redesign proposals by NCEE and other organizations, have chosen to use criterion-referenced tests that define one high standard that must be achieved by all students to receive a uniform diploma.
The aims were to ensure an adequate supply of training at all levels; to improve the quality and quantity of training; and to share the costs of training among employers.
The Act was amended in 1973 to include training of graduate and diploma engineers as "Graduate" & "Technician" Apprentices.
From 1919, young people had to take 150 hours of theory and general lessons in their subject a year.
The employer is responsible for the entire education programme coordinated by the German chamber of commerce.
For the few that did follow this path they accomplished a solid foundation of competency based work training via apprenticeship and attained a higher academic qualifications at a university or Polytechnic combining both forms of education; vocational plus academic.
Apprentices undertook a variety of job roles in numerous shop floor and office technical functions to assist the work of master craftsmen, technicians, engineers, and managers in the design, development, manufacture and maintenance of products and production systems.
In the 16th century the payment of a "premium" to the master was not at all common, but such fees became usual in the 17th century, though they varied greatly from trade to trade.
The parents or guardians of a minor would agree with a Guild's Master craftsman the conditions for an apprenticeship which would bind the minor for 5–9 years (e.g., from age 14 to 21).
As of 2009 there are over 180 apprenticeship frameworks.
Most of these apprentices participated in what are called "joint" apprenticeship programs, administered jointly by construction employers and construction labor unions.
Craft, technician and higher technician apprenticeships usually took 4 to 5 years while a graduate apprenticeship was a short 2 year experience usually while at university or post graduate experience.
Apprenticeships at Level 3 or above for those aged 24 or over no longer attract State funding, although there is a State loan facility in place by which individuals or companies can cover the cost of study and assessment and repay the State by instalments over an extended period at preferential rates of interest.
A master craftsman was entitled to employ young people as an inexpensive form of labour in exchange for providing food, lodging and formal training in the craft.
The first award of FCGI was approved by Council in December 1892 and awarded in 1893 to Mr H A Humphrey, Engineering Manager of the Refined Bicarbonate and Crystal Plant Departments of Messrs Brunner, Mond & Co.  His award was for material improvements in the manufacture of bicarbonate of soda.
It is obligatory for industry having fifty or more workers in an apprenticeable trade to operate apprenticeship training in the industry.
It was possible for apprentices to progress from national certificates and diplomas to engineering degrees if they had the aptitude.
Dubbed "law on equality of chances", it created the First Employment Contract as well as manual apprenticeship from as early as 14 years of age.
Finding employment without having completed an apprenticeship is almost impossible.
The construction industry is perhaps the heaviest user of apprenticeship programs in the United States, with the US Department of Labor reporting 74,164 new apprentices accepted in 2007 at the height of the construction boom.
Initially the Act envisaged training of trade apprentices.
That is, each of the 50 states sets its own licensing requirements and issues (and, if needed, revokes) licenses to practice engineering in that state.
The apprenticeship framework offered a clear pathway and competency outcomes that addressed the issues facing the industry sector and specific companies.
The length of an apprenticeship can be 2, 3 or 4 years.
The system allowed young people to find their level and still achieve milestones along the path from apprenticeship into higher education via a polytechnic or university.
The UK government has implemented a rigorous apprenticeship structure which in many ways resembles the traditional architecture of the 1960s and 1970s.
A modified form of apprenticeship is required for before an engineer is licensed as a Professional Engineer in any of the states of the United States.
An '''apprenticeship''' is a system of training a new generation of practitioners of a trade or profession with on-the-job training and often some accompanying study (classroom work and reading).
The current scheme extends beyond manufacturing and high technology industry to parts of the service sector with no apprenticeship tradition.
Though rare, it was possible for an apprentice to advance from vocational studies, to undergraduate degree, to graduate study and earn a master's degree or a PhD.
American education reformers have sought to end such tracking, which is seen as a barrier to opportunity.
Most job titles are legally standardized and restricted.
- Regulating and formalizing Informal Apprenticeships
The latent decrease of the German population due to low birth rates is now causing a lack of young people available to start an apprenticeship.
Trade associations such as the Independent Electrical Contractors and Associated Builders and Contractors also offer a variety of apprentice training programs.
Government funding agencies (in England, the  Skills Funding Agency) contract with 'learning providers' to deliver apprenticeships, and may accredit them as a  National Skills Academy.
trained its higher technicians and professional engineers via the traditional indentured apprenticeship system of learning - usually a 4 - 6-year process from age 16–21.
They cover all industry sectors in Australia and are used to achieve both 'entry-level' and career 'upskilling' objectives.
Some apprenticeships have a recommend or required age of 18, which obviously leads to a higher average age.
Entire cost of training is borne by industry including wages to apprentices.
An Ausbilder must prove he has the professional qualifications needed to educate another person.
In the "Wealth of Nations" Adam Smith states that Seven years seem anciently to have been, all over Europe, the usual term established for the duration of apprenticeships in the greater part of incorporated trades.
In 1814 compulsory apprenticeship by indenture was abolished.
By the 18th century regular payments, at least in the last two or three years of the apprentice's term, became usual and those who lived apart from their masters were frequently paid a regular wage.
When the apprenticeship is ended, the former apprentice now is considered a journeyman.
The apprenticeship system aimed at highly developed craft and higher technician skills for an elite minority of the workforce, the majority of whom were trained in industries that declined rapidly from 1973 onwards, and by the 1980s it was clear that in manufacturing this decline was permanent.
An employment in such function in any company would require this completed degree.
In 2009, the National Apprenticeship Service was founded to coordinate apprenticeships in England.
all the way up to qualifications equivalent to university master's degrees and doctorates.
Still, by 1990, apprenticeship took up only two-thirds of one percent of total employment.
are as strict as and even broader than for the business professions.
There is the additional benefit of the trainee/apprentice being employed by the GTO reducing the Payroll/Superannuation and other legislative requirements on the Host employer who pays as invoiced per agreement.
Other unions such as the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, United Association of Plumbers, Fitters, Welders and HVAC Service Techs, Operating Engineers, Ironworkers, Sheet Metal Workers, Plasterers, Bricklayers and others offer similar programs.
In 2008 Creative & Cultural Skills, the Sector Skills Council, introduced a set of Creative Apprenticeships awarded by EDI.
The system provided young people with an alternative to staying in full-time education post- 16/18 to gain purely academic qualifications without work-based learning.
The first laws regarding apprenticeships were passed in 1851.
'''Intermediate Apprenticeship (Level 2; equivalent to five good GCSE passes)''':  provides learners with the skills and qualifications for their chosen career and allow entry (if desired) to an Advanced Apprenticeship.
Engineering technicians and technologists continued in the traditional approach from the golden age attended the local technical college (1 day and 2 evenings per week) on a City & Guilds programme or Ordinary National Certificate / Higher National Certificate course.
In early modern usage, the clipped form '''prentice''' was common.
Aerospace Joint Apprenticeship Committee (AJAC) to fill a shortage of aerospace and advanced manufacturing workers in Washington State.
Also similar to apprenticeships are the professional development arrangements for new graduates in the professions of accountancy, engineering, management consulting, and the law.
In India, the Apprentices Act was enacted in 1961.
Thus, everyone who had completed an apprenticeship e.g., as an industrial manager (''Industriekaufmann'') has learned the same skills and has attended the same courses in procurement and stocking up, controlling, staffing, accounting procedures, production planning, terms of trade and transport logistics and various other subjects.
*Functional Skills which are in all cases minimum levels of maths and English attainment and in some cases additionally IT (in Scotland, Core Skills); and
This system was in place since the 1950s.
This was the norm in the 19th century but this system had existed in some trades since the 16th century.
They spend an additional 8 hours every other week in classroom training.
In these cases the apprentice often went home from Saturday night to Monday morning.
All such incorporations were anciently called universities, which indeed is the proper Latin name for any incorporation whatever.
The academic level of subjects such as mathematics, physics, chemistry on ONC / OND and some City & Guilds advanced technicians courses was equivalent to A level mathematics, physics and chemistry.
After graduation from school at the age of fifteen to nineteen (depending on type of school), students start an apprenticeship in their chosen professions.
Many years of hard work and disciplining under the authority of the master is the key to the young apprentice's education and learning process.
The time taken is also regulated.
The Freelance Apprenticeship was first written and proposed by Karen Akroyd (Access To Music) in 2008.
The years from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s saw the highest levels of apprentice recruitment, yet even so, out of a school leaving cohort of about 750,000, only about 110,000 (mostly boys) became apprentices.
Each of the over 300 nationwide defined vocational profiles has defined framework - conditions as length of education, theoretical and practical learning goals and certification conditions.
The IUPAT has joined forces with the Professional Decorative Painters Association (PDPA) to build educational standards using a model of apprenticeship created by the PDPA.
The modern concept of an internship is similar to an apprenticeship but not as rigorous.
Apprentice electricians work 32 to 40+ hours per week at the trade under the supervision of a journeyman wireman and receive pay and benefits.
For FDA-regulated industries such as food, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, nutraceuticals and cosemecuticals, companies may offer apprenticeships in Quality Assurance, Quality Control, Medical Affairs (MSLs), Clinical Trials, or Regulatory Affairs.
Although the requirements can vary slightly from state to state, in general to obtain a Professional Engineering License in a given state, one must graduate with Bachelor of Science in Engineering from an accredited college or university, pass the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Exam, which designates the title of Engineer in Training (EIT), work in that discipline for at least four years under a licensed Professional Engineer (PE), and then pass the Principles and Practice of Engineering Exam.
*a competence-based element, typically certified through an NVQ (in Scotland this can be through an SVQ or an alternative competence-based qualification);
), or Technician (quality inspector, draughtsman, designer, planner, work study, programmer), or Technician Engineer (tool design, product design, methods, stress and structural analysis, machine design etc.)
For other professions, usually which require more theoretical learning, the working and school times take place blockwise e.g., in a 12–18 weeks interval.
The defined content and skillset of the apprentice profession must be fully provided and taught by the employer.
In France, the term apprenticeship often denotes manual labor but it also include other jobs like secretary, manager, engineer, shop assistant...
Here, the average duration is about 36 months, some specialized crafts even take up to 42 months.
American high schools were introduced in the early 20th century to educate students of all ability and interests in one learning community rather than prepare a small number for college.
Each profession takes a different time, usually between 24 and 36 months.
The system of apprenticeship first developed in the later Middle Ages and came to be supervised by craft guilds and town governments.
The number of American apprentices has increased from 375,000 in 2014 to 500,000 in 2016, while the federal government intends to see 750,000 by 2019, particularly by expanding the apprenticeship model to include white-collar occupations such as information technology.
In 1986 National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) were introduced, in an attempt to revitalize vocational training.
It is a safety net, because the Group Training Organisation is the employer and provides continuity of employment and training for the Australian Apprentice.
Australian Apprentice and Traineeship services are dedicated to promoting retention, therefore much effort is made to match applicants with the right apprenticeship or traineeship.
There are three levels of apprenticeship available spanning 1–5 years.
Many U.S. states now require passing a high school graduation examination to ensure that students across all ethnic, gender and income groups possess the same skills.
There were 470,000 Australian Apprentices in-training as at 31 March 2012, an increase of 2.4% from the previous year.
In the early years of the Industrial Revolution entrepreneurs began to resist the restrictions of the apprenticeship system, and a legal ruling established that the Statute of Apprentices did not apply to trades that were not in existence when it was passed in 1563, thus excluding many new 18th century industries.
This is frequently the case for immigrants from countries without a compatible professional training system.
- Assessment and Certification of apprentices jointly by Industry - Chamber of Commerce & Industry - Government
These organisations provide off-the-job tuition and manage the bureaucratic workload associated with the apprenticeships.
The graduation from the master's school leads to the title of a master craftsman (''Meister'') of his profession, so e.g., a bakery master is entitled as ''Bäckermeister''.
For some particular technical university professions, such as food technology, a completed apprenticeship is often recommended; for some, such as marine engineering it may even be mandatory.
Most of their training is done while working for an employer who helps the apprentices learn their trade or profession, in exchange for their continued labor for an agreed period after they have achieved measurable competencies.
Most apprentices aspired to becoming master craftsmen themselves on completion of their contract (usually a term of seven years), but some would spend time as a journeyman and a significant proportion would never acquire their own workshop.
In the United States, regulation of professional engineering licenses is the right and responsibility of the federated state.
During the programme it is not allowed to assign the apprentice to regular employment and he is well protected from abrupt dismissal until the programme ends.
In states such as Washington, critics have questioned whether this ensures success for all or just creates massive failure (as only half of all 10th graders have demonstrated they can meet the standards).
Persons completing this program are considered highly skilled by employers and command high pay and benefits.
As at July 2015, there were 140 Trailblazer employer groups which had so far collectively delivered or were in the process of delivering over 350 apprenticeship standards.
Apprenticeship positions at elite companies often had hundreds of applications for a placement.
At the conclusion of training (five years for inside wireman and outside lineman, less for telecommunications), apprentices reach the level of journeyman wireman.
It regulates apprenticeship programs in industry and a TVET institute for theoretical instructions.
The academic science subjects were based on applied science in subjects such as thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, mechanics of machines, dynamics and statics, electrical science and electronics.
Apprenticeship frameworks contain a number of separately certified elements:
Approximately 500 plus people have been awarded Fellowship since its inception.
This was sometimes called the "half-pay" system or "colting", payments being made weekly or monthly to the apprentice or to his parents.
- Mainstream Apprenticeship Qualifications with National Vocational Qualifications Framework (Pakistan NVQF)
The dual system was successful in both parts of the divided Germany.
Recently, Government of Pakistan through National Vocational & Technical Training Commission ( NAVTTC) has initiated to reform existing system of apprenticeship.
Subsequently governmental regulation and the licensing of technical colleges and vocational education formalized and bureaucratized the details of apprenticeship.
The Apprentices Act enacted in 1961 and was implemented effectively in 1962.
During the 1970s City and Guilds assumed responsibility for the administration of HNC and HND courses.
This measure has long been a policy of conservative French political parties, and was met by tough opposition from trade unions and students.
They would pay a "premium" to the craftsman and the contract would be recorded in an indenture.
There is formally no maximum age, however for persons above 21 it is hard to find a company due to companies preferring younger ages due to the lower cost of labour.
With the exception of advanced technology companies particularly in aerospace (BAE systems, Rolls-Royce, Bombardier) this system declined with the decline of general manufacturing industry in the UK.
Apprenticeship also enables practitioners to gain a license to practice in a regulated profession.
The mainstay of training in industry has been the apprenticeship system (combining academic and practice), and the main concern has been to avoid skill shortages in traditionally skilled occupations and higher technician and engineering professionals, e.g., through the UK Industry Training Boards (ITBs) set up under the 1964 Act.
Originally, at the beginning of the 20th century, less than 1% of German students attended the Gymnasium (the 8-9 year university-preparatory school) to obtain the Abitur graduation which was the only way to university back then.
The FTI is working towards national accreditation so that it may offer associate and bachelor's degrees that integrate academics with a more traditional apprentice programs.
These are often referred to as the engineering sciences .
From 1987 the range of qualifications achieveable through an apprenticeship was widened to include the ''brevet professionnel'' (certificate of vocational aptitude), the ''bac professionnel'' (vocational baccalaureate diploma), the ''brevet de technicien supérieur'' (advanced technician's certificate), engineering diplomas, master's degree and more.
'''Advanced Apprenticeship (Level 3; equivalent to two A-level passes)''': to start this programme, learners should have five GCSEs (grade A*-C) or have completed an Intermediate Apprenticeship.
In 2011 Freelance Music Apprenticeships are available in music colleges in Birmingham, Manchester and London.
A minimum age of 18 is required.
To be accepted learners need to be enthusiastic, keen to learn and have a reasonable standard of education;
The learning curve in modern professional service firms, such as law firms, consultancies or accountancies, generally resembles the traditional master-apprentice model: the newcomer to the firm is assigned to one or several more experienced colleagues (ideally partners in the firm) and learns his skills on the job.
In 2001, two thirds of young people aged under 22 began an apprenticeship, and 78% of them completed it, meaning that approximately 51% of all young people under 22 have completed an apprenticeship.
An apprenticeship takes between 2.5 and 3.5 years.
'''Higher Apprenticeship (Level 4/5; equivalent to a Foundation Degree)''': to start this programme, learners should have a Level 3 qualification (A-Levels, Advanced Diploma or International Baccalaureate) or have completed an Advanced Apprenticeship.
Another view of this system is of graduate students in the role of apprentices, post-doctoral fellows as journeymen, and professors as masters .
The training period varies for different trades ranging from 1–4 years.
and even enabled a path to full Chartered Engineer registration (Mechanical, Electrical, Civil.
In some mostly safety-related professions, e.g., that of electricians only a master is allowed to found his own company.
There are three levels of apprenticeship.
Few apprentices followed this path since it would have meant 10 –12 years in further and higher education.
The costs of training and mentorship can be covered by the program and apprentices receive full pay and benefits.
HNC was accepted as entrance into the first year of an engineering degree and high performance on an HND course could allow a student direct entry into the second year of a degree.
In this case, an Electrician with 4 years apprenticeship gets more theoretical background than one with 3 years apprenticeship.
In 1986 the age limit for beginning an apprenticeship was raised from 20 to 25.
Traditional apprenticeships reached their lowest point in the 1980s: by that time, training programmes declined.
The training process usually starts when the small boy is of age 10-11 and becomes a full grown master at the age of 20-25.
First level is the apprentice, i.e., the "çırak" in Turkish.
The organization in charge of the program is called the National Joint Apprenticeship and Training Committee .
After the apprenticeship the journeyman can enter the master's school (''Meisterschule'') and continue his education at evening courses for 3–4 years or full-time for about one year.
People who successfully complete an apprenticeship reach the "journeyman" or professional certification level of competence.
Traditionally, American students are tracked within a wide choice of courses based on ability, with vocational courses (such as auto repair and carpentry) tending to be at the lower end of academic ability and trigonometry and pre-calculus at the upper end.
- Cost sharing by Industry and Government
This is usually the case for trade and craftspeople.
This is done with the aid of aptitude tests, tips, and information on 'how to retain an apprentice or apprenticeship'.
Information and resources on potential apprenticeship and traineeship occupations are available in over sixty industries.
The French government pledged to further develop apprenticeship as a path to success at school and to employment, based on its success: in 2005, 80% of young French people who had completed an apprenticeship entered employment.
According to the laws: ''the person wanting to educate a young apprentice must prove that he has an ethical way of living and the civic qualities of a good citizen''.
The dual system means that apprentices spend about 50-70% of their time in companies and the rest in formal education.
Also, but that is easily lost in translation, the profession has a different name.
* Employment Rights and Responsibilities (ERR) to show that the Apprentice has had a full induction to the company or training programme, and is aware of those rights and responsibilities that are essential in the workplace; this usually requires the creation of a personal portfolio of activities, reading and instruction sessions, but is not examined.
The traditional apprenticeship framework's purpose was to provide a supply of young people seeking to enter work-based learning via apprenticeships by offering structured high value learning and transferable skills and knowledge.
The student after graduation looks for a job at the nearest local marketplace usually under the authority of a master.
- Inclusion of services, agriculture and mining sector
These parish apprenticeships, which could be created with the assent of two Justices of the Peace, supplied apprentices for occupations of lower status such as farm labouring, brickmaking and menial household service.
Depending on the profession, they may work for two to three days a week in the company and then spend two or three days at a vocational school.
By contrast, the system studied by the NCEE (National Center on Education and the Economy) actually relies much more heavily on tracking.
more than 350 thousands annually.
- Apprenticeship Management Committee (having representation of 40% employers, 20% workers and 40% Government officials)
Switzerland has an apprenticeship similarly to Germany and Austria.
Apprenticeships are part of Germany's dual education system, and as such form an integral part of many people's working life.
For example, a mechanical engineer would be able to educate industrial mechanics, but not e.g., laboratory assistants or civil builders.
For entrance into the higher technical engineering apprenticeships "O"Levels had to include Mathematics, Physics, and English language.
An 'usta' is eligible to take in and accept new 'ciraks' to train and bring them up.
The plan aimed to raise the number of apprentices from 365,000 in 2005 to 500,000 in 2009.
Australian Government employer and employee incentives may be applicable, while State and Territory Governments may provide public funding support for the training element of the initiative.
The apprenticeship system of the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s provided the necessary preparation for young people to qualify as a Craft trade (Machinist, Toolmaker, Fitter, Plumber, Welder, Mechanic, Millwright etc.
Apprentices may be placed at a host company and must continue to work toward an industry certification such as those offered by ASQ or RAPS while they remain in the apprenticeship.
They seek to link academic education to careers.
An OND or HND were usually obtained via the block release approach whereby an apprentice would be released for periods of up to 3 months to study academic courses full-time and then return to the employer for applied work experience.
The mastery level is called as "usta" and is the highest level of achievement.
In the Czech Republic, the term "vocational school" (učiliště) can refer to the two, three or four years of secondary practical education.
On January 18, 2005, President Jacques Chirac announced the introduction of a law on a programme for social cohesion comprising the three pillars of employment, housing and equal opportunities.
In most cases the states have reciprocity agreements so that once an individual becomes licensed in one state can also become licensed in other states with relative ease.
This minimum training time rose to 360 hours a year in 1961, then 400 in 1986.
- Training Cost reimbursement (for those industries training more number of apprentices than the required)
*a knowledge-based element, typically certified through a qualification known as a ‘Technical Certificate’ (not mandatory in the Scottish Modern Apprenticeship);
