Figures from the 2005/2006 APPMA National Pet Owners Survey report that Americans own approximately 139 million freshwater fish and 9.6 million saltwater fish.
Marine aquaria frequently feature a diverse range of invertebrates in addition to species of fish.
However, chloramine is now used more often and does not leave the water as readily.
An aquarium's physical characteristics form another aspect of aquarium design.
A new trend is to have very small aquariums, termed mini aquariums (less than 150 litres or 40 gallons) or nano aquariums (less than 75 litres or 20 gallons).
Public aquariums designed for exhibition of large species or environments can be dramatically larger than any home aquarium.
In 1836, soon after his invention of the Wardian case, Dr. Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward proposed to use his tanks for tropical animals.
Combined biological and mechanical aquarium filtration systems are common.
In the United States, 40% of aquarists maintain two or more tanks.
Filter media can house microbes that mediate nitrification.
Germans soon rivaled the British in their interest.
Tank designs and techniques for maintaining water quality were developed by Warington, later cooperating with Gosse until his critical review of the tank water composition.
An '''aquarium''' (plural: ''aquariums'' or ''aquaria'') is a vivarium of any size having at least one transparent side in which water-dwelling plants or animals are kept and displayed.
The bacteria population depends on the physical space they have available to colonize.
Daily maintenance consists of checking the fish for signs of stress and disease.
There are several types of kreisel tanks.
Oxygen exchange at the surface is an important constraint, and thus the surface area of the aquarium matters.
In this book, Gosse primarily discussed saltwater aquaria.
*1&nbsp;inch of ''adult'' fish length per US gallon of water.
More important than the range is consistency; most organisms are not accustomed to sudden changes in temperatures, which can cause shock and lead to disease.
The largest bacterial populations are found in the filter, where is high water flow and plentiful surface available for their growth, so effective and efficient filtration is vital.
Aquaria are made in a variety of shapes, such as cuboid, hexagonal, angled to fit in a corner (L-shaped), and bow-front (the front side curves outwards).
Practical limitations, most notably the weight of water () and internal water pressure (requiring thick glass siding) of a large aquarium, restrict most home aquaria to a maximum of around 1 cubic metre in volume (1000 L, weighing  or ).
Aquarists may prefer anything from still water up to swift currents, depending on the aquarium's inhabitants.
Introduction of glass panes around the year 50 AD allowed Romans to replace one wall of marble tanks, improving their view of the fish.
Many aquarists choose a tropical aquarium because tropical fish tend to be more colorful.
In contrast, public aquaria with large water needs often locate themselves near a natural water source (such as a river, lake, or ocean) to reduce the level of treatment.
Several fundamental constraints on biological loading depend on aquarium size.
It is now possible to start a jellyfish aquarium at home as easily as a regular fish tank.
Straight tap water cannot be used in localities that pipe chlorinated water.
According to anecdotal reports, the plants can consume nitrogenous waste so efficiently that ammonia and nitrite level spikes seen in more traditional cycling methods are greatly reduced or disappear.
In it, an aquarist attempts to simulate a specific natural ecosystem, assembling fish, invertebrate species, plants, decorations and water conditions all found in that ecosystem.
Also, aquarists must make sure that the water has a good quality and it is not cloudy or foamy and the temperature of the water is appropriate for the particular species of fish that live in the aquarium.
These aquariums had the glass panels attached with metal frames and sealed with putty.
The top of a stretch kreisel may be open or closed with a lid.
During the latter half of the 19th century, a variety of aquarium designs were explored, such as hanging the aquarium on a wall, mounting it as part of a window, or even combining it with a birdcage.
Specimen tanks usually only house one fish species, along with plants, perhaps ones found in the fishes' natural environment and decorations simulating a natural ecosystem.
The "silent" cycle is basically nothing more than densely stocking the aquarium with fast-growing aquatic plants and relying on them to consume the nitrogen, allowing the necessary bacterial populations time to develop.
Salt content, or salinity, is the most basic measure of water conditions.
Water leaves the tank through a screen which prevents animals from being drawn into the pump intake or overflow line.
Simple metal tank stands are also available.
Concrete must be coated with a waterproof layer to prevent the water from breaking down the concrete, as well as preventing contamination of the water by the concrete.
Edward Edwards developed these glass-fronted aquaria in his 1858 patent for a "dark-water-chamber slope-back tank", with water slowly circulating to a reservoir beneath.
The swimming fish are rendered in real time, while the background of the tank is usually static.
The biological load, or bioload, is a measure of the burden placed on the aquarium ecosystem by its inhabitants.
According to the July issue of ''The North American Review'' of the same year, William Stimson may have owned some of the first functional aquaria, and had as many as seven or eight.
A single downwelling inlet may be used in the middle as well.
Glass aquaria have been a popular choice for many home and hobbyist aquarists for many years.
In addition to bioload/chemical considerations, aquarists also consider the mutual compatibility of the fish.
Decomposition in solution consumes oxygen.
The examples below are for small freshwater fish; larger freshwater fishes and most marine fishes need much more generous allowances.
The Georgia Aquarium, for example, features an individual aquarium of .
Thermometers used include glass alcohol thermometers, adhesive external plastic strip thermometers, and battery-powered LCD thermometers.
This process is known in the aquarium hobby as the nitrogen cycle.
Bacteria known as nitrifiers (genus ''Nitrosomonas'') metabolize nitrogen waste.
Appropriate handling of the nitrogen cycle, along with supplying an adequately balanced food supply and considered biological loading, is enough to keep these other nutrient cycles in approximate equilibrium.
It typically serves as the healthiest possible artificial environment for the tank's occupants.
Jugs made from a variety of materials were used to import fish from overseas, with a bicycle foot pump for aeration.
Objects on the floor of the tank may be mapped in simple planes so that the fish may appear to swim both in front and behind them, but a relatively simple 3D map of the general shape of such objects may be used to allow the light and ripples on the surface of the water to cast realistic shadows.
An aquarium may have freshwater (salinity below 500&nbsp;parts per million), simulating a lake or river environment; brackish water (a salt level of 500 to 30,000&nbsp;PPM), simulating environments lying between fresh and salt, such as estuaries; and salt water or seawater (a salt level of 30,000 to 40,000&nbsp;PPM), simulating an ocean environment.
Most marine tanks and tanks housing cichlids have to take the aggressiveness of the desired species into account when stocking.
The term, coined by English naturalist Philip Henry Gosse, combines the Latin root ''aqua'', meaning water, with the suffix ''-arium'', meaning "a place for relating to".
Large aquaria might instead use stronger materials such as fiberglass-reinforced plastics.
While there are fishes and invertebrates that could be introduced in the tank to clean up this algae, the ideal solution would be to find the optimal balance between the above-mentioned factors.
In 1853, the aquarium craze was launched in England by Philip Henry Gosse who created and stocked the first public aquarium in the London Zoo which came to be known as the Fish House.
In the United States, as of 1996, aquarium keeping is the second-most popular hobby after stamp collecting.
Therefore, fresh water has to be matured before stocking them with fish.
High biological loading presents a more complicated tank ecology, which in turn means that equilibrium is easier to upset.
Tap water from those areas must be treated with a suitable water conditioner, such as a product which removes chlorine and chloramine and neutralises any heavy metals present.
Sulfur, iron, and micronutrients also cycle through the system, entering as food and exiting as waste.
This is because fish of different sizes produce quite differing amounts of waste.
When fish are put into an aquarium, waste can quickly reach toxic concentrations in the enclosed environment unless the tank is cycled to remove waste.
A tank that is not level may distort, leak, or crack.
(''Nitrobacter'' bacteria were previously believed to fill this role.
However, this material is not transparent.
Some aquarists filter or purify their water through deionization or reverse osmosis prior to using it.
However, the coldwater aquarium is also popular, which is mainly restricted to goldfish, but can include fish from temperate areas worldwide and native fish keeping.
During the 1870s, some of the first aquarist societies were appearing in Germany.
The water's surface area limits oxygen intake.
However, some tanks have an underframe making this unnecessary.
While biologically they could theoretically fill the same niche as ''Nitrospira'', it has recently been found that ''Nitrobacter'' are not present in detectable levels in established aquaria, while ''Nitrospira'' are plentiful.)
In 1862 William Alford Lloyd, then bankrupt because of the craze in England being over, moved to Grindel Dammthor, Hamburg, to supervise the installation of the circulating system and tanks at the Hamburg Aquarium.
Ecotype, ecotope, or biotope aquaria is another type based on species selection.
Barbs also require more surface area than tetras of comparable size.
One way to classify aquaria is by salinity.
Some of the most popular biotopes are the freshwater habitats of the Amazon and Rio Negro rivers, the African rift lake environments of Lake Malawi and Lake Tanganyika, and saltwater coral reefs of Australia, the Red Sea, and the Caribbean.
One variable is differences between fish.
Acrylic aquaria are now the primary competitor with glass.
Some tanks of this sort are used simply to house adults for breeding.
Acrylic allows for the formation of unusual shapes, such as the hexagonal tank.
Compared to glass, acrylics are easier to scratch; but unlike glass, it is possible to polish out scratches in acrylic.
The solute content of water is perhaps the most important aspect of water conditions, as total dissolved solids and other constituents dramatically impact basic water chemistry, and therefore how organisms interact with their environment.
Saltwater is typically alkaline, while the pH (alkalinity or acidicity) of fresh water varies more.
For a given amount of light, if there is insufficient number of plants or insufficient CO2 to support the growth of those plants, so as to consume all the nutrients in the tank, the result would be algae growth.
Public aquaria may also be included in larger establishments such as a marine mammal park or a marine park.
Size, lighting conditions, density of floating and rooted plants, placement of bog-wood, creation of caves or overhangs, type of substrate, and other factors (including an aquarium's positioning within a room) can all affect the behavior and survival of tank inhabitants.
This method is usually done with a small starter population of hardier fish which can survive the ammonia and nitrite spikes, whether they are intended to be permanent residents or to be traded out later for the desired occupants.
Activated carbon and other substances, such as ammonia absorbing resins, stop working when their pores fill, so these components have to be replaced regularly.
The ''New York Aquarium Journal'', first published in October 1876, is considered to be the world's first aquarium magazine.
In the past, it was possible to "condition" the water by simply letting the water stand for a day or two, which allows the chlorine time to dissipate.
In 1369, the Hongwu Emperor of China established a porcelain company that produced large porcelain tubs for maintaining goldfish; over time, people produced tubs that approached the shape of modern fish bowls.
Fishkeepers use aquaria to keep fish, invertebrates, amphibians, aquatic reptiles such as turtles, and aquatic plants.
Additives formulated to remove chlorine or chloramine are often all that is needed to make the water ready for aquarium use.
The number of each type of fish can usually be selected, often including other animals like starfish, jellyfish, seahorses, and even sea turtles.
Relatively large home aquaria resist rapid fluctuations of temperature and pH, allowing for greater system stability.
The keeping of fish in an aquarium became a popular hobby and spread quickly.
During the Victorian age, glass aquariums commonly had slate or steel bottoms, which allowed them to be heated underneath by an open-flame heat source.
The fish, plants, substrate, rocks, wood, coral, and any other component of the display should completely match that of the local natural environment.
Other objects found in an aquarium can also be added and rearranged on some software, like treasure chests and giant clams that open and close with air bubbles, or a bobbing diver.
Specialized equipment maintains appropriate water quality and other characteristics suitable for the aquarium's residents.
''Stretch kreisels'' are a "double gyre" kreisel design, where the tank length is at least twice the height.
Gosse coined the word "aquarium", opting for this term (instead of "aquatic vivarium" or "aqua-vivarium") in 1854 in his book ''The Aquarium: An Unveiling of the Wonders of the Deep Sea''.
Dolphinaria are specifically for dolphins.
When plants metabolize nitrogen compounds, they remove nitrogen from the water by using it to build biomass that decays more slowly than ammonia-driven plankton already dissolved in the water.
In 1999, an estimated 9.6 million US households owned an aquarium.
It is possible to combine these designs; a circular shaped tank is used without a lid or cover, and the surface of the water acts as the continuation of circular flow.
Another safe practice consists of cleaning only half of the filter media during each service, or using two filters, only one of which is cleaned at a time.
It is better to apply the overall mass and size of a fish per gallon of water, than simply the length.
The United States soon followed.
Some hobbyists use an algae scrubber to filter the water naturally.
The aquarium principle was fully developed by Warington, explaining that plants added to water in a container would give off enough oxygen to support animals, so long as their numbers do not grow too large.
Fish kept in brackish water aquaria generally come from habitats with varying salinity, such as mangrove swamps and estuaries.
Fish, invertebrates, fungi, and some bacteria excrete nitrogen waste in the form of ammonia (which converts to ammonium, in acidic water) and must then either pass through the nitrogen cycle or be removed by passing through zeolite.
For example, the death of the only fish in a  tank causes dramatic changes in the system, while the death of that same fish in a  tank with many other fish in it represents only a minor change.
The water conditions must be checked both in the tank and in the replacement water, to make sure they are suitable for the species of fish kept.
It can be a challenge to recreate such environments, and most "true" biotopes will only have a few (if not only one) species of fish and invertebrates.
The phosphate cycle is an important, although often overlooked, nutrient cycle.
An aquarium must be maintained regularly to ensure that the fish are kept healthy.
Objects used for aquariums include: coffee tables, sinks, gumball machines and even toilets.
In these aquaria, the fish, invertebrates, and plants probably do not originate from the same geographic region, but tolerate similar water conditions.
The bottom would be made of slate and heated from below.
These can be either freshwater or saltwater, and are intended to display a tiny but self-contained ecosystem.
The aquarium principle was fully developed in 1850 by the chemist Robert Warington, who explained that plants added to water in a container would give off enough oxygen to support animals, so long as their numbers do not grow too large.
In the United Kingdom, it became popular after ornate aquaria in cast-iron frames were featured at the Great Exhibition of 1851.
Filtration systems are sometimes the most complex component of home aquaria.
However, he soon housed real animals.
During this process, ammonia, nitrite, and nitrate levels are tested to monitor progress.
In the Victorian era in the United Kingdom, a common design for the home aquarium was a glass front with the other sides made of wood (made watertight with a pitch coating).
In the wild, the vast amount of water surrounding the fish dilutes ammonia and other waste materials.
Smaller fish consume more oxygen per gram of body weight than larger fish.
In a true kreisel, a circular tank has a circular, submerged lid.
Reef aquaria under  have a special place in the aquarium hobby; these aquaria, termed nano reefs (when used in reefkeeping), have a small water volume, under .
For instance, predatory fish are usually not kept with small, passive species, and territorial fish are often unsuitable tankmates for shoaling species.
Initially, amateur aquarists kept native fish (with the exception of goldfish); the availability of exotic species from overseas further increased the popularity of the aquarium.
Leonhard Baldner, who wrote ''Vogel-, Fisch- und Tierbuch'' (Bird, Fish, and Animal Book) in 1666, maintained weather loaches and newts.
In 1841 he did so, though only with aquatic plants and toy fish.
Hard water is usually alkaline, while soft water is usually neutral to acidic.
Aquatic and semiaquatic animals, including otters and penguins, may also be kept by public aquaria.
In 1832, Jeanne Villepreux-Power, a pioneering French marine biologist, became the first person to create aquaria for experimenting with aquatic organisms.
Acrylic-soluble cements are used to directly fuse acrylic together.
Brackish water aquaria combine elements of both marine and freshwater fishkeeping.
Reinforced concrete is used for aquaria where weight and space are not factors.
Once silicone sealant became strong enough to ensure a long-term water-tight seal, it eliminated the need for a structural frame.
Wave-making devices have also been constructed to provide wave action.
Several nutrient cycles are important in the aquarium.
These either convert ammonia to nitrate (removing nitrogen at the expense of aquatic plants), or to sometimes remove phosphate.
Dissolved organic content and dissolved gases content are also important factors.
A good habit is to remove the water being replaced by "vacuuming" the gravel with suitable implements, as this will eliminate uneaten foods and other residues that settle on the substrate.
Acrylic is generally stronger than glass, weighs less, and provides a certain amount of temperature insulation.
More advanced systems soon began to be introduced, along with tanks of glass in metal frames.
Freshwater aquaria are the most popular due to their lower cost.
Most fish and plant species tolerate only a limited temperature range; tropical aquaria, with an average temperature of about , are much more common.
The bigger the tank, the easier such a systemic shock is to absorb, because the effects of that event are diluted.
Prior to the invention of UV stabilization, early acrylic aquaria discolored over time with exposure to light; this is no longer the case.
In 1846, Anne Thynne maintained stony corals and seaweed for almost three years, and was credited as the creator of the first balanced marine aquarium in London.
Limiting factors include the oxygen availability and filtration processing.
The tank has no sharp angles around its sides and keeps the housed animals away from plumbing.
Chemical filtration is frequently achieved via activated carbon, to filter medications, tannins, and/or other known impurities from the water.
Water temperature can be regulated with a thermostat and heater (or cooler).
Most companies that produce virtual aquarium software also offer other types of fish for sale via Internet download.
This can be accomplished by additives, such as sodium bicarbonate, to raise pH.
He published his findings in 1850 in the Chemical Society's journal.
Bubbles and water noises are common for virtual aquariums, which are often used as screensavers.
More expensive and complex equipment is required to set up and maintain marine aquaria.
Some aquarists modify water's alkalinity, hardness, or dissolved content of organics and gases, before adding it to their aquaria.
Lastly, the tank can become overcrowded without being overstocked.
The very first modern aquarium made of glass was developed in the 19th century by Robert Warrington.
In the 1850s, the aquarium became a fad in the United Kingdom.
Water movement can also be important in simulating a natural ecosystem.
An aquarium can range from a small glass bowl containing less than  of water to immense public aquaria that house entire ecosystems such as kelp forests.
The glass aquarium is standard for sizes up to about .
In 1854, an anonymous author had two articles published about the saltwater aquaria of the United Kingdom: ''Die Gartenlaube'' (The Garden House) entitled ''Der Ocean auf dem Tische'' (The Ocean on the Table).
In colder climates or environments, it is easier to achieve and maintain a tropical temperature and requires less capacity from an aquarium heater.
The largest tanks hold millions of gallons of water and can house large species, including sharks or beluga whales.
Although an aquarium can be overloaded with fish, an excess of plants is unlikely to cause harm.
In the Roman Empire, the first fish to be brought indoors was the sea barbel, which was kept under guest beds in small tanks made of marble.
These are often built with cabinets to allow storage, available in many styles to match room decor.
Published in 1858, Henry D. Butler's ''The Family Aquarium'' was one of the first books written in the United States solely about the aquarium.
Using two downwelling inlets on both sides of the tank lets gravity create two gyres in the tank.
Nitrogen waste products become toxic to fish and other aquarium inhabitants at high concentrations.
In many areas tap water is not considered to be safe for fish to live in because it contains chemicals that harm the fish.
For this reason, hobbyists often favor larger tanks, as they require less attention.
Dissolved oxygen enters the system at the surface water-air interface.
Ammonia is also produced through the decomposition of plant and animal matter, including fecal matter and other detritus.
The frames remained, however, though purely for aesthetic reasons.
In a fishless cycle, small amounts of ammonia are added to an unpopulated tank to feed the bacteria.
Labyrinth fish can breathe atmospheric oxygen and do not need as much surface area (however, some of these fish are territorial, and do not appreciate crowding).
In the 1960s, metal frames made marine aquaria almost impossible due to corrosion, but the development of tar and silicone sealant allowed the first all-glass aquaria made by Martin Horowitz in Los Angeles, CA.
In addition to bacteria, aquatic plants also eliminate nitrogen waste by metabolizing ammonia and nitrate.
However, glass as a material is brittle and has very little give before fracturing, though generally the sealant fails first.
