These first molars were also recurved in a manner designed to hold slippery prey once grasped.
The smooth-coated otter (''Lutrogale perspicillata'') of Asia may be its closest extant relative; similar behaviour, vocalizations, and skull morphology have been noted.
Noise pollution, for example, may adversely affect echolocating mammals, and the ongoing effects of global warming degrades arctic environments.
Moose have been known to dive underwater to reach plants on lake bottoms, and the complex snout may assist the moose in this type of feeding.
The Amazonian manatee is at risk from pollution, accidental drowning in commercial fishing nets, and the degradation of vegetation by soil erosion resulting from deforestation.
Fur robes were blankets of sewn-together, native-tanned, beaver pelts.
They also eat many aquatic plants such as lilies and water milfoil.
Aquatic mammals also display a variety of locomotion styles.
Likewise, their diet ranges considerably as well; some may eat zooplankton, others may eat small fish, and a few may eat other mammals.
Their diets consist almost entirely of grasses, but they also eat leaves, branches of shrubs and trees, fruits, and submerged and floating aquatic plants.They feed in the mornings and evenings.
The teeth of ''Castorocauda'' suggest that the animal was a piscivore, feeding on fish and small invertebrates.
They, namely sea otters and polar bears, play important roles in maintaining marine ecosystems, especially through regulation of prey populations.
Their first and foremost ecological function is as a reservoir for times of drought, and prevent drying of riverbeds.
In contrast, other aquatic mammals, such as dolphins, manatees, seals, and hippopotamuses, have lost their fur in favor of a thick and dense epidermis, and a thickened fat layer (blubber) in response to hydrodynamic requirements.
They mainly feed on croakers, cichlids, tetras, and pirahnas, but they may also target freshwater crabs and river turtles.
Beaver ponds have a profound effect on the surrounding ecosystem.
Hippopotamuses leave the water at dusk and travel inland, sometimes up to , to graze on short grasses, their main source of food.
''Astroconodon'' occurred abundantly in freshwater lacustrine deposits and its molars were originally interpreted as being similar to those of piscivorous mammals like cetaceans and pinnipeds; by extension some researchers considered the possibility that all eutriconodonts were aquatic piscivores.
In some European countries, such as Belgium, France, and the Netherlands, the muskrat is considered an invasive pest, as its burrowing damages the dikes and levees on which these low-lying countries depend for protection from flooding.
The industrialization of rivers led to the extinction of the Chinese river dolphin, with the last confirmed sighting in 2004.
Nonetheless, ''Ichthyoconodon'' may not be aquatic, but instead a gliding or even flying mammal.
Aquatic mammals were the target for commercial industry, leading to a sharp decline in all populations of exploited species, such as beavers.
The most popular theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around 60 million years ago (mya).
The long and thin legs of a moose limit exposure to and friction from water in contrast to hippopotamuses who keep most of their body submerged and have short and thick legs.
Increased ocean traffic causes collisions between fast ocean vessels and large marine mammals.
The riverbed was dredged and reinforced with concrete in many locations.
However the consumption of moose liver or kidneys significantly increased cadmium intake, with the study revealing that heavy consumers of moose organs have a relatively narrow safety margin below the levels which would probably cause adverse health effects.
hippopotamuses, beavers, otters, muskrats) and can walk on land like fully terrestrial mammals.
Wading and bottom-feeding animals (e.g.
Typically, thick and dense bone is found in bottom feeders and low bone density is associated with mammals living in deep water.
To navigate and detect prey in murky and turbid waters, aquatic mammals have developed a variety of sensory organs: for example, manatees have elongated and highly sensitive whiskers which are used to detect food and other vegetation directly front of them, and toothed whales have evolved echolocation.
Manatees make seasonal movements synchronized with the flood regime of the Amazon Basin.
Another docodontan, the Late Jurassic ''Haldanodon'', has been suggested to be a platypus or desman-like swimmer and burrower, being well adapted to dig and swim and occurring in a wetland environment.
This supplies other animals with cleaner drinking water and prevents degradation of spawning grounds for fish.
Noise pollution caused the nearly blind animal to collide with propellers.
The last verified sighting was in 2004.
One branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about 52 mya, with the protowhale ''Pakicetus'' and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans.
They were also the target for commercial industry, leading to a sharp decline in all populations of exploited species, such as whales and seals.
The wide variety of plants pygmy hippos have been observed eating suggests that they will eat any plants available.
Water voles mainly eat grass and plants near the water and at times, they will also consume fruits, bulbs, twigs, buds, and roots.
Generally, all aquatic desmans, shrews, and voles make quick dives and catch small fish and invertebrates.
Habitat degradation also threatens marine mammals and their ability to find and catch food.
In China it was standard for the royalty to wear robes made from them.
However, even natural occurrences, such as droughts and tidal changes, often strand manatees in an unsuitable habitat.
Some historians, seeking to explain the term ''castor gras'', have assumed that coat beaver was rich in human oils from having been worn so long (much of the top-hair was worn away through usage, exposing the valuable under-wool), and that this is what made it attractive to the hatters.
Muskrats also eat corn and other farm and garden crops growing near water bodies.
On December 13, 2006, the baiji was declared functionally extinct, after a 45-day search by leading experts in the field failed to find a single specimen.
Beavers do not hibernate, but rather they store sticks and logs in a pile in their ponds, eating the underbark.
Hat makers began to use it in England soon after, particularly after Huguenot refugees brought their skills and tastes with them from France.
Like almost any herbivore, they consume other plants if presented with them, but their diet consists almost entirely of grass, with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants.
They do not breathe underwater as fish do, so their respiratory systems had to protect the body from the surrounding water; valvular nostrils and an intranarial larynx exclude water while breathing and swallowing.
To reach high branches, a moose may bend small saplings down, using its prehensile lip, mouth or body.
The Chitwan population has repeatedly been jeopardized by poaching; in 2002 alone, poachers killed 37 animals to saw off and sell their valuable horns.
They include the various marine mammals who dwell in oceans, as well as various freshwater species, such as the platypus and the European otter.
However, a population of water voles living in Wiltshire and Lincolnshire, England have started eating frogs' legs and discarding the bodies.
By the mid-1990s, poaching had rendered the species extinct there.
It marks trails by vigorously waving its tail while defecating to further spread its feces.
The level of dependence on aquatic life are vastly different among species, with the Amazonian manatee and river dolphins being completely aquatic and fully dependent on aquatic ecosystems; whereas the Baikal seal feeds underwater but rests, molts, and breeds on land; and the capybara and hippopotamus are able to venture in and out of water in search of food.
Like other aquatic mammals, they do not represent a biological grouping.
dolphins) need to be neutrally buoyant in order to be able to swim up and down the water column.
Both cetaceans and sirenians are fully aquatic and therefore are obligate ocean dwellers.
Likewise, their diet ranges considerably as well, anywhere from aquatic plants and leaves to small fish and crustaceans.
Otters have also been hunted using dogs, specifically the otterhound.
moose and manatee) need to be heavier than water in order to keep contact with the floor or to stay submerged, surface-living animals (e.g.
The Lutrine opossum is the most carnivorous opossum, usually consuming small birds, rodents, and invertebrates.
Otters have been hunted for their pelts since at least the 1700s.
As China developed economically, pressure on the Chinese river dolphin grew significantly.
Indian rhinos were hunted relentlessly and persistently.
Seals are semiaquatic; they spend the majority of their time in the water, but need to return to land for important activities such as mating, breeding and molting.
The giant otter shrew, for example, makes quick dives that last for seconds and grabs small crabs (usually no bigger than  across).
Therefore, the general prohibition on the consumption of meat on Fridays did not apply to beaver meat.
Moose are hunted as a game species in many of the countries where they are found.
However, the slower water speed and lack of shade from trees (that have since been cut down to construct the dam), the overall temperature increases.
This feature of three cusps in a row is similar to the ancestral condition in mammal relatives (as seen in triconodonts), but is almost certainly a derived character in ''Castorocauda''.
otters) need the opposite, and free-swimming animals living in open waters (e.g.
They also eat sedges, pondweed, and water lilies.
Pinnipeds are semiaquatic; they spend the majority of their time in the water, but need to return to land for important activities such as mating, breeding and molting.
Additionally, cetaceans have two areas of high ganglion cell concentration ("best-vision areas"), where other aquatic mammals (e.g.
Tethytheria is thought to have evolved from primitive hoofed mammals ("condylarths") along the shores of the ancient Tethys Ocean.
Reports from the middle of the 19th century claim that some British military officers in Assam individually shot more than 200 rhinos.
They include animals such as sea lions, whales, dugongs, sea otters and polar bears.
Cadmium levels are high in moose liver and kidneys, with the result that consumption of these organs from moose more than one year old is prohibited in Finland.
Among non-placental mammals, which cannot give birth to fully developed young, some adjustments have been made for an aquatic lifestyle.
Many of the morphological similarities and adaptations to freshwater habitats arose due to convergent evolution; thus, a grouping of all river dolphins is paraphyletic.
The shape and function of the eyes in aquatic animals are dependent on water depth and light exposure: limited light exposure results in a retina similar to that of nocturnal terrestrial mammals.
They tackle very tall grasses or saplings by walking over the plant, with legs on both sides and using the weight of their bodies to push the end of the plant down to the level of the mouth.
South Asian river dolphins mainly eat fish (such as carp, catfish, and freshwater sharks) and invertebrates, mainly prawns.
Beavers are herbivores, and prefer the wood of quaking aspen, cottonwood, willow, alder, birch, maple and cherry trees.
In contrast, many other aquatic mammals, such as rhinoceroses, capybara, and water shrews, are much less adapted to aquatic living.
In modern times, TRAFFIC, a joint program of the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), reported that otters are at serious risk in Southeast Asia and have disappeared from parts of their former range.
However, the last common ancestor between platypi and echidnas probably was aquatic, and echidnas thus secondarily became terrestrial.
A moose's diet often depends on its location, but they seem to prefer the new growths from deciduous trees with a high sugar content, such as white birch, trembling aspen and striped maple, among many others.
The ancestry of Sirenia is distinct from that of Cetacea and Pinnipedia, although they are thought to have evolved an aquatic lifestyle around the same time.
For larger trees a moose may stand erect and walk upright on its hind legs, allowing it to reach plants  off the ground.
That is, elephants, hyraxes, and manatees share a common ancestry.
The oldest fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100,000 years ago, during the Quaternary period.
It relies on game trails to travel through dense forest vegetation.
Another lineage of Mesozoic mammals, the eutriconodonts, have been suggested to be aquatic animals with mixed results.
The other branch became the anthracotheres, and all branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants.
The yapok has a backwards-facing pouch which seals off completely when the animal is underwater, while the platypus deposits its young on a burrow on land.
They prefer aspen and poplar, but will also take birch, maple, willow, alder, black cherry, red oak, beech, ash, hornbeam and occasionally pine and spruce.
They play major roles in maintaining aquatic ecosystems, beavers especially.
More recently, ''Yanoconodon'' and ''Liaoconodon'' have been interpreted as semi-aquatic, bearing a long body and paddle-like limbs.
They are found in flooded forests and meadows during the flood season when food is abundant, and move to deep lakes during the dry season.
This is similar to the Church's classification of other semi-aquatic rodents, such as the capybara and muskrat.
While the number of marine mammals is small compared to those found on land, their roles in various ecosystems are large.
beef, deer and elk), it has a low fat content, and the fat that is present consists of a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fats rather than saturated fats.
Urban and agricultural development, increased damming, and increased use of hydroelectric power in rivers in countries such as Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana are threats to the African manatee's habitat and life, and thick congestion of boats in waterways may cause them to have a deadly run-in with the vessels.
Sport hunting of the Indian rhinoceros became common in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
By 1908, the population in Kaziranga had decreased to around 12 individuals.
In the 1950s, the population was estimated at 6,000 animals, but declined rapidly over the subsequent five decades.
Cetaceans excel in streamlined body shape and the up-and-down movements of their flukes make them fast swimmers; the tucuxi, for example, can reach speeds of .
In the event of a flood, beaver ponds slow down water-flow which reduces erosion on the surrounding soil.
Having no natural predators in their new environment, they quickly spread throughout the island, and to other islands in the region, reaching a number of 100,000 individuals within just 50 years.
dolphins and manatees).
Other than hunting, aquatic mammals can be killed as bycatch from fisheries, where they become entangled in fixed netting and drown or starve.
Increased river traffic, most notably in the Yangtze river, causes collisions between fast ocean vessels and aquatic mammals, and damming of rivers may land migratory aquatic mammals in unsuitable areas or destroy habitat upstream.
Their pelts, suited for conserving heat, were taken during the fur trade and made into coats and hats.
Unlike ''Castorocauda'' and ''Haldanodon'', it was a herbivore, being probably beaver or capybara-like in habits.
Industrial and residential waste flowed into the Yangtze.
Ship traffic multiplied, boats grew in size, and fishermen employed wider and more lethal nets.
River dolphins and manatees are both fully aquatic and therefore are completely tethered to a life in the water.
They use their prehensile lips to grasp grass stems, bend the stem down, bite off the top, and then eat the grass.
In the early 1900s, the species had declined to near extinction.
In India's Laokhowa Wildlife Sanctuary, 41 rhinos were killed in 1983, virtually the entire population of the sanctuary.
This diet is of higher quality than that of the common hippopotamus.
Mammals evolved on land, so all aquatic and semiaquatic mammals have brought many terrestrial adaptations into the waters.
There has been a long history of otter pelts being worn around the world.
In those countries, it is trapped, poisoned, and hunted to attempt to keep the population down.
After it was made illegal, many aquatic mammals became subject to poaching.
The South American continent houses the  ''Lontra'' genus of otters: the giant otter, the neotropical river otter, the southern river otter, and the marine otter.
Baikal seal pups have higher levels of DDT and PCB than known in any other population of European or Arctic earless seal.
The first two molars had cusps in a straight row, eliminating the grinding function suggesting that they were strictly for gripping and not for chewing.
This hypothesized ancestral group likely split into two branches around 54 mya.
seals) are amphibious and regularly leave the water, sometimes for extended periods, and maneuver on land by undulating their bodies to move on land, similar to the up-and-down body motion used underwater by fully aquatic mammals (e.g.
People that were financially high in status also wore them.
The Amazon river dolphin has the most diverse diet among cetaceans, consisting of at least 53 species of fish.
The pygmy hippo spends about six hours a day foraging for food, and they do not eat aquatic vegetation to a significant extent and rarely eat grass because it is uncommon in the thick forests they inhabit.
'''Aquatic''' and '''semiaquatic mammals''' are a diverse group of mammals that dwell partly or entirely in bodies of water.
These teeth are very similar to the teeth seen in mesonychids, an extinct group of semi-aquatic carnivorous ungulates, and resemble, to a lesser degree, the teeth of seals.
While the flesh has protein levels similar to those of other comparable red meats (e.g.
However, Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska and other researchers have latter found that the triconodont molars of eutriconodonts were more suited for a carnassial-like shearing action than the piercing and gripping function of piscivorous mammal molars, occluding instead of interlocking, and that ''Astroconodon'''s aquatic occurrences may be of little significance when most terrestrial tetrapod fossils are found in lacustrine environments anyway.
The pelts were called ''castor gras'' in French and "coat beaver" in English, and were soon recognized by the newly developed felt-hat making industry as particularly useful for felting.
The dams they build flood areas of surrounding forest, giving the beaver safe access to an important food supply, which is the leaves, buds, and inner bark of growing trees.
The bulk of a pygmy hippo's diet consists of ferns, broad-leaved plants and fruits that have fallen to the forest floor.
Some aquatic mammals with flippers (e.g.
The teeth of ''Castorocauda'', a presumably beaver-like mammal, are different in many ways from all other docodonts, presumably due to a difference in diet.
Poaching for rhinoceros horn became the single most important reason for the decline of the Indian rhino after conservation measures were put in place from the beginning of the 20th century, when legal hunting ended.
Their role in maintaining ecosystems makes them of particular concern considering 23% of marine mammal species are currently threatened.
Beaver dams hold sediment, which reduces turbidity and thereby improving overall water quality downstream.
The earless seals  (Phocidae) swim by moving their hind-flippers and lower body from side to side, while their fore-flippers are mainly used for steering.
When poor farmers from the mid-hills moved to the Chitwan Valley in search of arable land, the area was subsequently opened for settlement, and poaching of wildlife became rampant.
Moose are excellent swimmers and are known to wade into water to eat aquatic plants.
They are now considered a serious invasive species in the region, due to their massive destruction of forest trees, and efforts are being made for their eradication.
In the 1940s, beavers were brought from Canada to the island of Tierra Del Fuego in southern Chile and Argentina, for commercial fur production.
By the 1580s, beaver "wool" was the major starting material of the French felt-hatters.
Marine mammal adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle vary considerably between species.
The semiaquatic pygmy hippopotamus can walk quickly on a muddy underwater surface thanks to robust muscles and because all toes are weight-bearing.
The Amazonian manatee has the smallest degree of rostral deflection (25° to 41°) among sirenians, an adaptation to feed closer to the water surface.
One problem at Lake Baikal is the introduction of pollutants into the ecosystem.
However, the project failed and the beavers, ten pairs, were released into the wild.
Tethytheria, combined with Hyracoidea (hyraxes), forms a clade called Paenungulata.
They will also eat cattails, water lilies and other aquatic vegetation, especially in the early spring.
Cadmium intake has been found to be elevated amongst all consumers of moose meat, though the meat was found to contribute only slightly to the daily cadmium intake.
In contrast, both otters and the polar bear are much less adapted to aquatic living.
Commercial hunting lead to the extinction of Steller's sea cow and the Caribbean monk seal.
Most docodonts had teeth specialized for an omnivorous diet.
Pesticides such as DDT and hexachlorocyclohexane, as well as industrial waste, mainly from the Baykalsk Pulp and Paper Mill, are thought to have been the cause of several disease epidemics among Baikal seal populations.
Moose are the only deer that are capable of feeding underwater.
Other aquatic mammals, such as the Indian rhinoceros, were targets for sport hunting and had a sharp population decline in the 1900s.
The considerably slower sirenians can also propel themselves with their fluke, but they can also walk on the bottom with their forelimbs.
Marine mammals are aquatic mammals that rely on the ocean for their existence.
Marine mammals were first hunted by aboriginal peoples for food and other resources.
This decline in populations is due to hunting to supply the demand for skins.
Mammal adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle vary considerably between species.
For example, Amazon river dolphins are actually more closely related to oceanic dolphins than to South Asian river dolphins.
Only a few hundred were left by 1970.
Then the number dropped down to 400 by the 1980s and then to 13 in 1997 when a full-fledged search was conducted.
The extinct monotremes ''Teinolophos'' and ''Steropodon'' were once thought to be closely related to the modern platypus, but more recent studies show that platypi are more related to the modern echidnas than to these ancient forms and that at least ''Teinolophos'' was a rather different mammal lacking several speciations seen in platypi.
A metatherian, the stagodontid ''Didelphodon'', has been suggested to be aquatic, due to molar and skeleton similarities to sea otters.
Paenungulata and Tethytheria (especially the latter) are among the least controversial mammalian clades, with strong support from morphological and molecular interpretations.
They also house predatory zooplankton which help break down detritus and control algae populations.
River dolphins are thought to have relictual distributions, that is, their ancestors originally occupied marine habitats, but were then displaced from these habitats by modern dolphin lineages.
''Monotrematum sudamericanum'' is currently the oldest aquatic monotreme known.
It has been found in Argentina, indicating monotremes were present in the supercontinent of Gondwana when the continents of South America and Australia were joined via Antarctica, or that monotremes existed along the shorelines of Antarctica in the early Cenozoic.
They spend four to five hours grazing and can consume  of grass each night.
They are clumsy on land, and move on land by lunging, bouncing and wiggling while their fore-flippers keep them balanced; when confronted with predators, they retreat to the water as freshwater phocids have no aquatic predators.
After commercial hunting ended, some species, such as the gray whale and northern elephant seal, have rebounded in numbers, however the northern elephant seal has a genetic bottleneck; conversely, other species, such as the North Atlantic right whale, are critically endangered.
From 1980 to 1993, 692 rhinos were poached in India.
Additionally, the indiscriminate release of mercury in mining activities threatens the entire aquatic ecosystem of the Amazon Basin.
The pygmy hippopotamus emerges from the water at dusk to feed.
Beavers, muskrats, otters, capybara have fur, one of the defining mammalian features, that is long, oily, and waterproof in order to trap air to provide insulation.
This seems unlikely, since grease interferes with the felting of wool, rather than enhancing it.
An extinct genus, ''Satherium'', is believed to be ancestral to South American river otters, having migrated to the New World during the Pliocene or early Pleistocene.
Some are killed accidentally by fishing trawls and nets intended for catching sharks.
In 1950, Chitwan’s forest and grasslands extended over more than  and were home to about 800 rhinos.
However, two other eutriconodonts, ''Dyskritodon'' and ''Ichthyoconodon'', occur in marine deposits with virtually no dental erosion, implying that they died ''in situ'' and are thus truly aquatic mammals.
Other then hunting, marine mammals, dolphins especially, can be killed as bycatch from fisheries, where they become entangled in fixed netting and drown or starve.
Some aquatic mammals have retained four weight-bearing limbs (e.g.
Indian rhinoceros are grazers.
