Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Antalote, Cafre, Makoa, Oimatsaha, Sakalava
The oldest surviving indication of an Arab national identity is an inscription made in an archaic form of Arabic in 328 using the Nabataean alphabet, which refers to Imru' al-Qays ibn 'Amr as "King of all the Arabs".
During the early Muslim conquests, Arabic language, culture, and people spread across most of West Asia and North Africa, resulting in the acculturation of their inhabitants as Arabs.
Maqama was an incredibly popular form of Arabic literature, being one of the few forms which continued to be written during the decline of Arabic in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Most Arabs who are functional in Modern Standard Arabic acquire it through education and use it solely for writing and formal settings.
In Lebanon, Christians number about 40.5% of the population.
Since the 1834 Peasants' revolt in Palestine, the Arabic-speaking population of Palestine has shed its formerly tribal structure and emerged as the Palestinians, the same can be said about most of the inhabitants of the Levant who no longer determine their identity in tribal and clan lineages.
Sociologist Sammy Smooha stated "This ("Arab Jews") term does not hold water.
Arabians are most prevalent in the Arabian Peninsula, but are also found in large numbers in Mesopotamia (Arab tribes in Iraq), the Levant and Sinai (Negev Bedouin, Tarabin bedouin), as well as the Maghreb (Libya, South Tunisia and South Algeria) and the Sudan region.
Modern Standard Arabic serves as the standardized and literary variety of Arabic used in writing, as well as in most formal speech, although it is not used in daily speech by the overwhelming majority of Arabs.
With the collapse of the Umayyad state in 1031 AD, Islamic Spain was divided into small kingdoms.
Caliph Abd al-Malik established Arabic as the Caliphate's official language in 686.
There are small numbers of Ibadi and non-denominational Muslims too.
He rectified the disparity, demanding that all Muslims be treated as equals, but his intended reforms did not take effect, as he died after only three years of rule.
Therefore, every Arab country has cultural specificities that form a cultural mix that incorporates local novelties acquired after arabization.
Each of it phases largely an extension of the earlier phase, it left also heavy impact on the architecture of other nations.
While various varieties of Arabic are spoken as vernaculars by each distinct Arab group, these varieties are often regarded as dialects rather than independent languages.
It was not until the 11th century that the Maghreb saw a large influx of ethnic Arabs.
According to Israel's Central Bureau of Statistics, the Arab population in 2013 was estimated at 1,658,000, representing 20.7% of the country's population.
The most popular Arab account holds that the word ''Arab'' came from an eponymous father called Ya'rub who was supposedly the first to speak Arabic.
Most of the prominent Indonesians, Malaysians, and Singaporeans of Arab descent are Hadhrami people with origins in southern Yemen in the Hadramawt coastal region.
Arabic official language
Arabic official language
Arabic co-official language with Kurdish
Arab tribes came into conflict with the Assyrians during the reign of the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal, and he records military victories against the powerful Qedar tribe among others.
Arab Architecture has a deep diverse history, it dates to the dawn of the history in pre-Islamic Arabia.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Kuwaiti 31.3%, other Arab 27.9%, Asian 37.8%, African 1.9%, other 1.1% (includes European, North American, South American, and Australian) (2013 est.)
One well known member of this religious and ethnic community is Saint Abo, martyr and the patron saint of Tbilisi, Georgia.
This definition covers more than 420 million people (2014 estimate).
The Banu Hilal quickly defeated the Zirids and deeply weakened the neighboring Hammadids.
Other mixed DNA studies on Arabic populations
Arabic official language
The two qualities are connected for example in ayat 43.2–3, "By the ''clear'' Book: We have made it an ''Arabic'' recitation in order that you may understand".
It has now been resolved that the Arabic clade J1-P58, L147.1 (the major clad of P58 and still the major clade of J1) include all CMH haplotypes and is YCAII=22-22 (both specific to Arabs and J1-Cohanim) was the J1 clade that spread far and wide by the Islamic conquest.
In modern usage Arab refers to a heterogeneous collection of Arabic-speaking peoples in Western Asia and North Africa.
However, both these communities no longer speak Arabic, although with the Chaush, there has been re-immigration to Persian Gulf countries, and re-adoption of Arabic by these immigrants.
J-P58 subclade of J1 is the single paternal lineage originating in the Near East of high frequency in Bedouins 70%, Yemenis 68%, Jordanians 55%, 55% of Palestinian Arabs, 48% of Omani People 34% of Tunisians, 35% of Algerians, and its precipitations drop in frequency as one moves away from Saudi Arabia and the Near East.
Many Druze claim independence from other major religions in the area and consider their religion more of a philosophy.
Nearly all Algerians are of Berber origin, but only a minority identify themselves as Berber (~15%).
These were the languages spoken in the civilizations of Sheba, Magan, and Dilmun.
The Abbassids were influenced by the Qur'anic injunctions and hadith such as "The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of martyrs" stressing the value of knowledge.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Somali 85%, Bantu and other non-Somali 15% (including 30,000 Arabs)
The Quraysh subclan, the Banu Hashim, was the clan of Muhammad.
Certain Jewish traditions records the existence of nomadic tribes such as the Rechabites that converted to Judaism in antiquity.
The Book of Genesis narrates that God promised Hagar to beget from Ishmael twelve princes and turn him to a great nation.
Arab cultures went through a mixing process.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: black Moors (Haratines - Arab-speaking slaves, former slaves, and their descendants of African origin, enslaved by white Moors) 40%, white Moors (of Arab-Berber descent, known as Bidhan) 30%, black Africans (non-Arabic speaking, Halpulaar, Soninke, Wolof, and Bamara ethnic groups) 30%
Arabic co-official language with Hebrew
After the death of Muhammad in 632, Rashidun armies launched campaigns of conquest, establishing the Caliphate, or Islamic Empire, one of the largest empires in history.
In Biblical etymology, "Arab" (in Hebrew ''Arvi'' ) comes both from the desert origin of the Bedouins it originally described (''Arava'' means wilderness).
Maqama or rhymed prose is intermediate between poetry and prose, and also between fiction and non-fiction.
The name of ''Arab''  historically was synonymous with Bedouin.
The Nabataeans were nomadic newcomers who moved into territory vacated by the Edomites&nbsp;– Semites who settled the region centuries before them.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Emirati 19%, other Arab and Iranian 23%, South Asian 50%, other expatriates (includes Westerners and East Asians) 8% (1982)
Classical Arab music is extremely popular across the population, especially a small number of superstars known throughout the Arab world.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Somali 60%, Afar 35%, other 5% (includes French, Arab, Ethiopian, and Italian)
Arab ethnic identity does ''not'' include Christian, Jewish and other ethnic groups that retain non-Arabic languages and/or identities within the expanded Arab World.
Arabic, the main unifying feature among Arabs, is a Semitic language.
Therefore, all uses of the word "Arab" before the sixth century, and most of those before the 13th century, refer specifically to Arabians.
Rival Muslim dynasties such as the Fatimids of Egypt and the Umayyads of al-Andalus were also major intellectual centres with cities such as Cairo and Córdoba rivaling Baghdad.
Arabic official language
The scope of the term at that early stage is unclear, but it seems to have referred to various desert-dwelling Semitic tribes in the Syrian Desert and Arabia.
In North West Africa (Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia) the dominant Maternal lineage is the rare Scandinavian European U8 haplogroup probably came with the Vandals when escaped from Spain from the Visigoths.
Most Arabs of Central Asia are fully integrated into local populations, and sometimes call themselves the same as locals (for example, Tajiks, Uzbeks) but they use special titles to show their Arabic origin such as Sayyid, Khoja or Siddiqui.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Arab 40%, Indian 18%, Pakistani 18%, Iranian 10%, other 14%
The J2 in Algerian Arabs is minor 3% and is of the rare J2-M67 of Chechnya, rarely found in other Arabic countries and non existent in Arabian Peninsula and Yemen.
From the time of the Arab conquest of the Caucasus, continuous small-scale Arab migration from various parts of the Arab world occurred in Dagestan, which influenced local culture.
This reform greatly influenced the conquered non-Arab peoples and fueled the Arabization of the region.
In the modern era, however, DNA tests have at times proved reliable in identifying those of Arab genealogical descent.
There are also a minority of Ahmadi Muslims.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Arab 90%, Afro-Asian 10%
According to the International Organization for Migration, there are 13 million first-generation Arab migrants in the world, of which 5.8 million reside in Arab countries.
The 150 Arab tribes in Iraq are grouped into federations (''qabila''), and divided into clans  (''fukhdh'').
For example, the language shift to Arabic displaced the distinct Old South Arabian languages from what is now modern-day Yemen and southern Oman.
Pre-Islamic Arabia refers to Arabic civilization in the Arabian Peninsula before the rise of Islam in the 630s.
The root ''ʿ-r-b'' has several additional meanings in Semitic languages—including "west/sunset," "desert," "mingle," "mixed," "merchant," and "raven"—and are "comprehensible" with all of these having varying degrees of relevance to the emergence of the name.
By now, discontent with the Umayyads swept the region and an uprising occurred in which the Abbasids came to power and moved the capital to Baghdad.
HLA polymorphism in Saudi.
Arabs in modern times live in the Arab world, which comprises 22 countries in Western Asia, North Africa, and parts of the Horn of Africa.
The 1888 edition of Encyclopædia Britannica also mentioned a certain number of Arabs populating the Baku Governorate of the Russian Empire.
These communities all allege an Arab ancestry, but none speak Arabic and follow the customs and traditions of the Hindu majority.
In contrast, a modernist movement began by translating Western modernist works&mdash;primarily novels&mdash;into Arabic.
The Hebrew Bible occasionally refers to ''Aravi'' peoples (or variants thereof), translated as "Arab" or "Arabian."
All contemporary Arabs were considered as descended from two ancestors, Qahtan and Adnan.
Only 4 nations - Bahrain, Kuwait, UAE, and Qatar have an under 15 population less than 35 percent."
Some of the names given in these texts are Aramaic, while others are the first attestations of Ancient North Arabian dialects.
Some combine aspects of each definition, as done by Palestinian Habib Hassan Touma, who defines an ''Arab'' "in the modern sense of the word", as "one who is a national of an Arab state, has command of the Arabic language, and possesses a fundamental knowledge of Arab tradition, that is, of the manners, customs, and political and social systems of the culture."
Zanzibar was once ruled by Omani Arabs.
The Greek Catholic church and Maronite church are under the Pope of Rome, and a part of the larger worldwide Catholic Church.
These include the Jews, Assyrian people of Iraq, north east Syria, north west Iran and south east Turkey, the Syriac Christians of western Syria, Armenians around the entire Near East, and Mandaeans in Iraq and Iran—though many of these peoples speak Arabic as a first or second language.
Most people who consider themselves Arab do so based on the overlap of the political and linguistic definitions.
Arab culture is a term that draws together the common themes and overtones found in the Arab countries, especially those of the Middle-Eastern countries.
in addition, there are Arabized or partially Arabized ethnic groups such as the Nubians, Copts, or Beja; they are sometimes united under the umbrella term of Sudanese Arabs.
Today in Azerbaijan alone, there are nearly 30 settlements still holding the name ''Arab'' (for example, Arabgadim, Arabojaghy, Arab-Yengija, etc.
The Arab world consists largely of populations that are Arabized in varying degrees.
The ties that bind Arabs are linguistic, cultural, political, and ethnic, with Arabized Arabs displaying genetic contributions, in varying proportions, from both indigenous elements and the Arabian peninsula.
Umayyads expanded their Empire westwards capturing North Africa from the Byzantines.
The relative importance of these factors is estimated differently by different groups and frequently disputed.
The Qur'an became regarded as the prime example of the '''', the language of the Arabs.
The Romans called the vassal nomadic states within the Roman Empire "Arabia Petraea" after the city of Petra, and called unconquered deserts bordering the empire to the south and east Arabia Magna.
Among Muslims of North India and Pakistan there are groups who claim the status of Sayyid, have origin myths that allege descent from the Prophet Mohammad.
Those who dispute the historicity of the term make the claim that Middle Eastern Jews are similar to Assyrians, Berbers, and other Middle Eastern groups who live in Arab societies as distinct minority groups with distinct identity and therefore are not categorized as Arabs.
Jews from Arab countries&nbsp;– mainly Mizrahi Jews, Yemenite Jews and Maghrebi Jews&nbsp;– are usually not categorized as, and do not consider themselves to be, Arabs, as Jews are a separate nation from Arabs, with different history and culture.
The plural noun '''' refers to the Bedouin tribes of the desert who resisted Muhammad, for example in ''at-Tawba'' 97, '''' "the Bedouin are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy".
The Banu Hilal spent almost a century in Egypt before moving to Libya, Tunisia and Algeria, and another century later some moves to Morocco, it is logical to think that they are mixed with inhabitants of Egypt and with Libya.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: predominantly Arab; but also Afro-Arab, South Asians, Europeans
Today, the main unifying characteristic among Arabs is Arabic, a South Semitic language from the Afroasiatic language family.
From about the 2nd century BCE, a few inscriptions from Qaryat al-Faw (near Sulayyil) reveal a dialect no longer considered ''proto-Arabic'', but ''pre-classical Arabic''.
They returned to Yemen and allied themselves with the Himyarites who installed them as a vassal kingdom that ruled Central Arbia from "Qaryah Dhat Kahl" (the present-day called Qaryat al-Faw) in Central Arabia.
Arab are mostly Muslims with Sunni majority and Shia minority, one exception being the Ibadis, who predominate in Oman and can be found as small minorities in Algeria and Libya (mostly Berbers).
Some of those tribes are thought to have merged into Yemenite Jewish community, while others, like the residents of Yatta consider themselves Islamized descendants of Khaybar, a Jewish tribe of Arabia.
The Jewish tribes of Arabia were Arabian tribes professing the Jewish faith that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula before and during the advent of Islam.
A number of other indigenous peoples living in the Arab World are equally non-Arab, such as Berbers, Kurds, Turks, Iranians, Azeris, Yezidis, Circassians, Shabaks, Turcomans, Romani, Chechens, Kawliya, Mhallami, Samaritans, nor migrant groups from Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and Southeast Asia.
However, all Arab countries do also share a common culture in arts (music, literature, poetry, calligraphy...), cultural products (handicrafts, carpets, henne, bronze carving...), social behavior, and relations (hospitality, codes of conduct among friends and family...), customs and superstitions, some dishes (shorba, mloukhia), traditional clothing, and architecture.
Arabs did not feel the change of administration because the Ottomans modeled their rule after the previous Arab administration systems.
It is also possible that some forms were metathetical from  "moving around" (Arabic  "traverse"), and hence, it is alleged, "nomadic."
The Nabataean alphabet was adopted by Arabs to the south, and evolved into modern Arabic script around the 4th century.
'''Central Asia and Caucasus'''
In Iraq, Christians constitute 0.1% of the population.
In Israel, the Druze have a ''status aparte'' from the general Arab population, treated as a separate ethno-religious community.
In the USA, Arabs are classified as white by the U.S. Census, and have been since before 1977.
* Linguistic: someone whose first language, and by extension cultural expression, is Arabic, including any of its varieties.
Based on this, in early Islamic terminology, '''' referred to the language, and '''' to the Arab Bedouins, carrying a negative connotation due to the Qur'anic verdict just cited.
() The Book of Jubilees claims that the sons of Ishmael intermingled with the 6 sons of Keturah, from Abraham, and their descendants were called Arabs and Ishmaelites:
A sizeable share of those are Arab Christians proper, and affiliated Arabic-speaking populations of Copts and Maronites.
Arabic Art includes a wide range or artistic components, it can be Arabic miniature, calligraphy or Arabesque for modern and contemporary art,see Arab art scene.
The so-called Sabaean or Himyarite language described by Abū Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdānī (died 946) appears to be a special case of language contact between the two groups, an originally north Arabic dialect spoken in the south, and influenced by Old South Arabian.
Lebanese musical pioneer Lydia Canaan fused Middle-Eastern quarter notes and microtones with anglophone rock, making her the first internationally successful Lebanese recording artist and widely regarded as the first rock star of the Middle East.
They ruled much of the Northern/Central Arabian peninsula, until they were destroyed by the Lakhmid king Al-Mundhir, and his son 'Amr
The motif YCAII=22-22 characterize a monophyletic clad found in Arabs but less frequent in Ethiopian J1 and rare in Europe and Caucasus.
The Christians of Italy and the Crusaders preferred the term Saracens for all the Arabs and Muslims of that time.
Shia Islam is dominant among the Arab population in Bahrain and southern Iraq while northern Iraq is mostly Sunni.
Arabic co-official language with Berber
Populations of Hamitic origin form the majorities in the Arab states of North Africa and the Horn of Africa.
The relation of '''' and '''' is complicated further by the notion of "lost Arabs" '''' mentioned in the Qur'an as punished for their disbelief.
Starting with the 11th century, the Arab bedouin Banu Hilal tribes migrated to the West.
Before the spread of Islam, Arab referred to any of the largely nomadic Semitic people from the northern and central Arabian Peninsula.
The paternal ancestry found across all Arabic countries is Haplogroup J1, especially its major subclade J-P58, the haplogroup that spread with Arabic conquest in the 7th century.
The literary revival is known as ''al-Nahda'' in Arabic, and was centered in Egypt and Lebanon.
According to the ''History of Ibn Khaldun'', the Arabs that were once in Central Asia have been either killed or have fled the Tatar invasion of the region, leaving only the locals.
Arabic music is the music of Arab people or countries.
The Christians of Iberia used the term Moor to describe all the Arabs and Muslims of that time.
A few individuals, the ''hanifs'', had apparently rejected polytheism in favor of monotheism unaffiliated with any particular religion.
Arab Christians generally follow Eastern Churches such as the Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholic churches, though a minority of Protestant Church followers also exists; The Copts and the Maronites, who are sometimes associated with Arab people as well, follow the Coptic Church and Maronite Church accordingly.
Arabic co-official language with English
Nevertheless, opinions vary on whether the phenomenon should be seen as exclusively based on Islamic practices as a 1992 study among Arabs in Jordan did not show significant differences between Christian Arabs or Muslim Arabs when comparing the occurrence of consanguinity.
Originally, "Arabs" were synonymous with the tribes of Arabia, until the Arabization of people outside the Arabian peninsula, mostly during the Abassid era.
The Maternal ancestral lineages of Arabic countries are very diverse.
Arabic official language
The study of Pre-Islamic Arabia is important to Islamic studies as it provides the context for the development of Islam.
The populations of the Arab countries are comparatively young.
This is attested by Safaitic inscriptions (beginning in the 1st century BCE) and the many Arabic personal names in Nabataean inscriptions.
The Abbasids led a revolt against the Umayyads and defeated them in the Battle of the Zab effectively ending their rule in all part of the Empire except Al-Andalus.
For example, it has been found that the frequency of the "Arab marker" Haplogroup J1 collapses suddenly at the borders of Arabic speaking countries.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Berber and Arab 97%, other 3% (includes Greeks, Maltese, Italians, Egyptians, Pakistanis, Turks, Indians, and Tunisians)
Many Christian Lebanese identify as Phoenician descendants of the ancient Canaanites rather than Arab.
Arabic epic literature was much less common than poetry, and presumably originates in oral tradition, written down from the 14th century or so.
These same segment mutations are also markers of Arabs in Genealogical and forensic profiling tests and studies.
Ethnic groups according to the CIA: Bahraini 46%, Asian 45.5%, other Arabs 4.7%, African 1.6%, European 1%, other 1.2% (includes Gulf Co-operative country nationals, North and South Americans, and Oceanians) (2010 est.)
There are only two communities with the self-identity Arab in India, the Chaush of the Deccan region and the Chavuse of Gujarat, who are by and large descended of Hadhrami migrants who settled in these two regions in the 18th Centuries.
In the Sudan, there are numerous Arab tribes, including the Shaigya, Ja'alin, Shukria, Rashaida, etc.
However, sometimes the term Arab Jews is used to describe Jews from Arab countries, though the term is highly controversial.
In South Asia, claiming Arab ancestry is considered prestigious, and many communities have origin myths with claim to an Arab ancestry.
Arabic official language
Their influx was a major factor in the Arabization of the Maghreb.
Before the coming of Islam, most Arabs followed a pagan religion with a number of deities, including Hubal, Wadd, Allāt, Manat, and Uzza.
Even in Islamic Spain there was enmity between the Qays of the northern and the Kalb of the southern group.
Their books of worship are called Kitab Al Hikma (Epistles of Wisdom).
As such, Arab identity is based on one or more of genealogical, linguistic or cultural grounds, although with competing identities often taking a more prominent role, based on considerations including regional, national, clan, kin, sect, and tribe affiliations and relationships.
During the early Muslim conquests of the 7th and 8th centuries, the Arabs forged the Rashidun and then Umayyad Caliphate, and later the Abbasid Caliphate, whose borders touched southern France in the west, China in the east, Anatolia in the north, and the Sudan in the south.
The majority of these lived in the village of Darvag, to the north-west of Derbent.
With the expansion of Islam, polytheistic Arabs were rapidly Islamized, and polytheistic traditions gradually disappeared.
In the Levant, local populations mainly descend from the ancient Phoenicians and other early non-Arabic-speaking Semitic groups.
The most prominent Arab Christian kingdoms were the Ghassanid and Lakhmid kingdoms.
The practice of marrying of relatives is a common feature of Arab culture.
The latest of these accounts dates to the 1930s.
The Qur'an calls itself '''', "Arabic", and '''', "clear".
The Lakhmids contested control of the Central Arabian tribes with the Kindites with the Lakhmids eventually destroying Kinda in 540 after the fall of their main ally Himyar.
This traditional division of the Arabs of Arabia may have arisen at the time of the First Fitna.
It is absolutely not a parallel to 'Arab Christian'".
They ended up allying with the Sassanids against the Ghassanids and the Byzantine Empire.
A modern revival took place beginning in the 19th century, alongside resistance against Ottoman rule.
Linguistically, the major Semitic language before the Arab conquest was Aramaic, spoken in various forms.
Arab culture and language, however, began a more limited diffusion before the Islamic Golden Age, first spreading in West Asia beginning in the second century as Arab Christians such as the Ghassanids, Lakhmids and Banu Judham began migrating north from Arabia into the Syrian Desert, south western Iraq and the Levant.
The related word ''ʾaʿrāb'' is still used to refer to Bedouins today, in contrast to ''ʿarab'' which refers to Arabs in general.
According to Sadek Jawad Sulaimanis the former Ambassador of Oman to the United States:
Arabic co-official language with French
), the arrival of these tribes eventually helped Arabize much of it ethnically, in addition to the linguistic and political impact local non-Arabs.
Listed among the booty captured by the army of king Shalmaneser III of Assyria in the Battle of Qarqar are 1000 camels of "Gi-in-di-bu'u the ar-ba-a-a" or  "the man Gindibu belonging to the ''arab'' (''ar-ba-a-a'' being an adjectival nisba of the noun ''ʿarab'').
Ancient Arab poets recited poems with a high note.
It was found that Haplogroup J1 occur at high frequencies among the Arabic-speaking populations of the Middle East and is the prevalent Y-chromosome lineage within the Near East.
Of the Arabian tribes that interacted with Muhammad, the most prominent was the Quraysh.
Studies have shown that 67% of Saudi marriages are between close relatives as are 54% of all marriages in Kuwait, whereas 29% of all marriages in Egypt and 18% of all Lebanese were between blood relatives.
During this period the Muslim world became an intellectual centre for science, philosophy, medicine and education as the Abbasids championed the cause of knowledge and established the "House of Wisdom" (Arabic: بيت الحكمة) in Baghdad.
Arabic official language
Ethnically Arab populations are predominant in the Arab states of the Arabian peninsula.
Arab Christians are living also in a holy Christian cities such as Nazareth, Bethlehem and the Christian Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem and many other villages with holy Christian sites.
Christians make up 5.5% of the population of Western Asia and North Africa.
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani had another view; he states that Arabs were called '''Gharab''' ("West") by Mesopotamians because Bedouins originally resided to the west of Mesopotamia; the term was then corrupted into Arab.
Arabic official language
