* Solifugae – solpugids, windscorpions, sun spiders or camel spiders (900 species)
They have a pair of prosomatic scent glands that secrete a peculiar smelling fluid when disturbed.
Arachnids are further distinguished from insects by the fact they do not have antennae or wings.
All spiders produce silk, a thin, strong protein strand extruded by the spider from spinnerets most commonly found on the end of the abdomen.
A venom gland and duct are usually located in the mobile finger; the poison is used to capture and immobilise the pseudoscorpion's prey.
The next pair of appendages, the pedipalps, have been adapted for feeding, locomotion, and/or reproductive functions.
Scorpions have been found in many fossil records, including coal deposits from the Carboniferous Period and in marine Silurian deposits.
0.080–1.00&nbsp;mm), but the giants of the Acari (some ticks and red velvet mites) may reach lengths of 10–20&nbsp;mm.
The excretory glands of arachnids include up to four pairs of coxal glands along the side of the prosoma, and one or two pairs of Malpighian tubules, emptying into the gut.
They have no silk glands or venomous fangs, but can have prominent pincer-like pedipalps.
Like all arthropods, arachnids have an exoskeleton, and they also have an internal structure of cartilage-like tissue, called the endosternite, to which certain muscle groups are attached.
Arachnids have two kinds of eyes, the lateral and median ocelli.
They have a single pair of eyes in the middle of their heads, oriented sideways.
Phalangiotarbi has been recently proposed to be sister group to (Palpigradi+Tetrapulmonata): the taxon Megoperculata sensu Shultz (1990).
Amblypygids, particularly the species ''Phrynus marginemaculatus'' and ''Damon diadema'', are thought to be one of the few species of arachnids that show signs of social behavior.
Approximately 57 species of ricinuleids have been described worldwide, all in a single family that contains three genera.
The addition of Scorpiones to produce a clade called Arachnopulmonata was also well supported.
They have been found within the very structure of ground-dwelling plants, possibly where they hid to await their prey.
The median ocelli develop from a transverse fold of the ectoderm.
Other species spray formic acid or chlorine.
These early arachnids seem to have been adapted to stalking prey on the ground.
Arachnids with an efficient tracheal system do not need to transport oxygen in the blood, and may have a reduced circulatory system.
Whip scorpions have no poison glands, but they do have glands near the rear of their abdomen that can spray a combination of acetic acid and octanoic acid when they are bothered.
The ancestors of modern arachnids probably had both types, but modern ones often lack one type or the other.
They outnumber other arthropods in the soil organic matter and detritus.
The cornea of the eye also acts as a lens, and is continuous with the cuticle of the body.
Several mites and ticks are parasites, some of which are carriers of disease.
The digestive juices rapidly turn the prey into a broth of nutrients, which the arachnid sucks into a pre-buccal cavity located immediately in front of the mouth.
The Thelyphonida (formerly Uropygi), commonly known as vinegarroons or whip scorpions, range from 25 to 85&nbsp;mm in length; the largest species, of the genus ''Mastigoproctus'', reaches .
They comprise over 100,000 named species, including spiders, scorpions, harvestmen, ticks, mites, and solifuges.
Another trait they share with their closest relatives, the spiders, is breathing through spiracles.
Haptopoda is an extinct order known exclusively from a few specimens from the Upper Carboniferous of the United Kingdom.
* Schizomida – "split middle" whip scorpions with divided exoskeletons (220 species)
The three groups are related as shown in the cladogram below.
They can be found on every continent, except in Arctic and Antarctic regions.
It is estimated that over 50,000 species have been described (as of 1999) and that a million or more species are currently living.
Males in all families but Eremobatidae possess a flagellum on the basal article of the chelicera.
* Opiliones – phalangids, harvestmen or daddy-long-legs (6,300 species)
Between the base of the fourth pair of legs and the abdomen is a pair of spiracles, one opening on each side.
They are valuable in controlling cockroach and cricket populations.
Extant (living) arthropods are a monophyletic group and are divided into three main clades, chelicerates (including arachnids), pancrustaceans (the paraphyletic crustaceans plus insects and their allies), and myriapods (centipedes, millipedes and allies).
After the first molt, they look like miniature whip scorpions, and leave the burrow; the mother dies soon after.
Prey is located with the pedipalps and killed and cut into pieces by the chelicerae.
(Pycnogonida (sea spiders) may be excluded from the chelicerates, which are then identified as the group labelled "Euchelicerata".)
In more advanced species, the first five abdominal segments are often fused into a dorsal shield called the scutum, which is normally fused with the carapace.
Ricinulei have no eyes.
Inside the pit, a small hair touches the underside of the membrane, and detects its motion.
The affinities of phalangiotarbids are obscure, with most authors favouring affinities with Opiliones (harvestmen) and/or Acari (mites and ticks).
The second segment bears a pair of featherlike sensory organs known as the "pectines"; the final four segments each contain a pair of book lungs.
They have a gonopore on the ventral cephalothorax, and copulation is direct, as the male has a penis (while the female has an ovipositor).
Schizomida is an order of arachnids that tend to live in the top layer of soils.
The young grow slowly, going through three molts in about three years before reaching adulthood.
Reproduction can involve direct or indirect sperm transfer; when indirect, the male emits a spermatophore on the ground and then inserts it with his chelicerae in the female's genital pore.
*†Phalangiotarbi – extinct arachnids of uncertain affinity (30 species)
Most spiders have one pair of spiracles, and one of book lungs, but pseudoscorpions do not have book lungs.
* Thelyphonida (also called Uropygi) – whip scorpions or vinegaroons, forelegs modified into sensory appendages and a long tail on abdomen tip (100 species)
They may also burrow under logs, rotting wood, rocks, and other natural debris.
Scorpions use their venom to kill or paralyze their prey so that it can be eaten; in general, it is fast acting, allowing for effective prey capture.
Many are parasitic, and they affect both vertebrates and invertebrates.
They have a thin, pale, segmented carapace that terminates in a whip-like flagellum, made up of 15 segments.
The abdomen's front half, the mesosoma, is made up of six segments.
Arachnids usually lay yolky eggs, which hatch into immatures that resemble adults.
Their mating habits are unknown, except that they lay only a few relatively large eggs at a time.
Damage to crops is perhaps the most costly economic effect of mites, especially by the spider mites and their relatives (Tetranychoidea), earth mites (Penthaleidae), thread-footed mites (Tarsonemidae) and the gall and rust mites (Eriophyoidea).
During the day, they may hide under logs, bark, stones, or leaves.
Arachnids are mostly carnivorous, feeding on the pre-digested bodies of insects and other small animals.
The order Opiliones is divided into five suborders: Cyphophthalmi, Eupnoi, Dyspnoi, Laniatores, and the recently described Tetrophthalmi.
Phalangiotarbi is an extinct arachnid order known exclusively from the Palaeozoic (Devonian to Permian) of Europe and North America.
The fossil record of pseudoscorpions dates back over 380 million years, to the Devonian period, near the time when the first land-animal fossils appear.
Approximately 5 families, 17 genera and 136 species have been described.
These can be relatively simple, but many arachnids also possess more complex structures, called trichobothria.
However, molecular phylogenetic studies suggest that the two groups do not form a single clade, with morphological similarities being due to convergence.
Solifugae also have long pedipalps, which function as sense organs similar to insects' antennae and give the appearance of the two extra legs.
The authors favoured relationships shown by more slowly evolving genes, which demonstrated the monophyly of Chelicerata, Euchelicerata and Arachnida, as well as of some clades within the arachnids.
For example, gall mites like ''Phyllocoptes variabilis'' (superfamily Eriophyioidea) have a wormlike body with only two pairs of legs; some parasitic mites have only one or three pairs of legs in the adult stage.
Palpigradi, commonly known as "microwhip scorpions", are tiny cousins of the uropygid, or whip scorpion, no more than 3&nbsp;mm in length.
Newly molted scorpions do not glow until after their cuticle has hardened.
However, arachnids also have two further pairs of appendages that have become adapted for feeding, defense, and sensory perception.
The opisthosoma is made up of twelve segments, each guarded by plate-like tergites above and sternites below.
*†Uraraneida – extinct spider-like arachnids, but with a "tail" and no spinnerets (2 species)
The white young that hatch from the eggs climb onto their mother's back and attach themselves there with special suckers.
Microwhip scorpions need a damp environment to survive, and they always hide from light, so they are commonly found in the moist earth under buried stones and rocks.
Ricinulei are predators, feeding on other small arthropods.
They enjoy humid, dark places and avoid the light.
Tetrapulmonata, here consisting of Araneae, Amblypygi and Thelyphonida (Schizomida was not included in the study), received strong support.
A study in 2014, based on the largest set of molecular data to date, concluded that there were systematic conflicts in the phylogenetic information, particularly affecting the orders Acariformes, Parasitiformes and Pseudoscorpiones, which have had much faster evolutionary rates.
An unquantified, but major positive contribution of the Acari is their normal functioning in ecosystems, especially their roles in the decomposer subsystem.
Human deaths normally occur in the young, elderly, or infirm; scorpions are generally unable to deliver enough venom to kill healthy adults.
The prey is then liquefied and the liquid ingested through the pharynx.
Unlike the majority of Arachnida species, scorpions are viviparous.
However, they differ in a several respects.
In most arachnids only the females provide parental care, with harvestmen being one of the few exceptions.
Sometimes this shield is only present in males.
The equivalent joints of the pedipalps of scorpions though, are extended by elastic recoil.
Most adult mites have four pairs of legs, like other arachnids, but some have fewer.
With the exception of scorpions, which can have up to five pairs of lateral ocelli, there are never more than three pairs present.
In most modern treatments, the Acari is considered a subclass of Arachnida and is composed of two or three orders or superorders: Acariformes, Parasitiformes, and Opilioacariformes.
* Araneae – spiders (40,000 species)
Araneae, or spiders, are the most familiar of the arachnids, and the most species-rich with around 40,000 described species.
They are nocturnal and fossorial, finding shelter during the day in the relative cool of underground holes or undersides of rocks and coming out at night to hunt and feed.
Their bodies are broad and highly flattened and the first pair of legs (the first walking legs in most arachnid orders) are modified to act as sensory organs.
The most distinctive feature of Solifugae is their large chelicerae.
Slit sense organs are believed to be involved in proprioception, and possibly also hearing.
They range worldwide, even in temperate to cold regions, but have their most dense and diverse populations in the tropics and subtropics.
Pseudoscorpions are generally beneficial to humans since they prey on clothes moth larvae, carpet beetle larvae, booklice, ants, mites, and small flies.
They prefer a humid environment.
Silk is produced from spigots borne along the rear edges of plates on the underside of the abdomen, not on appendage-like spinnerets, as in spiders.
The larvae of mites and Ricinulei have only six legs; a fourth pair usually appears when they moult into nymphs.
* Pseudoscorpionida – pseudoscorpions (3,000 species)
The second pair of legs is longer than the others and works as antennae.
The arachnid subdivisions are listed below alphabetically; numbers of species are approximate.
Pseudoscorpions spin silk from a gland in their jaws to make disk-shaped cocoons for mating, molting, or waiting out cold weather.
Well-preserved fossils have been found in the 410-million year old Rhynie cherts of Scotland and 305-million-year-old rocks from France; they look surprisingly modern, suggesting that the basic structure of the harvestmen has not changed much since then.
In most arachnids, the retina probably does not have enough light sensitive cells to allow the eyes to form a proper image.
The telson, in turn, consists of the vesicle, which holds a pair of venom glands and the hypodermic aculeus, the venom-injecting barb.
The age range appears to be approximately 4–25 years (25 years being the maximum reported life span in the giant desert hairy scorpion, ''Hadrurus arizonensis'').
The abdomen is segmented in the more primitive forms, but varying degrees of fusion between the segments occur in many groups.
Phytoseiidae) in pest control and herbivorous mites that attack weeds is also important.
The Devonian period was the time frame in which certain species of animals developed legs.
Some species have three pairs of book lungs, while others have no respiratory organs at all.
Scorpions, pseudoscorpions and some harvestmen have evolved muscles that extend two leg joints (the femur-patella and patella-tibia joints) at once.
Others are detritivores that help to break down forest litter and dead organic matter such as skin cells.
Most parasitic forms are external parasites, while the free living forms are generally predaceous and may even be used to control undesirable arthropods.
The young go through three molts over the course of several years before reaching adulthood.
They are thought to have existed in some form since about .
A consensus emerged from about 2010 onwards, based on both morphological and molecular evidence.
The neurotoxins consist of a variety of small proteins as well as sodium and potassium cations, which serve to interfere with neurotransmission in the victim.
* Scorpiones – scorpions (2,000 species)
The pedipalps generally consist of an immobile "hand" and "finger", with a separate movable finger controlled by an adductor muscle.
However, leg span is much larger and can exceed .
Like the Thelyphonida, Amblypygi, and Solifugae, the schizomids use only six legs for walking, having modified their first two legs to serve as sensory organs.
They are mostly nocturnal and coloured in hues of brown, although there are a number of diurnal species that have vivid patterns in yellow, green and black with varied reddish and blackish mottling and reticulation.
During the elaborate mating dance, the male of some pseudoscorpion species pulls a female over a spermatophore previously laid upon a surface.
In scorpions and some spiders, however, the blood contains haemocyanin, a copper-based pigment with a similar function to haemoglobin in vertebrates.
The young are born one by one, and the brood is carried about on its mother's back until the young have undergone at least one moult.
They are found in tropical and subtropical regions worldwide.
Scorpion venoms are optimised for action on other arthropods and therefore most scorpions are relatively harmless to humans; stings produce only local effects (such as pain, numbness or swelling).
Scorpions (formally the order Scorpiones) are characterised by a metasoma (tail) comprising six segments, the last containing the scorpion's anus and bearing the telson (the sting).
Depending on the toxicity of their venom and size of their claws, they will then either crush the prey or inject it with neurotoxic venom.
The young generally resemble their parents, requiring between five and seven moults to reach maturity.
This anterior body region is called the gnathosoma (or capitulum) and is also found in the Ricinulei.
has only one species, ''Plesiosiro madeleyi''.
Discovering relationships within the arachnids has proved difficult , with successive studies producing different results.
Many species use it to trap insects in webs, although there are many species that hunt freely.
Including fossil taxa does not fundamentally alter this view, although it introduces some additional basal groups.
However, some inhabit freshwater environments and, with the exception of the pelagic zone, marine environments as well.
In other species, the male also pushes the sperm into the female genitals using the forelegs.
Many species are omnivorous, eating primarily small insects and all kinds of plant material and fungi; some are scavengers of the decays of any dead animal, bird dung and other fecal material.
Schizomids present the prosoma covered by a large protopeltidium and smaller, paired, mesopeltidia and metapeltidia.
The diagram below summarizes their conclusions, based largely on the 200 most slowly evolving genes; dashed lines represent uncertain placements.
Almost all extant arachnids are terrestrial, living mainly on land.
They are active in the warm months of the year, overwintering in silken cocoons when the weather grows cold.
Up to two dozen young are hatched in a single brood; there may be more than one brood per year.
In addition to the eyes, almost all arachnids have two other types of sensory organs.
Only in the harvestmen and among mites, such as the house dust mite, is there ingestion of solid food particles, and thus exposure to internal parasites, although it is not unusual for spiders to eat their own silk.
Only about 200 species, however, have bites that can pose health problems to humans.
These very thin modified legs can extend several times the length of body.
Larval and prelarval stages have a maximum of three pairs of legs; adult mites with only three pairs of legs may be called 'larviform'.
The fluorescent hyaline layer can be intact in fossil rocks that are hundreds of millions of years old.
Amblypygids are also known as tailless whip scorpions or cave spiders.
Fossilised amblypygids have been found dating back to the Carboniferous period.
The remainder of the body is called the idiosoma and is unique to mites.
Each of the two chelicerae are composed of two articles forming a powerful pincer; each article bears a variable number of teeth.
Further, when two or more siblings were placed in an unfamiliar environment, such as a cage, they would seek each other out and gather back in a group.
Many species also have very large scorpion-like pedipalps (pincers).
Uraraneida is a small extinct order of arachnids consisting of two fossil species found in the Devonian and the Permian.
Typical body length does not exceed  even in the largest species.
A well-known effect of mites on humans is their role as an allergen and the stimulation of asthma in people affected by the respiratory disease.
The abdomen is short and rounded at the rear, rather than extending into a segmented tail and stinger like true scorpions.
Some species are subterranean; many are nocturnal.
The most important to most arachnids are the fine sensory hairs that cover the body and give the animal its sense of touch.
Most species live for a year.
Most arachnids lack extensor muscles in the distal joints of their appendages.
(Compare solifugids, uropygids, and schizomids.)
Approximately 80 species of Palpigradi have been described worldwide, in the families Eukoeneniidae and Prokoeneniidae, with a total of seven genera.
The heavy-bodied abdomen forms a narrow pedicel, or waist, where it attaches to the prosoma.
The term is derived from the Greek word  (''aráchnē''), meaning "spider".
Males secrete a sperm sac, which is transferred to the female.
Opiliones (formerly Phalangida, and better known as harvestmen or daddy longlegs) are arachnids that are harmless to people and are known for their exceptionally long walking legs, compared to their body size.
Several groups secrete venom from specialized glands to kill prey or enemies.
Pedipalps terminate in reversible adhesive organs.
They have one pair of eyes at the front of the cephalothorax and three on each side of the head.
The stomach and its diverticula both produce digestive enzymes and absorb nutrients from the food.
Acari or Acarina is a taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks.
Finally, slit sense organs are slit-like pits covered with a thin membrane.
There are characteristics that are particularly important for the terrestrial lifestyle of arachnids, such as internal respiratory surfaces in the form of tracheae, or modification of the book gill into a book lung, an internal series of vascular lamellae used for gas exchange with the air.
The genital opening is usually located on the underside of the second abdominal segment.
While the tracheae are often individual systems of tubes, similar to those in insects, ricnuleids, pseudoscorpions, and some spiders possess sieve tracheae, in which several tubes arise in a bundle from a small chamber connected to the spiracle.
Scorpions are opportunistic predators of small arthropods and insects.
In most species, the male transfers sperm to the female in a package, or spermatophore.
They were at one time identified as spiders, and are clearly closely related to them.
The phylogenetic relationships among the main subdivisions of arthropods have been the subject of considerable research and dispute for many years.
The cephalothorax is derived from the fusion of the cephalon (head) and the thorax, and is usually covered by a single, unsegmented carapace.
It is monotypic, i.e.
Silk can be used to aid in climbing, form smooth walls for burrows, build egg sacs, wrap prey, temporarily hold sperm, and even fly, among other applications.
The opisthosoma is a smooth oval of 12 recognisable somites.
It has been found that scorpions have two types of venom: a translucent, weaker venom designed to stun only, and an opaque, more potent venom designed to kill heavier threats.
Larvae (and prelarvae) have a maximum of three pairs of legs (legs are often reduced to stubs or absent in prelarvae); the fourth pair of legs is added at the first nymphal stage.
Arachnids may have one or two gonads, which are located in the abdomen.
The carapace is divided into two plates between the third and fourth leg set.
