They usually also have a peep sight (rear sight) built into the string, which aids in a consistent anchor point.
Usually the release aims to keep the drawing arm rigid, the bow hand relaxed, and the arrow is moved back using the back muscles, as opposed to using just arm motions.
The fletching may be either ''parabolic'' (short feathers in a smooth parabolic curve) or ''shield'' (generally shaped like half of a narrow shield) cut and is often attached at an angle, known as ''helical'' fletching, to introduce a stabilizing spin to the arrow while in flight.
They are not limited by the strength of a single archer and larger varieties have been used as siege engines.
Cable-backed bows use cords as the back of the bow; the draw weight of the bow can be adjusted by changing the tension of the cable.
Archery was highly developed in Asia.
Dry firing refers to releasing the bow string without a nocked arrow.
In West African Yoruba belief, Osoosi is one of several deities of the hunt who are identified with bow and arrow iconography and other insignia associated with archery.
Modern archery equipment usually includes sights.
However, if archers are using fletching made of feather or similar material, they may use same color vanes, as different dyes can give varying stiffness to vanes, resulting in less precision.
The body should be at or nearly perpendicular to the target and the shooting line, with the feet placed shoulder-width apart.
Historically, archery has been used for hunting and combat.
A typical let-off is anywhere from 65% to 80%.
Practice arrows, for instance, have a blunt tip that spreads the force over a wider area to reduce the risk of injury or limit penetration.
Arrows designed to pierce armor in the Middle Ages used a very narrow and sharp tip ("bodkinhead") to concentrate the force.
The back of the arrow is attached to the bowstring with the '''nock''' (a small locking groove located at the proximal end of the arrow).
The societies were also elitist, and the new middle class bourgeoisie were excluded from the clubs due to their lack of social status.
Aiming without a sight picture may allow more rapid shooting.
There are also several other lesser-known and historical forms of archery, as well as archery novelty games and flight archery, where the aim is to shoot the greatest distance.
Modern compound bows automatically limit the draw length to give a consistent arrow velocity, while traditional bows allow great variation in draw length.
Shorter bows are more suited to use on horseback, and the composite bow enabled mounted archers to use powerful weapons.
This flexing can be a desirable feature, since, when the spine of the shaft is matched to the acceleration of the bow(string), the arrow bends or flexes around the bow and any arrow-rest, and consequently the arrow, and fletchings, have an un-impeded flight.
Archery golf is mentioned in the United States media as early as 1923 and has been played in tournaments ever since.
A simple tab of leather is commonly used, as is a skeleton glove.
Roger Ascham mentions one archer, presumably with an unusual shooting style, who wore a leather guard for his face.
However, the bow and arrow is still an effective weapon, and archers have seen action in the 21st century.
Using archery to take game animals is known as "bow hunting".
Left hand draw = arrow on left side of bow.
The elbow of this arm should be rotated so that the inner elbow is perpendicular to the ground, though archers with hyper extendable elbows tend to angle the inner elbow toward the ground, as exemplified by the Korean archer Jang Yong-Ho.
Empires throughout the Eurasian landmass often strongly associated their respective "barbarian" counterparts with the usage of the bow and arrow, to the point where powerful states like the Han Dynasty referred to their neighbours, the Xiong-nu, as "Those Who Draw the Bow" For example, Xiong-nu mounted bowmen made them more than a match for the Han military, and their threat was at least partially responsible for Chinese expansion into the Ordos region, to create a stronger, more powerful buffer zone against them.
The arrows were made of pine and consisted of a mainshaft and a  long fore shaft with a flint point.
The compound bow was invented by Holless Wilbur Allen in the 1960s (a US patent was filed in 1966 and granted in 1969) and it has become the most widely used type of bow for all forms of archery in North America.
This is clearly visible in high-speed photography of arrows at discharge.
Competitive archery in the United States is governed by USA Archery and National Field Archery Association (NFAA), which also certifies instructors.
Depending on the arrow's elasticity, some of the energy is also absorbed by compressing the arrow, primarily because the release of the bowstring is rarely in line with the arrow shaft, causing it to flex out to one side.
It consists of a small bow attached by cables on the back of a larger main bow.
Some archers  (nearly all archers ) wear protection on their chests, called chestguards or plastrons.
Because of this, heavier draw weights are required to achieve the same energy transfer to the arrow.
The word comes from the Latin ''arcus''.
This fletch is called the "index fletch" or "cock feather" (also known as "the odd vane out" or "the nocking vane") and the others are sometimes called the "hen feathers".
In Arab archery, Turkish archery and Kyūdō, the arrows are released from the right hand side of the bow, and this affects construction of the bow.
Despite the high social status, ongoing utility, and widespread pleasure of archery in Armenia, China, Egypt, England, America, India, Japan, Korea, Turkey, Wales and elsewhere, almost every culture that gained access to even early firearms used them widely, to the neglect of archery.
Compound bows are designed to reduce the force required to hold the string at full draw, hence allowing the archer more time to aim with less muscular stress.
This lets the archer adjust aim with successive shots to achieve accuracy.
The archer's lower trapezius muscles are used to pull the arrow to the anchor point.
In many countries, including much of the United States, bow hunting for large and small game is legal.
Carbon fiber arrows became popular in the 1990s and are very light, flying even faster and flatter than aluminium arrows.
Directly drawn bows may be further divided based upon differences in the method of limb construction, notable examples being self bows, laminated bows and composite bows.
The last of the Yahi Indian tribe, a native known as Ishi, came out of hiding in California in 1911.
Archery golf shares some qualities with clout archery and flight archery, and is especially similar to the oldest form of competitive archery, roving marks, but it is unique in that a player may shoot at or toward a single target as many times as necessary to complete that "hole".
By 1889, just 50 archery clubs were left in Britain, but it was still included as a sport at the 1900 Paris Olympics.
They led the commercial development of new forms of bow including the modern recurve and compound bow.
However, not everyone agrees with this line of thought.
Either eye can be used for aiming, and the less dominant eye can be trained over time to become more effective for use.
Some are so highly ornamented that the users could not have used them to loose an arrow.
Also solid plastic '''vanes''' and thin sheetlike spin vanes are used.
This is the most popular form of competitive archery worldwide and is called target archery.
It is governed by the World Archery Federation (WA), and is one of the sports in the Summer Paralympic Games.
Armenian Hayk and Babylonian Marduk, Indian Karna (also known as Radheya/son of Radha) (also known as the greatest archer in the whole world), Abhimanyu, Eklavya, Arjuna, Bhishma, Drona, Parashurama, Rama, and Shiva, and Persian Arash were all archers.
As well as its emphasis on display and status, the sport was notable for its popularity with females.
Armies equipped with guns could thus provide superior firepower, and highly trained archers became obsolete on the battlefield.
Deities and heroes in several mythologies are described as archers, including the Greek Artemis and Apollo, the Roman Diana and Cupid, the Germanic Agilaz, continuing in legends like those of Wilhelm Tell, Palnetoke, or Robin Hood.
Of the remaining energy, some is dampened both by the limbs of the bow and the bowstring.
Modern arrows are made to a specified 'spine', or stiffness rating, to maintain matched flexing and hence accuracy of aim.
In either the split finger or three finger under case, the string is usually placed in the first or second joint, or else on the pads of the fingers.
The cross-section of the limb also varies; the classic longbow is a tall bow with narrow limbs that are D-shaped in cross section, and the flatbow has flat wide limbs that are approximately rectangular in cross-section.
Another type of string hold, used on traditional bows, is the type favoured by the Mongol warriors, known as the "thumb release", style.
Barebow archers often use a sight picture, which includes the target, the bow, the hand, the arrow shaft and the arrow tip, as seen at the same time by the archer.
Hence, a cross-section of a yew longbow shows the narrow, light-coloured sap-wood on the 'straight' part (riser) of the D, and the red/orange heartwood forms the curved part of the D, to balance the mechanical tension/compression stress.
To load, the bow is pointed toward the ground, tipped slightly clockwise of vertical (for a right handed shooter) and the shaft of the arrow is placed on the arrow rest or shelf.
This makes the arrow oscillate in flight—its center flexing to one side and then the other repeatedly, gradually reducing as the arrow's flight proceeds.
Jumong, the first Taewang of the Goguryeo kingdom of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, is claimed by legend to have been a near-godlike archer.
In the most commonly used, the string is released by a finger-operated trigger mechanism, held in the archer's hand or attached to their wrist.
A compound bow is fitted with a special type of arrow rest, known as a launcher, and the arrow is usually loaded with the cock feather/vane pointed either up, or down, depending upon the type of launcher being used.
In modern times, it is mainly a competitive sport and recreational activity.
One variety of cable-backed bow is the Penobscot bow or Wabenaki bow, invented by Frank Loring (Chief Big Thunder) about 1900.
The development of firearms rendered bows obsolete in warfare, albeit efforts were sometimes made to preserve archery practice.
In the 1980s, the skills of traditional archery were revived by American enthusiasts, and combined with the new scientific understanding.
The Navajo people have developed highly ornamented bracers as non-functional items of adornment.
When using this type of release, the arrow should rest on the same side of the bow as the drawing hand i.e.
It was often consciously styled in the manner of a Medieval tournament with titles and laurel wreaths being presented as a reward to the victor.
Almost any fiber can be made into a bow string.
Bows eventually replaced the spear-thrower as the predominant means for launching shafted projectiles, on every continent except Australasia, though spear-throwers persisted alongside the bow in parts of the Americas, notably Mexico and among the Inuit.
Three fletches is the most common configuration in all cultures, though as many as six have been used.
The bowstring and arrow are held with three fingers, or with a mechanical arrow release.
Bow hunting differs markedly from hunting with firearms, as distance between hunter and prey must be much shorter to ensure a humane kill.
The most commonly used forms are target points, field points, and broadheads, although there are also other types, such as bodkin, judo, and blunt heads.
Even with a carefully made arrow, the slightest imperfection or air movement causes some unbalanced turbulence in air flow.
In the Levant, artifacts that could be arrow-shaft straighteners are known from the Natufian culture, (c. 10,800–8,300 BC) onwards.
The bow and arrow seems to have been invented in the later Paleolithic or early Mesolithic periods.
The Company of Scottish Archers was formed in 1676 and is one of the oldest sporting bodies in the world.
It maintains accuracy, for if part of the arrow struck a glancing blow on discharge, some inconsistency would be present, and the excellent accuracy of modern equipment would not be achieved.
The arrow's manufacturer (a "fletcher") can arrange fletching to cause the arrow to rotate along its axis.
In the United States, primitive archery was revived in the early 20th century.
Early recreational archery societies included the Finsbury Archers and the Kilwinning Papingo, established in 1688.
Most archers wear a bracer (also known as an arm-guard) to protect the inside of the bow arm from being hit by the string and prevent clothing from catching the bow string.
In contrast, traditional English Longbow shooters step "into the bow", exerting force with both the bow arm and the string hand arm simultaneously, especially when using bows having draw weights from 100&nbsp;lbs to over 175&nbsp;lbs.
Egyptians used composite bows for warfare already from the 16th Century BC  while the Bronze Age Aegean Cultures were able to deploy a number of state-owned specialised bowmakers for warfare and hunting purposes already from the 15th century BC.
Bows and arrows have been present in Egyptian culture since its predynastic origins.
Some bows use mechanical methods to make the draw length consistent.
'''Instinctive shooting''' is a style of shooting that includes the barebow aiming method that relies heavily upon the subconscious mind, proprioception, and motor/muscle memory to make aiming adjustments; the term used to refer to a general category of archers who did not use a mechanical or fixed sight.
Most compound designs use cams or elliptical wheels on the ends of the limbs to achieve this.
Consequently, rotation creates an equalization of such turbulence, which, overall, maintains the intended direction of flight i.e.
They were widespread among Inuit who lacked easy access to good bow wood.
Some have suggested that dry firing may cause physical damage to the bow, such as cracks and fractures—and because most bows are not specifically made to handle the high amounts of energy dry firing produces, should never be done.
The first Grand National Archery Society meeting was held in York in 1844 and over the next decade the extravagant and festive practices of the past were gradually whittled away and the rules were standardised as the 'York Round' - a series of shoots at 60, 80, and 100 yards.
The latter held competitions in which archers had to dislodge a wooden parrot from the top of an abbey tower.
Today, arrows made up of composite materials are the most popular tournament arrows at Olympic Events, especially the Easton X10 and A/C/E.
Because there is no arrow to receive the stored potential energy, all the energy stays in the bow.
Possibly these were items of personal adornment, and hence value, remaining extant whilst leather had virtually no intrinsic value and would also deteriorate with time.
In modern form, the archer stands erect, forming a "T".
This is often one fluid motion for shooters of recurves and longbows, which tend to vary from archer to archer.
Some believe that the hand with the greatest dexterity should therefore be the hand that draws and releases the string.
The hand that holds the bow is referred to as the ''bow hand'' and its arm the ''bow arm''.
Medieval Europeans probably used a complete leather glove.
Linen and other traditional materials are still used on traditional bows.
With sufficient practice, such archers can normally achieve good practical accuracy for hunting or for war.
If shooting according to hand dexterity, the archer draws the string with the hand that possesses the greatest dexterity, regardless of eye dominance.
The huge ratio of length vs. cross sectional area, coupled with velocity, made the arrow more powerful than any other hand held weapon until firearms were invented.
From the 1920s, professional engineers took an interest in archery, previously the exclusive field of traditional craft experts.
The oldest signs of its use in Europe come from the  in the  north of Hamburg, Germany and dates from the late Paleolithic, about 10,000–9000 BC.
Whether helicial or straight fletched, when natural fletching (bird feathers) are used it is critical that all feathers come from the same side of the bird.
Similarly, short bows seem to have been introduced to Japan by northeast Asian groups.
The bracer does not brace the arm; the word comes from the armoury term "brassard", meaning an armoured sleeve or badge.
His doctor, Saxton Pope, learned many of Ishi's traditional archery skills, and popularized them.
In East Asia, Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea was well known for its regiments of exceptionally skilled archers.
Archery features in the story of Oguz Khagan.
The most common form of arrow consists of a shaft with an arrowhead attached to the front end and with fletchings and a nock attached to the other end.
There are no definite earlier bows; previous pointed shafts are known, but may have been launched by spear-throwers rather than bows.
For example, a 60-pound bow with 80% let-off only requires 12 pounds of force to hold at full draw.
The innovative aspect of the invention of the bow and arrow was the amount of power delivered to an extremely small area by the arrow.
Compound bows are often held at full draw for a short time to achieve maximum accuracy.
As an archer progresses from beginner to a more advanced level other stances such as the  "open stance"  or the "closed stance" may be used, although many choose to stick with a "neutral stance".
He won the Grand National 11 times in a row and published a highly influential guide to the sport in 1856.
Two makes the arrow unstable in flight.
The arrow is typically released by relaxing the fingers of the drawing hand (see Bow draw), or triggering the mechanical release aid.
This rotation is not to be confused with the rapid gyroscopic rotation of a rifle bullet.
The sap-wood is best suited to the tension on the back of the bow, and the heart-wood to the compression on the belly.
In another type, known as a back-tension release, the string is automatically released when drawn to a pre-determined tension.
Modern game archery owes much of its success to Fred Bear, an American bow hunter and bow manufacturer.
A smoother, and more fluid release of the string will produce the most consistently repeatable shots, and therefore may provide greater accuracy of the arrow flight.
Archery was also co-opted as a distinctively British tradition, dating back to the lore of Robin Hood and it served as a patriotic form of entertainment at a time of political tension in Europe.
Early firearms were vastly inferior in rate-of-fire, and were very susceptible to wet weather.
Mechanical sights can be affixed to the bow to aid in aiming.
A direct effect of these energy transfers can clearly be seen when dry firing.
In Wales and England, for example, the government tried to enforce practice with the Longbow until the end of the 16th century.
Thus, archery came to act as a forum for introductions, flirtation and romance.
Young women could not only compete in the contests but retain and show off their sexuality while doing so.
Split-finger aiming requires the archer to place the index finger above the nocked arrow, while the middle and ring fingers are both placed below.
Sir Ashton Lever, an antiquarian and collector, formed the Toxophilite Society in London in 1781, with the patronage of George, the Prince of Wales.
Yi the archer and his apprentice Feng Meng appear in several early Chinese myths, and the historical character of Zhou Tong features in many fictional forms.
Classical civilizations, notably the Assyrians, Greeks, Armenians, Persians, Parthians, Indians, Koreans, Chinese, and Japanese fielded large numbers of archers in their armies.
Towards the end of the 19th century, the sport experienced declining participation as alternative sports such as croquet and tennis became more popular among the middle class.
An archer should also pay attention to the recoil or ''follow through'' of his or her body, as it may indicate problems with form (technique) that affect accuracy.
These mechanically drawn bows also have devices to hold the tension when the bow is fully drawn.
In western archery, the arrow is usually released from the left hand side of the bow.
Horace A. Ford helped to improve archery standards and pioneered new archery techniques.
Aiming then involves hand-eye coordination—which includes proprioception and motor-muscle memory, similar to that used when throwing a ball.
They can be as simple as a pin, or may use optics with magnification.
Typical arrows with three vanes should be oriented such that a single vane, the "cock feather", is pointing away from the bow, to improve the clearance of the arrow as it passes the arrow rest.
Fletching is traditionally made from bird feathers.
Heavily-stacked traditional bows (recurves, long bows, and the like) are released immediately upon reaching full draw at maximum weight, whereas compound bows reach their maximum weight in or around mid-draw, dropping holding weight significantly at full draw.
The author of "Arab Archery" suggests the hide of a young, emaciated camel.
To assist with this, an eye patch can be temporarily worn over the dominant eye.
The classic D-shape comes from the use of the wood of the yew tree.
After the Napoleonic Wars, the sport became increasingly popular among all classes, and it was framed as a nostalgic reimagining of the preindustrial rural Britain.
'''Archery''' is the sport, practice or skill of using a bow to propel arrows.
Most commonly, for finger shooters, the index finger is placed above the arrow and the next two fingers below, although several other techniques have their adherents around the world, involving three fingers below the arrow, or an arrow pinching technique.
Fiberglass arrows are brittle, but can be produced to uniform specifications easily.
In archery, some energy dissipates through elastic hysteresis, reducing the overall amount released when the bow is shot.
Mechanically drawn bows typically have a stock or other mounting, such as the crossbow.
In the Americas archery was widespread at European contact.
Bow hunters generally enjoy longer seasons than are allowed with other forms of hunting such as black powder, shotgun, or rifle.
When a bow is used, the muscles are able to perform work much more slowly, resulting in greater force and greater work done.
Fletching that is not arranged to induce rotation still improves accuracy by causing a restoring drag any time the arrow tilts from its intended direction of travel.
Terms such as ''bow shoulder'' or ''string elbow'' follow the same convention.
This point is consistent from shot to shot, and is usually at the corner of the mouth, on the chin, to the cheek, or to the ear, depending on preferred shooting style.
When ''three-fletched'' the fletches are equally spaced around the shaft with one placed such that it is perpendicular to the bow when nocked on the string (though with modern equipment, variations are seen especially when using the modern spin vanes).
It remained a small and scattered pastime, however, until the late 18th century when it experienced a fashionable revival among the aristocracy.
Oversized fletchings can be used to accentuate drag and thus limit the range of the arrow significantly; these arrows are called ''flu-flus''.
Additionally, a game known variously by names such as "Archery Golf" or "Gol-Archery" adopts some of the rules of golf to play a game that uses traditional or modern archery tools.
This is because the bowstring accelerates faster than the archer's fingers can open, and consequently some sideways motion is imparted to the string, and hence arrow nock, as the power and speed of the bow pulls the string off the opening fingers.
Earlier Greek representations of Heracles normally depict him as an archer.
With a fixed "anchor point" (where the string is brought to, or close to, the face), and a fully extended bow arm, successive shots taken with the sight picture in the same position fall on the same point.
Para-Archery is an adaptation of archery for athletes with a disability.
Using a bow and arrow to take fish is known as "bow fishing".
They are attached near the nock (rear) end of the arrow with thin double sided tape, glue, or, traditionally, sinew.
Three-under aiming places the index, middle, and ring fingers under the nocked arrow.
Archery societies were set up across the country, each with its own strict entry criteria and outlandish costumes.
This keeps the forearm out of the way of the bowstring.
Particularly influential was Sir Walter Scott's 1819 novel, ''Ivanhoe'' that depicted the heroic character Lockseley winning an archery tournament.
Aluminium shafts were a very popular high-performance choice in the latter half of the 20th century due to their straightness, lighter weight, and subsequently higher speed and flatter trajectories.
A form particularly popular in Europe and America is field archery, shot at targets generally set at various distances in a wooded setting.
When using short bows or shooting from horseback, it is difficult to use the sight picture.
Up to 99% let-off is possible.
The myth of the Amazons was that they had one breast removed to solve this problem.
The two most common forms of a non-mechanical release are split-finger and three-under.
This improves accuracy by evening pressure buildups that would otherwise cause the arrow to "plane" on the air in a random direction after shooting.
Central Asian tribesmen (after the domestication of the horse) and American Plains Indians (after gaining access to horses) became extremely adept at archery on horseback.
This involves using the thumb to draw the string, with the fingers curling around the thumb to add some support.
