The first conviction of the transport of artifacts illegally removed from private property under the  Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA; Public Law 96-95; 93 Statute 721; ) was in 1992 in the State of Indiana.
Hence, written records cannot be trusted as a sole source.
'', together with many subsequent lesser-known works, expounds a theory of ancient contacts between human civilization on Earth and more technologically advanced extraterrestrial civilizations.
The science of archaeology (from Greek , ''archaiologia'' from , ''arkhaios'', "ancient" and , ''-logia'', "-logy") grew out of the older multi-disciplinary study known as antiquarianism.
Computer graphics are now used to build virtual 3D models of sites, such as the throne room of an Assyrian palace or ancient Rome.
Archaeology can be a subsidiary activity within Cultural resources management (CRM), also called heritage management in the United Kingdom.
Early archaeology was largely an attempt to uncover spectacular artifacts and features, or to explore vast and mysterious abandoned cities.
Archaeological adventure stories tend to ignore the painstaking work involved in carrying out modern surveys, excavations, and data processing.
The next major figure in the development of archaeology was Sir Mortimer Wheeler, whose highly disciplined approach to excavation and systematic coverage in the 1920s and 1930s brought the science on swiftly.
Webcasting is also another tool for educational outreach.
He undertook excavations in Wiltshire from around 1798, funded by Sir Richard Colt Hoare.
In the UK, metal detectorists have been solicited for involvement in the Portable Antiquities Scheme.
Often archaeologists are assisted by the public in the locating of archaeological sites, which professional archaeologists have neither the funding, nor the time to do.
Passive instruments detect natural energy that is reflected or emitted from the observed scene.
This theory, known as palaeocontact theory, or Ancient astronaut theory, is not exclusively Däniken's, nor did the idea originate with him.
Egyptology, Indology, Sinology).
Certain charities and local government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of academic work or as a defined community project.
Jeffrey Quilter, an archaeologist with Harvard University said, "You can go up three metres and photograph a room, 300 metres and photograph a site, or you can go up 3,000 metres and photograph the entire valley."
Tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred, while the archaeologists gain the elders' aid in interpreting their finds.
The audience may not take away scientific methods from popular cinema but they do form a notion of "who archaeologists are, why they do what they do, and how relationships to the past are constituted".
CRM archaeologists face considerable time pressure, often being forced to complete their work in a fraction of the time that might be allotted for a purely scholarly endeavour.
Archaeometry also investigates different spatial characteristics of features, employing methods such as space syntax techniques and geodesy as well as computer-based tools such as geographic information system technology.
These techniques frequently provide information that would not otherwise be known, and therefore they contribute greatly to the understanding of a site.
Surface survey may also include mini-excavation techniques such as augers, corers, and shovel test pits.
Petrie was the first to scientifically investigate the Great Pyramid in Egypt during the 1880s.
This contradictory situation was addressed by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 1990), which sought to reach a compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human remains.
An example of this occurred June 21, 2005, when community members and elders from a number of the 10 Algonquian nations in the Ottawa area convened on the Kitigan Zibi reservation near Maniwaki, Quebec, to inter ancestral human remains and burial goods — some dating back 6,000 years.
The idea of overlapping strata tracing back to successive periods was borrowed from the new geological and paleontological work of scholars like William Smith, James Hutton and Charles Lyell.
There are two types of remote sensing instruments—passive and active.
If initial survey and/or test excavations indicate the presence of an extraordinarily valuable site, the construction may be prohibited entirely.
However, prior to the development of modern techniques, excavations tended to be haphazard; the importance of concepts such as stratification and context were  overlooked.
A laser altimeter uses a lidar (see above) to measure the height of the instrument platform above the surface.
The literacy even of aristocrats has sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts.
Looting of archaeological sites is an ancient problem.
When such unrealistic subjects are treated more seriously, accusations of pseudoscience are invariably levelled at their proponents ''(see Pseudoarchaeology)''.
These civilizations are, not coincidentally, the best-known; they are open to the inquiry of historians for centuries, while the study of pre-historic cultures has arisen only recently.
An example of this type is the writing of Erich von Däniken.
Site survey is the attempt to systematically locate features of interest, such as houses and middens, within a site.
In the UK, popular archaeology programs such as ''Time Team'' and ''Meet the Ancestors'' have resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest.
The cut and fill are given consecutive numbers for recording purposes.
Along with other statutes, the NHPA mandates that projects on federal land or involving federal funds or permits consider the effects of the project on each archaeological site.
He was also ahead of his time in the analysis of his findings.
Much thorough and productive research has indeed been conducted in dramatic locales such as Copán and the Valley of the Kings, but the bulk of activities and finds of modern archaeology are not so sensational.
It is not uncommon for final excavation reports for major sites to take years to be published.
Smuggling of antiquities abroad to private collectors has caused great cultural and economic damage in many countries whose governments lack the resources and or the will to deter it.
Archaeologists trying to protect artifacts may be placed in danger by looters or locals trying to protect the artifacts from archaeologists who are viewed as looters by the locals.
John Aubrey was a pioneer archaeologist who recorded numerous megalithic and other field monuments in southern England.
Any knowledge of the early years of human civilization – the development of agriculture, cult practices of folk religion, the rise of the first cities – must come from archaeology.
The material record may be closer to a fair representation of society, though it is subject to its own biases, such as sampling bias and differential preservation.
His painstaking recording and study of artifacts, both in Egypt and later in Palestine, laid down many of the ideas behind modern archaeological recording; he remarked that "I believe the true line of research lies in the noting and comparison of the smallest details."
The commercial and academic demand for artifacts unfortunately contributes directly to the illicit antiquities trade.
The application of stratigraphy to archaeology first took place with the excavations of prehistorical and Bronze Age sites.
As a result, numerous archaeological organizations undertake mitigation work in advance of (or during) construction work in archaeologically sensitive areas, at the developer's expense.
Prehistory includes over 99% of the human past, from the Paleolithic until the advent of literacy in societies across the world.
The first stratigraphic excavation to reach wide popularity with public was that of Hissarlik, on the site of ancient Troy, carried out by Heinrich Schliemann, Frank Calvert, Wilhelm Dörpfeld and Carl Blegen in the 1870s.
Although negotiations were at times tense between the Kitigan Zibi community and museum, they were able to reach agreement.
Experimental archaeology represents the application of the experimental method to develop more highly controlled observations of processes that create and impact the archaeological record.
However, a much more comprehensive range of analytical techniques are available through archaeological science, meaning that artifacts can be dated and their compositions examined.
Plants growing above a buried man made structure, such as a stone wall, will develop more slowly, while those above other types of features (such as middens) may develop more rapidly.
Since 1990 PPG 16 has required planners to consider archaeology as a material consideration in determining applications for new development.
Drones costing as little as £650 have proven useful.
Meanwhile, another theory, known as historical processualism has emerged seeking to incorporate a focus on process and post-processual archaeology's emphasis of reflexivity and history.
Archaeological features whose electrical resistivity contrasts with that of surrounding soils can be detected and mapped.
In contrast, ''Homo sapiens'' has existed for at least 200,000 years, and other species of ''Homo'' for millions of years (see Human evolution).
Another popular thought that dates back to this era is that archaeology is monetarily lucrative.
Survey data are commonly assembled into maps, which may show surface features and/or artifact distribution.
CRM archaeologists frequently examine archaeological sites that are threatened by development.
One audience for archaeologists' work is the public.
His approach was highly methodical by the standards of the time, and he is widely regarded as the first scientific archaeologist.
The next task is to form a site plan and then use it to help decide the method of excavation.
The approach first gained prominence during the processual movement of the 1960s, and continues to be a vibrant component of post-processual and other current archaeological approaches.
Antiquarianism focused on the empirical evidence that existed for the understanding of the past, encapsulated in the motto of the 18th-century antiquary, Sir Richard Colt Hoare, "We speak from facts not theory".
Near Eastern archaeology, Islamic archaeology, Medieval archaeology), other thematic concern (e.g.
By independently knowing the height of the platform with respect to the mean Earth's surface, the topography of the underlying surface can be determined.
(Nevertheless, surveying a large region or site can be expensive, so archaeologists often employ sampling methods.)
Over 99% of the development of humanity has occurred within prehistoric cultures, who did not make use of writing, thereby not leaving written records of themselves that can be studied today.
And, third, the data collected from the excavation is studied and evaluated in an attempt to achieve the original research objectives of the archaeologists.
Since its early development, various specific sub-disciplines of archaeology have developed, including maritime archaeology, feminist archaeology and archaeoastronomy, and numerous different scientific techniques have been developed to aid archaeological investigation.
A new trend in the heated controversy between First Nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native artifacts to the original descendants.
It is not unheard-of for the agency responsible for the construction to simply choose the proposal that asks for the least funding.
The fill is what the feature is filled with, and will often appear quite distinct from the natural soil.
Cunnington made meticulous recordings of neolithic and Bronze Age barrows, and the terms he used to categorize and describe them are still used by archaeologists today.
The archaeological project then continues (or alternatively, begins) with a field survey.
From the SHPO's perspective there is to be no difference between a report submitted by a CRM firm operating under a deadline, and a multi-year academic project.
Again the percentage of a site excavated depends greatly on the country and "method statement" issued.
The cut describes the edge of the feature, where the feature meets the natural soil.
Volunteers work with professional USFS archaeologists and historians on national forests throughout the U.S.
Archaeologists study human prehistory and history, from the development of the first stone tools at Lomekwi in East Africa 3.3 million years ago up until recent decades.
The application of CRM in the United Kingdom is not limited to government-funded projects.
Even within a literate civilization many events and important human practices are not officially recorded.
maritime archaeology, landscape archaeology, battlefield archaeology), or a specific archaeological culture or civilization (e.g.
There is no one singular approach to archaeological theory that has been adhered to by all archaeologists.
Local heritage awareness is aimed at increasing civic and individual pride through projects such as community excavation projects, and better public presentations of archaeological sites and knowledge.
Further adaptation and innovation in archaeology continued in this period, when maritime archaeology and urban archaeology became more prevalent and rescue archaeology was developed as a result of increasing commercial development.
In England, ultimate responsibility of care for the historic environment rests with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport in association with English Heritage.
In the context of the logical positivism of processualism with its goals of improving the scientific rigor of archaeological epistemologies the experimental method gained importance.
Archaeology developed out of antiquarianism in Europe during the 19th century, and has since become a discipline practiced across the world.
Gordon Willey pioneered the technique of regional settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru, and survey of all levels became prominent with the rise of processual archaeology some years later.
Photographs of ripening grain, which changes colour rapidly at maturation, have revealed buried structures with great precision.
Today, CRM accounts for most of the archaeological research done in the United States and much of that in western Europe as well.
As a result, very few sites are excavated in their entirety.
However, it is not only prehistoric, pre-literate cultures that can be studied using archaeology but historic, literate cultures as well, through the sub-discipline of historical archaeology.
Modern excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and features, known as their provenance or provenience, be recorded.
Archaeology can be considered both a social science and a branch of the humanities.
Motivated by a desire to halt looting, curb pseudoarchaeology, and to help preserve archaeological sites through education and fostering public appreciation for the importance of archaeological heritage, archaeologists are mounting public-outreach campaigns.
By the end of the 20th century nearly all professional archaeologists, at least in developed countries, were graduates.
It questioned processualism's appeals to scientific positivism and impartiality, and emphasized the importance of a more self-critical theoretical reflexivity.
Distance to the object is determined by recording the time between the transmitted and backscattered pulses and using the speed of light to calculate the distance travelled.
In downtown New York City, archaeologists have exhumed the 18th century remains of the African Burial Ground.
It was not determined, however, if the remains were directly related to the Algonquin people who now inhabit the region.
Early ethnoarchaeological research focused on hunter-gatherer or foraging societies; today ethnoarchaeological research encompasses a much wider range of human behaviour.
The data is being analysed by the Austrian Archaeological Institute in Vienna.
Flavio Biondo, an Italian Renaissance humanist historian, created a systematic guide to the ruins and topography of ancient Rome in the early 15th century, for which he has been called an early founder of archaeology.
Early archaeology was mostly done by upper class, scholarly men.
Thus, written records tend to reflect the biases, assumptions, cultural values and possibly deceptions of a limited range of individuals, usually a small fraction of the larger population.
Excavation is the most expensive phase of archaeological research, in relative terms.
The purpose of archaeology is to learn more about past societies and the development of the human race.
If these do exist, time and money must be allotted for their excavation.
The West views time as linear; for many natives, it is cyclic.
Looters damage and destroy archaeological sites, denying future generations information about their ethnic and cultural heritage.
'''Laser Altimeter'''
Tentative steps towards the systematization of archaeology as a science took place during the Enlightenment era in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.
CRM is conducted by private companies that bid for projects by submitting proposals outlining the work to be done and an expected budget.
Created and co-produced by Nautilus Productions and Marine Grafics, this project enabled students to talk to scientists and learn about methods and technologies utilized by the underwater archaeology team.
Volunteers are involved in all aspects of professional archaeology under expert supervision.
They increasingly realize that their work can benefit non-academic and non-archaeological audiences, and that they have a responsibility to educate and inform the public about archaeology.
An archaeological investigation usually involves several distinct phases, each of which employs its own variety of methods.
These excavations began in 1748 in Pompeii, while in Herculaneum they began in 1738.
This allows the archaeologist to deduce which artifacts and features were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity.
In September 2014 drones weighing about  were used for 3D mapping of the above-ground ruins of the Greek city of Aphrodisias.
Kennewick Man is another repatriation candidate that has been the source of heated debate.
In Europe, philosophical interest in the remains of Greco-Roman civilization and the rediscovery of classical culture began in the late Middle Age.
In many societies, literacy was restricted to the elite classes, such as the clergy or the bureaucracy of court or temple.
His most important methodological innovation was his insistence that ''all'' artifacts, not just beautiful or unique ones, be collected and catalogued.
Due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism, some archaeologists have begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be descended from those under study.
They seek to stop looting by combatting people who illegally take artifacts from protected sites, and by alerting people who live near archaeological sites of the threat of looting.
Regional survey is the attempt to systematically locate previously unknown sites in a region.
His 1968 book, ''Chariots of the Gods?
Archaeologists have also been obliged to re-examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples believe to constitute sacred space.
Indigenous peoples especially lose access to and control over their 'cultural resources', ultimately denying them the opportunity to know their past.
In North America, archaeology is considered a sub-field of anthropology, while in Europe archaeology is often viewed as either a discipline in its own right or a sub-field of other disciplines.
In addition to their scientific importance, archaeological remains sometimes have political or cultural significance to descendants of the people who produced them, monetary value to collectors, or simply strong aesthetic appeal.
Among the goals of CRM are the identification, preservation, and maintenance of cultural sites on public and private lands, and the removal of culturally valuable materials from areas where they would otherwise be destroyed by human activity, such as proposed construction.
Active instruments emit energy and record what is reflected.
From a Western perspective, the past is long-gone; from a native perspective, disturbing the past can have dire consequences in the present.
At a basic level of analysis, artifacts found are cleaned, catalogued and compared to published collections.
Thus, written records tend to reflect the biases, assumptions, cultural values and possibly deceptions of a limited range of individuals, usually only a fraction of the larger population.
Writings that were produced by people more representative of the general population were unlikely to find their way into libraries and be preserved there for posterity.
It is then considered good practice for the information to be published so that it is available to other archaeologists and historians, although this is sometimes neglected.
Excavations were also carried out in the ancient towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum, both of which had been covered by ash during the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79.
He attempted to chart the chronological stylistic evolution of handwriting, medieval architecture, costume, and shield-shapes.
Metal detectorists have also contributed to archaeology where they have made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts from their archaeological context.
Bones, plants, and pollen collected from a site can all be analyzed using the methods of zooarchaeology, paleoethnobotany, and palynology, while any texts can usually be deciphered.
Moreover, the oldest of these remains might have no relation at all to the Algonquin or Iroquois, and belong to an earlier culture who previously inhabited the area.
The annual ratio of open academic archaeology positions (inclusive of post-doc, temporary, and non- tenure track appointments) to the annual number of archaeology MA/MSc and PhD students is disproportionate.
Satellite imagery is an example of passive remote sensing.
Agent-based modeling and simulation can be used to better understand past social dynamics and outcomes.
In the 1980s, a new postmodern movement arose led by the British archaeologists Michael Shanks, Christopher Tilley, Daniel Miller, and Ian Hodder, which has become known as post-processual archaeology.
Meanwhile, the work of Sir Arthur Evans at Knossos in Crete revealed the ancient existence of an equally advanced Minoan civilization.
For years, American archaeologists dug on Indian burial grounds and other places considered sacred, removing artifacts and human remains to storage facilities for further study.
This generalization laid the foundation for the modern popular view of archaeology and archaeologists.
This study involves at least a cursory examination to determine whether or not any significant archaeological sites are present in the area affected by the proposed construction.
Australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to survey these sites to give them some protection from being developed.
The discovery of entire towns, complete with utensils and even human shapes, as well the unearthing of ancient frescos, had a big impact throughout Europe.
There is also a flourishing industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological holiday tours.
A relatively nascent subfield is that of archaeological materials, designed to enhance understanding of prehistoric and non-industrial culture through scientific analysis of the structure and properties of materials associated with human activity.
In the 1960s, an archaeological movement largely led by American archaeologists like Lewis Binford and Kent Flannery arose that rebelled against the established cultural-history archaeology.
The Archaeological Legacy Institute (ALI), self-described as "an independent, nonprofit, tax-exempt (501c3)", is a research and education corporation registered in Oregon in 1999.
The remains and artifacts, including jewelry, tools and weapons, were originally excavated from various sites in the Ottawa Valley, including Morrison and the Allumette Islands.
They had been part of the Canadian Museum of Civilization's research collection for decades, some since the late 19th century.
Petrie developed the system of dating layers based on pottery and ceramic findings, which revolutionized the chronological basis of Egyptology.
Some archaeologists refer to such off-the-mark portrayals as "pseudoarchaeology".
The archaeological record consists of artifacts, architecture, biofacts or ecofacts, and cultural landscapes.
Before any practical work can begin, however, a clear objective as to what the archaeologists are looking to achieve must be agreed upon.
An inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where close to 80 boxes of various sizes are buried.
The material record is closer to a fair representation of society, though it is subject to its own inaccuracies, such as sampling bias and differential preservation.
Many important developments in human history occurred during prehistory, such as the evolution of humanity during the Paleolithic period, when the hominins developed from the australopithecines in Africa and eventually into modern ''Homo sapiens''.
Survey was not widely practiced in the early days of archaeology.
If no materials are found, the area surveyed is deemed sterile.
Second, an excavation may take place to uncover any archaeological features buried under the ground.
This always involves determining their horizontal locations, and sometimes vertical position as well (also see Primary Laws of Archaeology).
Because archaeology is the study of past human activity, it stretches back to about 2.5 million years ago when we find the first stone tools - The Oldowan Industry.
Many non-fiction authors have ignored the scientific methods of processual archaeology, or the specific critiques of it contained in post-processualism.
Ethnoarchaeology is the ethnographic study of living people, designed to aid in our interpretation of the archaeological record.
A bird's-eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites.
Even where written records do exist, they are often incomplete and invariably biased to some extent.
Each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods.
In many societies, literacy was restricted to the elite classes, such as the clergy or the bureaucracy of court or temple.
He arranged his artifacts by type or "typologically, and within types by date or "chronologically".
Examples of formal archaeological use of metal detectors include musketball distribution analysis on English Civil War battlefields, metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a 19th-century ship wreck, and service cable location during evaluation.
The literacy even of aristocrats has sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts.
All this information serves as a permanent record of the now-destroyed archaeology and is used in describing and interpreting the site.
Aerial survey is conducted using cameras attached to airplanes, balloons, UAVs, or even Kites.
They proposed a "New Archaeology", which would be more "scientific" and "anthropological", with hypothesis testing and the scientific method very important parts of what became known as processual archaeology.
To generalize, the public views archaeology as a fantasized hobby more than a job in the scientific community.
The job of archaeologist is depicted as a "romantic adventurist occupation".
Archaeologists are also very much reliant on public support; the question of exactly who they are doing their work for is often discussed.
This generalization has been with western culture for a long time.
'''Lidar''' (Light Detection and Ranging)
A major figure in the development of archaeology into a rigorous science was the army officer and ethnologist, Augustus Pitt Rivers, who began excavations on his land in England in the 1880s.
