Hardly any recent discovery shows more forcibly than this how little we as yet know of the former inhabitants of the world."
Unlike the analysis from the description of ''Xiaotingia'', the analysis conducted by Godefroit, ''et al.''
The lack of a bony breastbone suggests that ''Archaeopteryx'' was not a very strong flier, but flight muscles might have attached to the thick, boomerang-shaped wishbone, the platelike coracoids, or perhaps, to a cartilaginous sternum.
The tail feathers were less asymmetrical, again in line with the situation in modern birds and also had firm vanes.
In German, this ambiguity is resolved by the term ''Schwinge'' which does not necessarily mean a wing used for flying.
lithographica'' except in its larger size.
Paul measured some of the inner primary feathers, finding rachises  across.
Their claims were repudiated by Alan J. Charig and others at the Natural History Museum in London.
Altogether, it appears that the species was not particularly specialized for running on the ground or for perching.
Currently located at the Bürgermeister-Müller-Museum in Solnhofen, it originally was classified as ''Compsognathus'' by an amateur collector, the same mayor Friedrich Müller after which the museum is named.
pointed to the presence of hairline cracks in the slabs running through both rock and fossil impressions, and mineral growth over the slabs that had occurred before discovery and preparation, as evidence that the feathers were original.
A main belt asteroid discovered in 1991, 9860 Archaeopteryx, was named in honour of the genus.
This, they reasoned, would require an even thicker rachis, evidence for which has not yet been presented.
While these conceivably may have been nude, this may still be an artefact of preservation.
''Urschwinge'' was the favoured translation of ''Archaeopteryx'' among German scholars in the late nineteenth century.
It is currently located at the Paläontologisches Museum München in Munich, to which it was sold in 1999 for 1.9 million Deutschmark.
The feather studied was most probably a single covert, which would have partly covered the primary feathers on the wings.
lithographica'' also had a constricted portion of the crown in some teeth and a stouter metatarsus.
The short and rounded shape of the wings would have increased drag, but also could have improved its ability to fly through cluttered environments such as trees and brush (similar wing shapes are seen in birds that fly through trees and brush, such as crows and pheasants).
The skull scan also revealed the structure of its inner ear.
The first detailed study of the hind wings by Longrich in 2006, suggested that the structures formed up to 12% of the total airfoil.
The pterosaurs included species such as ''Rhamphorhynchus'' belonging to the Rhamphorhynchidae, the group which dominated the niche currently occupied by seabirds, and which became extinct at the end of the Jurassic.
Nudds and Dyke reported a diameter of  for the longest primary feather, which Paul could not confirm using photographs.
There are some indications it is not from the same animal as most of the skeletons (the "typical" ''A.
The resultant structure was then compared to that of 87 modern bird species and was determined with a high percentage of likelihood to be black.
Still others suggest that ''Archaeopteryx'' might have been at home both in the trees and on the ground, like modern crows, and this latter view is what currently is considered best-supported by morphological characters.
Kurzanov (1987) suggested that ''Avimimus'' was more likely to be the ancestor of all birds than ''Archaeopteryx''.
It is currently located at the Humboldt Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin.
Another phylogenetic study by Godefroit, ''et al.
lithographica'' and ''A.
Nudds and Dyke had assumed a mass of  for the Munich specimen ''Archaeopteryx'', a young juvenile, based on published mass estimates of larger specimens.
The study also found that the avialans ''Jeholornis'' and ''Sapeornis'' grew relatively slowly, as did the dromaeosaurid ''Mahakala''.
The pterosaurs, which also included ''Pterodactylus'', were common enough that it is unlikely that the specimens found are vagrants from the larger islands  to the north.
In the 1970s, John Ostrom, following T. H. Huxley's lead in 1868, argued that birds evolved within theropod dinosaurs and ''Archaeopteryx'' was a critical piece of evidence for this argument; it had several avian features, such as a wishbone, flight feathers, wings, and a partially reversed first toe along with dinosaur and theropod features.
Modern paleontology has often classified ''Archaeopteryx'' as the most primitive bird.
'', using a more inclusive matrix than the one from the analysis in the description of ''Eosinopteryx brevipenna'', also found ''Archaeopteryx'' to be a member of Avialae (defined by the authors as the most inclusive clade containing ''Passer domesticus'', but not ''Dromaeosaurus albertensis'' or ''Troodon formosus'').
What was initially believed to be a bony sternum turned out to be part of the coracoid, but a cartilaginous sternum may have been present.
They studied more than 70 families of living birds, and found that some flightless types do have a range of asymmetry in their feathers, and that the feathers of ''Archaeopteryx'' fall into this range.
The islands that surrounded the Solnhofen lagoon were low lying, semi-arid, and sub-tropical with a long dry season and little rain.
The poorly vascularized bone of ''Archaeopteryx'' might have grown as slowly as that in a mallard (2.5 micrometres per day) or as fast as that in an ostrich (4.2 micrometres per day).
In 2007, two sets of scientists therefore petitioned the ICZN requesting that the London specimen explicitly be made the type by designating it as the new holotype specimen, or neotype.
Described in 1884 by Wilhelm Dames, it is the most complete specimen, and the first with a complete head.
Using scanning electron microscopy technology and energy-dispersive X-ray analysis, the team was able to detect the structure of melanosomes in the single-feather specimen described in 1861.
It is not thought to be a true ancestor of modern birds, but rather, a close relative of that ancestor.
The discovery of an eleventh specimen was announced in 2011, and it was described in 2014.
An eighth, fragmentary specimen was discovered in 1990, not in Solnhofen limestone, but in somewhat younger sediments at Daiting, Suevia.
Similar in size to a Eurasian magpie, with the largest individuals possibly attaining the size of a raven, the largest species of ''Archaeopteryx'' could grow to about  in length.
Therefore, it is known as the '''Daiting Specimen''', and had been known since 1996 only from a cast, briefly shown at the Naturkundemuseum in Bamberg.
Apart from that, the feather traces in the Berlin specimen are limited to a sort of "proto-down" not dissimilar to that found in the dinosaur ''Sinosauropteryx'': decomposed and fluffy, and possibly even appearing more like fur than feathers in life (although not in their microscopic structure).
The degree of asymmetry seen in ''Archaeopteryx'' is more typical for slow flyers than for flightless birds.
It is possibly a separate genus (''Jurapteryx recurva'') or species (''A.
A supposed additional species, ''Wellnhoferia grandis'' (based on the Solnhofen specimen), seems to be indistinguishable from ''A.
Long in a private collection in Switzerland, the '''Thermopolis Specimen''' (WDC CSG 100) was discovered in Bavaria and described in 2005 by Mayr, Pohl, and Peters.
Their suggestions have not been taken seriously by palaeontologists, as their evidence was largely based on misunderstandings of geology, and they never discussed the other feather-bearing specimens, which have increased in number since then.
The original was purchased by palaeontologist Raimund Albertsdörfer in 2009.
''Archaeopteryx'' had a cerebrum-to-brain-volume ratio 78% of the way to modern birds from the condition of non-coelurosaurian dinosaurs such as ''Carcharodontosaurus'' or ''Allosaurus'', which had a crocodile-like anatomy of the brain and inner ear.
It most likely hunted small prey, seizing it with its jaws if it was small enough, or with its claws if it was larger.
A more thorough analysis was published soon after to test this hypothesis, and failed to arrive at the same result; it found ''Archaeopteryx'' in its traditional position at the base of Avialae, while ''Xiaotingia'' was recovered as a basal dromaeosaurid or troodontid.
The flora of these islands was adapted to these dry conditions and consisted mostly of low () shrubs.
The specimen is missing its head and tail, although the rest of the skeleton is mostly intact.
The authors of the follow-up study noted that uncertainties still exist, and that it may not be possible to state confidently whether or not ''Archaeopteryx'' is a member of Avialae or not, barring new and better specimens of relevant species.
The richness and diversity of the Solnhofen limestones in which all specimens of ''Archaeopteryx'' have been found have shed light on an ancient Jurassic Bavaria strikingly different from the present day.
Newer research shows that while the ''Archaeopteryx'' brain was more complex than that of more primitive theropods, it had a more generalized brain volume among maniraptoran dinosaurs, even smaller than that of other non-avian dinosaurs in several instances, which indicates the neurological development required for flight was already a common trait in the maniraptoran clade.
Agnolín and Novas (2013) found ''Archaeopteryx'' and (possibly synonymous) ''Wellnhoferia'' to be the basalmost avialans (Avialae being defined by the authors as including ''Archaeopteryx lithographica'' and ''Passer'', their most recent common ancestor and all of its descendants), with Microraptoria, Unenlagiinae, and the clade containing ''Anchiornis'' and ''Xiaotingia'' being successively closer outgroups to the Avialae.
Since then twelve specimens have been recovered:
siemensii'', but their taxonomic history is complicated.
The excellent preservation of ''Archaeopteryx'' fossils and other terrestrial fossils found at Solnhofen indicates that they did not travel far before becoming preserved.
Most of their evidence for a forgery was based on unfamiliarity with the processes of lithification; for example, they proposed that, based on the difference in texture associated with the feathers, feather impressions were applied to a thin layer of cement, without realizing that feathers themselves would have caused a textural difference.
As interpreted today, the name ''A.
These features make ''Archaeopteryx'' a clear candidate for a transitional fossil between non-avian dinosaurs and birds.
Below is a cladogram published in 2013 by Godefroit ''et al.''
The other is that Owen wanted to set a trap for Darwin, hoping the latter would support the fossils so Owen could discredit him with the forgery; this is unlikely because Owen wrote a detailed paper on the London specimen, so such an action would certainly backfire.
It was on display for the first time with six other original fossils of ''Archaeopteryx'' at the Munich Mineral Show in October 2009.
In addition, they claimed that the other specimens of ''Archaeopteryx'' known at the time did not have feathers, which is incorrect; the Maxberg and Eichstätt specimens have obvious feathers.
''"Archaeopteryx" vicensensis'' (Anon.
These occur on the remainder of the body—although some feathers did not fossilize and others were obliterated during preparation, leaving bare patches on specimens—and the lower neck.
Only the front of its face is missing.
lithographica'' (consisting of at least the London and Solnhofen specimens), and ''A.
According to a study by Philip Senter in 2006, ''Archaeopteryx'' was indeed unable to use flapping flight as modern birds do, but it may well have used a downstroke-only flap-assisted gliding technique.
Finally, the motives they suggested for a forgery are not strong, and are contradictory; one is that Richard Owen wanted to forge evidence in support of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, which is unlikely given Owen's views toward Darwin and his theory.
The authors used a modified version of the matrix from the study describing ''Xiaotingia'', adding ''Jinfengopteryx elegans'' and ''Eosinopteryx brevipenna'' to it, as well as adding four additional characters related to the development of the plumage.
The avialans ''Confuciusornis'' and ''Ichthyornis'' grew relatively quickly, following a growth trend similar to that of modern birds.
''Archaeopteryx'' seemed to confirm Darwin's theories and has since become a key piece of evidence for the origin of birds, the transitional fossils debate, and confirmation of evolution.
This would have reduced stall speed by up to 6% and turning radius by up to 12%.
Due to these differences, most individual specimens have been given their own species name at one point or another.
The transaction was financed by Ernst Werner von Siemens, founder of the famous company that bears his name.
Because it displays features common to both birds and non-avian dinosaurs, ''Archaeopteryx'' has often been considered a link between them.
''Archaeopteryx'' wings were relatively large, which would have resulted in a low stall speed and reduced turning radius.
Thus, as more than one species seems to be involved, the research into the Berlin specimen's feathers does not necessarily hold true for the rest of the species of ''Archaeopteryx''.
A twelfth specimen had been discovered by amateur collectors in 2010 at the Schamhaupten quarry, but the finding was only announced in February 2014.
''Archaeopteryx'' continues to play an important part in scientific debates about the origin and evolution of birds.
It is also one of the least complete specimens, consisting mostly of limb bones, isolated cervical vertebrae, and ribs.
In part they are firm and thus capable of supporting flight.
It is the largest specimen known and may belong to a separate genus and species, ''Wellnhoferia grandis''.
reported a discolouration: a dark band between two layers of limestone – they say it is the product of sedimentation.
Nonetheless, ''Archaeopteryx'' was often used as a model of the true ancestral bird.
The presence of "hind wings", asymmetrical flight feathers stemming from the legs similar to those seen in dromaeosaurids such as ''Microraptor'', also would have added to the aerial mobility of ''Archaeopteryx''.
This implies that the wings and tail were used for lift generation, but it is unclear whether ''Archaeopteryx'' was capable of flapping flight or simply a glider.
Another possibility is that they had not achieved true flight, but instead used their wings as aids for extra lift while running over water after the fashion of the basilisk lizard, which could explain their presence in lake and marine deposits (see Evolution of bird flight).
It appears that most ''Archaeopteryx'' specimens became embedded in anoxic sediment after drifting some time on their backs in the sea—the head and neck and the tail are generally bent downward, which suggests that the specimens had just started to rot when they were embedded, with tendons and muscle relaxing so that the characteristic shape (death pose) of the fossil specimens was achieved.
In the Berlin specimen, there are "trousers" of well-developed feathers on the legs; some of these feathers seem to have a basic contour feather structure, but are somewhat decomposed (they lack barbicels as in ratites).
Paul also criticized the measurements of the rachises themselves, noting that the feathers in the Munich specimen are poorly preserved.
(2013) recovered ''Archaeopteryx'' as more closely related to dromaeosaurids and troodontids in the analysis included in their description of ''Eosinopteryx brevipenna''.
In particular, they shared the following features with the dromaeosaurids and troodontids: jaws with sharp teeth, three fingers with claws, a long bony tail, hyperextensible second toes ("killing claw"), feathers (which also suggest warm-bloodedness), and various features of the skeleton.
The initial discovery, a single feather, was unearthed in 1860 or 1861 and described in 1861 by Hermann von Meyer.
In addition, in 1977 the first specific name of the Haarlem specimen, ''crassipes'', described by Meyer as a pterosaur before its true nature was realized, also was suppressed.
Between the late nineteenth century and the early twenty-first century, ''Archaeopteryx'' had been generally accepted by palaeontologists and popular reference books as the oldest known bird (member of the group Avialae).
Dozens of names have been published for the handful of specimens, most of which are simply spelling errors (''lapsus'').
That same year, the first complete specimen of ''Archaeopteryx'' was announced.
An early and unusual example is Alfred Jarry's 1897 play  ('Ubu cuckolded, or the Archaeopteryx'), which features an ''Archaeopteryx'' as an important character.
It was named from a single feather in 1861.
The sideways orientation of the glenoid (shoulder) joint between scapula, coracoid, and humerus—instead of the dorsally angled arrangement found in modern birds—may indicate that ''Archaeopteryx'' was unable to lift its wings above its back, a requirement for the upstroke found in modern flapping flight.
Despite variation among these fossils, most experts regard all the remains that have been discovered as belonging to a single species, although this is still debated.
siemensii''; though often considered a synonym of ''A.
''Archaeopteryx'' was roughly the size of a raven, with broad wings that were rounded at the ends and a long tail compared to its body length.
then attempted to show that the cracks would have propagated naturally through their postulated cement layer, but neglected to account for the fact that the cracks were old and had been filled with calcite, and thus were not able to propagate.
On the other hand, Godefroit, ''et al.''
These characteristics taken together suggest that ''Archaeopteryx'' had the keen sense of hearing, balance, spatial perception, and coordination needed to fly.
Although it was once exhibited at the Maxberg Museum in Solnhofen, it is currently missing.
Thus, ''Archaeopteryx'' plays an important role, not only in the study of the origin of birds, but in the study of dinosaurs.
The specimen is considered to represent the most complete and best-preserved ''Archaeopteryx'' remains yet.
The study does not mean that ''Archaeopteryx'' was entirely black, but suggests that it had some black colouration which included the coverts.
did not find ''Archaeopteryx'' to be related particularly closely to ''Anchiornis'' and ''Xiaotingia'', which were recovered as basal troodontids instead.
At first he referred to a single feather which appeared to resemble a modern bird's remex (wing feather), but he had heard of and been shown a rough sketch of the London specimen, to which he referred as a "''Skelett eines mit ähnlichen Federn bedeckten ''" ("skeleton of an animal covered in similar feathers").
Carney pointed out that this is consistent with what we know of modern flight characteristics, in that black melanosomes have structural properties that strengthen feathers for flight.
siemensii'' specimens being relatively simple and straight).
Chiappe suggested that it is difficult to measure the rachises of fossilized feathers, and Currie speculated that ''Archaeopteryx'' and ''Confuciusornis'' must have been able to fly to some degree, as their fossils are preserved in what is believed to have been marine or lake sediments, suggesting that they must have been able to fly over deep water.
The closest modern analogue for the Solnhofen conditions is said to be Orca Basin in the northern Gulf of Mexico, although it is much deeper than the Solnhofen lagoons.
After his death in 1991, it was discovered that the specimen was missing and may have been stolen or sold.
They were markedly asymmetrical and showed the structure of flight feathers in modern birds, with vanes given stability by a barb-barbule-barbicel arrangement.
Unlike modern birds, ''Archaeopteryx'' had small teeth, as well as a long bony tail, features which ''Archaeopteryx'' shared with other dinosaurs of the time.
''Archaeopteryx'' feathers, although less documented than its other features, were very similar in structure to modern-day bird feathers.
A scenario outlined by Elżanowski in 2002 suggested that ''Archaeopteryx'' used its wings mainly to escape predators by glides punctuated with shallow downstrokes to reach successively higher perches, and alternatively, to cover longer distances (mainly) by gliding down from cliffs or treetops.
The overall brain anatomy was reconstructed using the scan.
It is privately owned and has yet to be given a name.
The authors determined that ''Archaeopteryx'' and ''Confuciusornis'', were unable to use flapping flight.
They assumed that poorly vascularized bone grows at similar rates in all birds and in ''Archaeopteryx''.
It was found in a limestone bed that was a few hundred thousand years younger than the other finds.
Its easily recognizable appearance, and the public's interest in dinosaurs, have made ''Archaeopteryx'' a feature of worldwide popular culture.
Comparisons between the scleral rings of ''Archaeopteryx'' and modern birds and reptiles indicate that it may have been diurnal, similar to most modern birds.
They also expressed disbelief that slabs would split so smoothly, or that one half of a slab containing fossils would have good preservation, but not the counterslab.
Recent studies of flight feather barb geometry reveal that modern birds possess a larger barb angle in the trailing vane of the feather, whereas ''Archaeopteryx'' lacks this large barb angle, indicating potentially weak flight abilities.
Specimens of ''Archaeopteryx'' were most notable for their well-developed flight feathers.
Gregory Paul also disagreed with the study, arguing in a 2010 response that Nudds and Dyke had overestimated the masses of these early birds, and that more accurate mass estimates allowed powered flight even with relatively narrow rachises.
bavarica'', but more recent studies suggest it belongs to ''A.
''Archaeopteryx'' was found to form a grade at the base of Avialae with ''Xiaotingia'', ''Anchiornis'', and ''Aurornis''.
They suggested that ''Archaeopteryx'' was a dinosaur that was no more closely related to birds than were other dinosaur groups.
As the feather had been designated the type specimen, the name ''Archaeopteryx'' should then no longer be applied to the skeletons, thus creating significant nomenclatorial confusion.
However, it was later shown that this interpretation was incorrect, and that the isolated feather was indeed matte black with a darker tip.
''fide'' Lambrecht, 1933) is a ''nomen nudum'' for what appears to be an undescribed pterosaur.
In a 2013 study published in the ''Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry'', new analyses of ''Archaeopteryx'''s feathers revealed that the animal may have had complex light- and dark-coloured plumage, with only the tips of its flight feathers being primarily black.
The '''Berlin Specimen''' (HMN 1880/81) was discovered in 1874 or 1875 on the Blumenberg near Eichstätt, Germany, by farmer Jakob Niemeyer.
Barsbold (1983) and Zweers and Van den Berge (1997) noted that many maniraptoran lineages are extremely birdlike, and they suggested that different groups of birds may have descended from different dinosaur ancestors.
One of the few modern birds that exhibit slow growth is the flightless kiwi, and the authors speculated that ''Archaeopteryx'' and the kiwi had similar basal metabolic rate.
In 1897 it was named by Dames as a new species, ''A.
Differences do exist among the specimens, and while some researchers regard these as due to the different ages of the specimens, some may be related to actual species diversity.
lithographica'' (the claws of ''A.
It could reach up to  in body length, with an estimated mass of .
In 1954 Gavin de Beer concluded that the London specimen was the holotype.
lithographica'' only referred to the single feather described by Meyer.
In 2004, scientists analysing a detailed CT scan of the braincase of the London ''Archaeopteryx'' concluded that its brain was significantly larger than that of most dinosaurs, indicating that it possessed the brain size necessary for flying.
The two species are distinguished primarily by large flexor tubercles on the foot claws in ''A.
The '''Munich Specimen''' (BSP 1999 I 50, formerly known as the ''Solenhofer-Aktien-Verein Specimen'') was discovered on 3 August 1992 near Langenaltheim and described in 1993 by Wellnhofer.
The feathers of ''Archaeopteryx'' were asymmetrical.
This study was criticized by Philip J. Currie and Luis Chiappe.
Several authors have done so.
The '''Solnhofen Specimen''' (unnumbered specimen) was discovered in the 1970s near Eichstätt, Germany, and described in 1988 by Wellnhofer.
Other well-developed areas involved hearing and muscle coordination.
It is missing only portions of the neck, tail, backbone, and head.
It is in private possession and, since 2004, on loan to the Bürgermeister-Müller Museum in Solnhofen, so it is called the '''Bürgermeister-Müller Specimen'''; the institute itself officially refers to it as the "Exemplar of the families Ottman & Steil, Solnhofen".
Because these feathers are of an advanced form (flight feathers), these fossils are evidence that the evolution of feathers began before the Late Jurassic.
The analysis suggested that the rachises on these two genera were thinner and weaker than those of modern birds relative to body mass.
The ICZN, implicitly accepting de Beer's standpoint, did indeed suppress the plethora of alternative names initially proposed for the first skeleton specimens, which mainly resulted from the acrimonious dispute between Meyer and his opponent Johann Andreas Wagner (whose ''Griphosaurus problematicus'' – "problematic riddle-lizard" – was a vitriolic sneer at Meyer's ''Archaeopteryx'').
The first skeleton, known as the '''London Specimen''' (BMNH 37001), was unearthed in 1861 near Langenaltheim, Germany, and perhaps given to local physician Karl Häberlein in return for medical services.
siemensii'' (consisting of at least the Berlin, Munich, and Thermopolis specimens).
The Thermopolis Specimen was assigned to ''Archaeopteryx siemensii'' in 2007.
Composed of a torso, the '''Maxberg Specimen''' (S5) was discovered in 1956 near Langenaltheim; it was brought to the attention of professor Florian Heller in 1958 and described by him in 1959.
''Archaeopteryx'' was long considered the earliest known bird, so it has received widespread attention in popular media.
Meyer suggested this in his description.
Over the years, ten more fossils of ''Archaeopteryx'' have surfaced.
Some scientists, including Thomson and Speakman, have questioned this.
Most of these eleven fossils include impressions of feathers.
In 2007, a review of all well-preserved specimens including the then-newly discovered Thermopolis specimen concluded that two distinct species of ''Archaeopteryx'' could be supported: ''A.
In 1960, Swinton accordingly proposed that the name ''Archaeopteryx lithographica'' be placed on the official genera list making the alternative names ''Griphosaurus'' and ''Griphornis'' invalid.
A histological study by Erickson, Norell, Zhongue, and others in 2009 estimated that ''Archaeopteryx'' grew relatively slowly compared to modern birds, presumably because the outermost portions of ''Archaeopteryx'' bones appear poorly vascularized; in living vertebrates poorly vascularized bone is correlated with slow growth rate.
Beginning in 1985, a group including astronomer Fred Hoyle and physicist Lee Spetner published a series of papers claiming that the feathers on the Berlin and London specimens of ''Archaeopteryx'' were forged.
In 2010, Robert L. Nudds and Gareth J. Dyke in the journal ''Science'' published a paper in which they analysed the rachises of the primary feathers of ''Confuciusornis'' and ''Archaeopteryx''.
Despite the presence of numerous avian features, ''Archaeopteryx'' had many non-avian theropod dinosaur characteristics.
They also mention that a complete absence of air bubbles in the rock slabs is further proof that the specimen is authentic.
The latitude was similar to Florida, though the climate was likely to have been drier, as evidenced by fossils of plants with adaptations for arid conditions and a lack of terrestrial sediments characteristic of rivers.
Various aspects of the morphology of ''Archaeopteryx'' point to either an arboreal or ground existence, including the length of its legs and the elongation in its feet; some authorities consider it likely to have been a generalist capable of feeding in both shrubs and open ground, as well as along the shores of the lagoon.
Because the bones of ''Archaeopteryx'' could not be histologically sectioned in a formal skeletochronological (growth ring) analysis, Erickson and colleagues used bone vascularity (porosity) to estimate bone growth rate.
He then sold it for £700 to the Natural History Museum in London, where it remains.
This has been interpreted as evidence that it was a flyer, because flightless birds tend to have symmetrical feathers.
It is one of the more complete specimens, but is missing much of the skull and one forelimb.
''Archaeopteryx'' lived in the Late Jurassic around 150&nbsp;million years ago, in what is now southern Germany during a time when Europe was an archipelago of islands in a shallow warm tropical sea, much closer to the equator than it is now.
This suggestion was upheld by the ICZN after four years of debate, and the London specimen was designated the neotype on October 3, 2011.
Despite these criticisms, Nudds and Dyke stood by their original conclusions.
Other scientists see ''Archaeopteryx'' as running quickly along the ground, supporting the idea that birds evolved flight by running (the "ground up" hypothesis proposed by Samuel Wendell Williston).
The '''Eichstätt Specimen''' (JM 2257) was discovered in 1951 near Workerszell, Germany, and described by Peter Wellnhofer in 1974.
