:This treatise was thought lost until the discovery of the Archimedes Palimpsest in 1906.
Some of his sections float with the base under water and the summit above water, similar to the way that icebergs float.
The palimpsest holds seven treatises, including the only surviving copy of ''On Floating Bodies'' in the original Greek.
In ''The Sand Reckoner'', Archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain.
In order to catch fire, wood needs to reach its autoignition temperature, which is around 300&nbsp;°C (570&nbsp;°F).
(''Mē mou tous kuklous taratte!
Archimedes died ''c''.
Research published by Dr. Reviel Netz of Stanford University in 2003 argued that Archimedes was attempting to determine how many ways the pieces could be assembled into the shape of a square.
* ''On Floating Bodies'' (two volumes)
As the number of sides increases, it becomes a more accurate approximation of a circle.
The surface area is 42 for the sphere, and 62 for the cylinder (including its two bases), where  is the radius of the sphere and cylinder.
While taking a bath, he noticed that the level of the water in the tub rose as he got in, and realized that this effect could be used to determine the volume of the crown.
287&nbsp;BC in the seaport city of Syracuse, Sicily, at that time a self-governing colony in Magna Graecia, located along the coast of Southern Italy.
He also proved that the area of a circle was equal to π multiplied by the square of the radius of the circle (πr2).
The ''Lemmas'' may be based on an earlier work by Archimedes that is now lost.
It was also pointed out that since Syracuse faces the sea towards the east, the Roman fleet would have had to attack during the morning for optimal gathering of light by the mirrors.
A test of the Archimedes heat ray was carried out in 1973 by the Greek scientist Ioannis Sakkas.
This would have used the principle of the parabolic reflector in a manner similar to a solar furnace.
This principle states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces.
:This is a dissection puzzle similar to a Tangram, and the treatise describing it was found in more complete form in the Archimedes Palimpsest.
This is the Archimedean property of real numbers.
Flames broke out on a patch of the ship, but only after the sky had been cloudless and the ship had remained stationary for around ten minutes.
It is the locus of points corresponding to the locations over time of a point moving away from a fixed point with a constant speed along a line which rotates with constant angular velocity.
The odometer was described as a cart with a gear mechanism that dropped a ball into a container after each mile traveled.
The 2nd century AD author Lucian wrote that during the Siege of Syracuse (''c.''
Eventually he found the tomb near the Agrigentine gate in Syracuse, in a neglected condition and overgrown with bushes.
This purported weapon has been the subject of ongoing debate about its credibility since the Renaissance.
If the first term in this series is the area of the triangle, then the second is the sum of the areas of two triangles whose bases are the two smaller secant lines, and so on.
The introductory letter states that Archimedes' father was an astronomer named Phidias.
''The Sand Reckoner'' or ''Psammites'' is the only surviving work in which Archimedes discusses his views on astronomy.
It is the only known source of ''The Method of Mechanical Theorems'', referred to by Suidas and thought to have been lost forever.
He was also one of the first to apply mathematics to physical phenomena, founding hydrostatics and statics, including an explanation of the principle of the lever.
:In this treatise, Archimedes counts the number of grains of sand that will fit inside the universe.
Plutarch also gives a  account of the death of Archimedes which suggests that he may have been killed while attempting to surrender to a Roman soldier.
Archimedes' machine was a device with a revolving screw-shaped blade inside a cylinder.
The treatise defines what is now called the Archimedean spiral.
This is a description of a planetarium or orrery.
After the capture of Syracuse ''c.''
The standard versions of the life of Archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of Ancient Rome.
A sculpted sphere and cylinder were placed on the tomb of Archimedes at his request.
He achieves this by calculating the value of a geometric series that sums to infinity with the ratio .
The most widely known anecdote about Archimedes tells of how he invented a method for determining the volume of an object with an irregular shape.
In a 12th-century text titled ''Mappae clavicula'' there are instructions on how to perform the weighings in the water in order to calculate the percentage of silver used, and thus solve the problem.
When the mirrors were focused accurately, the ship burst into flames within a few seconds.
The relatively few copies of Archimedes' written work that survived through the Middle Ages were an influential source of ideas for scientists during the Renaissance, while the discovery in 1906 of previously unknown works by Archimedes in the Archimedes Palimpsest has provided new insights into how he obtained mathematical results.
A biography of Archimedes was written by his friend Heracleides but this work has been lost, leaving the details of his life obscure.
In all of the experiments, the sail failed to reach the 210&nbsp;°C (410&nbsp;°F) required to catch fire, and the verdict was again "busted".
A tomb discovered in the courtyard of the Hotel Panorama in Syracuse in the early 1960s was claimed to be that of Archimedes, but there was no compelling evidence for this and the location of his tomb today is unknown.
", meaning "I have found it!").
Archimedes calculates the areas of the 14 pieces which can be assembled to form a square.
The plywood ship had a coating of tar paint, which may have aided combustion.
The date of birth is based on a statement by the Byzantine Greek historian John Tzetzes that Archimedes lived for 75 years.
Cicero (106–43&nbsp;BC) mentions Archimedes briefly in his dialogue ''De re publica'', which portrays a fictional conversation taking place in 129&nbsp;BC.
However, the first reliable reference to the formula is given by Heron of Alexandria in the 1st century AD.
* ''On the Sphere and the Cylinder'' (two volumes)
The older works in the palimpsest were identified by scholars as 10th century AD copies of previously unknown treatises by Archimedes.
:with real numbers  and .
After four such steps, when the polygons had 96 sides each, he was able to determine that the value of π lay between 3 (approximately 3.1429) and 3 (approximately 3.1408), consistent with its actual value of approximately 3.1416.
A Roman soldier commanded him to come and meet General Marcellus but he declined, saying that he had to finish working on the problem.
The world's first seagoing steamship with a screw propeller was the SS ''Archimedes'', which was launched in 1839 and named in honor of Archimedes and his work on the screw.
It is addressed to Eratosthenes and the mathematicians in Alexandria.
The parchment spent hundreds of years in a monastery library in Constantinople before being sold to a private collector in the 1920s.
In ''Measurement of a Circle'', Archimedes gives the value of the square root of 3 as lying between  (approximately 1.7320261) and  (approximately 1.7320512).
For practical purposes water is incompressible, so the submerged crown would displace an amount of water equal to its own volume.
In 1906, the Danish professor Johan Ludvig Heiberg visited Constantinople and examined a 174-page goatskin parchment of prayers written in the 13th century AD.
This was once thought to have been beyond the range of the technology available in ancient times, but the discovery of the Antikythera mechanism in 1902 has confirmed that devices of this kind were known to the ancient Greeks.
Ausonius refers to the puzzle as ''Ostomachion'', a Greek compound word formed from the roots of  (''osteon'', bone) and  (machē&nbsp;– fight).
* ''The Sand Reckoner''
During the Renaissance, the ''Editio Princeps'' (First Edition) was published in Basel in 1544 by Johann Herwagen with the works of Archimedes in Greek and Latin.
On October 29, 1998 it was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for $2 million at Christie's in New York.
It has been suggested that a large array of highly polished bronze or copper shields acting as mirrors could have been employed to focus sunlight onto a ship.
The account of the siege of Syracuse given by Polybius in his ''Universal History'' was written around seventy years after Archimedes' death, and was used subsequently as a source by Plutarch and Livy.
:In the first part of this treatise, Archimedes spells out the law of equilibrium of fluids, and proves that water will adopt a spherical form around a center of gravity.
He proposed a number system using powers of a myriad of myriads (100 million) and concluded that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe would be 8 vigintillion, or 8.
During his lifetime, Archimedes made his work known through correspondence with the mathematicians in Alexandria.
Pappus of Alexandria mentions ''On Sphere-Making'' and another work on polyhedra, while Theon of Alexandria quotes a remark about refraction from the  ''Catoptrica''.
The last words attributed to Archimedes are "Do not disturb my circles", a reference to the circles in the mathematical drawing that he was supposedly studying when disturbed by the Roman soldier.
Archimedes had to solve the problem without damaging the crown, so he could not melt it down into a regularly shaped body in order to calculate its density.
The written work of Archimedes has not survived as well as that of Euclid, and seven of his treatises are known to have existed only through references made to them by other authors.
Modern research in this area has been focused on the Antikythera mechanism, another device built &nbsp;BC that was probably designed for the same purpose.
In 75&nbsp;BC, 137 years after his death, the Roman orator Cicero was serving as quaestor in Sicily.
() Plutarch describes how Archimedes designed block-and-tackle pulley systems, allowing sailors to use the principle of leverage to lift objects that would otherwise have been too heavy to move.
''MythBusters'' also pointed out that conventional weaponry, such as flaming arrows or bolts from a catapult, would have been a far easier way of setting a ship on fire at short distances.
In ''Measurement of a Circle'' he did this by drawing a larger regular hexagon outside a circle and a smaller regular hexagon inside the circle, and progressively doubling the number of sides of each regular polygon, calculating the length of a side of each polygon at each step.
It is written in the form of a correspondence with Dositheus of Pelusium, who was a student of Conon of Samos.
Marcellus called Archimedes "a geometrical Briareus".
Similarly, the sphere has an area   that of the cylinder (including the bases).
The ''Syracusia'' is said to have been the largest ship built in classical antiquity.
He wrote: "There are some, King Gelo (Gelo II, son of Hiero II), who think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude; and I mean by the sand not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily but also that which is found in every region whether inhabited or uninhabited."
He is credited with designing innovative machines, such as his screw pump, compound pulleys, and defensive war machines to protect his native Syracuse from invasion.
The foremost document containing the work of Archimedes is the Archimedes Palimpsest.
Using this principle, it would have been possible to compare the density of the golden crown to that of solid gold by balancing the crown on a scale with a gold reference sample, then immersing the apparatus in water.
The scholars T. L. Heath and Marshall Clagett argued that it cannot have been written by Archimedes in its current form, since it quotes Archimedes, suggesting modification by another author.
There is a more difficult version of the problem in which some of the answers are required to be square numbers.
The sphere has a volume  that of the circumscribed cylinder.
214–212&nbsp;BC), Archimedes destroyed enemy ships with fire.
In this treatise Archimedes calculates the areas and volumes of sections of cones, spheres, and paraboloids.
Cicero mentions similar mechanisms designed by Thales of Miletus and Eudoxus of Cnidus.
According to the popular account given by Plutarch, Archimedes was contemplating a mathematical diagram when the city was captured.
This was probably an idealization of the shapes of ships' hulls.
René Descartes rejected it as false, while modern researchers have attempted to recreate the effect using only the means that would have been available to Archimedes.
The experiment took place at the Skaramagas naval base outside Athens.
This is an early example of a mechanical curve (a curve traced by a moving point) considered by a Greek mathematician.
In doing so, he challenged the notion that the number of grains of sand was too large to be counted.
By dividing the mass of the crown by the volume of water displaced, the density of the crown could be obtained.
During his youth, Archimedes may have studied in Alexandria, Egypt, where Conon of Samos and Eratosthenes of Cyrene were contemporaries.
:In this treatise addressed to Dositheus, Archimedes obtains the result of which he was most proud, namely the relationship between a sphere and a circumscribed cylinder of the same height and diameter.
The treatises in the Archimedes Palimpsest are: ''On the Equilibrium of Planes, On Spirals, Measurement of a Circle, On the Sphere and the Cylinder, On Floating Bodies, The Method of Mechanical Theorems'' and ''Stomachion''.
:This work was discovered by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in a Greek manuscript consisting of a poem of 44 lines, in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, Germany in 1773.
:This is a work in 32 propositions addressed to Dositheus.
In Proposition II, Archimedes gives an approximation of the value of pi (), showing that it is greater than  and less than .
The word is from the Greek  ''murias'', for the number 10,000.
A large part of Archimedes' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse.
'''Archimedes of Syracuse''' (; ; &nbsp;BC&nbsp;– &nbsp;BC) was an Ancient Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer.
Moreover, the practicality of the method it describes has been called into question, due to the extreme accuracy with which one would have to measure the water displacement.
In October 2005 a group of students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology carried out an experiment with 127 one-foot (30&nbsp;cm) square mirror tiles, focused on a  wooden ship at a range of around 100&nbsp;feet (30&nbsp;m).
In ''The Quadrature of the Parabola'', Archimedes proved that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is  times the area of a corresponding inscribed triangle as shown in the figure at right.
:This work of 28 propositions is also addressed to Dositheus.
This quote is often given in Latin as "''Noli turbare circulos meos''," but there is no reliable evidence that Archimedes uttered these words and they do not appear in the account given by Plutarch.
By using a system of numbers based on powers of the myriad, Archimedes concludes that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe is 8 in modern notation.
According to this story, Archimedes was carrying mathematical instruments, and was killed because the soldier thought that they were valuable items.
Palimpsests were created by scraping the ink from existing works and reusing them, which was a common practice in the Middle Ages as vellum was expensive.
1114–1187&nbsp;AD).
The fluids described by Archimedes are not , since he assumes the existence of a point towards which all things fall in order to derive the spherical shape.
:In this work of 24 propositions addressed to Dositheus, Archimedes proves by two methods that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4/3 multiplied by the area of a triangle with equal base and height.
When ''MythBusters'' broadcast the result of the San Francisco experiment in January 2006, the claim was placed in the category of "busted" (or failed) because of the length of time and the ideal weather conditions required for combustion to occur.
According to Vitruvius, a votive crown for a temple had been made for King Hiero II, who had supplied the pure gold to be used, and Archimedes was asked to determine whether some silver had been substituted by the dishonest goldsmith.
Also known as "the ship shaker," the claw consisted of a crane-like arm from which a large metal grappling hook was suspended.
Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed.
The Archimedes' screw described in Roman times by Vitruvius may have been an improvement on a screw pump that was used to irrigate the Hanging Gardens of Babylon.
This may have been an attempt at explaining the theory of contemporary Greek astronomers such as Eratosthenes that the Earth is round.
The difference in density between the two samples would cause the scale to tip accordingly.
Earlier descriptions of the lever are found in the Peripatetic school of the followers of Aristotle, and are sometimes attributed to Archytas.
The earliest known copy of the text is in Arabic.
In ''The Sand Reckoner'', Archimedes gives his father's name as Phidias, an astronomer about whom nothing is known.
Dr. Netz calculates that the pieces can be made into a square 17,152 ways.
It sheds little light on Archimedes as a person, and focuses on the war machines that he is said to have built in order to defend the city.
Equivalently, in polar coordinates (, ) it can be described by the equation
* ''On Conoids and Spheroids''
Since a ship of this size would leak a considerable amount of water through the hull, the Archimedes' screw was purportedly developed in order to remove the bilge water.
The mirrors were pointed at a plywood  of a Roman warship at a distance of around 160&nbsp;feet (50&nbsp;m).
He expressed the solution to the problem as an infinite geometric series with the common ratio :
The Claw of Archimedes is a weapon that he is said to have designed in order to defend the city of Syracuse.
* ''The Method of Mechanical Theorems''
Archimedes then took to the streets naked, so excited by his discovery that he had forgotten to dress, crying "Eureka!"
Marcellus' mechanism was demonstrated, according to Cicero, by Gaius Sulpicius Gallus to Lucius Furius Philus, who described it thus:
212&nbsp;BC during the Second Punic War, when Roman forces under General Marcus Claudius Marcellus captured the city of Syracuse after a two-year-long siege.
This version of the problem was first solved by A. Amthor in 1880, and the answer is a very large number, approximately 7.760271.
General Marcellus was reportedly angered by the death of Archimedes, as he considered him a valuable scientific asset and had ordered that he not be harmed.
:In the second part, he calculates the equilibrium positions of sections of paraboloids.
The story of the golden crown does not appear in the known works of Archimedes.
''Stomachion'' was also discovered in the palimpsest, with a more complete analysis of the puzzle than had been found in previous texts.
Archimedes was able to use infinitesimals in a way that is similar to modern integral calculus.
In December 2010, ''MythBusters'' again looked at the heat ray story in a special edition entitled "President's Challenge".
Constructing mechanisms of this kind would have required a sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing.
Archimedes may have instead sought a solution that applied the principle known in hydrostatics as Archimedes' principle, which he describes in his treatise ''On Floating Bodies''.
The Latin poem ''Carmen de ponderibus et mensuris'' of the 4th or 5th century describes the use of a hydrostatic balance to solve the problem of the crown, and attributes the method to Archimedes.
Archimedes' principle of buoyancy is given in the work, stated as follows:
The dialogue says that Marcellus kept one of the devices as his only personal loot from Syracuse, and donated the other to the Temple of Virtue in Rome.
It is possible that he used an iterative procedure to calculate these values.
Through proof by contradiction (reductio ad absurdum), he could give answers to problems to an arbitrary degree of accuracy, while specifying the limits within which the answer lay.
The MIT group repeated the experiment for the television show ''MythBusters'', using a wooden fishing boat in San Francisco as the target.
The tomb of Archimedes carried a sculpture illustrating his favorite mathematical proof, consisting of a sphere and a cylinder of the same height and diameter.
Galileo considered it "probable that this method is the same that Archimedes followed, since, besides being very accurate, it is based on demonstrations found by Archimedes himself."
The soldier was enraged by this, and killed Archimedes with his sword.
Archimedes has also been credited with improving the power and accuracy of the catapult, and with inventing the odometer during the First Punic War.
He discovered that it was a palimpsest, a document with text that had been written over an erased older work.
Pappus of Alexandria stated that Archimedes had written a manuscript (now lost) on the construction of these mechanisms entitled .
Although few details of his life are known, he is regarded as one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity.
* ''(O)stomachion''
The writings of Archimedes were first collected by the Byzantine Greek architect Isidore of Miletus (''c''.
According to Pappus of Alexandria, Archimedes' work on levers caused him to remark: "Give me a place to stand on, and I will move the Earth."
There have been modern experiments to test the feasibility of the claw, and in 2005 a television documentary entitled ''Superweapons of the Ancient World'' built a version of the claw and concluded that it was a workable device.
Archimedes had proven that the volume and surface area of the sphere are two thirds that of the cylinder including its bases.
This aspect of the work of Archimedes caused John Wallis to remark that he was: "as it were of set purpose to have covered up the traces of his investigation as if he had grudged posterity the secret of his method of inquiry while he wished to extort from them assent to his results."
The show concluded that a more likely effect of the mirrors would have been blinding, dazzling, or distracting the crew of the ship.
In ''On the Sphere and Cylinder'', Archimedes postulates that any magnitude when added to itself enough times will exceed any given magnitude.
:This is a short work consisting of three propositions.
Cicero had the tomb cleaned up, and was able to see the carving and read some of the verses that had been added as an inscription.
The device, sometimes called the "Archimedes heat ray", was used to focus sunlight onto approaching ships, causing them to catch fire.
Archimedes' ''Book of Lemmas'' or ''Liber Assumptorum'' is a treatise with fifteen propositions on the nature of circles.
Valerius Maximus, writing in ''Memorable Doings and Sayings'' in the 1st century AD, gives the phrase as "''...sed protecto manibus puluere 'noli' inquit, 'obsecro, istum disturbare'''" - "... but protecting the dust with his hands, said 'I beg of you, do not disturb this.
The phrase is also given in Katharevousa Greek as "μὴ μου τοὺς κύκλους τάραττε!"
It has also been claimed that Heron's formula for calculating the area of a triangle from the length of its sides was known to Archimedes.
He referred to Conon of Samos as his friend, while two of his works (''The Method of Mechanical Theorems'' and the ''Cattle Problem'') have introductions addressed to Eratosthenes.
Other mathematical achievements include deriving an accurate approximation of pi, defining and investigating the spiral bearing his name, and creating a system using exponentiation for expressing very large numbers.
According to Athenaeus, it was capable of carrying 600 people and included garden decorations, a gymnasium and a temple dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite among its facilities.
It is unknown, for instance, whether he ever married or had children.
It was concluded that the device was a feasible weapon under these conditions.
Again some charring occurred, along with a small amount of flame.
The Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis described how King Hiero II commissioned Archimedes to design a huge ship, the ''Syracusia'', which could be used for luxury travel, carrying supplies, and as a naval warship.
The volume is 3 for the sphere, and 23 for the cylinder.
Centuries later, Anthemius of Tralles mentions burning-glasses as Archimedes' weapon.
Archimedes' work was translated into Arabic by Thābit ibn Qurra (836–901&nbsp;AD), and Latin by Gerard of Cremona (''c.''
Around the year 1586 Galileo Galilei invented a hydrostatic balance for weighing metals in air and water after apparently being inspired by the work of Archimedes.
Generally considered the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time, Archimedes anticipated modern calculus and analysis by applying concepts of infinitesimals and the method of exhaustion to derive and rigorously prove a range of geometrical theorems, including the area of a circle, the surface area and volume of a sphere, and the area under a parabola.
Unlike his inventions, the mathematical writings of Archimedes were little known in antiquity.
When the claw was dropped onto an attacking ship the arm would swing upwards, lifting the ship out of the water and possibly sinking it.
He had heard stories about the tomb of Archimedes, but none of the locals was able to give him the location.
Cicero describes visiting the tomb of Archimedes, which was surmounted by a sphere and a cylinder, which Archimedes had requested to be placed on his tomb, representing his mathematical discoveries.
