Short stories such as ''Ficciones'' and ''The Aleph'' are among his most famous books.
Established in 1991, the CONAE has since launched two satellites successfully and, in June 2009, secured an agreement with the European Space Agency on for the installation of a 35-m diameter antenna and other mission support facilities at the Pierre Auger Observatory, the world's foremost cosmic ray observatory.
José López Rega organized the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance (AAA) to fight against them and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP).
Fostered by a new public, compulsory, free and secular education system, literacy skyrocketed from 22% to 65%, a level higher than most Latin American nations would reach even fifty years later.
Boosting the neo-Keynesian economic policies laid by Duhalde, Kirchner ended the economic crisis attaining significant fiscal and trade surpluses, and steep GDP growth.
Space research has also become increasingly active in Argentina.
The relatively high access to medical care has historically resulted in mortality patterns and trends similar to developed nations': from 1953 to 2005, deaths from cardiovascular disease increased from 20% to 23% of the total, those from tumors from 14% to 20%, respiratory problems from 7% to 14%, digestive maladies (non-infectious) from 7% to 11%, strokes a steady 7%, injuries, 6%, and infectious diseases, 4%.
*The Secret in Their Eyes (''El Secreto de sus Ojos'') in 2009
The flag was designed by Manuel Belgrano in 1812; it was adopted as a national symbol on 20 July 1816.
Started in 1896; by the early 1930s it had already become Latin America's leading film producer, a place it kept until the early 1950s.
The Zonda, a hot dry wind, affects Cuyo and the central Pampas.
Beyond this they are fully autonomous: they enact their own constitutions, freely organize their local governments, and own and manage their natural and financial resources.
It is enforced by the Federal Police; the Prefecture, which fulfills coast guard duties; the Gendarmerie, which serves border guard tasks; and the Airport Security Police.
Argentina has one of Latin America's lowest population growth rates, recently about 1% a year, as well as a comparatively low infant mortality rate.
Historically, however, its economic performance has been very uneven, with high economic growth alternating with severe recessions, income maldistribution and—in the recent decades—increasing poverty.
The country has its roots in Spanish colonization of the region during the 16th century.
Córdoba is Argentina's major industrial center, hosting metalworking, motor vehicle and auto parts manufactures.
Argentina's nuclear programme has been highly successful.
The government is regulated by a system of checks and balances defined by the Constitution of Argentina, the country's supreme legal document.
Cámpora won the March 1973 election, issued a pardon for condemned guerrilla members and then secured Perón's return from his exile in Spain.
Uriburu ruled for two years; then Agustín Pedro Justo was elected in a fraudulent election, and signed a controversial treaty with the United Kingdom.
Julio Cortázar, one of the leading members of the Latin American Boom and a major name in 20th century literature, influenced an entire generation of writers in the Americas and Europe.
Teatro Colón is a global landmark for opera and classical performances; its acoustics are considered among the world's top five.
Its birth rate of 2.3 children per woman is still nearly twice as high as that in Spain or Italy, compared here as they have similar religious practices and proportions.
Argentina is largely characterized by both the prevalence of people of European descent, and of conscious imitation of European styles in architecture.
Other highly regarded Argentine writers, poets and essayists include Estanislao del Campo, Eugenio Cambaceres, Pedro Bonifacio Palacios, Hugo Wast, Benito Lynch, Enrique Banchs, Oliverio Girondo, Ezequiel Martínez Estrada, Victoria Ocampo, Leopoldo Marechal, Silvina Ocampo, Roberto Arlt, Eduardo Mallea, Manuel Mujica Láinez, Ernesto Sábato, Silvina Bullrich, Rodolfo Walsh, María Elena Walsh, Tomás Eloy Martínez, Manuel Puig, Alejandra Pizarnik, and Osvaldo Soriano.
At the federal level it is coordinated by the Interior, Security and Justice ministries, and monitored by Congress.
Some of the major rivers are the Paraná, Uruguay—which join to form the Río de la Plata, Paraguay, Salado, Negro, Santa Cruz, Pilcomayo, Bermejo and Colorado.
In April 2016, the Macri Government introduced austerity measures intended to tackle inflation and public deficits.
Juan Manuel Fangio was five times Formula One world champion under four different teams, winning 102 of his 184 international races, and is widely ranked as the greatest driver of all time.
The other big influence is the gauchos and their traditional country lifestyle of self-reliance.
A new military coup toppled the government, and Argentina declared war on the Axis Powers a month before the end of World War II in Europe.
The Argentine Polo Championship is the sport's most important international team trophy.
Argentina is a multicultural country with significant European influences.
San Luis was established in 1596.
The system has been in decline since the 1940s: regularly running up large budgetary deficits, by 1991 it was transporting 1,400 times less goods than it did in 1973.
The Argentine National Anthem was written by Vicente López y Planes with music by Blas Parera, and was adopted in 1813.
''Asado'' and ''locro'' are considered the national dishes.
In 1816 the Congress of Tucumán formalized the Declaration of Independence.
Congress appointed Eduardo Duhalde as acting president, who abrogated the fixed exchange rate established by Menem.
The lower courts' judges are proposed by the Council of Magistrates (a secretariat composed of representatives of judges, lawyers, researchers, the Executive and the Legislative), and appointed by the President on Senate approval.
Argentina has its own satellite programme, nuclear power station designs (4th generation) and public nuclear energy company INVAP, which provides several countries with nuclear reactors.
A New York judge blocked Argentina's payments to 93% of its bonds unless it pays to "Vulture funds" the full value of the defaulted bonds they bought after its 2001 default.
The Ezeiza International Airport, about  from downtown Buenos Aires, is the largest in the country, followed by Cataratas del Iguazú in Misiones, and El Plumerillo in Mendoza.
He enacted social and economic reforms and extended assistance to family farmers and small businesses.
The country is home to most of the world's top players, among them Adolfo Cambiaso, the best in Polo history.
The last national territory, Tierra del Fuego, became the Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico Sur Province in 1990.
Aeroparque, in the city of Buenos Aires, is the most important domestic airport.
The Supreme Court has seven members appointed by the President—subject to Senate approval—who serve for life.
The Spanish navigators Juan Díaz de Solís and Sebastian Cabot visited the territory that is now Argentina in 1516 and 1526, respectively.
Responsibility for educational supervision is organized at the federal and individual provincial states.
Menem embraced neo-liberal policies: a fixed exchange rate, business deregulation, privatizations and dismantling of protectionist barriers normalized the economy for a while.
Infant deaths have fallen from 19% of all deaths in 1953 to 3% in 2005.
The disappeared ones were considered to be a political or ideological threat to the military junta and their disappearances an attempt to silence the opposition and break the determination of the guerillas.
The Chamber of Senators represents the provinces, has 72 members elected at-large to six-year terms, with each province having three seats; one third of Senate seats are up for election every other year.
Until the period of European colonization, Argentina was relatively sparsely populated by a wide number of diverse cultures with different social organizations, which can be divided into three main groups.
Argentina became in 2010 the first country in Latin America and the second in the Americas to allow same-sex marriage nationwide.
Centralists and Federalists resumed the civil war; the latter prevailed and formed the Argentine Confederation in 1831, led by Juan Manuel de Rosas.
Therefore, most Argentines are descended from the 19th- and 20th-century immigrants of the great immigration wave to Argentina (1850–1955), with a great majority of these immigrants coming from diverse European countries.
With , Tucumán is the only Argentine province more densely populated than the world average; by contrast, the southern province of Santa Cruz has around .
The Chamber of Deputies represents the people and has 257 voting members elected to a four-year term.
Onganía shut down Congress, banned all political parties and dismantled student and worker unions.
It is the country with the highest Human Development Index in Latin America with a rating of "very high".
In addition, Argentine composers Luis Enrique Bacalov and Gustavo Santaolalla have been honored with Academy Award for Best Original Score in 2006 and 2007 nods and ''Armando Bo'' and  ''Nicolás Giacobone'' have been honored with Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay in 2015.
It was the nation's longest-continuously operating stage.
the leading sectors by volume were: food processing, beverages and tobacco products; motor vehicles and auto parts; textiles and leather; refinery products and biodiesel; chemicals and pharmaceuticals; steel, aluminum and iron; industrial and farm machinery; home appliances and furniture; plastics and tires; glass and cement; and recording and print media.
By the end of 1976 Montoneros had lost near 2,000 members; by 1977, the ERP was completely defeated.
Domingo Liotta designed and developed the first artificial heart successfully implanted in a human being in 1969.
La Pampa and Chaco became provinces in 1951.
In this stage, in 1786, a tragedy entitled ''Siripo'' had its premiere.
there were 161 airports with paved runways out of more than a thousand.
Perón was reelected in 1951, even surpassing his 1946 performance.
At least one-third of the candidates presented by the parties must be women.
On the day Perón returned to Argentina, the clash between Peronist internal factions—right-wing union leaders and left-wing youth from Montoneros—resulted in the Ezeiza Massacre.
Buenos Aires repelled two ill-fated British invasions in 1806 and 1807.
Chosen from 20 potential sites and one of only three such ESA installations in the world, the new antenna will create a triangulation which will allow the ESA to ensure mission coverage around the clock
The public universities of Buenos Aires, Córdoba, La Plata, Rosario, and the National Technological University are some of the most important.
The declaration and fight for independence (1810–1818) was followed by an extended civil war that lasted until 1861, culminating in the country's reorganization as a federation of provinces with Buenos Aires as its capital city.
The world's first animated feature films were made and released in Argentina, by cartoonist Quirino Cristiani, in 1917 and 1918.
Juan de Garay founded Santa Fe in 1573 and the same year Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera set up Córdoba.
The National Defense System, an exclusive responsibility of the federal government, coordinated by the Ministry of Defense, and comprising the Army, the Navy and the Air Force.
about 100 full-length motion pictures were being created annually.
After 1930 Argentina descended into political instability and periodic economic crisis that pushed it back into underdevelopment, though it nevertheless remained among the fifteen richest countries until the mid-20th century.
The National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons estimates that around 13,000 were disappeared.
Though these figures compare favorably with global averages, they fall short of levels in developed nations and in 2006, Argentina ranked fourth in Latin America.
This system links all 23 provinces plus Buenos Aires City, and connects with all neighboring countries.
The genre suffered during the regime of Juan Manuel de Rosas, though it flourished alongside the economy later in the century.
'''Argentina''' (; ), officially the '''Argentine Republic''' (), is a federal republic located in southeastern South America.
Argentina claims sovereignty over part of Antarctica, the Falkland Islands (), South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.
However, real military expenditures declined steadily after 1981 and the defense budget in 2011 was about 0.74% of GDP, a historical minimum, below the Latin American average.
The national sport is ''pato'', an equestrian game that was popular among gauchos.
Ruled and monitored by Congress through the Houses' Defense Committees, it is organized on the essential principle of legitimate self-defense: the repelling of any external military aggression in order to guarantee freedom of the people, national sovereignty, and territorial integrity.
Juan Maldacena, an Argentine-American scientist, is a leading figure in string theory.
''Siripo'' is now a lost work (only the second act is conserved), and can be considered the first Argentine stage play, because it was written by Buenos Aires poet Manuel José de Lavardén, it was premiered in Buenos Aires, and its plot was inspired by an historical episode of the early colonization of the Río de la Plata Basin: the destruction of Sancti Spiritu colony by aboriginals in 1529.
''La Ranchería'' theatre operated until its destruction in a fire in 1792.
The men's national team is the only one in the FIBA Americas zone that has won the quintuplet crown: World Championship, Olympic Gold Medal, Diamond Ball, Americas Championship, and Pan American Gold Medal.
Argentina is home to a significant population of Arab and partial Arab background, mostly of Syrian and Lebanese origin (in Argentina they are considered among the White people, just like in the United States Census).
Arturo Illia was elected in 1963 and led to an overall increase in prosperity; however his attempts to legalize Peronism resulted in his overthrow in 1966 by the Juan Carlos Onganía-led coup d'état called the Argentine Revolution, a new military government that sought to rule indefinitely.
The economy began to decline in 1995, with increasing unemployment and recession; led by Fernando de la Rúa, the UCR returned to the presidency in the 1999 elections.
The population growth rate in 2010 was an estimated 1.03% annually, with a birth rate of 17.7 live births per 1,000 inhabitants and a mortality rate of 7.4 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants.
During the War of Independence the main cities and their surrounding countrysides became provinces though the intervention of their cabildos.
Because of its stability, market size and growing high-tech sector, Argentina is classified as a high-income economy.
Argentina vowed not to capitulate to what it considered the ransom tactics of the funds.
These rivers are discharged into the Argentine Sea, the shallow area of the Atlantic Ocean over the Argentine Shelf, an unusually wide continental platform.
Some 10,000 of the "disappeared" were believed to be guerrillas of the Montoneros (MPM), and the Marxist People's Revolutionary Army (ERP).
*The Truce (''La Tregua'') in 1974
As new president of the Confederation, Urquiza enacted the liberal and federal 1853 Constitution.
He nationalized strategic industries and services, improved wages and working conditions, paid the full external debt and achieved nearly full employment.
Luis Leloir discovered how organisms store energy converting glucose into glycogen and the compounds which are fundamental in metabolizing carbohydrates.
Argentina stayed neutral during World War I.
Driven by this immigration wave and decreasing mortality, the Argentine population grew fivefold and the economy 15-fold: from 1870 to 1910 Argentina's wheat exports went from  per year, while frozen beef exports increased from  per year, placing Argentina as one of the world's top five exporters.
There are more than 153,000 hospital beds, 121,000 physicians and 37,000 dentists (ratios comparable to developed nations).
Bernardo Houssay, the first Latin American among them, discovered the role of pituitary hormones in regulating glucose in animals.
Argentina reigns undisputed in Polo, having won more international championships than any other country and been seldom beaten since the 1930s.
The ''ceibo'' is the national floral emblem and national tree, while the ''quebracho colorado'' is the national forest tree.
The minister of welfare, Juan Domingo Perón, was fired and jailed because of his high popularity among workers.
He took office on 10 December 2015.
The first group are basic hunters and food gatherers without development of pottery, such as the Selknam and Yaghan in the extreme south.
The proportion of people under 15 is 25.6%, a little below the world average of 28%, and the proportion of people 65 and older is relatively high at 10.8%.
De la Rúa kept Menem's economic plan despite the worsening crisis, which led to growing social discontent.
Modern Argentine culture has been largely influenced by Italian, Spanish and other European immigration like France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Germany among others.
The country is subdivided into twenty-three provinces (, singular ''provincia'') and one autonomous city (''ciudad autónoma''), Buenos Aires,  which is the federal capital of the nation () as decided by Congress.
His liberation was forced by a massive popular demonstration, and he went on to win the 1946 election.
Argentina also had the highest coverage of networked telecommunications among Latin American powers: about 67% of its population had internet access and 137.2%, mobile phone subscriptions.
Griselda Gambaro, Copi, Roberto Cossa, Marco Denevi, Carlos Gorostiza, and Alberto Vaccarezza are a few of the most prominent Argentine playwrights.
Jujuy seceded from Salta in 1834, and the thirteen provinces became fourteen.
From the 1970s, immigration has mostly been coming from Bolivia, Paraguay and Peru, with smaller numbers from Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Romania.
Néstor Kirchner was elected as the new president.
At the provincial level it is coordinated by the respective internal security ministries and enforced by local police agencies.
One year later General Martín Miguel de Güemes stopped royalists on the north, and General José de San Martín took an army across the Andes and secured the independence of Chile; then he led the fight to the Spanish stronghold of Lima and proclaimed the independence of Peru.
Also, the Argentine French actress Berenice Bejo received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 2011 and won the César Award for Best Actress and  won the Best Actress award in the Cannes Film Festival for her role in the film ''The Past''.
there were 47 national public universities across the country, as well as 46 private ones.
*Son of the Bride (''El hijo de la novia'') in 2001
There are four incompatible gauges in use; this forces virtually all interregional freight traffic to pass through Buenos Aires.
César Milstein did extensive research in antibodies.
The national government gave Argentine theatre its initial impulse with the establishment of the Colón Theatre, in 1857, which hosted classical and operatic, as well as stage performances.
Reynaldo Bignone replaced Galtieri and began to organize the transition to democratic rule.
Cámpora resigned, overwhelmed by political violence, and Perón won the September 1973 election with his third wife Isabel as vice-president.
In 1955 the Navy bombed the Plaza de Mayo in an ill-fated attempt to kill the President.
*Camila (''Camila'') in 1984
He encouraged investment to achieve energetic and industrial self-sufficiency, reversed a chronic trade deficit and lifted Peronism proscription; yet his efforts to stay in good terms with Peronists and the military earned him the rejection of both and a new coup forced him out.
The number of people believed to have been killed or "disappeared," depending on the source, range from 9,089 to 30,000 in the period from 1976 to 1983, when the military was forced from power following Argentina's defeat in the Falklands War.
After democratic government was restored, Congress passed legislation to provide compensation to victims' families.
In 1983, the country admitted having the capability of producing weapon-grade uranium, a major step needed to assemble nuclear weapons; since then, however, Argentina has pledged to use nuclear power only for peaceful purposes.
Under his administration Argentina restructured its defaulted debt with an unprecedented discount of about 70% on most bonds, paid off debts with the International Monetary Fund, purged the military of officers with doubtful human rights records, nullified and voided the Full Stop and Due Obedience laws, ruled them as unconstitutional, and resumed legal prosecution of the Juntas' crimes.
The country's capital city, Buenos Aires, is the most visited city in South America.
The median age is approximately 30 years and life expectancy at birth is 77.14 years.
Finally, indigenous American traditions have been absorbed into the general cultural milieu.
He pardoned the officers who had been sentenced during Alfonsín's government.
Although the most populated areas are generally temperate, Argentina has an exceptional climate diversity, ranging from subtropical in the north to subpolar in the far south.
The Trelew massacre of 1972, the actions of the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance since 1973, and Isabel Martínez de Perón's "annihilation decrees" against left-wing guerrillas during ''Operativo Independencia'' (translates to Operation of Independence) in 1975, have also been suggested as dates for the beginning of the Dirty War.
Population density is of 15 persons per square kilometer of land area, well below the world average of 50 persons.
Argentine wine is the national liquor, and ''mate'', the national infusion.
Its waters are influenced by two major ocean currents: the warm Brazil Current and the cold Falklands Current.
Argentina hosted the Basketball World Cup in 1950 and 1990.
The availability of health care has also reduced infant mortality from 70 per 1000 live births in 1948 to 12.1 in 2009 and raised life expectancy at birth from 60 years to 76.
A severely weakened Montoneros launched a counterattack in 1979, which was quickly annihilated, ending the guerrilla threat.
The Judicial branch includes the Supreme Court and lower federal courts interpret laws and overturn those they find unconstitutional.
Nevertheless, the junta stayed in power.
But Senate Chief José María Guido reacted swiftly and applied the anti-power vacuum legislation, becoming president instead; elections were repealed and Peronism proscribed again.
The average annual precipitation ranges from  in the driest parts of Patagonia to over  in the westernmost parts of Patagonia and the northeastern parts of the country.
It was the tenth country to allow same-sex marriage.
Suffrage is universal, equal, secret and mandatory.
The Argentine film industry has historically been one of the three most developed in Latin American cinema, along with those produced in Mexico and Brazil.
It has also conquered 13 South American Championships, and many other tournaments.
Isabel Perón was ousted one year later by a junta of the three armed forces, led by army general  Jorge Rafael Videla.
Internationally laureate sculptors Erminio Blotta, Lola Mora and Rogelio Yrurtia authored many of the classical evocative monuments of the Argentine cityscape.
Argentina ranks 107th out of 175 countries in the Transparency International's 2014 Corruption Perceptions Index.
In addition, Argentina has since long been one of the top five wine-producing countries in the world.
Most important cities are linked by a growing number of expressways, including Buenos Aires–La Plata, Rosario–Córdoba, Córdoba–Villa Carlos Paz, Villa Mercedes–Mendoza, National Route 14 ''General José Gervasio Artigas'' and Provincial Route 2 ''Juan Manuel Fangio'', among others.
In the last decades the role of the private sector has grown across all educational stages.
*The Official Story (''La Historia Oficial'') in 1985
Provinces are divided for administration purposes into departments and municipalities, except for Buenos Aires Province, which is divided into partidos.
6.3% of people over age 20 had graduated from university.
Argentina's defense has historically been one of the best equipped in the region, even managing its own weapon research facilities, shipyards, ordnance, tank and plane factories.
An 1862 law designated as national territories those under federal control but outside the frontiers of the provinces.
Mean annual temperatures range from  in the far south to  in the north.
Garay went further south to re-found Buenos Aires in 1580.
The 1994 Constitutional Amendment allowed Menem to be elected for a second term.
In 1912, President Roque Sáenz Peña enacted universal and secret male suffrage, which allowed Hipólito Yrigoyen, leader of the Radical Civic Union (or UCR), to win the 1916 election.
Sharing the bulk of the Southern Cone with its neighbor Chile to the west, the country is also bordered by Bolivia and Paraguay to the north, Brazil to the northeast, Uruguay and the South Atlantic Ocean to the east, and the Drake Passage to the south.
Londres was founded in 1558; Mendoza, in 1561; San Juan, in 1562; San Miguel de Tucumán, in 1565.
Argentina is a federation of twenty-three provinces and one autonomous city, Buenos Aires.
Argentine wine, one of the world's finest, is an integral part of the local menu.
In 1819 Buenos Aires enacted a centralist constitution that was soon abrogated by federalists.
Guillermo Vilas is the greatest Latin American player of the Open Era, while Gabriela Sabatini is the most accomplished Argentine female player of all time—having reached #3 in the WTA Ranking, are both inductees into the International Tennis Hall of Fame.
It is most common in late autumn and winter along the central coast and in the Río de la Plata estuary.
On 13 March 2013, Argentine Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio was elected as Pope of the Catholic Church and took the name "Francis", becoming the first pope from the Americas and from the Southern Hemisphere, the first non-European pope in 1272 years, and the first Jesuit one.
The most popular sport is Football.
Tourism in Argentina is characterized by its cultural offerings and its ample and varied natural assets.
Argentina disputes sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (), and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, which are administered by the United Kingdom as Overseas Territories.
Argentine built satellites include LUSAT-1 (1990), Víctor-1 (1996), PEHUENSAT-1 (2007), and those developed by CONAE, the Argentine space agency, of the SAC series.
The almost-unparalleled increase in prosperity led to Argentina becoming the seventh wealthiest developed nation in the world by the early 20th century.
Alfredo Di Stéfano, Diego Maradona, and Lionel Messi are among the best players in the game's history.
Major wind currents include the cool Pampero Winds blowing on the flat plains of Patagonia and the Pampas; following the cold front, warm currents blow from the north in middle and late winter, creating mild conditions.
Some 11,000 Argentines have applied to the relevant authorities and received up to US $200,000 each as monetary compensation for the loss of loved ones during the military dictatorship.
Argentina's per capita income was 70% higher than Italy's, 90% higher than Spain's, 180% higher than Japan's and 400% higher than Brazil's.
Next in importance are the Greater Buenos Aires area (food processing, metallurgy, motor vehicles and auto parts, chemicals and petrochemicals, consumer durables, textiles and printing); Rosario (food processing, metallurgy, farm machinery, oil refining, chemicals, and tanning); San Miguel de Tucumán (sugar refining); San Lorenzo (chemicals and pharmaceuticals); San Nicolás de los Arroyos (steel milling and metallurgy); and Ushuaia and Bahía Blanca (oil refining).
Buenos Aires seceded but was forced back into the Confederation after being defeated in the 1859 Battle of Cepeda.
The Asian population in the country numbers at around 180,000 individuals, most of whom are of Chinese and Korean descent, although an older Japanese community that traces back to the early 20th century still exists.
