The current governor of Arizona is Doug Ducey (R).
Arizona is the 48th state and last of the contiguous states to be admitted to the Union, achieving statehood on February 14, 1912.
The Fiesta Bowl is part of the new College Football Playoff (CFP).
In contrast, Pima County, home to Tucson, and most of southern Arizona have historically voted more Democratic.
The rivalry between Arizona State Sun Devils and the Arizona Wildcats predates Arizona's statehood, and is the oldest rivalry in the NCAA.
Justices are appointed by the governor from a list recommended by a bipartisan commission, and are re-elected after the initial two years following their appointment.
In the Mexican–American War (1847), the US occupied Mexico City and pursued its claim to much of northern Mexico, including what later became Arizona.
A November 2011 Public Policy Polling survey found that 44% of Arizona voters supported the legalization of same-sex marriage, while 45% opposed it and 12% were not sure.
During office the governors reside within their private residence, and all executive offices are housed in the executive tower at the state capitol.
On March 4, 2008, Senator John McCain effectively clinched the Republican nomination for 2008, becoming the first presidential nominee from the state since Barry Goldwater in 1964.
Other elected executive officials include the Secretary of State, State Treasurer, State Attorney General, Superintendent of Public Instruction, State Mine Inspector and a five-member Corporation Commission.
The Arizona Supreme Court ruled in their favor.
Arizona also has many singers and other musicians.
The northern third of Arizona is a plateau at significantly higher altitudes than the lower desert, and has an appreciably cooler climate, with cold winters and mild summers, though the climate remains semiarid to arid.
Its capital and largest city is Phoenix.
Arizona is one of seven states that do not have a specified lieutenant governor.
George Strait's "Oceanfront Property" uses "ocean front property in Arizona" as a metaphor for a sucker proposition.
Formed in 1862, Arizona Scout Companies fought with the Confederate Army throughout the war.
Dewpoints as high as 81&nbsp;°F (27&nbsp;°C) have been recorded during the Phoenix monsoon season.
Division Two is based in Tucson, consists of six judges, and has jurisdiction over the Southern regions of the state, including the Tucson area.
The line "see you down in Arizona Bay" is used in a Tool song in reference to the possibility (expressed as a ''hope'' by comedian Bill Hicks) that Southern California will one day fall into the ocean.
After US soldiers were fired on by Mexican federal troops, the American garrison launched an assault into Nogales, Mexico.
While Tucson's suburbs lean Republican, they hold to a somewhat more moderate brand of Republicanism than is common in the Phoenix area.
The first session following the general election is known as the first regular session, and the session convening in the second year is known as the second regular session.
Arizona is prominently featured in the lyrics of many Country and Western songs, such as Jamie O'Neal's hit ballad "There Is No Arizona".
Arizona's Apache County has the highest concentration of speakers of Native American Indian languages in the United States.
It was centered near Fredonia, in the northwestern part of the state near the border with Utah.
In addition, the various urban areas are served by complex networks of state routes and highways, such as the Loop 101, which is part of Phoenix's vast freeway system.
About midway through February, the temperatures start to rise again, with warm days, and cool, breezy nights.
It has two colleges, Mohave Community College and ASU Colleges in Lake Havasu City.
In Tucson, the Sun Link streetcar system travels through the downtown area, connecting the main University of Arizona campus with Mercado San Agustin on the western edge of downtown Tucson.
Voter turnout in this state primary increased more than 500% over the 1996 primary.
Cotton farming and copper mining, two of Arizona's most important statewide industries, suffered heavily during the Great Depression.
Democrat Lyndon Johnson, in 1964, lost the state by less than 5,000 votes to Arizona Senator and native Barry Goldwater.
Other notable singers include country singers Dierks Bentley and Marty Robbins, folk singer Katie Lee, Fleetwood Mac's Stevie Nicks, CeCe Peniston, Rex Allen, 2007 ''American Idol'' winner Jordin Sparks, and Linda Ronstadt.
Green Valley, south of Tucson, was another such community, designed as a retirement subdivision for Arizona's teachers.
Their experiences resulted in a rising activism in the postwar years to achieve better treatment and civil rights after their return to the state.
With 212,635 residents, this cluster of towns forms the third largest metropolitan area in the state.
He explored parts of the state and made contact with native inhabitants, probably the Sobaipuri.
There are ski resorts in the areas of Flagstaff, Alpine, and Tucson.
On the other hand, Northern Arizona is at moderate risk due to numerous faults in the area.
It was developed as the site of the Phoenix Zoo.
It has voted Republican in every presidential election since 1948.
It has an average July high temperature of , one of the highest of any metropolitan area in the United States, offset by an average January high temperature of , the basis of its winter appeal.
Maricopa County is home to almost 60 percent of the state's population, and most of the state's elected officials live there.
The supreme court has appellate jurisdiction in death penalty cases, but almost all other appellate cases go through the Arizona Court of Appeals beforehand.
Lake Havasu City was founded by real estate developer Robert P. McCulloch in 1963.
Arizona is home to the largest number of speakers of Native American languages in the 48 contiguous states, as over 85,000 individuals reported speaking Navajo, and 10,403 people reported Apache, as a language spoken at home in 2005.
In March 2000, Arizona was the site of the first legally binding election ever held over the internet to nominate a candidate for public office.
During this forty-year span, it was the only state not to be carried by a Democrat at least once.
Arizona supported the Confederate cause with men, horses, and supplies.
They include the Arizona Biltmore Hotel in central Phoenix (opened 1929) and the Wigwam Resort on the west side of the Phoenix area (opened 1936).
Arizona politics are dominated by a longstanding rivalry between its two largest counties, Maricopa and Pima—home to Phoenix and Tucson, respectively.
Spain founded ''presidios'' ("fortified towns") at Tubac in 1752 and Tucson in 1775.
Three ships named USS ''Arizona'' have been christened in honor of the state, although only USS ''Arizona'' (BB-39) was so named after statehood was achieved.
Phoenix International Raceway in Avondale is home to NASCAR race weekends twice a year.
As of 2011, 61.3% of Arizona's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups.
The TV sitcom ''Alice'', which was based on the movie was set in Phoenix.
Another POW camp was located near the Gila River in eastern Yuma County.
The Mormons settled what became northern Arizona and northern New Mexico.
The first European contact by native peoples was with Marcos de Niza, a Spanish Franciscan, in 1539.
Arizona's executive branch is headed by a governor, who is elected to a four-year term.
Arizona was the 48th state admitted to the US and the last of the contiguous states to be admitted.
The area is still known as ''alĭ ṣonak'' in the O'odham language.
Democrat Bill Clinton ended this streak in 1996, when he won Arizona by a little over two percentage points (Clinton had previously come within less than two percent of winning Arizona's electoral votes in 1992).
Phoenix, located in Maricopa County, is the capital and the largest city in Arizona.
(The same month's average in Death Valley is .)
Several upscale hotels and resorts opened during this period, some of which are still top tourist draws.
Phoenix's Amtrak service was canceled in 1996, and now an Amtrak bus runs between Phoenix and the station in Maricopa.
Each of the thirty legislative districts has one senator and two representatives.
As of the start of the 114th Congress, Arizona's representatives in the United States House of Representatives are Ann Kirkpatrick (D-1), Martha McSally (R-2), Raul Grijalva (D-3), Paul Gosar (R-4), Matt Salmon (R-5), David Schweikert (R-6), Ruben Gallego (D-7), Trent Franks (R-8), and Kyrsten Sinema (D-9).
Extremely cold temperatures are not unknown; cold air systems from the northern states and Canada occasionally push into the state, bringing temperatures below  to the northern parts of the state.
Phoenix Art Museum, located on the historic Central Avenue corridor in Phoenix, is the Southwest's largest collection of visual art from across the world.
Although federal law gave all Native Americans the right to vote in 1924, Arizona excluded those living on reservations from voting until its state Supreme Court ruled in 1948 in favor of Native American plaintiffs.
It is rare for tornadoes or hurricanes to occur in Arizona.
The camps were abolished after World War II.
Numerous Native Americans from Arizona fought for the United States during World War II.
A separate question on the same survey found that 72% of respondents supported legal recognition of same-sex couples, with 40% supporting same-sex marriage, 32% supporting civil unions, 27% opposing all legal recognition and 1% not sure.
Arizona's population grew tremendously with residential and business development after World War II, aided by the widespread use of air conditioning, which made the intensely hot summers more comfortable.
Arizona state senators and representatives are elected for two-year terms and are limited to four consecutive terms in a chamber, though there is no limit on the total number of terms.
Spring training has been somewhat of a tradition in Arizona since 1947, (i.e.
Yuma and Flagstaff also have public bus systems.
Arizona has an average annual rainfall of , which comes during two rainy seasons, with cold fronts coming from the Pacific Ocean during the winter and a monsoon in the summer.
Created around 50,000 years ago, the Barringer Meteorite Crater (better known simply as "Meteor Crater") is a gigantic hole in the middle of the high plains of the Colorado Plateau, about  west of Winslow.
Generally, Arizona is at low risk of earthquakes, except for the southwestern portion which is at moderate risk due to its proximity to Southern California.
Each Legislature covers a two-year period.
After the men were refused the opportunity to register in Maricopa County, they filed suit against the registrar.
Major incorporated suburbs of Tucson include Oro Valley and Marana northwest of the city, Sahuarita south of the city, and South Tucson in an enclave south of downtown.
It is the sixth largest and the 14th most populous of the 50 states.
Numerous monuments and memorials are on the site, including the anchor and signal mast from the USS ''Arizona'' (one of the U.S. Navy ships sunk in Pearl Harbor) and a granite version of the Ten Commandments.
Arizona has had four female governors, more than any other state.
During the Mexican Revolution from 1910 to 1920, several battles were fought in the Mexican towns just across the border from Arizona settlements.
The Heard Museum has about 250,000 visitors a year.
Arizona voted Republican in every presidential election from 1952 to 1992, with Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan winning the state by particularly large margins.
The Fiesta Bowl, originally held at Sun Devil Stadium, is now held at University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale.
By 1970, it was 1,752,122.
About one-quarter of the state is made up of Indian reservations that serve as the home of 27 federally recognized Native American tribes, including the Navajo Nation, the largest in the state and the United States, with more than 300,000 citizens.
Historically part of the territory of ''Alta California'' in New Spain, it became part of independent Mexico in 1821.
American composer Elliott Carter composed his first String Quartet (1950–51) while on sabbatical (from New York) in Arizona.
The Americans won the latter.
The Gin Blossoms, Chronic Future, Roger Clyne and the Peacemakers, Jimmy Eat World, Caroline's Spine, and others began their careers in Arizona.
These downpours often cause flash floods, which can turn deadly.
The governor may serve any number of terms, though no more than two in a row.
The state's per capita income is $40,828, ranking 39th in the U.S.
They founded Mesa, Snowflake, Heber, Safford, and other towns.
Due to its large area and variations in elevation, the state has a wide variety of localized climate conditions.
It is sited at the base of the San Francisco Peaks, the highest mountain range in the state of Arizona, which contain Humphreys Peak, the highest point in Arizona at .
Arizona became a US state on February 14, 1912.
The Jeff Foxworthy comedy documentary movie ''Blue Collar Comedy Tour'' was filmed almost entirely at the Dodge Theatre.
Tucson, with a metro population of just over one million, is the state's second-largest city.
Many senior citizens from across the U.S. and Canada come to Arizona each winter and stay only during the winter months; they are referred to as snowbirds.
The current majority party is the Republican Party, which has held power in both houses since 1993.
The Phoenix-area German POW site was purchased after the war by the Maytag family (of major home appliance fame).
In 1853 the US acquired the land below the Gila River from Mexico in the Gadsden Purchase.
Dude ranches, such as the K L Bar and Remuda in Wickenburg, along with the Flying V and Tanque Verde in Tucson, gave tourists the chance to take part in the flavor and activities of the "Old West".
It was probably considered—and rejected—for its sentimental value before Congress settled on the name "Arizona.")
The fast-growing Phoenix and Tucson suburbs became increasingly friendly to Republicans from the 1950s onward.
Descendants of ethnic Spanish and mestizo settlers from the colonial years still lived in the area, with much deeper roots than later European-American migrants from the United States.
Although names including "Gadsonia", "Pimeria", "Montezuma", and "Arizuma" had been considered for the territory, when President Lincoln signed the final bill, it read "Arizona," and that name was adopted.
Arizona is one of two U.S. states that does not observe Daylight Saving Time (the other being Hawaii).
The largest stand of ponderosa pine trees in the world is contained in Arizona.
Arizona has the westernmost recorded engagement of the war, the Battle of Picacho Pass.
In July or August, the dewpoint rises dramatically for a brief period.
Arizona gained a ninth seat in the House of Representatives due to redistricting based on Census 2010.
Some of Alfred Hitchcock's classic film ''Psycho'' was shot in Phoenix, the ostensible home town of the main character.
They were centered near the Imperial Valley, or Mexico, back in the 1800s.
The canyon is one of the seven natural wonders of the world and is largely contained in the Grand Canyon National Park—one of the first national parks in the United States.
Tucson was incorporated in 1877, making it the oldest incorporated city in Arizona.
Some of the signature exhibits include a full Navajo hogan, the Mareen Allen Nichols Collection containing 260 pieces of contemporary jewelry, the Barry Goldwater Collection of 437 historic Hopi kachina dolls, and an exhibit on the 19th century boarding school experiences of Native Americans.
Besides the money spent on state agencies, it also includes more than $500&nbsp;million in income- and property tax cuts, pay raises for government employees, and additional funding for the K–12 education system.
University of Phoenix Stadium was also home to the 2007 and 2011 BCS National Championship Games.
The shock was violent in Flagstaff.
The two counties have almost 75 percent of the state's population and cast almost 80 percent of the state's vote.
Some of the television shows filmed or set in Arizona include ''The New Dick Van Dyke Show'', ''Medium'', ''Alice'', ''The First 48'', ''Insomniac with Dave Attell'', ''Cops'', and ''America's Most Wanted''.
November through February are the coldest months, with temperatures typically ranging from 40 to 75&nbsp;°F (4 to 24&nbsp;°C), with occasional frosts.
The secretary of state is the first in line to succeed the governor in the event of death, disability, resignation, or removal from office.
The ''Texas Eagle'' and ''Sunset Limited'' routes serve South-Central Arizona, stopping at Tucson, Maricopa, Yuma and Benson.
This includes the 1964 run of native son Barry Goldwater; he would not have carried his home state without his 20,000-vote margin in Maricopa County.
Arizona was the first state in the nation to do so.
Flagstaff has a strong tourism sector, due to its proximity to numerous tourist attractions including: Grand Canyon National Park, Sedona, and Oak Creek Canyon.
The museum also has PhxArtKids, an interactive space for children; photography exhibitions through the museum's partnership with the Center for Creative Photography; the landscaped Sculpture Garden and dining at Arcadia Farms.
It is home to the University of Arizona.
The remaining area is public forest and park land, state trust land and Native American reservations.
President Theodore Roosevelt was a major proponent of designating the Grand Canyon area as a National Park, visiting on numerous occasions to hunt mountain lion and enjoy the scenery.
Legal interpretations of Arizona's constitution prohibited Native Americans living on reservations from voting, classifying them as being under "guardianship."
All elected officials hold a term of four years, and are limited to two consecutive terms (except the office of the State Mine Inspector, which is limited to 4 terms).
The federal government declared a new Arizona Territory, consisting of the western half of New Mexico Territory, in Washington, D.C., on February 24, 1863.
Phoenix became the official state capital with Arizona's admission to the union in 1912.
It is located in Pima County, approximately  southeast of Phoenix.
The Flagstaff metropolitan area is home to 134,421 residents and the main campus of Northern Arizona University.
In 1912, the year Arizona achieved statehood, on August 18, an earthquake caused a 50-mile crack in the San Francisco Range.
It is also part of the Western United States and of the Mountain West states.
As of January 2012, the population of the Phoenix area is estimated to be over 4.3&nbsp;million.
Attempts to suppress native identities included forcing the children to cut their hair, to take and use English names, to speak only English, and to practice Christianity rather than their native religions.
Subsequent re-elections occur every six years.
Arizona is home to one of the most well-preserved meteorite impact sites in the world.
''Twilight'' had passages set in Phoenix at the beginning and the end of the film.
The first damaging earthquake known to be centered within Arizona's borders occurred on January 25, 1906, also including a series of other earthquakes centered near Socorro, New Mexico.
Yuma attracts many winter visitors from all over the United States.
Amtrak ''Southwest Chief'' route serves the northern part of the state, stopping at Winslow, Flagstaff, Williams and Kingman.
(This was the most closely contested state in what was otherwise a landslide victory for Johnson that year.)
After Maricopa County did not allow them to register to vote, in 1948 veteran Frank Harrison and Harry Austin, of the Mojave-Apache Tribe at Fort McDowell Indian Reservation, brought a legal suit, ''Harrison and Austin v. Laveen,'' to challenge this exclusion.
It passed by a more narrow majority than similar votes in a number of other states.
That year, a similar provision was overturned in New Mexico when challenged by another Indian veteran in court.
Arizona remained sparsely settled for most of the 19th century.
Thereafter, the session can only be extended by a majority vote of members present of each house.
Arizona is located in the Southwestern United States as one of the Four Corners states.
Only two significant engagements took place on US soil between US and Mexican forces: Pancho Villa's 1916 Columbus Raid in New Mexico, and the Battle of Ambos Nogales in 1918 in Arizona.
In addition to the Grand Canyon National Park, there are several national forests, national parks, and national monuments.
The regions near and west of Phoenix have the lowest risk.
Since the late 20th century, the Republican Party has also dominated Arizona politics in general.
Early in its history, Arizona's economy relied on the "five C's": copper (see ''Copper mining in Arizona''), cotton, cattle, citrus, and climate (tourism).
Because of wartime fears of Japanese invasion of the West Coast and racial discrimination, the government authorized the removal of all Japanese-American residents from western Washington, western Oregon, all of California, and western Arizona.
Children were often enrolled into these schools against the wishes of their parents and families.
The 1993 science fiction movie ''Fire in the Sky'', based on a reported alien abduction in the town of Snowflake, was set in Snowflake.
Chester Bennington, the lead vocalist of Linkin Park, and mash-up artist DJ Z-Trip are both from Phoenix.
Metro Phoenix alone accounts for two-thirds of the state's population.
This hot moisture brings lightning, thunderstorms, wind, and torrential, if usually brief, downpours.
In 2010, Arizona passed SB 1070, called the toughest illegal immigration legislation in the nation.
Arizona was administered as part of the Territory of New Mexico until southern New Mexico Territory seceded from the Union as the Confederate Territory of Arizona on March 16, 1861.
The Maricopa County Community College District includes 11 community colleges throughout Maricopa County and is one of the largest in the nation.
The President of the Senate and Speaker of the House, by rule, may extend the session up to seven additional days.
With a community education mandate since 1951, Phoenix Art Museum holds a year-round program of festivals, live performances, independent art films and educational programs.
At the time these areas were located in a part of the former New Mexico Territory.
To the European settlers, their pronunciation sounded like "Arissona".
Several major Hollywood films, such as ''Billy Jack'', ''U Turn'', ''Waiting to Exhale'', ''Just One of the Guys'', ''Can't Buy Me Love'', ''Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure'', ''The Scorpion King'', ''The Banger Sisters'', ''Used Cars'', and ''Raising Arizona'' have been made there (as  have many Westerns).
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848) specified that, in addition to language and cultural rights of the existing inhabitants being considered as inviolable, the sum of US$15&nbsp;million in compensation (equivalent to about $ today) be paid to the Republic of Mexico.
One of Arizona's better known musicians is shock rocker Alice Cooper, who helped define the genre.
The court meets in the Arizona Supreme Court Building at the capitol complex (at the southern end of Wesley Bolin Plaza).
Lake Havasu City, in Mohave County, known as "Arizona's playground," was developed on the Colorado River and is named after Lake Havasu.
While the state normally supports Republicans at the federal level, Democrats are often competitive in statewide elections.
Flagstaff, in Coconino County, is the largest city in northern Arizona, and is at an elevation of nearly .
Sun Link, loosely based on the Portland Streetcar, launched in July 2014.
The percentage growth each decade averaged about 20% in the earlier decades, and about 60% each decade thereafter.
Auto racing is another sport known in the state.
"Carefree Highway", released in 1974 by Gordon Lightfoot, takes its name from Arizona State Route 74 north of Phoenix.
Sun City, established by developer Del Webb and opened in 1960, was one of the first such communities.
The Arizona Legislature is bicameral (like the legislature of every other state except Nebraska) and consists of a thirty-member Senate and a 60-member House of Representatives.
The 2011 total gross state product was $259&nbsp;billion.
With its large Ponderosa pine forests, snowy winter weather and picturesque mountains, it is a stark contrast to the desert regions typically associated with Arizona.
