Finally he reached the palace of Manipur.
Anticipating a likely battle to the death between Karna and Arjuna, Krishna warned Arjuna calling Karna to be the foremost of the heroes and in some versions he also referred Karna as greater archer than Arjuna.
Lord Krishna reminded Arjuna about the life, prowess, and past heroic actions of Karna.
She allows Bhima to attend because he is Yudhishthira's heir and could win Draupadi for his brother without controversy.
At the same time, he prevents Subhadra from marrying Abhimanyu to Balarama's daughter Vatsala, as the Kurus find marriages between cousins taboo.
In the film, Arvind Swamy's character was loosely based on Arjuna
Yudhishthira decided to hold the Ashvamedha Yagna, or "horse sacrifice", to grant them the title of ''Chakravarti'' ("Emperor").
When the rest of the children gave up the ball as being lost, Arjuna stayed behind trying to get it.
Indra then invited his son to his palace in heaven.
He was acknowledged as a son of Pandu by his first wife Kunti, though he was fathered by the grace of the god Indra, rather than by Pandu who was cursed that he would die if he tried to father children.
Indra noted the passionate glances exchanged between Arjuna and Urvashi during his stay.
When attacking Drupada, Draupadi, trained in martial arts due to Panchal's attitudes towards gender neutrality, fights with Arjuna, but Arjuna after some while stops and evades Draupadi, saying that he cannot fight a woman.
Arjuna also obtained his famous conch.
After the death of Pandu (and Madri's subsequent sati), the Pandavas and their mother lived in Hastinapura, where they were brought up together with their cousins, the Kaurava brothers.
'''Arjuna''' (in Devanagari: अर्जुन '''') is one of the protagonists of the ancient Indian epic ''Mahabharata'' and plays a key role in the Bhagavad Gita alongside Krishna.
* Shwetavahana (श्वेतवाहन) - one with white horses mounted to his chariot.
An alternate etymology may be traced to PIE root ''*reg-'' which means "ruler" or "one who guides".
At the end of their training, the Kuru princes displayed their talents to their elders in an arena.
* '''Fall of Bhishma''': Throughout the first nine-days of battle, Arjuna was unable to defeat Bhishma.This was partially due to his own reluctance to fight his grandsire, as well as Bhishma's terrific skill.
Eager to defend the land that had given him refuge, Arjuna (dressed up as Brihannala) engaged the legion of Kaurava warriors, leading Matsya to victory and giving all credit for the victory to Uttar in his place.
Yudhishthira won the nomination over Duryodhana.
In any case, Khandavaprastha was where Arjuna and Krishna's friendship is truly forged.
Arjuna had, in his childhood, heard about Krishna's sister, Subhadra.
With Krishna using the Sudarshana Chakra  Arjuna and Krishna waged a successful battle against Indra and helped Agni burn down the entire Khandava Vana including all its demons and evil spirits.
Out of all of the great kings and other Kaurava princes, only Karna and Arjuna are able to do the established challenge.
Arjuna built the Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple during his conquest in South India.Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple is one of the "Divya Desams", the 108 temples of Vishnu revered by the 12 poet saints, or Alwars located near Aranmula, a village in Pathanamthitta District, Kerala, South India.The temple is dedicated to Parthasarathy, Lord Krishna's role as Arjuna's Charioteer in the Mahabharatha war.
When an astonished Arjuna related the story to Bhishma, Bhishma realised that the stranger was none other than Drona.
Arjuna was very upset that Babruvahana did not respect the duties worthy of a King and did not ask for war.
Because Balarama had already promised Subhadra to his favorite disciple, Duryodhana, Krishna advised Arjuna to kidnap Subhadra.
In another story, Arjuna, noticing Bhima eating in the dark, trained himself to shoot accurately without visualising his target.
His children included Srutakarma, Iravan, Babruvahana, and Abhimanyu.
Regaining his composure, Hanuman pledges to reside in Arjuna's battle standard (flag) during the Kurukshetra war.
Urvashi, annoyed at this, cursed him that he would become a eunuch who would have to live among women, singing and dancing.
Following the advice of Sage Vyasa to go on a meditation or "tapasya" to attain this divine weapon, Arjuna left his brothers for a penance.
The test is to lift, string, and fire Pinakin to pierce the eye of a golden fish whilst only looking at its reflection; Drupada had designed this test with Arjuna in mind.
Dismissively, and without looking because she was preoccupied, Kunti asks him to share it with his brothers.
Karna matched Arjuna's feats.
Shiva lectures Arjuna on the abilities of the weapon, as well as the judgement he must use while wielding it.
Bhagadatta was also a great friend of Pandu.
Kunti's reasoning is that only Yudhishthira and Duryodhana would be acceptable candidates for Draupadi's hand; anyone else, not set to inherit the throne, would be an insult to Panchal.
When the brothers returned with Draupadi, Arjuna joked to his mother that they had brought alms.
* Gandivadhara (गाण्डीवधर) - Gandiva holder
She was mesmerised by Arjun and forcefully took him to Naga Lok (the land of the snake-people) and gave him a choice: if he married her, she would let him go; otherwise, she would not.
The Mahabharata mentions several kingdoms to the east of Indraprastha which were conquered (or otherwise peacefully bent-the-knee) by Arjuna.
Arjuna is a popular choice of name for Hindu male child in the Indian subcontinent.
But Takshaka, the serpent-king lived in the same forest and was a friend of Indra's.
The Kauravas have a house of wax built; they desired to send the Pandavas vacationing to the wax house, under some pretense, before setting the house on fire.
Dancers like Urvashi, Tilottama, Rambha and Menaka entertained him.
However, before he can be crowned as the victor of the tournament, he is challenged by Karna.
In some versions of the story, this was the first time Arjuna meets Krishna.
It was then that Krishna took charge and explained the necessity and inevitability of the war to Arjuna.
Wishing to mock Arjuna, Jayadratha went to the head of the army in joy, even as the sun emerged from the eclipse.
At this point, there are two different popular versions of the story.
There, Arjuna steals the show, using divine weapons to great effect.
Impressed by Arjuna, Drona promised his pupil that he would make Arjuna the greatest archer that ever lived or ever would live.
Further, owing to a curse Karna received from his Guru Parasurama, Karna forgot the mantra to invoke the Brahmanda astra.
Later, Arjuna arranges for Uttara to become his daughter-in-law by marrying his son Abhimanyu to her.
Bhagadatta was later decapitated by Arjuna's arrow.
At this point in the Mahabharatha, the Pandavas revealed that they were alive.
The Mahabharata refers to Arjuna by twelve different names.
* Kiritin (किरीटिन्) - one who wears the celestial diadem, Kiriti, presented by Indra.
Here he met king Chitravahana's daughter, Chitrangadaa.
Finally Arjuna  chased Duryodhana and defeated him .
Many versions of Mahabharata do not mention it.
It is later stated that the defeat was because of Arjuna's using of Shikhandi  to plot Bhishma's death and the unethical killing of Karna.
He is also considered by many the best archer of his time (although disputed by some in favour of Karna).
The Bhagavad Gita primarily takes the form of a philosophical dialogue between Arjuna and Krishna.
Tensions escalate until Arjuna pledges to defeat Hanuman or kill himself, going so far as to frivolously use divine weapons to build bridge after bridge, while Hanuman uses his god-given strength to destroy them all.
Agni requested Krishna and Arjuna to help him realise his goal.
But Krishna reminded Arjuna of all the incidents - Draupadi’s insult, Abhimanyu’s death and the enraged Arjuna attacked Karna while he was trying to lift his sunken chariot wheel.
Continuing his quest, Arjuna visits the site of Rama Setu in Dhanushkodi.
However, Krishna created an artificial eclipse by using his Sudarshana Chakra to hide the sun, forcing Kauravas to believe the day was over and Arjuna's death was imminent.
Draupadi realised she had been tricked, but she forgave Subhadra and let her stay in Indra-prastha, allowing her to give company to Arjuna in the four years when he was not with Draupadi.
One day, when the princes were playing a game, they lost their ball in a well.
The Kauravas hid Jayadratha from Arjuna in a formation, knowing that Arjuna's death would result in a Kaurava victory.
In some versions of the Swayamvara, Arjuna is forbidden by Kunti to attend the Swayamvara.
As per the verses in Harivamsha or Harivamsha purana, the name '''Arjuna''' is cursed by sage Parashurama.
In due course,Arjuna and Subhadra gave birth to a son, Abhimanyu.
He cursed his son as a coward and asked him to prepare for war.
He was also taken to Hiranyapura, a palace in the sky created by a witch Puloma and his asura tribe of the Kalakanjas.
Arjuna was the fourth one to fall after Draupadi, Sahadeva and Nakula.
As Krishna became frustrated with Arjuna, he took up arms against Bhishma himself, at least twice.
Full of bravado, Virata's son Uttar attempts to take on the army by himself while the rest of the Matsya army has been lured away to fight Susharma and the Trigartas.
Under Bhishma's advice, the kingdom is split, with the Kauravas getting Hastinapur and the Pandavas getting Khandavaprastha.
Arjuna and Bhima wanted to declare war, but Yudhishthira cooled them down.
Draupadi also falls because while she claimed to love all the Pandavas equally, she had a soft spot for Arjuna.
Switching places with Uttar, Arjuna takes up the Gandiva and Devadatta.
As Krishna dispenses the advice, Arjuna asks the questions.
Balarama became furious upon learning of the abduction but is pacified by Krishna, after he showed that the wedding rein was in Sudhadra's hand, which showed her consent.
But Arjun and Subhadra are cousins too since Kunti (Arjun's Mother) and Vasudeva (Subhadra's father) are brother and sister.
On Indra's request, and regretting her anger, Urvashi reduced her curse to a period of one year of Arjuna's choice.
Angered, Duryodhana plotted with his uncle Shakuni, who masterminded a plan to kill the Pandavas.
Arjuna was the third son, after Yudhishthira and Bhima.
After Shri Krishna left his mortal body, Arjuna took the citizens of Dwaraka including 16,000 women that had formed Krishna's harem to Indraprastha.
However, Draupadi had made it clear that no other Pandava wife would be allowed to stay in her city, so Arjun, as per Krishna's advice, tricked Draupadi into meeting Subhadra as a milkmaid.
In one version, prompted by Krishna, Arjuna simply beheads the unarmed, afoot Karna with the Anjalika weapon.
He received the submission of many kings, either without or following an armed confrontation.
Scholars do also argue that if Arjuna was indeed able to defeat the Kaurava army in just half a day then he need not have resorted to guile to kill Bhishma, Karna, Bhagadatta, Bhurisrava and Jayadrath during the Kurukshetra war
They both had a son, who survived the Mahabharata war and ruled the small kingdom peacefully.
On the tenth day of the war, after asking Bhishma himself how to best defeat him, Arjuna took Shikhandi in his chariot.
* Savyasachin (सव्यसाचिन्) - ambidextrous
He is distraught at the thought of having to fight with his friends and family such as his dear teacher, Drona and grandsire Bhishma.
Agni also gave Arjuna an incandescent chariot with four horses yoked, and bearing a flag that would one-day be occupied by Hanuman.
In two other incidents, the reader sees how Arjuna's destiny is shaped.
That is why Arjuna carried the severed head of Jayadratha to his father, who was awoken from his meditation by the sudden landing of a severed head on his body and since he ended up dropping it to the ground, he had his head blown up.
Some interpretations claim that Krishna actually killed Karna...using Arjuna as his vessel, thereby freeing Arjuna of the shame of blatantly violating the rules of war.
Arjuna led the armed forces which followed the horse around its random wanderings.
As the battle draws close, Arjuna is overcome with self-doubt about the righteousness of the war against his own kith and kin.
Following the rules of engagement of war, Karna did not try to kill him but instead tried to utilize the time in extracting the wheels of his chariot.
Consequently, Shiva transformed himself to show his real avatar and blessed Arjuna with the Pashupatastra.
Here he sat in meditation in the name of Lord Shiva.
Arjuna  fell in love with Subhadra and desired to marry her .
Virat war  is considered as an interpolation by many scholars.
Perhaps overpowered him.But due to his low birth, Karna is not allowed to compete and gets insulted by Bhima, Arjuna and the others for being a sutaputra; this incident marks the beginning of a feud between Karna and Arjuna that lasts until the end of the story.
* Madhyapandava (मध्यपाण्डव) - the third of Pandavas, younger to Yudhishthira and Bhima and elder to Nakula and Sahadeva.
Arjuna thought for some while and agreed.
Accordingly, Arjuna disguised himself as a "yati" and stayed at Krishna's palace.
With both Duryodhana and Yudhishthira being crown princes, tensions are high.
Drona requested this in order to settle an old grudge he had with Drupada.
He was the third of the Pandava brothers and was married to Draupadi, Ulupi, Chitrangada and Subhadra (Krishna's sister) at different occasions.
Legend has it that Arjuna built this temple, to expiate for the sin of having killed Karna on the battlefield, against the dharma of killing an unarmed enemy
There, he openly questions why, if Rama had been such a great archer, he hadn't simply built the bridge out of arrows.
Hearing about the death of Kichaka, Duryodhana surmises that the Pandavas were hiding in Matsya.
Arjuna recovered and using the Anjalika weapon decapitated the weaponless Karna, who was still trying to lift the sunken chariot wheel.
While being thoroughly dominated by Shiva, Arjuna became confused as to how an ordinary hunter could beat a warrior like himself.
Afterwards, the disguised Arjuna accomplished the stringing and shooting of the bow.
Seeing his father Babruvahana came all the way to receive Arjuna.
Arjuna was defeated by mere robbers and  in his very sight the ladies of the Vrishnis, Andhakas and the 16000 wives of Krishna were taken away.
As Bhishma would not raise weapons against a woman, Arjuna was able to attack Bhishma unimpeded.
Along with his brothers, Arjuna spent his last year of exile in the kingdom of Matsya.
Arjuna fought with them but he already lost his divine energy and even lost the power to wield the celestial bow Gandiva.
Under his orders, Arjuna, Kunti, and the Pandavas faked their deaths and went into hiding.
Arjuna was the only one with the skill and fortitude to save his teacher from an attack from a crocodile.
Mani Ratnam's 1991 blockbuster Thalapathi was loosely based on the Mahabharatha.
Krishna, wishing to further tie their families, knew of Arjuna's visit and devised a plan to arrange their meet.
This conversation is a key part of the Mahabharata known as Bhagavad gita, and is considered as a holy scripture of Hinduism.
This is the place where Urvashi's curse is implemented and Arjuna becomes a eunuch called Brihannala (within themselves Pandavas called him Vijaya).
During the battle Bhagadatta shot an irresistible arrow Vaishnavastra which could kill Arjun but he was saved by Krishna's timely intervention; Krishna stood so that the weapon fell on Krishna and formed a garland.
Arjuna traveled for a while before reaching the mountain Indra keeladri, Vijayawada.
Younger to him were the twin sons born of Pandu's second wife Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva.
The couple stayed in Dwaraka for a year, and then another year in Pushkar.
* Partha (पार्थ) - son of Pritha, another name for Kunti.
* Jishnu (जिष्णु) - triumphant.
In this way, Arjuna came into possession of his famous bow.
At the palace, he teaches song and dance, qualities he had learnt from Chitrasena King of the Gandharvas in Devalok, to the King Virata's daughter, Uttarā.
The first ten names are spoken by Arjuna himself, while the name "Kapi Dhwaja" is also used to refer to his chariot, the "Nandi Ghosha" .The names and their meanings are as follow:
Arjuna became Drona's favorite and most accomplished pupil; specifically, he became a master in using the bow and the arrow.
Finally he reached Dwarka, the place where his cousin Krishna resided.
Arjuna was born into the royal family of Hastinapura.
Sensing an impending war with the Kauravas, Sage Vyasa  advised Arjuna that he obtain the Pashupatastra from Lord Shiva.
Alerted of the scheme by Vidura, the Pandavas evaded the trap.
When Arjuna disobeys her anyways, as he is firing the arrow, he swears to God that if wins Draupadi's hand, he would never disobey his mother's commands.
Her five sons, one from each of the Pandava brothers, are known as the Upapandavas.
The brothers follow Vyasa's advice on a sharing arrangement with regard to Draupadi: each brother would have exclusive rights over her for a year, after which the mantle will shift to the next brother.
Arjuna plays the role of the reader in the Bhagavad Gita.
In another version of the story, the duel just continues with Karna on foot; Karna even invoked Rudraastra and rendered Arjuna unconscious.
When Bhima asks Yudhishthira why Arjuna isn't permitted the same, the reason given is Arjuna's extreme pride in his skills as an archer.
Indra's anger was metered by his pride in his son.
Shiva was very pleased with the bravery and prowess of the prince.
After the defeat of mighty evil king Kartavirya Arjuna or otherwise called Sahasra Arjuna, sage Parashurama cursed that who ever holds the name ''Arjuna'' will never become a king and always be a servant of others.
Since Chitrangadaa was his oldest child and Manipur practiced equal primogeniture, which Hastinapur did not practice, the king sought a promise from Arjuna that Chitrangadaa and any of her and Arjuna's children would remain in Manipur as Chitravahana's heirs.
Arjuna went to Manipur,where the king was Babruvahana, his own son with Chitrangadaa.
Srutakarma is the son of Arjuna.
Here Arjuna uses the Raudra-astra and annihilates the demons.
Karna got down from his chariot to free the wheel and asked Arjuna to pause, reminding him of the etiquette of war.
Except for Yudhishthira, all of the Pandavas grew weak and died before reaching heaven (only Yudhishthira is allowed to keep his mortal body).
* '''Death of Bhagadatta''': On the Twelfth day Arjuna was busy fighting Bhagadatta the king of Pragjyotisha who came with a thousand elephants and attacked him.
Agni was in great hunger and needed to burn down the entire Khandava Vana to quench his hunger.
He married her, and they had a son called Iravan.
In reality, the attack was a ruse Drona used to test his students.
Arjuna learnt song and dance from the Gandharva, Chitrasena and Indra himself taught him all the divine weapons and also gave him his Vajra.
Arjuna was sent north by Yudhishthira to subjugate kingdoms for the Rajasuya Yagya, so that he could be crowned Emperor of Indraprastha.
In some versions Arjuna was defeated by Bhishma, Drona and Karna.
According to  many scholars Virat war is an interpolated medicine to recover the cheater and weak image of Arjuna.
Arjuna was amazed at the splendor of his father's palace at Amaravati.
Holding his mother's orders as a divine command, he requested his elder brother to accept Draupadi.
He prays to Shiva for strength, and then sees the offerings he made to Shiva around the hunter's neck.
Arjuna moved to other Tirthas, including the southern regions in Kerala.
Still in hiding, the Pandavas disguise themselves as brahmins and attend the Swayamvara of Panchala princess Draupadi.
Arjuna makes his arrows to carry away Jayadratha's head.
So the latter brought down heavy rains to thwart Agni's plans to burn the woods.
However, Arjuna refused her advances, alleging that he had heard of her relationship with his ancestor Pururava, and hence she had the status of a mother, equal in respect to Kunti.
And on the eighteenth day, Arjuna killed Susharma with an arrow which ended the Trigarta saga.
Arjuna used the Mohini-astra and the Madhava-astra to demolish these asuras.
* '''Killing of the Trigartas''': Attempting to distract him so that Dronacharya could capture Yudhishthira, Susharma and the Trigartas challenged Arjuna to a fight to the death.
In some versions of the story, Arjuna is the only prince (of the Kaurava/Pandava party) to have interacted with Draupadi before.
Drona adhered to this vow so strongly, that when he discovered a Kirat prince Ekalavya of potential superior archery skill, Drona demands him into cutting off the thumb of his hand (needed to draw the bow), so that he kept his promise to Arjuna.
* Dhananjaya (धनञ्जय) - one who brings prosperity and wealth in the land where he goes to.
There, Arjuna reveals his identity and those of his brothers'.
Giving up all their belongings and ties, the Pandavas, accompanied by a dog, made their final journey of pilgrimage to the Himalayas.
It was here that he met the Naga princess, Uloopi.
Arjuna gets the opportunity to test his skill when Indra asked him to defeat his enemy as the price of his training.
* Kapidhwaja (कपिध्वज) - having flag of Kapi (monkey) in his chariot (Arjuna's flag displayed an image of Hanuman from a previous encounter).
In the fight between father and son Babruvahana killed Arjuna, but Ulupi, the snake-princess used the Mritasanjivani, a boon from Ganga Devi to bring Arjuna back to life.
* '''Death of Karna''': Karna  and Arjuna were sworn enemies in the epic, each having taken an oath to kill the other in the battle.
The warriors on the battlefield and the devas in heaven watched the battle in speechless amazement and terrified admiration of the strength and skill of these two greatest of warriors.
On the way, they were attacked by a group of bandits.
Despite the understanding of all and being forgiven by both Yudhishthira and Draupadi, Arjuna accepted the punishment agreed with Narada and set off on a twelve-year tirtha-yatra.
Along with his brothers, Arjuna was trained in religion, science, administration and military arts by Bhishma.
Per Draupadi's suggestion, Uttar takes Brihannala with him, as his charioteer.
