These directionally named regions are broad and not defined along county lines.
Senators, John Boozman and Tom Cotton, are Republicans.
Through reforms, the state is a leader in requiring curricula designed to prepare students for postsecondary education, rewarding teachers for student achievement, and providing incentives for principals who work in lower-tier schools.
The southeastern part of Arkansas along the Mississippi Alluvial Plain is sometimes called the Arkansas Delta.
In 2010, Republicans captured three of the state's four seats in the U.S. House of Representatives.
The museum includes walking trails and educational opportunities in addition to displaying over 450 works covering five centuries of American art.
Following the purchase, the balanced give-and-take relationship between settlers and Native Americans began to change all along the frontier, including in Arkansas.
The six other elected executive positions in Arkansas are lieutenant governor, secretary of state, attorney general, treasurer, auditor, and land commissioner.
Their ancestry primarily goes back to the original 13 colonies and for this reason many of them today simply claim American ancestry.
Baseball runs deep in Arkansas and has been popular before the state hosted Major League Baseball (MLB) spring training in Hot Springs from 1886-1920s.
A narrow band of rolling hills, Crowley's Ridge rises from  above the surrounding alluvial plain and underlies many of the major towns of eastern Arkansas.
It was settled only when President Ulysses S. Grant ordered Joseph Brooks to disperse his militant supporters.
The state's culture also includes distinct cuisine, dialect, and traditional festivals.
Six Fortune 500 companies are based in Arkansas, including the world's #1 retailer, Walmart.
In the latter area, Republicans have been known to get 90 percent or more of the vote, while the rest of the state was more Democratic.
The University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff is a member of the Southwestern Athletic Conference, a league whose members all play football in the second-level Football Championship Subdivision (FCS).
In 2014, the last Democrat in Arkansas' Congressional Delegation, Mark Pryor, was defeated in campaign to win a third term in the U.S. Senate, leaving the entire congressional delegation in GOP hands for the first time since Reconstruction.
There are 28 judicial circuits of Circuit Court, with each contains five subdivisions: criminal, civil, probate, domestic relations, and juvenile court.
The principal ancestries of Arkansas's residents in 2010 were surveyed to be the following:
The Senate contains 35 members from districts of approximately equal population.
Forestry remains strong in the Arkansas Timberlands, and the state ranks fourth nationally and first in the South in softwood lumber production.
In Arkansas, the lieutenant governor is elected separately from the governor and thus can be from a different political party.
Following the Brooks-Baxter War, a new state constitution was ratified, re-enfranchising former Confederates.
Arkansas is home to many caves, such as Blanchard Springs Caverns.
Nearby Crowley's Ridge is only home of the tulip tree in the state, and generally hosts more northeastern plant life such as the beech tree.
A 2010 United States Forest Service survey determined  of Arkansas's land is forestland, or 56% of the state's total area.
Arkansas ranks as the 32nd smartest state on the Morgan Quitno Smartest State Award, 44th in percentage of residents with at least a high school diploma, and 48th in percentage of bachelor's degree attainment.
Clinton won the Democratic nomination for President the following cycle.
This staggers elections such that half the body is up for re-election every two years and allows for complete body turnover following redistricting.
Over the years, many Arkansans have looked to the Razorbacks football team as the public image of the state.
Millions of acres of public land are available for both bow and modern gun hunters.
Historically and modernly, the people of Arkansas call themselves either "Arkansans" or "Arkansawyers".
While he was dumped into the Mississippi River, the once rich De Soto's will read: "four Indian slaves, three horses and 700 hogs".
Its name is of Siouan derivation from the language of the Osage denoting their related kin, the Quapaw Indians.
Several smaller retirement communities such as Bull Shoals, Hot Springs Village, and Fairfield Bay have flourished due to their position on a fishing lake.
Arkansas has seven distinct natural regions: the Ozark Mountains, Ouachita Mountains, Arkansas River Valley, Gulf Coastal Plain, Crowley's Ridge, and the Arkansas Delta, with Central Arkansas sometimes included as a blend of multiple regions.
The Governor of Arkansas is Asa Hutchinson, a Republican, who was inaugurated on January 13, 2015.
As of 2015, Arkansas has an estimated population of 2,978,204.
Arkansas is served by  of railroad track divided among twenty-six railroad companies including three Class I railroads.
The Buffalo River, Little Red River, Black River and Cache River all serve as tributaries to the White River, which also empties into the Mississippi.
In the late 1880s, the worsening agricultural depression catalyzed Populist and third party movements, leading to interracial coalitions.
The Ozark Folk Festival in Mountain View is a celebration of Ozark culture and often features folk and bluegrass musicians.
In 1891 state legislators passed a requirement for a literacy test, knowing that many blacks and whites would be excluded, at a time when more than 25% of the population could neither read nor write.
After Reconstruction, the state began to receive more immigrants and migrants.
Presenting himself as a "New Democrat" and using incumbent George H. W. Bush's broken promise against him, Clinton won the 1992 presidential election (43.0% of the vote) against Republican Bush (37.4% of the vote) and billionaire populist Ross Perot, who ran as an independent (18.9% of the vote).
The Fayetteville–Springdale–Rogers Metropolitan Area is the second-largest metropolitan area in Arkansas, growing at the fastest rate due to the influx of businesses and the growth of the University of Arkansas and Walmart.
Arkansas features a variety of native music across the state, ranging from the blues heritage of West Memphis, Pine Bluff, Helena-West Helena to rockabilly, bluegrass, and folk music from the Ozarks.
'''Arkansas''' () is a state located in the southeastern region of the United States.
As with the federal government of the United States, political power in Arkansas is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.
The jurisdiction of the Arkansas Court of Appeals is determined by the Arkansas Supreme Court, and there is no right of appeal from the Court of Appeals to the high court.
Only in the primary was there any competition among candidates, as Democrats held all the power.
The state's gross domestic product (GDP) was $105 billion in 2010.
About 0.8% of the state's population spoke an Asian language, and 0.2% spoke other languages.
Freight railroads are concentrated in southeast Arkansas to serve the industries in the region.
The state soon came under almost exclusive control of the Radical Republicans, (those who moved from the North being derided as "carpetbaggers" based on allegations of corruption), and led by Governor Powell Clayton, they presided over a time of great upheaval and racial violence in the state between Republican state militia and the Ku Klux Klan.
Residents generally wanted to avoid a civil war.
The Arkansas Supreme Court can review Court of Appeals cases upon application by either a party to the litigation, upon request by the Court of Appeals, or if the Arkansas Supreme Court feels the case should have been initially assigned to it.
It appealed to a wide variety of classes, becoming almost as popular as Hot Springs.
It is also home to 11 private colleges and universities including Hendrix College, one of the nation's top 100 liberal arts colleges, according to U.S. News & World Report.
Their families have been in the state so long, in many cases since before statehood, that they choose to identify simply as having American ancestry or do not in fact know their own ancestry.
All four seats are held by Republicans: Rick Crawford (1st district), French Hill (2nd district), Steve Womack (3rd district), and Bruce Westerman (4th district).
The two schools have never played each other, due to the University of Arkansas' policy of not playing intrastate games.
The state's agriculture outputs are poultry and eggs, soybeans, sorghum, cattle, cotton, rice, hogs, and milk.
As European Americans settled throughout the East Coast and into the Midwest, in the 1830s the United States government forced the removal of many Native American tribes to Arkansas and Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River.
Related to the state's frontier past, hunting continues in the state.
Later explorers included the French Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet in 1673, and Frenchmen Robert La Salle and Henri de Tonti in 1681.
These areas are set aside for outdoor recreation and are open to hunting, fishing, hiking, and primitive camping.
The culture of Arkansas is available to all in various forms, whether it be architecture, literature, or fine and performing arts.
After 2010, Republican strength expanded further to the Northeast and Southwest and into the Little Rock suburbs.
When Arkansas applied for statehood, the slavery issue was again raised in Washington DC.
It recorded population losses in the 1950 and 1960 Censuses.
The town's attractions included horse racing and other entertainment.
In contrast though a Gallup poll demonstrates that Arkansas made the most immediate progress in reducing its number of uninsured residents following the passage of the Affordable Care Act.
Major institutions with multiple branches include Baptist Health, Community Health Systems, and HealthSouth.
Arkansas's plant life varies with its climate and elevation.
Arkansas borders Louisiana to the south, Texas to the southwest, Oklahoma to the west, Missouri to the north, as well as Tennessee and Mississippi on the east.
In early antebellum Arkansas, the southeast Arkansas economy developed rapidly on slavery.
Arkansas, like most other Southern states, is part of the Bible Belt and is predominantly Protestant.
The Kansa tribe of Native Americans are closely associated with the Sioux tribes of the Great Plains.
Napoleon Bonaparte sold French Louisiana to the United States in 1803, including all of Arkansas, in a transaction known today as the Louisiana Purchase.
In defiance of federal court orders to integrate, the governor and city of Little Rock decided to close the high schools for the remainder of the school year.
Sports are also very important to the culture of Arkansas, ranging from football, baseball, and basketball to hunting and fishing.
The governor also appoints qualified individuals to lead various state boards, committees, and departments.
The southern lowlands include the Gulf Coastal Plain and the Arkansas Delta.
It should be pronounced in three (3) syllables, with the final "s" silent, the "a" in each syllable with the Italian sound, and the accent on the first and last syllables.
In 2012, Republicans won election for all four House seats.
Several historic town sites have been restored as Arkansas state parks, including Historic Washington State Park, Powhatan Historic State Park, and Davidsonville Historic State Park.
Following the completion of Norfork Dam, the Norfork Tailwater and the White River have become a destination for trout fishers.
In eastern Arkansas, one can find ''Taxodium '' (cypress), ''Quercus nigra'' (water oaks), and hickories with their roots submerged in the Mississippi Valley bayous indicative of the deep south.
De Soto died there the next day, in May 1542, opting for a watery burial in order to hide from the Natives that he was not a deity, and was a mortal.
Interior Highlands region, the only major mountainous region between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachian Mountains.
Once a state with a cashless society in the uplands and plantation agriculture in the lowlands, Arkansas's economy has evolved and diversified.
The reputation began when the state was characterized by early explorers as a savage wilderness full of outlaws and thieves.
As of 2014, Arkansas was found to be the most affordable US state to live in.
Arkansas's rate of change, age distributions, and gender distributions mirror national averages.
The Arkansas Clean Indoor Air Act went into effect in 2006, a statewide smoking ban excluding bars and some restaurants.
Although intended to represent the divide between rich southeastern plantation Arkansas planters and the poor northwestern hill country, the meaning was twisted to represent a Northerner lost in the Ozarks on a white horse asking a backwoods Arkansan for directions.
Together, these two institutions are the state's only Level I trauma centers.
Battles early in the war took place in northwest Arkansas, including the Battle of Cane Hill, Battle of Pea Ridge, and Battle of Prairie Grove.
Arkansas began to diversify its economy following World War II and relies on its service industry, aircraft, poultry, steel, tourism, cotton, and rice.
Lumbering and paper milling activity is active throughout the region.
The word "Arkansas" itself is a French pronunciation ("Arcansas") of a Quapaw (a related "Kaw" tribe) word, ''akakaze'', meaning "land of downriver people" or the Sioux word ''akakaze'' meaning "people of the south wind".
Between 1905 and 1911, Arkansas began to receive a small immigration of German, Slovak, and Scots-Irish from Europe.
White rural interests continued to dominate the state's politics until the Civil Rights movement in the mid-20th century.
Several main corridors pass through Little Rock, including Interstate&nbsp;30 (I-30) and I-40 (the nation's 3rd-busiest trucking corridor).
The Republican Party majority status in the Arkansas State House of Representatives following the 2012 elections is the party's first since 1874.
College football in Arkansas began from humble beginnings.
The state line along the Mississippi River is indeterminate along much of the eastern border with Mississippi due to these meanders.
Dominant species in Arkansas's forests include ''Quercus'' (oak), ''Carya'' (hickory), ''Pinus echinata'' (shortleaf pine) and ''Pinus taeda'' (loblolly pine).
In April 1783, Arkansas saw its only battle of the American Revolutionary War, a brief siege of the post by British Captain James Colbert with the assistance of the Choctaw and Chickasaw.
Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton brought national attention to the state with a long speech at the 1988 Democratic National Convention endorsing Michael Dukakis.
The Caddo, Osage, and Quapaw peoples encountered European explorers.
The University of Arkansas, flagship campus of the University of Arkansas System in Fayetteville was ranked #63 among public schools in the nation by ''U.S.
Each officer's term is four years long.
It also brought new development into different parts of the state, including the Ozarks, where some areas were developed as resorts.
The Saline River, Little Missouri River, Bayou Bartholomew, and the Caddo River all serve as tributaries to the Ouachita River in south Arkansas, which eventually empties into the Mississippi in Louisiana.
De Tonti established Arkansas Post at a Quapaw village in 1686, making it the first European settlement in the territory.
Seven of Arkansas' smaller colleges play in NCAA Division II, with six in the Great American Conference and one in the Heartland Conference.
And, whereas, the matter has been thoroughly investigated by the State Historical Society and the Eclectic Society of Little Rock, which have agreed upon the correct pronunciation as derived from history, and the early usage of the American immigrants.
Arkansas held a very important position for the Rebels, maintaining control of the Mississippi River and surrounding Southern states.
Arkansas held the distinction of having a U.S. House delegation composed entirely of military veterans (Rick Crawford - Army; Tim Griffin - Army Reserve; Steve Womack - Army National Guard, Tom Cotton- Army).
The Arkansas Supreme Court is the court of last resort in the state, composed of seven justices elected to eight-year terms.
By 1900 the Democratic Party expanded use of the white primary in county and state elections, further denying blacks a part in the political process.
According to CNBC, Arkansas ranks as the 20th best state for business, with the 2nd-lowest cost of doing business, 5th-lowest cost of living, 11th best workforce, 20th-best economic climate, 28th-best educated workforce, 31st-best infrastructure and the 32nd-friendliest regulatory environment.
Arkansas is the 29th largest in square miles and the 33rd most populous of the 50 United States.
The name Arkansas derives from the same root as the name for the state of Kansas.
In 1881, the Arkansas state legislature enacted a bill that adopted an official pronunciation of the state's name, to combat a controversy then simmering.
Arkansas has been making strides in education reform.
European Americans have a strong presence in the northwestern Ozarks and the central part of the state.
The state has four seats in U.S. House of Representatives.
Arkansas also benefits from the use of its rivers for commerce.
The Texas Eagle, an Amtrak passenger train, serves five stations in the state  Walnut Ridge, Little Rock, Malvern, Arkadelphia, and Texarkana.
Team sports and especially collegiate football have been important to Arkansans.
By the fall of 1959, the Little Rock high schools were completely integrated.
Northwest Arkansas is served by I-540 from Fort Smith to Bella Vista, which is a segment of future I-49.
Citizens of the state of Kansas often pronounce the Arkansas River as , in a manner similar to the common pronunciation of the name of their state.
High school football also began to grow in Arkansas in the early 20th century.
The northwestern highlands are covered in an oak-hickory mixture, with Ozark white cedars, ''cornus'' (dogwoods), and ''Cercis canadensis'' (redbuds) also present.
Arkansas did not secede until Abraham Lincoln demanded Arkansas troops be sent to Fort Sumter to quell the rebellion there.
Interior Highlands, to the densely forested land in the south known as the Arkansas Timberlands, to the eastern lowlands along the Mississippi River and the Arkansas Delta.
Pundits  suggested the speech would ruin Clinton's political career.
Americans of English stock are found throughout the state.
There are fewer people in Arkansas of Hispanic or Latino origin than the national average.
In 1874, the Brooks-Baxter War, a political struggle between factions of the Republican Party shook Little Rock and the state governorship.
Arkansas has only elected three Republicans to the U.S. Senate since Reconstruction, Tim Hutchinson, who was defeated after one term by Mark Pryor; John Boozman, who defeated incumbent Blanche Lincoln; and Tom Cotton, who defeated Mark Pryor in the 2014 elections.
"Calling the Hogs" is a cheer that shows support for the Razorbacks, one of the two NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) teams in the state.
(See Law and Government below.)
English and Scots-Irish immigrants settled throughout the backcountry of the South and in the more mountainous areas.
Governor Orval Faubus had ordered the Arkansas National Guard to aid segregationists in preventing nine African-American students from enrolling at Little Rock's Central High School.
Many cities also hold festivals which draw tourists to the culture of Arkansas, such as The Bradley County Pink Tomato Festival in Warren, King Biscuit Blues Festival, Ozark Folk Festival, Toad Suck Daze, and Tontitown Grape Festival.
The largest city in the eastern part of the state is Jonesboro.
The three-year median household income from 2009-11 was $39,806, ranking forty-ninth in the nation.
Under the Arkansas Constitution Arkansas is a right to work state, its voters passed a ban on same-sex marriage with 75% voting yes, and the state is one of a handful with legislation on its books banning abortion in the event ''Roe v. Wade'' is ever overturned.
The University of Arkansas first fielded a team in 1894 when football was a very dangerous game.
Minority group data also approximates national averages.
Arkansas is usually ranked as one of the least healthy states due to high obesity, smoking, and sedentary lifestyle rates.
The state was a Democratic one-party state for decades, until after passage of the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 to enforce constitutional rights.
Reflecting the state's large evangelical population, the state has a strong social conservative bent.
The Germans were mostly Lutheran and the Slovaks were primarily Catholic.
Before 2013, the General Assembly had not been controlled by the Republican Party since Reconstruction, with the GOP holding a 51-seat majority in the state House and a 21-seat (of 35) in the state Senate following victories in 2012.
Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art in Bentonville was visited by 604,000 people in 2012, its first year.
Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas'' in 1954 that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional, some students worked to integrate schools in the state.
The University of Arkansas at Little Rock, which brands its athletic program as "Little Rock", is a member of the FBS Sun Belt Conference, but is one of two conference schools that has no football program.
Additional Native American removals began in earnest during the territorial period, with final Quapaw removal complete by 1833 as they were pushed into Indian Territory.
The completion of the William Jefferson Clinton Presidential Library in Little Rock has drawn many visitors to the city and revitalized the nearby River Market District.
The Irish were mostly Protestant from Ulster, of Scots and Northern Borders descent.
The Arkansas General Assembly is the state's bicameral bodies of legislators, composed of the Senate and House of Representatives.
Both teams compete in the Texas League.
Before European settlement of North America, Arkansas was inhabited by indigenous peoples for thousands of years.
Of these, only Fort Smith and Jonesboro are outside the two largest metropolitan areas.
In descending order of size, they are: Little Rock, Fort Smith, Fayetteville, Springdale, Jonesboro, North Little Rock, Conway, and Rogers.
Arkansas House members can serve a maximum of three two-year terms.
* 15.5% African American
In a few years at the end of the 19th century, for instance, Eureka Springs in Carroll County grew to 10,000 people, rapidly becoming a tourist destination and the fourth-largest city of the state.
Arkansas was the last state of the old Confederacy to never have Republicans control either chamber of its house since the Civil War.
Arkansas has many rivers, lakes, and reservoirs within or along its borders.
The twelve judges of the Arkansas Court of Appeals are elected from judicial districts to renewable six-year terms.
The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) in Little Rock operates the UAMS Medical Center, a teaching hospital ranked as high performing nationally in cancer and nephrology.
Bill Clinton, the 42nd President of the United States, was born in Hope, Arkansas.
Arkansas is divided into three broad ecoregions, the ''Ozark, Ouachita-Appalachian Forests'', ''Mississippi Alluvial and Southeast USA Coastal Plains'', and the ''Southeastern USA Plains''and two biomes, the subtropical coniferous forest and the temperate deciduous forest.
Today a significant portion of Arkansas's population participates in hunting duck in the Mississippi flyway and deer across the state.
Top high schools receiving recognition from the U.S. News & World Report are spread across the state, including Haas Hall Academy in Fayetteville, KIPP Delta Collegiate in Helena-West Helena, Bentonville, Rogers, Rogers Heritage, Valley Springs, Searcy, and McCrory.
No mechanized vehicles nor developed campgrounds are allowed in these areas.
Other cities are located in Arkansas such as Pine Bluff, Crossett, Lake Village, Hot Springs, Bentonville, Texarkana, Sherwood, Jacksonville, Russellville, Bella Vista, West Memphis, Paragould, Cabot, Searcy, Van Buren, El Dorado, Blytheville, Harrison, Dumas, Rison, Warren, and Mountain Home.
House districts are redistricted by the Arkansas Board of Apportionment.
Together, these immigrants made the Delta more diverse than the rest of the state.
Most of the people identifying as American are of English descent and/or Scots-Irish descent.
After the Supreme Court's decision in ''Brown ''v.''
Two other small Arkansas colleges compete in NCAA Division III, in which athletic scholarships are prohibited.
The United States Census Bureau classifies Arkansas as a southern state, sub-categorized among the West South Central States.
In 2010 Arkansas students earned an average score of 20.3 on the ACT exam, just below the national average of 21.
The capital was relocated from Arkansas Post to Little Rock in 1821, during the territorial period.
In northeast Arkansas, I-55 travels north from Memphis to Missouri, with a new spur to Jonesboro (I-555).
Festivals such as the King Biscuit Blues Festival and Bikes, Blues, and BBQ pay homage to the history of blues in the state.
The Republican-controlled reconstruction legislature established universal male suffrage (though temporarily disfranchising all former Confederates, who were mostly Democrats), a public education system, and passed general issues to improve the state and help more of the population.
Settlers, such as fur trappers, moved to Arkansas in the early 18th century.
News & World Report''.
The owners and operators of the cotton plantation economy in southeast Arkansas firmly supported slavery, as slave labor was perceived by them to be the best or "only" economically viable method of harvesting their cotton commodity crops.
None of these nationalities stayed long at farm labor; the Chinese especially quickly became small merchants in towns around the Delta.
The bloody Battle of Wilson's Creek just across the border in Missouri shocked many Arkansans who thought the war would be a quick and decisive Southern victory.
