When, in 1991, the Soviet Union was dissolved, Armenia's independence was officially recognized.
Gorbachev's inability to alleviate any of Armenia's problems created disillusionment among the Armenians and fed a growing hunger for independence.
In the next centuries, Armenia was in the Persian Empire's sphere of influence during the reign of Tiridates I, the founder of the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, which itself was a branch of the eponymous Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.
Its faculty numbered about 1,300 teachers and its student population about 10,000 students.
The name has traditionally been derived from Hayk (), the legendary patriarch of the Armenians and a great-great-grandson of Noah, who, according to the 5th-century AD author Moses of Chorene, defeated the Babylonian king Bel in 2492&nbsp;BC and established his nation in the Ararat region.
Turkish forces under the command of Kazım Karabekir captured Armenian territories that Russia had annexed in the aftermath of the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War and occupied the old city of Alexandropol (present-day Gyumri).
Due to its Soviet past, Russian is still widely used in Armenia and could be considered as ''de facto'' second language.
The most successful team was the FC Ararat Yerevan team of the 1970s who won the Soviet Cup in 1973 and 1975 and the Soviet Top League in 1973.
(consisting of the Erivan and Karabakh khanates).
Football is also popular in Armenia.
Small deposits of coal, gas, and petroleum exist but have not yet been developed.
Witnesses there claimed that the MVD used excessive force and that they had instigated the fighting.
The Ministry of Defence is in charge of political leadership, currently headed by Colonel General Seyran Ohanyan, while military command remains in the hands of the General Staff, headed by the Chief of Staff, who is currently Colonel General Yuri Khatchaturov.
Several bronze-era states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia, including the Hittite Empire (at the height of its power), Mitanni (South-Western historical Armenia), and Hayasa-Azzi (1500–1200&nbsp;BC).
At the end of the war, the victorious powers sought to divide up the Ottoman Empire.
The Karabakh war ended after a Russian-brokered cease-fire was put in place in 1994.
The pomegranate, with its symbolic association with fertility, represents that nation.
Health expenditures were about 5.6% of GDP in 2004.
Armenians kept to their traditions and certain diasporans rose to fame with their music.
Agriculture accounted for less than 20% of both net material product and total employment before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
This occurred after mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event's fiftieth anniversary in 1965.
Other educational institutions in Armenia include the American University of Armenia and the QSI International School of Yerevan.
In the agreement, Turkey allowed the Soviet Union to assume control over Adjara with the port city of Batumi in return for sovereignty over the cities of Kars, Ardahan, and Iğdır, all of which were part of Russian Armenia.
However, unemployment, which was 18.5% in 2015, still remains a major problem due to the influx of thousands of refugees from the Karabakh conflict.
The treaty forced Armenia to disarm most of its military forces, cede all former Ottoman territory granted to it by the Treaty of Sèvres, and to give up all the "Wilsonian Armenia" granted to it at the Sèvres treaty.
In the Armenian diaspora, Armenian revolutionary songs are popular with the youth.
The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved.
Most of those expenditures were outside the private sector.
Armenian border guards are in charge of patrolling the country's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and Turkey.
Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed $1.1&nbsp;billion.
40,000 to 70,000 Armenians still live in Turkey (mostly in and around Istanbul).
This figure, however, accounts for solely the first year of the Genocide and does not take into account those who died or were killed after the report was compiled on 24 May 1916.
There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats.
The Armenian government's stated aim is to build a Western-style parliamentary democracy as the basis of its form of government.
In the 1st century BC the Kingdom of Armenia reached its height under Tigranes the Great.
According to the histories of both Moses of Chorene and Michael Chamchian, ''Armenia'' derives from the name of Aram, a lineal descendant of Hayk.
Between the 16th century and 19th century, the traditional Armenian homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia came under the rule of the Ottoman and Iranian empires, repeatedly ruled by either of the two over the centuries.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament.
Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians, Pontic Greeks (here usually called Caucasus Greeks), Kurds, Georgians, and Belarusians.
Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's economy suffers from the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns.
Under the Bagratuni dynasty, the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia was restored in the 9th century.
Several Armenian officials have also expressed the desire for their country to eventually become an EU member state, some predicting that it will make an official bid for membership in a few years.
The Byzantine rule was short lived, as in 1071 Seljuk Turks defeated the Byzantines and conquered Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert, establishing the Seljuk Empire.
There has been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break-up of the USSR.
The Nairi people (12th to 9th centuries BC) and the Kingdom of Urartu (1000–600&nbsp;BC) successively established their sovereignty over the Armenian Highland.
On 17 March 1991, Armenia, along with the Baltic states, Georgia and Moldova, boycotted a nationwide referendum in which 78% of all voters voted for the retention of the Soviet Union in a reformed form.
Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function.
Russian was still widely taught, however, as a second language.
As of 2016, there are an estimated 35,000 Yazidis in Armenia.
The economies of both countries have been hurt in the absence of a complete resolution and Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan remain closed.
During the Gorbachev era of the 1980s, with the reforms of Glasnost and Perestroika, Armenians began to demand better environmental care for their country, opposing the pollution that Soviet-built factories brought.
Armenia competed internationally as part of the USSR national football team until the Armenian national football team was formed in 1992 after the split of the Soviet Union.
The status of Karabakh has yet to be determined.
On April 13, 2013, the Armenian government announced a change in law to allow freedom of panorama for 3D works of art.
Tensions were running high between Armenians and Azerbaijanis during the final years of the Soviet Union.
$9.3&nbsp;million has been invested in the resort town of Tsaghkadzor to improve the winter sports infrastructure because of dismal performances at recent winter sports events.
But those difficulties notwithstanding, 90 percent of Armenians athletes on Soviet Olympic teams came back with medals."
Another seventy specialized secondary institutions had 45,900 students, and 68,400 students were enrolled in a total of ten postsecondary institutions that included universities.
However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan.
Being a landlocked country, water sports can only be practiced on lakes, notably Lake Sevan.
Armenian became the dominant language of instruction, and many schools that had taught in Russian closed by the end of 1991.
The main characteristics of Armenian cuisine are a reliance on the quality of the ingredients rather than heavily spicing food, the use of herbs, the use of wheat in a variety of forms, of legumes, nuts, and fruit (as a main ingredient as well as to sour food), and the stuffing of a wide variety of leaves.
Signed between the Allied and Associated Powers and Ottoman Empire at Sèvres on 10 August 1920, the Treaty of Sèvres promised to maintain the existence of the Armenian republic and to attach the former territories of Ottoman Armenia to it.
The Armenian Genocide caused widespread emigration that led to the settlement of Armenians in various countries in the world.
The number of assaults has recently declined, but the physical integrity of journalists remain at stake.
These songs encourage Armenian patriotism and are generally about Armenian history and national heroes.
The International Association of Genocide Scholars places the death toll at "more than a million".
Armenia is a member of more than 40 international organisations, including the United Nations; the Council of Europe; the Asian Development Bank; the Commonwealth of Independent States; the World Trade Organization; World Customs Organization; the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation; and La Francophonie.
In the case of an attack, Armenia is able to mobilise every able-bodied man between the age of 15 and 59, with military preparedness.
It also participates in the Winter Olympic Games in alpine skiing, cross-country skiing and figure skating.
This increase in the importance of agriculture was attributable to food security needs of the population in the face of uncertainty during the first phases of transition and the collapse of the non-agricultural sectors of the economy in the early 1990s.
In Armenia it passed through the legislatively required approval of the Constitutional Court and was sent to parliament for final ratification.
The genocide was implemented in two phases: the wholesale killing of the able-bodied male population through massacre and subjection of army conscripts to forced labour, followed by the deportation of women, children, the elderly and infirm on death marches leading to the Syrian desert.
From 1604 Abbas I of Iran implemented a "scorched earth" policy in the region to protect his north-western frontier against any invading Ottoman forces, a policy which involved a forced resettlement of masses of Armenians outside of their homelands.
Turkey also has a long history of poor relations with Armenia over its refusal to acknowledge the Armenian Genocide.
The government joined the World Trade Organization on 5 February 2003.
On the basis of the expansion and development of Yerevan State University a number of higher educational independent Institutions were formed including Medical Institute separated in 1930 which was set up on the basis of medical faculty.
Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold items.
The Armenian Premier League is the highest level football competition in Armenia, and has been dominated by FC Pyunik in recent seasons.
The Modern Art Museum, the Children’s Picture Gallery, and the Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy collections of fine art on display in Yerevan.
In the post-Genocide Armenian community of the United States, the so-called "kef" style Armenian dance music, using Armenian and Middle Eastern folk instruments (often electrified/amplified) and some western instruments, was popular.
Foreign students' department for Armenian diaspora established in 1957 later was enlarged and the enrollment of foreign students began.
There was local Armenian resistance in the region, developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire.
It has not lifted its blockade despite pressure from the powerful Turkish business lobby interested in Armenian markets.
As in the Soviet period, primary and secondary education in Armenia is free, and completion of secondary school is compulsory.
The country used the solar Hayk Armenian calendar, which consisted of 12 months.
In the past years emigration levels have declined and there is steady population growth.
A wide array of sports are played in Armenia, the most popular among them being wrestling, weightlifting, judo, association football, chess, and boxing.
After Soviet agreements to include the Syunik Province in Armenia's borders, the rebellion ended and the Red Army took control of the region on July 13.
Armenia is member of Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) along with Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The market offers woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus specialty.
To escape death or servitude at the hands of those who had assassinated his relative, Gagik II, King of Ani, an Armenian named Roupen, went with some of his countrymen into the gorges of the Taurus Mountains and then into Tarsus of Cilicia.
The largest Armenian communities outside of Armenia can be found in Russia, France, Iran, the United States, Georgia, Syria, Lebanon, Argentina, Australia, Canada, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Poland, Ukraine and Brazil.
Located in Western Asia, on the Armenian Highland, it is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, the ''de facto'' independent Nagorno-Karabakh Republic and Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and Azerbaijan's exclave of Nakhchivan to the south.
In 1980 Yerevan State Medical University was awarded one of the main rewards of the former USSR – the Order of Labor red Banner for training qualified specialists in health care and valuable service in the development of Medical Science.
There are currently two synagogues in Armenia – in the capital, Yerevan, and in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.
By the 19th century, Eastern Armenia had been conquered by the Russian Empire, while most of the western parts of the traditional Armenian homeland remained under Ottoman rule.
According to the Constitution of Armenia, the President is the head of state and of a multi-party system.
The President had made multiple public announcements, both in Armenia and abroad, that as the leader of the political majority of Armenia he assured the ratification of the protocols if Turkey also ratified them.
During the Soviet era, Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest population in the country (forming about 2.5% in 1989).
Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing down the hills of Tsakhkadzor, located thirty minutes outside Yerevan.
These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit and stabilizing the currency; developing private businesses; energy; agriculture; food processing; transportation; the health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone.
Before independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry-based – chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and textile – and highly dependent on outside resources.
Because the new borders of Armenia were to be drawn by United States President Woodrow Wilson, Ottoman Armenia was also referred to as "Wilsonian Armenia."
The Republic of Armenia constitutes only one-tenth of historical Armenia.
Urartu was established in 860 BC and by the 6th century BC it was replaced by the Satrapy of Armenia.
As part of the Soviet Union, Armenia was very successful, winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings at the Olympics on numerous occasions.
Armenia maintains cordial relations with both countries.
Armenia is a unitary, multi-party, democratic nation-state with an ancient cultural heritage.
A literacy rate of 100% was reported as early as 1960.
Peaceful protests in Yerevan supporting the Karabakh Armenians were met with anti-Armenian pogroms in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait.
Armenia is home to a Russian community of Molokans which practice a form of Spiritual Christianity originated from the Russian Orthodox Church.
Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia (especially hydroelectric and wind power), the Armenian Government is working toward building a new nuclear power plant at Metsamor near Yerevan.
Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead.
The league currently consists of eight teams and relegates to the Armenian First League.
Despite this, Armenia has also been looking toward Euro-Atlantic structures in recent years.
After the fall of the republic, the February Uprising soon took place in 1921, and led to the establishment of the Republic of Mountainous Armenia by Armenian forces under command of Garegin Nzhdeh on April 26, which fought off both Soviet and Turkish intrusions in the Zangezur region of southern Armenia.
In the 1988–89 school year, 301 students per 10,000 population were in specialized secondary or higher education, a figure slightly lower than the Soviet average.
Recently, the Intel Corporation agreed to open a research center in Armenia, in addition to other technology companies, signalling the growth of the technology industry in Armenia.
By 1920, the state was incorporated into the Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, and in 1922 became a founding member of the Soviet Union.
Armenian is the only official language.
The vast majority of energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic energy source is hydroelectric.
Since 1999, Freedom House's Democracy Score for Armenia has been steadily on the decline (from 4.79 to 5.21).
With this annexation, the Treaty of Alexandropol was superseded by the Turkish-Soviet Treaty of Kars.
In between the late 3rd century to early years of the 4th century, the state became the first Christian nation.
Religion in ancient Armenia was historically related to a set of beliefs which, in Persia, led to the emergence of Zoroastrianism.
Armenia has engaged in a peacekeeping mission in Kosovo as part of non-NATO KFOR troops under Greek command.
It has made a full switch to a market economy.
Armenia lies in the highlands surrounding the mountains of Ararat.
Armenia also hosts a deployment of OLPC – One Laptopschool Per child XO laptop-tablet schools.
Armenia has also been very successful in chess, winning the  World Champion in 2011 and the World Chess Olympiad on three occasions.
Mkhitar Heratsi was the founder of Armenian Medical school in Cilician Armenia.
Evening breezes blowing down the mountains provide a welcome refreshing and cooling effect.
In the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire divided Armenia.
Although the Russian Caucasus Army of Imperial forces commanded by Nikolai Yudenich and Armenians in volunteer units and Armenian militia led by Andranik Ozanian and Tovmas Nazarbekian succeeded in gaining most of Ottoman Armenia during World War I, their gains were lost with the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.
However, as Christians under a strict Muslim social system, Armenians faced pervasive discrimination.
They received medicine, food, and other provisions from Moscow, and communist rule proved to be a soothing balm in contrast to the turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire.
The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy, because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials.
The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first years after its introduction in 1993.
During the 1890s, the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, commonly known as ''Dashnaktsutyun'', became active within the Ottoman Empire with the aim of unifying the various small groups in the empire that were advocating for reform and defending Armenian villages from massacres that were widespread in some of the Armenian-populated areas of the empire.
The events of 1915 to 1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide.
The Armenian Catholic denomination is headquartered in Bzoummar, Lebanon.
The treaty, however, was rejected by the Turkish National Movement, and never came into effect.
The land rises to  above sea level at Mount Aragats, and no point is below  above sea level.
According to the US Census Bureau, there are 427,822 Armenians living in the country.
As it enters the 21st century, Armenia faces many hardships.
When World War I broke out leading to confrontation between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire in the Caucasus and Persian Campaigns, the new government in Istanbul began to look on the Armenians with distrust and suspicion.
Competitively, Armenia has been successful in chess, weightlifting and wrestling at the international level.
There is a Jewish community in Armenia diminished to 750 persons since independence with most emigrants leaving for Israel.
The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers and few forests.
According to a 2013 survey, 95% of Armenians said they had some knowledge of Russian (24% advanced, 59% intermediate) compared to 40% who said they knew some English (4% advanced, 16% intermediate and 20% beginner).
In 1936, the Transcaucasian state was dissolved, transforming its constituent states, including the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, into full Union republics.
Armenia has a relatively large external diaspora (8&nbsp;million by some estimates, greatly exceeding the 3&nbsp;million population of Armenia itself), with communities existing across the globe.
Over 93% of Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of Oriental (Non-Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syriac churches.
In the 2016 Index of Economic Freedom, Armenia ranked 54th, ahead of countries like France, Portugal and Italy.
The main opposition party is Raffi Hovannisian's Heritage party, which favors eventual Armenian membership in the European Union and NATO.
Later, stemming from the Middle Eastern Armenian diaspora and influenced by Continental European (especially French) pop music, the Armenian pop music genre grew to fame in the 1960s and 1970s with artists such as Adiss Harmandian and Harout Pamboukjian performing to the Armenian diaspora and Armenia; also with artists such as Sirusho, performing pop music combined with Armenian folk music in today's entertainment industry.
In 1992 Armenia's largest institution of higher learning, Yerevan State University, had eighteen departments, including ones for social sciences, sciences, and law.
By now Eastern Armenia would, after centuries of Iranian rule, fall into a Russian dominated era.
The economy relies heavily on investment and support from Armenians abroad.
Artists such as Sayat Nova are famous due to their influence in the development of Armenian folk music.
The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment, was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992.
Archaeological surveys in 2010 and 2011 at the Areni-1 cave complex have resulted in the discovery of the world's earliest known leather shoe, skirt, and wine-producing facility.
The Nagorno-Karabakh War dominated the region's politics throughout the 1990s.
Armenia is also an active member of the international sports community, with full membership in the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF).
The war was a success for the Karabakh Armenian forces who managed to capture 16% of Azerbaijan's internationally recognised territory including Nagorno-Karabakh itself.
This style preserved the folk songs and dances of Western Armenia, and many artists also played the contemporary popular songs of Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries from which the Armenians emigrated.
Cilicia's significance in Armenian history and statehood is also attested by the transfer of the seat of the Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church, the spiritual leader of the Armenian people, to the region.
Soon, the other Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well.
96% of the people in the country speak Armenian, while 75.8% of the population additionally speaks Russian, although English is becoming increasingly popular.
Economic projects such a gas pipeline going from Iran to Armenia are being developed.
Moreover, many private galleries are in operation, with many more opening every year, featuring rotating exhibitions and sales.
In 1989 some 58% of Armenians over age fifteen had completed their secondary education, and 14% had a higher education.
The kingdom became fully sovereign from the sphere of influence of the Seleucid Empire in 190 BC under King Artaxias I and begun the rule of the Artaxiad dynasty.
While Western Armenia still remained under Ottoman rule, the Armenians were granted considerable autonomy within their own enclaves and lived in relative harmony with other groups in the empire (including the ruling Turks).
The Principality of Armenia lasted until 884, when it regained its independence from the weakened Arab Empire under King Ashot I Bagratuni.
During World War I, Armenians living in their ancestral lands in the Ottoman Empire were systematically exterminated in the Armenian Genocide.
A large cuneiform lapidary inscription found in Yerevan established that the modern capital of Armenia was founded in the summer of 782&nbsp;BC by King Argishti I. Yerevan is the world's oldest city to have documented the exact date of its foundation.
Yerevan Vernissage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square, bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid-week).
After the fall of the Armenian kingdom in 428, most of Armenia was incorporated as a marzpanate within the Sassanid Empire.
Levon Ter-Petrosyan was popularly elected the first President of the newly independent Republic of Armenia on 16 October 1991.
Further firefights between Armenian militiamen and Soviet troops occurred in Sovetashen, near the capital and resulted in the deaths of over 26 people, mostly Armenians.
The food often has quite a distinct aroma.
The Mongolian invasions were soon followed by those of other Central Asian tribes such as the Kara Koyunlu, Timurid and Ak Koyunlu, which continued from the 13th century until the 15th century.
All but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original settings.
It houses paintings by many European masters as well.
In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia.
It maintains good relations with the United States especially through its Armenian diaspora.
The principality was ruled by the Prince of Armenia, and recognized by the Caliph and the Byzantine Emperor.
Armenia also had 46 members of its military peacekeeping forces as a part of the Coalition Forces in Iraq War until October 2008.
After the Marzpanate period (428–636), Armenia emerged as the Emirate of Armenia, an autonomous principality within the Arabic Empire, reuniting Armenian lands previously taken by the Byzantine Empire as well.
Traditional Armenian wrestling is called Kokh and practiced in traditional garb; it was one of the influences included in the Soviet combat sport of Sambo, which is also very popular.
Richard Hagopian is perhaps the most famous artist of the traditional "kef" style and the Vosbikian Band was notable in the 1940s and 1950s for developing their own style of "kef music" heavily influenced by the popular American Big Band Jazz of the time.
Life expectancy at birth was 70 for males and 76 for females in 2006.
The initial post-Soviet years were marred by economic difficulties, which had their roots early in the Karabakh conflict when the Azerbaijani Popular Front managed to pressure the Azerbaijan SSR to instigate a railway and air blockade against Armenia.
In 2005, a cycling center was opened in Yerevan with the aim of helping produce world class Armenian cyclists.
Armenia became the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its official religion.
By the time both Azerbaijan and Armenia had finally agreed to a ceasefire in 1994, an estimated 30,000 people had been killed and over a million had been displaced.
An estimated 500,000 Armenians (nearly a third of the population) served in the military during the war, and 175,000 died.
Armenia acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993.
