He was bitterly disappointed.
The war was over, but not the fighting, as the Christians took reprisals on the Muslims, and the Muslims sought to defend themselves.
Apparently she never lived there.
Despite subsequent events, there is no evidence that the young Arthur might have had ulterior motives at this time, despite the fact that Butler had helped to educate half the government of the United Kingdom.
The Ottomans were using Bashi-bazouks to try to quell it.
In the spring of 1875 he applied for the Archaeological Travelling Studentship offered by Oxford, but, as he says in a letter to Freeman later in life, he was turned down thanks to the efforts of Benjamin Jowett and Charles Thomas Newton, two Oxford dons having a low opinion of his work there.
He did so following the advice of his old friend and fellow member of the Society of Antiquities, John Evans.
Ultimately Arthur's continued stance in favour of native government led to a condition of unacceptability to the local regime within the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
They lived happily, Arthur pursuing his journalistic career, until 1882.
In his language, his precious infants needed a proper mother to care for them.
Evans had no better luck with Linear B, which turned out to be Greek.
Then they headed south to Ragusa, where Arthur later was to spend so many happily married years in his own villa on the sea.
It was suggested that he apply to a new Professorship of Classical Archaeology at Oxford.
In 1873 he and Balfour tramped over Lapland, Finland, and Sweden.
He was co-editor of ''The Harrovian'' in his final year, 1869/70.
After a year of grief the mounting tension in Crete began to attract his interest.
Home again, Arthur wrote of his experiences, working from his extensive notes and drawings, publishing ''Through Bosnia and Herzegovina'', which was so popular it came out in two editions, 1876 and 1877.
His quarters were stuffy, and the topics were of little interest to him, as he had already demonstrated.
The villagers had been attacked by Christians in the night.
In 1894, Evans became intrigued by the idea that the script engraved on the stones he had purchased before Margaret's death might be Cretan, his grief abated, steamed off to Heraklion to join the circle of watchers.
Shortly the revolt reached lower Bosnia.
The next day he complained to the mayor.
In 1893, Arthur's way of life as a married, middling archaeologist, puttering around the Ashmolean, and travelling extensively and perpetually on holiday with his beloved Margaret, came to an abrupt end, leaving emotional devastation in its wake and changing the course of his life.
He was more interested in the stone-age artifacts he was discovering while mapping stream beds.
Fortuitously he had convinced one of his examiners, Edward Augustus Freeman, of his talent.
In 1912 he refused the opportunity to become President of the Society of Antiquaries, a position which his father had already held.
His journalistic sources were not acceptable friendships to the authorities.
He called it Youlbury, after the name of the locality.
The Ottomans ceded Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Austro-Hungarian Empire as a protectorate.
His house, Youlbury, has since been demolished.
To his father, who had a more practical view, having had motherless children to care for, he wrote: "I do not think anyone can ever know what Margaret has been to me."
He went ahead with the mansion on Boar's Hill, against the advice of his father, who regarded it as wasteful and useless.
diplomatic and political problems posed by the decay of the Ottoman Empire.
From 1894 until his death in 1941 Evans lived on Boars Hill, Berkshire (now Oxfordshire), near Oxford.
He completed his articles on Roman roads and cities there.
Arthur had made himself familiar with these.
Another old friend, Federico Halbherr, the Italian archaeologist and future excavator of Phaistos, was keeping him posted on developments at Knossos by mail.
The couple were married near the Freeman home in Wookey, at the Parish Church.
In February he met John Myres, a student at the British School, in Athens.
After Margaret's death Arthur wandered aimlessly around Liguria ostensibly looking at Terramare Culture sites and for Neolithic remains in Ligurian caves.
He used the Cetan Exploration Fund, devised on the model of the Palestine Exploration Fund, to acquire the site.
Arthur placed on the grave a wreath he wove himself of margarite and wild broom, expressive of their innermost feelings, commemorating the event with a private poem, ''To Margaret my beloved wife'', not published until after his death decades later:
On the way to the holding cell the two young men were followed by a large crowd, whom Arthur lost no opportunity to harangue, even though they understood only German.
Göttingen was not to Arthur's liking.
Their notorious cruelty, which they practised against the natives, helped to turn the British Empire under Gladstone against the Ottoman Empire, as well as to attract Russian intervention at Serbian request, the very sequence of events that, when the region was under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, would result in world-wide conflagration.
In 1856, with Harriet's declining health and Jack's growing reputation and prosperity, they moved into Harriet's childhood home, a mansion with a garden, where the children ran free.
Arthur found them prosaic and preoccupied with souvenir-hunting.
Even the wealthy Schliemann had given up on the price in 1890 and had gone home to die in that year.
He insisted the artifacts be transferred back to the museum, negotiated for and succeeded in acquiring Fortnam's collections, later gave his father’s collections to the museum, and finally, bequeathed his own Minoan collections, not without the intended effect.
At the time of Arthur's and Lewis's initial adventure, the Ottomans were still trying to lessen the threat of intervention by placating their neighbours.
At Harrow he was friends especially with Francis Maitland Balfour.
Arthur, Myres and Hogarth returned to Crete together, Arthur this time as correspondent for the ''Manchester Guardian'', a role in which he reveled.
After a celebration they took up residence in a Venetian villa Arthur had purchased in Ragusa, Casa San Lazzaro, on the bluffs overlooking the Adriatic.
Always of precarious health, he had heard that Spain had a salubrious climate.
Meanwhile, the incident came to attention of Dr Makanetz, leader of the National Party of the Croatian Assembly, who happened to be in Brod.
He received an honorary doctorate (D.Litt.)
He criticized the Ottoman Empire for its corruption, as usual.
As some of them are now missing, the transcriptions are the only source of the marks on the tablets.
Despite decades of theories, Linear A has not been convincingly deciphered, nor even the language group identified.
Freeman convinced Evans's tutors, George Kitchen and John Richard Green, and they convinced the Regius professor, William Stubbs, that, in view of his special other knowledge and interests, and his father's "high standing in learned society," Evans should not only be passed, but receive a first.
Many officials of that empire had been Greek.
Minchin characterized him as "a philologer and wit" as well as an expert on "the eastern question", i.e.
For the rest of his life he wrote on black-bordered stationery.
It was the topic of much jesting.
Arthur and Margaret moved back to Oxford, renting a house there in January 1883.
His oldest daughter did not survive him long.
Modern scholars now see it as a continuation of the Proto-Canaanite alphabet from ca.
He is most famous for unearthing the palace of Knossos on the Greek island of Crete.
In Sarajevo they learned that the region through which they had just passed was now "plunged in civil war."
He suffered from near-sightedness, but he refused to wear glasses.
His housemaster at Harrow, F. Rendall, had eased the way to his acceptance with the recommendation that he was "a boy of powerful original mind."
Evans left part of his estate to the Boy Scouts and Youlbury Camp is still available for their use.
He spent six weeks in prison awaiting trial, but at the trial nothing definitive could be proved.
The term "palace" may be misleading; Knossos was an intricate collection of over 1000 interlocking rooms, some of which served as artisans' workrooms and food processing centres (e.g.
Evans took it firmly in the direction of being an archaeology museum.
It served as a central storage point, and a religious and administrative centre.
His close support and assistance had been indispensable in excavating and conceptualizing Minoan civilization.
It had been a natural history museum, but a decision had been made that it was not to be so any longer, and the collections had been transferred to other museums.
Arthur purchased some seal stones inscribed with a mysterious writing, said to have come from Crete.
He wrote to Freeman to the effect that to confine archaeology to classics was an absurdity.
His letters speak mainly of the discrepancy between the poor peasants of the countryside and the institution of the wealthy in the town.
The Evans's returned home to rent a house in Oxford, abandoning their villa, which was turned into a hotel.
In November 1883, Fortnum wrote to Arthur asking for his assistance in locating some letters in the Bodleian Library that would help to validate a noted ring in his collection, about which he had written.
:Pure as the blue of heaven
Checkpoints went up everywhere.
Large numbers could be assembled on short notice.
The headmaster had suggested "my old pupil, Arthur John Evans – a remarkably able young man."
After a childhood stay at Callipers Preparatory School (no longer extant) he entered Harrow School in 1865 at age 14, at which he did well.
His efforts to negotiate with the noted and self-educated wealthy art collector, Charles Drury Edward (CDE) Fortnum, for the privilege of housing the latter's extensive art collection, were being undercut by the university administrators and were about to fail.
Arthur was to study with Reinhold Pauli, who had spent some years in Britain, and was a friend of Green.
They were hoping to conceive, but the longed-for event never happened, even though Margaret returned to England for six months for an operation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina were then in a full-blown state of insurrection.
The government in Vienna similarly disavowed any knowledge of or connection to the actions of the local authorities.
Everywhere he went he took copious anthropological notes and made numerous drawings of the people, places and artifacts.
He was becoming dissatisfied with the rivals for his collection, the South Kensington Museum, because of their "lack of a properly informed and competent person as keeper," which was the same reason he had been dissatisfied with the Ashmolean.
Finally Arthur wrote some public letters in favour of an insurrection.
Now they were working with the British trying to build a credible Cretan government.
For the sake of preserving some artifacts, he hired a crew, performed such hasty excavations as he could, crated the material and sent it home to John.
Edward was assisting his good friend, the Prime Minister, to keep an eye on the situation.
His wit was very sharp, too sharp for the administration, which stopped a periodical he had started, ''The Pen-Viper'', after the first issue.
Painted on the walls of the palace were numerous scenes depicting bulls, leading Evans to conclude that the Minoans did indeed worship the bull.
from the University of Dublin in June 1901.
During excavations by Evans, he found 3000 clay tablets, which he transcribed and organized, publishing them in ''Scripta Minoa''.
The mill consumed large amounts of water, which was also needed for the canals.
Grandmother Evans called Arthur "darling Trot," asserting in a note that, compared to his father, he was "a bit of a dunce."
Now that the restriction of the Ottoman firman was removed, there was a great rush on the part of all the other archaeologists to obtain first permission to dig from the new Cretan government.
The two brothers experienced little difficulty with either the Serbs or the Ottomans but they did provoke the neighboring Austro-Hungarian Empire, and spent the night in "a wretched cell."
Prince George was completely conciliatory, assisting in any way that he could to halt the bloodshed and establish a new Constitution.
Farther away his field of vision was blurry.
In 1878 the Russians compelled a settlement of the conflict on appeal by the Serbs.
They were given an escort – one man, enough to establish authority – as far as Dervent.
But in 1914 at the age of 63, when he was too old to take part in the War, he took on the Presidency of the Antiquaries which carried with it an ex officio appointment as a Trustee of the British Museum and he spent the War successfully fighting the War Office who wanted to commandeer the museum for the Air Board.
His intent was to keep her from the cold, damp ground.
Instead he and Margaret travelled to Greece, seeking out Heinrich Schliemann at Athens.
A relationship with one of the winsome daughters, Margaret, had begun to blossom.
During his year of tending to the details of Youlbury, administering the Ashmolean, and writing some minor papers, he had also discovered the script on some other jewellery that came to the museum from Myres in Crete.
Politics in Crete were taking a violent turn however.
Arthur had been told at the French border to remove the dark cape he was wearing so that he would not be shot for a spy.
Freeman died in March 1892.
Arthur went everywhere, investigating everything recklessly.
He hired two foremen, and they hired 32 diggers.
Then he criticized the British Empire for its collaboration with the Ottoman.
For the time being they were an unpretentious and affectionate family.
He always made moral judgments, taking the side of the underdog, no matter who it was.
They sought refuge in a mosque.
Evans continued Heinrich Schliemann's concept of a Mycenaean civilization, but found that he needed to distinguish another civilization, the Minoan, from the structures and artifacts found there and throughout the eastern Mediterranean.
John Evans came from a family of men who were both educated and intellectually active; they were nevertheless undistinguished by either wealth or aristocratic connection.
The English Protestants of Sarajevo, some of whom had come in a missionary capacity, were packing to leave the country, as were other "resident Europeans."
Evans was also the first to define Cretan scripts Linear A and Linear B, as well as an earlier pictographic writing.
Arthur's political work was done.
His older interests in antiquities continued.
They crossed the Save into Bosnia, which Arthur found so different that he regarded the Save as the border between Europe and Asia.
The chief, in a somewhat less than civil manner, won the argument about whether he had the right to check the passports of Englishmen by inviting them to spend the night in a cell.
He was invited later to play a role in the formation of the pre-Yugoslav state.
In 1905 he finished excavations.
He collided with the British military, complaining vociferously to the British higher authorities.
John knew Latin and could quote the classical authors.
The Cretans were afraid of the Ottomans' removing any artifacts to Istanbul.
This period of unemployment was the only one of his life; however, he employed himself as best he could, including recovering from his Balkan experiences and finishing up his Balkan studies.
Offered the position of keeper at Ashmolean, he took it with a tremendous burst of enthusiasm and energy.
She found most offensive the reading of her love letters before her eyes by a hostile police agent.
In the myth, the labyrinth had been built by King Minos to hide the Minotaur, a half-man half-bull creature that was the offspring of Minos's wife, Pasiphae, and a bull.
Then he met Margaret in Bordighera.
The study would be preparatory to doing research in modern history at Göttingen.
Archaeologists from the United States, Britain, France, Germany and Italy were in attendance at the site watching the progress, so to speak, of "the sick man of Europe", a metaphor of the dying Ottoman Empire.
However, Arthur's reputation among the Slavs assumed unassailable proportions.
Seeing the sign of the double axe almost immediately he knew that he was at the home of the script.
The small ruin of Knossos spanned  and the palace had a maze-like quality that reminded Evans of the labyrinth described in Greek mythology.
His connections and invaluable advice were indispensable to Arthur's career throughout the remainder of his long life.
While Evans based the recreations on archaeological evidence, some of the best-known frescoes from the throne room were almost complete inventions of the Gilliérons, according to his critics.
Arthur sought and obtained permission to travel in Bosnia, even though at war, from its Turkish military governor.
His detailed, enthusiastic account was published in Fraser's Magazine for May 1873.
She had no children of her own and also predeceased her husband.
She approved the location, so he convinced his father to put up the money.
But in 1908 at the age of 57 he resigned his position to concentrate on writing up his Minoan work.
After resolving to leave Göttingen, Arthur and Lewis planned an adventure in Bosnia and Herzegovina starting immediately in August 1875.
He saw that the Muslim population was now on the decline, some being massacred, and some abandoning the island.
:I wreathe for her tonight.
He did not see the Austro-Hungarian regime as an improvement over the Ottoman.
Gladstone had been apprised of the situation immediately, but, as far as the public knew, did nothing.
The Ottoman method of stalling was to require any would-be excavators to buy the site from its native owners first.
"While the Keeper’s salary was not generous, the conditions of residence were very liberal ... the keeper could and should travel to secure new acquisitions".
Apparently Arthur did not bother to explain that he was the only contributor.
Turkish garrisons were massacred, in response to which the irregular Turkish troops began to massacre.
He was once again the Pen-viper, but this time there was no administration to cage him.
After the massacre at the village of Eteà, he came down mainly on the Moslem side.
Suddenly Arthur appeared at the right moment with the right qualifications.
The British Army forbade travel for any reason.
When he was 70 they had a daughter, Joan, who would become an art historian.
The Franco-Prussian War had just concluded the month before.
Arthur was expelled from the country.
The A script appeared to have preceded the B. Evans dated the Linear B Chariot Tablets, so called from their depictions of chariots, at Knossos to immediately prior to the catastrophic Minoan civilization collapse of the 15th century BC.
They were both published authors, they were both Gladstone liberals, and they were both interested in and on the side of Bosnian and Herzegovinian insurrection.
Having been given an ample allowance by his father, he went looking for adventure on the continent, deliberately seeking out circumstances that might be considered dangerous by some.
The next day they were promised clemency if they would disarm themselves.
He never married again.
Because of his vision, Arthur was not interested in team sports.
Assisted by Duncan Mackenzie, who had already distinguished himself by his excavations on the island of Melos, and Mr Fyfe, an architect from the British School at Athens, Evans employed a large staff of local labourers as excavators, and began work in 1900.
The Phoenician alphabet seamlessly continues the Proto-Canaanite alphabet, by convention called Phoenician from the mid-11th century, where it is first attested on inscribed bronze arrowheads.
They were away again for the winter, Margaret to winter with her sister in Bordighera, Arthur to Sicily to complete the last volume of the history he and Freeman had begun together.
:Such as herself she plucked, – a wreath
Then he had the tops of the pines cut, eight feet from the ground, on which he had built a platform and a log cabin to serve as a temporary quarters while the mansion was being built.
They moved into a brick row house built for the purpose near the mill, which came to be called the "red house" because it lacked the sooty patina of the other houses.
The pasha of Sarajevo, however, was determined to keep the peace.
The lower floor housed some art and archaeology, but the upper floor was being used for university functions.
Evans returned to London to wind up his affairs there and make sure the Ashmolean had suitable direction in the event of his further absence.
In September 1898, the last of the Turkish troops withdrew from Crete.
During the Christmas holidays of 1873, Evans cataloged a coin collection being bequeathed to Harrow by John Gardner Wilkinson, the father of British Egyptology, who was too ill to work on it himself.
He bought 1/4 of the site with first option to buy the rest later.
On the way to Göttingen, Arthur was sidetracked, unpropitiously for the modern history plan, by some illegal excavations at Trier.
The real adventure, in his mind, was the revolution in the Balkans.
Although not a professional statesman or soldier, and probably never a paid agent of the government, he nevertheless negotiated or played a role in negotiating unofficially with foreign powers in the Balkans and Middle East.
He and Lewis hunted for stone-age artifacts in the gravel quarries, Arthur remarking that he was glad the Prussians were not interested in flint artifacts.
Instead, they were shot, the only survivor being a small girl who had a cape thrown over her to conceal her.
He threatened the authorities in the name of the British fleet, which, he asserted, would sail up the Save.
Politely invited by two other officers to join the police chief and produce passports, Arthur replied, "Tell him that we are Englishmen and are not accustomed to being treated in this way."
Harriet called her husband "Jack."
He wanted to buy 60 acres to build a home for Margaret on the hill.
Amiens was occupied by the Prussian army.
He became an expert and a legal consultant.
