We cannot ''prove'' that our mental picture of an outside world corresponds with a reality by reasoning; through will, we know – without thinking – that the world can stimulate us.
The rational mind is, for Schopenhauer, a leaf borne along in a stream of pre-reflective and largely unconscious emotion.
Acts of malice are different from egotistic acts.
These organs have an agenda the conscious mind did not choose, and over which it has limited power.
In later years, Wittgenstein was highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately shallow thinker: "Schopenhauer has quite a crude mind... where real depth starts, his comes to an end."
Schopenhauer departed from Kant in his description of the relationship between the phenomenon and the noumenon.
It is the most satisfying and elevating reading (with the exception of the original text) which is possible in the world; it has been the solace of my life and will be the solace of my death.
It is for this reason that Schopenhauer identifies the ''noumenon'' with what we call our will.
Schopenhauer believed that humans were motivated by only their own basic desires, or  ("Will to Live"), which directed all of mankind.
It does so by placing "beside every possible motive for committing a wrong a more powerful motive for leaving it undone, in the inescapable punishment.
He said that his philosophy could not have been conceived before these teachings were available.
There he studied metaphysics and psychology under Gottlob Ernst Schulze, the author of ''Aenesidemus'', who advised him to concentrate on Plato and Immanuel Kant.
In contradistinction to Godwin's claim that Buddhism inspired Schopenhauer, the philosopher himself made the following statement in his discussion of religions:
They can only be influenced by strong motives that overpower criminal motives.
Schopenhauer begins by arguing that Kant's demarcation between external objects, knowable only as phenomena, and the Thing in Itself of noumenon, contains a significant omission.
In a fit of temper Arthur Schopenhauer told her that his work would be read long after the "rubbish" she wrote would have been totally forgotten.
:Schopenhauer’s book was never completely out of my mind, and by the following summer I had studied it from cover to cover four times.
...Kant used the word Idea wrongly as well as illegitimately, although Plato had already taken possession of it, and used it most appropriately.
Schopenhauer was among the first thinkers in Western philosophy to share and affirm significant tenets of Eastern philosophy (e.g., asceticism, the world-as-appearance), having initially arrived at similar conclusions as the result of his own philosophical work.
All this is due to the fact that necessity is the mother of invention because those tribes that emigrated early to the north, and there gradually became white, had to develop all their intellectual powers and invent and perfect all the arts in their struggle with need, want and misery, which in their many forms were brought about by the climate.
We know our human bodies have boundaries and occupy space, the same way other objects known only through our named senses do.
He wrote many disparaging remarks about Germany and the Germans.
After reading Schopenhauer's ''The World as Will and Representation'', Tolstoy gradually became converted to the ascetic morality upheld in that work as the proper spiritual path for the upper classes: "Do you know what this summer has meant for me?
In all other respects he was completely selfish.
Universal compassion is the only guarantee of morality.
This they had to do in order to make up for the parsimony of nature and out of it all came their high civilization.
This is explained more fully in Schopenhauer's doctoral thesis, ''On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason'' (1813).
His mother informed him that the book was incomprehensible and it was unlikely that anyone would ever buy a copy.
It is well known that the book ''Oupnekhat'' (Upanishad) always lay open on his table, and he invariably studied it before sleeping at night.
Buddhist philosopher Nishitani Keiji, however, sought to distance Buddhism from Schopenhauer.
Philosophy ... is a science, and as such has no articles of faith; accordingly, in it nothing can be assumed as existing except what is either positively given empirically, or demonstrated through indubitable conclusions.
Indeed, Rodgers and Thompson in ''Philosophers Behaving Badly'' call Schopenhauer "a misogynist without rival in....Western philosophy."
Hans Brockhaus later recalled that, when she brought them some of her son's work, his predecessors "saw nothing in this manuscript, but wanted to please one of our best-selling authors by publishing her son's work.
... no student has ever studied so much on his course, and learned so much, as I have this summer"
There is, in fact, one physical object we know more intimately than we know any object of sense perception: our own body.
Richard Wagner, writing in his autobiography, remembered his first impression that Schopenhauer left on him (when he read ''World as Will and Representation''):
He finished it in 1818 and Brockhaus published it that December.
He is credited with one of the most famous opening lines of philosophy: "The world is my representation."
It is not the weal or woe of any one individual, but that of the human race to come, which is here at stake."
Schopenhauer declared that "real moral reform is not at all possible, but only determent from the deed...."
Diogenes Laërtius (III, 12) Plato ideas in natura velut exemplaria dixit subsistere; cetera his esse similia, ad istarum similitudinem consistencia.
Schopenhauer suggested that Hegel's works were filled with "castles of abstraction," and that Hegel used deliberately impressive but ultimately vacuous verbiage.
'''Arthur Schopenhauer''' (; 22 February 1788&nbsp;– 21 September 1860) was a German philosopher.
While in Berlin, Schopenhauer was named as a defendant in a lawsuit initiated by a woman named Caroline Marquet.
As a teenager, Ludwig Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism.
References to Eastern philosophy and religion appear frequently in his writing.
He believed, like Swami Vivekananda in the unity of all with one-self and also believed that ego is the origin of pain and conflicts, that reduction of ego frames the moral principles.
Even though Schopenhauer ended his treatise on the freedom of human will with the postulate of everyone's responsibility for their character and, consequently, acts—the responsibility following from one's being the Will as noumenon (from which also all the characters and creations come)—he considered his views incompatible with theism, on grounds of fatalism and, more generally, responsibility for evil.
Marquet alleged that the philosopher had assaulted and battered her after she refused to leave his doorway.
Should capital punishment be legal?
We usually are not aware of the breathing of our lungs or the beating of our heart unless somehow our attention is called to them.
As noted above, he appreciated the teachings of the Buddha and even called himself a Buddhist.
Music, for Schopenhauer, was the purest form of art because it was the one that depicted the will itself without it appearing as subject to the Principle of Sufficient Grounds, therefore as an individual object.
This Orientalism reflected the struggle of the German Romantics, in the words of Leon Poliakov, to "free themselves from Judeo-Christian fetters."
Einstein paraphrased his views as follows: "Man can indeed do what he wants, but he cannot will what he wants."
He was so impressed by their philosophy that he called them "the production of the highest human wisdom," and believed they contained superhuman concepts.
While Schopenhauer's philosophy may sound rather mystical in such a summary, his methodology was resolutely empirical, rather than speculative or transcendental:
Schopenhauer settled permanently in Frankfurt in 1833, where he remained for the next twenty-seven years, living alone except for a succession of pet poodles named Atman and Butz.
They are included in a recent case study that traces Schopenhauer's interest in Buddhism and documents its influence.
Our actions are necessary and determined because "every human being, even every animal, after the motive has appeared, must carry out the action which alone is in accordance with his inborn and immutable character."
Thus three of the four "truths of the Buddha" correspond to Schopenhauer's doctrine of the will.
The word "will" designated, for him, force, power, impulse, energy, and desire; it is the closest word we have that can signify both the real essence of all external things and also our own direct, inner experience.
Scholars have started to revise earlier views about Schopenhauer's discovery of Buddhism.
From this immersion with the world one no longer views oneself as an individual who suffers in the world due to one's individual will but, rather, becomes a "''subject of cognition''" to a perception that is "''Pure, will-less, timeless''" (section 34) where the essence, "ideas," of the world are shown.
The essay does give some compliments, however: that "women are decidedly more sober in their judgment than men are," and are more sympathetic to the suffering of others.
He describes the treatment of "our innocent black brothers whom force and injustice have delivered into the slave-master's devilish clutches" as "belonging to the blackest pages of mankind's criminal record."
However, after his study of the philosophy of mathematics, he rejected epistemological idealism for Gottlob Frege's conceptual realism.
Schopenhauer had a robust constitution, but in 1860 his health began to deteriorate.
The State, Schopenhauer claimed, punishes criminals to prevent future crimes.
If we could castrate all scoundrels and stick all stupid geese in a convent, and give men of noble character a whole harem, and procure men, and indeed thorough men, for all girls of intellect and understanding, then a generation would soon arise which would produce a better age than that of Pericles.
Here Schopenhauer wrote:
These ideas foreshadowed the discovery of evolution, Freud's concepts of the libido and the unconscious mind, and evolutionary psychology in general.
Yet, for Kant, an object is known through each of them.
Most noticeable, in the case of Schopenhauer’s work, was the significance of the Chandogya Upanishad, whose Mahavakya, Tat Tvam Asi is mentioned throughout ''The World as Will and Representation''.
They met during the winter of 1813–1814 in Weimar at the home of Schopenhauer's mother according to the biographer Sanfranski.
Concerning this, he stated that "the vice we are considering appears to work directly against the aims and ends of nature, and that in a matter that is all important and of the greatest concern to her, it must in fact serve these very aims, although only indirectly, as a means for preventing greater evils."
Instead Schopenhauer relied upon the Neoplatonist interpretation of the biographer Diogenes Laërtius from ''Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers''.
In Schopenhauer's philosophy the dogmas of Christianity lose their significance, and the "Last Judgment" is no longer preceded by anything—"The world is itself the Last Judgment on it."
It will not sound to him strange, as to many others, much less disagreeable; for I might, if it did not sound conceited, contend that every one of the detached statements which constitute the Upanishads, may be deduced as a necessary result from the fundamental thoughts which I have to enunciate, though those deductions themselves are by no means to be found there.
In his criticism of Kant, Schopenhauer claimed that sensation and understanding are separate and distinct abilities.
Other commentators suggest that Schopenhauer considered will to be only a subset of the "thing-in-itself" class, namely that which we can most directly experience.
Whereas God, if he existed, would be evil.
In 1821, he fell in love with nineteen-year-old opera singer, Caroline Richter (called Medon), and had a relationship with her for several years, but did not marry her.
For this reason, he claimed that a good person would have sympathy for animals, who are our fellow sufferers.
Schopenhauer, by his own admission, did not give much thought to politics, and several times he writes proudly of how little attention he had paid "to political affairs of his day."
I have done so by giving them the opportunity of slandering me by saying that I defend and commend pederasty."
He left to become a student at the University of Göttingen in 1809.
He was very attached to his succession of pet poodles.
Schopenhauer attributed civilizational primacy to the northern "white races" due to their sensitivity and creativity (except for the ancient Egyptians and Hindus whom he saw as equal):
* knowledge of the essential nature of life in the world through observation of the suffering of other people.
"The murderer," wrote Schopenhauer, "who is condemned to death according to the law must, it is true, be now used as a mere ''means'', and with complete right.
He opined that women are deficient in artistic faculties and sense of justice, and expressed opposition to monogamy.
This was through his neighbor of two years, Karl Christian Friedrich Krause.
Schopenhauer has had a massive influence upon later thinkers, though more so in the arts (especially literature and music) and psychology than in philosophy.
He kept large portraits of the pair in his office in Leipzig for the edification of his new editors.
Schopenhauer had a notably strained relationship with his mother Johanna.
Schopenhauer even went so far as to protest against the use of the pronoun "it" in reference to animals because it led to the treatment of them as though they were inanimate things.
If the reader has also received the benefit of the Vedas, the access to which by means of the Upanishads is in my eyes the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818) may claim before all previous centuries, if then the reader, I say, has received his initiation in primeval Indian wisdom, and received it with an open heart, he will be prepared in the very best way for hearing what I have to tell him.
Schopenhauer was first introduced to the 1802 Latin Upanishad translation through Friedrich Majer.
As a consequence of his monistic philosophy, Schopenhauer was very concerned about the welfare of animals.
His theory is also being explored by some modern philosophers as a precursor to evolutionary theory and modern evolutionary psychology.
We published more and more of her son Arthur's work and today nobody remembers Johanna, but her son's works are in steady demand and contribute to Brockhaus's reputation."
Schopenhauer read the Latin translation of the ancient Hindu texts, The Upanishads, which French writer Anquetil du Perron had translated from the Persian translation of Prince Dara Shikoh entitled ''Sirre-Akbar'' ("The Great Secret").
Krause was then a minor and rather unorthodox philosopher who attempted to mix his own ideas with that of ancient Indian wisdom.
When she died, he wrote on a copy of her death certificate, ''Obit anus, abit onus'' ("The old woman dies, the burden is lifted").
"For safeguarding the lives of citizens," he asserted, "capital punishment is therefore absolutely necessary."
For him, all individual animals, including humans, are essentially the same, being phenomenal manifestations of the one underlying Will.
:"It is therefore just as little necessary for the saint to be a philosopher as for the philosopher to be a saint; just as it is not necessary for a perfectly beautiful person to be a great sculptor, or for a great sculptor to be himself a beautiful person.
Jorge Luis Borges remarked that the reason he had never attempted to write a systematic account of his world view, despite his penchant for philosophy and metaphysics in particular, was because Schopenhauer had already written it for him.
Since every living thing possesses will, then humans and animals are fundamentally the same and can recognize themselves in each other.
In 1841, he praised the establishment, in London, of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and also the Animals' Friends Society in Philadelphia.
According to Schopenhauer, compassion alone is the good of the object of the acts, that is, they cannot be inspired by either the prospect of personal utility or the feeling of duty.
In Buddhism, however, while greed and lust are always unskillful, desire is ethically variable – it can be skillful, unskillful, or neutral.
He called the opening up of Sanskrit literature "the greatest gift of our century," and predicted that the philosophy and knowledge of the Upanishads would become the cherished faith of the West.
According to Kant, things-in-themselves ground the phenomenal representations in our minds; Schopenhauer, on the other hand, believed that phenomena and noumena are two different sides of the same coin.
When he was forty-three years old, he took interest in seventeen-year-old Flora Weiss but she rejected him as recorded in her diary.
For Schopenhauer, Will had ontological primacy over the intellect; in other words, desire is understood to be prior to thought.
Some commentators suggest that Schopenhauer claimed that the noumenon, or thing-in-itself, was the basis for Schopenhauer's concept of the will.
In 1819 the fortunes of his mother and sister, and himself, were threatened by the failure of the firm in Danzig in which his father had been a director and shareholder.
Shrewdly anticipating the interpretive distortion, on the part of the popular mind, of his attempted scientific ''explanation'' of pederasty as personal ''advocacy'' (when he had otherwise described the act, in terms of spiritual ethics, as an "objectionable aberration"), Schopenhauer sarcastically concludes the appendix with the statement that "by expounding these paradoxical ideas, I wanted to grant to the professors of philosophy a small favour, for they are very disconcerted by the ever-increasing publicization of my philosophy which they so carefully concealed.
Schopenhauer did not begin a serious study of the Indic texts, however, until the summer of 1814.
I believe that if a woman succeeds in withdrawing from the mass, or rather raising herself above the mass, she grows ceaselessly and more than a man."
Schopenhauer shared the view of Thomas Hobbes on the necessity of the state, and of state action, to check the destructive tendencies innate to our species.
This actual world of what is knowable, in which we are and which is in us, remains both the material and the limit of our consideration.
He wrote his first book, ''On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason'', while at university.
In ''The World as Will and Representation'' Schopenhauer explicitly stated:
Few of us have any idea what our liver is doing right now, though this organ is as needful as lungs, heart, or kidneys.
It is difficult to believe that a man who was profoundly convinced of the virtue of asceticism and resignation would never have made any attempt to embody his convictions in his practice."
He also wrote that homosexuality did have the benefit of preventing ill-begotten children.
Schopenhauer's moral theory proposed that only compassion can drive moral acts.
Writing about them, he said:
What it all turns upon is nothing less than the composition of the next generation....
It is hard to find in his life evidences of any virtue except kindness to animals ...
The murderer, his life, his person, must be the ''means'' of fulfilling the law, and thus of re-establishing public security."
Schopenhauer said he was influenced by the Upanishads, Immanuel Kant and Plato.
In the third, expanded edition of ''The World as Will and Representation'' (1859), Schopenhauer added an appendix to his chapter on the ''Metaphysics of Sexual Love''.
He also thought that his glorification of church and state were designed for personal advantage and had little to do with the search for philosophical truth.
Lastly, Schopenhauer departed from Kant in how he interpreted the Platonic ideas.
Kant's philosophy was formulated as a response to the radical philosophical skepticism of David Hume, who claimed that causality could not be observed empirically.
Other scholarly work questions how similar Schopenhauer's philosophy actually is to Buddhism.
It was from Krause that Schopenhauer learned meditation and received the closest thing to expert advice concerning Indian thought.
For Schopenhauer, human desiring, "willing," and craving cause suffering or pain.
Accordingly, the criminal code is as complete a register as possible of counter-motives to all criminal actions that can possibly be imagined..."
Analysts (e.g., Keith Ansell-Pearson) have suggested that Schopenhauer's advocacy of anti-egalitarianism and eugenics influenced the neo-aristocratic philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, who initially considered Schopenhauer his mentor.
To reinforce his points, Schopenhauer referred to anecdotal reports of the look in the eyes of a monkey who had been shot and also the grief of a baby elephant whose mother had been killed by a hunter.
He claimed that "woman is by nature meant to obey."
Egotistic acts are those guided by self-interest, desire for pleasure or happiness.
Concerning the Upanishads and Vedas, he writes in ''The World as Will and Representation'':
We suffer fear, or desire: these states arise involuntarily; they arise prior to reflection; they arise even when the conscious mind would prefer to hold them at bay.
Schopenhauer, a reader of both Kant and Hegel, criticized their logical optimism and the belief that individual morality could be determined by society and reason.
Friedrich Nietzsche owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading ''The World as Will and Representation'' and admitted that he was one of the few philosophers that he respected, dedicating to him his essay ''Schopenhauer als Erzieher'' one of his ''Untimely Meditations''.
Schopenhauer disagreed.
In 1814, Schopenhauer began his seminal work ''The World as Will and Representation'' (''Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung'').
And this agreement must be yet the more pleasing to me, inasmuch as ''in my philosophizing I have certainly not been under its influence'' emphasis added.
The numerous notes that he made during these years, amongst others on aging, were published posthumously under the title ''Senilia''.
Schopenhauer's controversial writings have influenced many, from Friedrich Nietzsche to nineteenth-century feminists.
Schopenhauer declared that their teaching was corrupted by subsequent errors and therefore was in need of clarification.
In Berlin, from 1811 to 1812, he had attended lectures by the prominent post-Kantian philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte and the theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher.
Ducha 47), the son of Johanna Schopenhauer (née Trosiener) and Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer, both descendants of wealthy German patrician families.
In any case, it must be a pleasure to me to see my doctrine in such close agreement with a religion that the majority of men on earth hold as their own, for this numbers far more followers than any other.
Art is the practical consequence of this brief aesthetic contemplation as it attempts to depict one's immersion with the world, thus tries to depict the essence/pure ideas of the world.
With our knowledge of the complete unalterability both of character and of mental faculties, we are led to the view that a real and thorough improvement of the human race might be reached not so much from outside as from within, not so much by theory and instruction as rather by the path of generation.
Our kidneys command our attention on their schedule rather than one we choose.
Sansfranski maintains that between 1815 and 1817, Schopenhauer had another important cross-pollination with Indian thought in Dresden.
Schopenhauer accepted Kant's double-aspect of the universe – the phenomenal (world of experience) and the noumenal (the true world, independent of experience).
Schopenhauer wrote that "Women are directly fitted for acting as the nurses and teachers of our early childhood by the fact that they are themselves childish, frivolous and short-sighted."
See also Influence of Schopenhauer on Tristan und Isolde.
This belief in heritability of traits informed Schopenhauer's view of love – placing it at the highest level of importance.
Previously, it appeared in the writings of Plato, Seneca, Hobbes, Pufendorf, and Anselm Feuerbach.
As early as 1799, Arthur started playing the flute.
He claimed this doctrine was not original to him.
However, only five students turned up to Schopenhauer's lectures, and he dropped out of academia.
While all other religions endeavor to explain to the people by symbols the metaphysical significance of life, the religion of the Jews is entirely immanent and furnishes nothing but a mere war-cry in the struggle with other nations.
His popularity peaked in the early twentieth century, especially during the Modernist era, and waned somewhat thereafter.
Schopenhauer noted a correspondence between his doctrines and the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism.
In this sense, he adhered to the Fichtean principle of idealism: "The world is ''for'' a subject."
If I wished to take the results of my philosophy as the standard of truth, I should have to concede to Buddhism pre-eminence over the others.
Will, for Schopenhauer, is what Kant called the "thing-in-itself."
Nirvāṇa is not the extinguishing of the ''person'' as some Western scholars have thought, but only the "extinguishing" (the literal meaning of nirvana) of the flames of greed, hatred, and delusion that assail a person's character.
He declared monarchy as "that which is natural to man" for "intelligence has always under a monarchical government a much better chance against its irreconcilable and ever-present foe, stupidity" and disparaged republicanism as "unnatural as it is unfavourable to the higher intellectual life and the arts and sciences."
Their aim is to cause damage to others, independently of personal gains.
Proceeding from the transcendental idealism of Immanuel Kant, Schopenhauer developed an atheistic metaphysical and ethical system that has been described as an exemplary manifestation of philosophical pessimism, rejecting the contemporaneous post-Kantian philosophies of German idealism.
Schopenhauer's second major departure from Kant's epistemology concerns the body.
Though we seldom think of our body as a physical object, we know even before reflection that it shares some of an object's properties.
Yet our consciousness is not commensurate with our body.
Mankind can also be guided by egoism and malice.
He was also disgusted by the ease with which his mother had forgotten his father's memory.
For public security, which is the principal object of the State, is disturbed by him; indeed it is abolished if the law remains unfulfilled.
He scheduled his lectures to coincide with those of the famous philosopher G. W. F. Hegel, whom Schopenhauer described as a "clumsy charlatan."
By that time, Johanna Schopenhauer had already opened her famous salon, and Arthur was not compatible with what he considered its vain and ceremonious ways.
His sister accepted a compromise compensation package of 70 per cent, but Schopenhauer angrily refused this, and eventually recovered 9400 thalers.
* personal experience of an extremely great suffering that leads to loss of the will to live; or
In general, it is a strange demand on a moralist that he should commend no other virtue than that which he himself possesses.
In occasional political comments in his ''Parerga and Paralipomena'' and ''Manuscript Remains'', Schopenhauer described himself as a proponent of limited government.
Those who have cited his influence include Friedrich Nietzsche, Richard Wagner, Leo Tolstoy, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Erwin Schrödinger, Sigmund Freud, Gustav Mahler, Joseph Campbell, Albert Einstein, Carl Jung, Thomas Mann, Jorge Luis Borges, and Samuel Beckett, among others.
The noumenon was what Kant called the ''Ding an sich'' (the Thing in Itself), the reality that is the foundation of our sensory and mental representations of an external world.
A late essay, ''On University Philosophy'', expressed his resentment towards the work conducted in academies.
Constant raptures over Schopenhauer and a whole series of spiritual delights which I've never experienced before.
We know that our consciousness inhabits a physical body, similar to other physical objects only known as phenomena.
Noumena do not ''cause'' phenomena, but rather phenomena are simply the way by which our minds perceive the noumena, according to the principle of sufficient reason.
