He met her in Paris around 1867, and the affair began in earnest soon after she moved to London permanently in 1871.
Mackerras's Sullivan ballet score, ''Pineapple Poll'', has received many recordings since its premiere in 1951, four of them conducted by Mackerras.
On 14 August 1888, George Gouraud introduced Thomas Edison's phonograph to London in a press conference, including the playing of a piano and cornet recording of Sullivan's "The Lost Chord", one of the first recordings of music ever made.
From June to August 1885, after ''The Mikado'' premiered, Sullivan visited the family in Los Angeles and took them on a sightseeing trip of the American west.
Most of the operas have at least one number that Hughes calls "virtually a ''pizzicato ostinato''"; he instances "Kind sir, you cannot have the heart" (''The Gondoliers''), "Free from his fetters grim" (''The Yeomen of the Guard'') and "In vain to us you plead" (''Iolanthe'').
Sullivan never married, but he had serious love affairs with several women.
In his serious works, Sullivan attempted to avoid harmonic devices associated with the Savoy operas, with the result, according to Hughes, that ''The Golden Legend'' is a "hotch-potch of harmonic styles".
A grateful Sullivan presented his collaborator with an engraved silver cup inscribed "W.S.
Sullivan was born in Lambeth, London.
At first, critics were struck by his potential, and he was hailed as the long-awaited great English composer.
Instead, Sullivan teamed up again with his old partner, F. C. Burnand.
The mock-jingoistic "He is an Englishman" in ''H.M.S.
The son of a military bandmaster, Sullivan composed his first anthem at age eight.
Sullivan's deliberate echoes of other composers are covered below under "Musical Quotations", but other echoes may not have been conscious: Hughes cites the concluding bars of "Tell a tale of cock and bull" from ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' as an example of Handel's influence, and another critic, Edward Greenfield, found a theme in the slow movement of the ''Irish Symphony'' "an outrageous crib" from Schubert's ''Unfinished'' Symphony.
Thomas Sullivan was based from 1845 to 1857 at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he was the bandmaster and taught music privately to supplement his income.
Both Hughes and Jacobs in ''Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians'' comment adversely on Sullivan's over-use of tonic pedals, usually in the bass, which Hughes attributes to "lack of enterprise or even downright laziness".
The opera passed into obscurity after a touring revival in 1894–95.
Sullivan did not seriously consider writing grand opera again.
Even at this age, Sullivan's health was delicate, and he was easily fatigued.
The chorus "With catlike tread" from ''Pirates'' is an imitation of Verdi's "Anvil Chorus" from ''Il trovatore''.
His music also shows the influence of Handel, Schubert and, conspicuously in the fairy music in ''Iolanthe'', Mendelssohn.
Hopes for a new departure were evident in the ''Daily Telegraph'''s review of ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' (1888), Sullivan's most serious opera to that point: "The music follows the book to a higher plane, and we have a genuine English opera, forerunner of many others, let us hope, and possibly significant of an advance towards a national lyric stage."
In ''Ruddigore'', the sailor character dances a hornpipe, while in ''The Mikado'', Sullivan quotes a Japanese war song in "Miya Sama".
Despite his thorough contrapuntal training in London and Leipzig, as well as his experience as a church organist, Sullivan rarely composed fugues.
In late 1883, Charlotte and six of her children emigrated to Los Angeles, California, leaving the oldest boy, "Bertie", in Sullivan's sole care.
For his first festival he was commissioned to write a sacred choral work.
As a contemporary writer observed, Sullivan draws on these various influences while remaining recognisably himself.
He proposed instead that Sullivan should go ahead with his plan to write a grand opera, but should continue also to compose comic works for the Savoy.
Sullivan also turned out more than 80 popular songs and parlour ballads, most of them written before the end of the 1870s.
While studying at a private school in Bayswater, Sullivan, then aged 11, persuaded his parents and the headmaster to allow him to apply for membership in the choir of the Chapel Royal.
During this year at the Royal Academy, Sullivan continued to sing solos with the Chapel Royal, which provided a small amount of spending money.
Sir Henry Wood continued to perform Sullivan's serious music.
''H.M.S Pinafore'' retains "a nautical tang ''throughout''", and in ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' the Tower of London is evoked continually by its own motif.
Hughes especially notes Sullivan's clarinet writing, exploiting all registers and colours of the instrument, and his particular fondness for oboe solos.
Electrical recordings of the complete musical scores of most of the operas were then issued by the Gramophone Company and Victor Talking Machine Company beginning in the late 1920s.
Sullivan's operas have often been adapted, first in the 19th century as dance pieces and in foreign adaptations of the operas themselves.
In 1856, the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14-year-old Sullivan, allowing him to study first at the Academy and then in Germany, at the Leipzig Conservatoire.
''Iolanthe'' (1882), Gilbert and Sullivan's fourth hit in a row, was the first of the operas to premiere at the new theatre.
On 22 May 1883, Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria for his "services ... rendered to the promotion of the art of music" in Britain.
For instance, the ''Irish Symphony'' contains two long solo oboe passages in succession, and in the Savoy operas there are many shorter examples.
For his large-scale orchestral pieces, Sullivan added a second oboe part, sometimes double bassoon and bass clarinet, more horns, trumpets, tuba, and sometimes an organ and/or a harp.
Edward Elgar, to whom Sullivan had been particularly kind, rose to Sullivan's defence, branding Fuller Maitland's obituary "the shady side of musical criticism ... that foul unforgettable episode."
Even Sullivan's friend George Grove wrote: "Surely the time has come when so able and experienced a master of voice, orchestra, and stage effect – master, too, of so much genuine sentiment – may apply his gifts to a serious opera on some subject of abiding human or natural interest."
Hughes comments that harmonic contrast in the Savoy works is enhanced by Sullivan's characteristic modulation between keys, as in "Expressive glances" (''Princess Ida''), where he smoothly negotiates E major, C sharp minor and C major, or "Then one of us will be a queen" (''The Gondoliers''), where he writes in F major, D flat major and D minor.
Harmonically his early works used the conventional formulae of Auber, Donizetti, Balfe and Schubert.
Helmore also enlisted Sullivan's assistance in creating harmonisations for a volume of ''The Hymnal Noted'' and arranged for Sullivan's compositions to be performed; one of the boy's anthems was given at the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace under the direction of Sir George Smart.
In a lengthy exchange of correspondence, Sullivan pronounced Gilbert's plot sketch (particularly the "lozenge" element) unacceptably mechanical, and too similar in both its grotesque "elements of topsyturveydom" and in actual plot to their earlier work, especially ''The Sorcerer'', and repeatedly requested that Gilbert find a new subject.
''The Times'' called it "another step in advance on the part of the only composer of any remarkable promise that just at present we can boast."
''The Times'' and several of the other papers agreed, however, that while the piece was entertaining, Sullivan was capable of higher art, and frivolous light opera would hold him back.
From 1861 to 1872, he supplemented his income by working as a church organist and music teacher, and writing hymns and songs.
His unfinished opera, ''The Emerald Isle'', was completed by Edward German and produced in 1901.
The first commercial recordings of Sullivan's music, beginning in 1898, were of individual numbers from the Savoy operas.
The first was with Rachel Scott Russell (1845–1882), the daughter of the engineer John Scott Russell.
Sullivan explained that his process was not to wait for inspiration, but "to dig for it.
In 1960 Hughes published the first full-length book about Sullivan's music "which, while taking note of his weaknesses (which are many) and not hesitating to castigate his lapses from good taste (which were comparatively rare) attempted to view them in perspective against the wider background of his sound musicianship."
...  Gilbert and Sullivan's world was an artificial world, with a neatly controlled and shapely precision.
Many of these pieces used very large orchestras.
Hughes compares "Here is a case unprecedented" from ''The Gondoliers'' to the Act II quintet from Bizet's ''Carmen''.
Sullivan's orchestra for the Savoy Operas was typical of any other pit orchestra of his era: 2 flutes (+ piccolo), oboe, 2 clarinets, bassoon, 2 horns, 2 cornets, 2 trombones, timpani, percussion and strings.
Sullivan's only serious opera, ''Ivanhoe'', though initially successful in 1891, was little-heard after that.
''Pinafore'' was followed by ''The Pirates of Penzance'' in 1879, another international success, which opened in New York and then ran in London for 363 performances.
Examples include "When the Foeman bares his steel" (''The Pirates of Penzance''), "In a doleful train" (''Patience'') and "Welcome, gentry" (''Ruddigore'').
After ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' opened, Sullivan turned once again to Shakespeare, composing incidental music for Henry Irving's production of ''Macbeth'' (1888).
If so, it must befall that Death, whene'er he call, must call too soon".
Sullivan told an interviewer, Arthur Lawrence, "I don't use the piano in composition – that would limit me terribly".
But the latter work had only a few short runs, and for the next 15 years Sullivan's sole operatic collaborator was Gilbert; the two created an additional 12 operas together.
''The Musical Times'' noted that Sullivan's tunes, at least in the comic operas, appeal to the professional as much as to the layman: his continental contemporaries such as Saint-Saëns and the Viennese critic Eduard Hanslick held the Savoy operas in high regard.
Since 1994, the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival has released numerous professional and amateur CDs and videos of its productions and other Sullivan recordings.
He left the overtures until last and often delegated their composition, based on his outlines, to his assistants, often adding his suggestions or corrections.
Between 1988 and 2003, after the company was revived, it recorded seven of the operas.
In 1856, the Royal Academy of Music awarded the first Mendelssohn Scholarship to the 14-year-old Sullivan, granting him a year's training at the academy.
Both relationships had ceased by early 1869.
Sullivan was happy on occasion to use chords traditionally considered technically incorrect.
In the same year, his ''Overture in C (In Memoriam)'', commemorating the recent death of his father, was a commission from the Norwich Festival.
Afterwards, Carte was unable to fill the new opera house with other opera productions, however, and ''Ivanhoe'' was blamed for the failure of the opera house.
In the comic operas, where many numbers were in verse-plus-refrain form, Sullivan frequently produced two climaxes in the melodic line.
Hughes writes, "When Sullivan wrote what we call 'a good tune' it was nearly always 'good music' as well.
They reunited in the 1890s for two more operas, but those did not achieve the popularity of their earlier works.
After ''Iolanthe'', Sullivan had not intended to write a new work with Gilbert, but he suffered a serious financial loss when his broker went bankrupt in November 1882.
A distinctive four-note theme is associated with the character Iolanthe, and the Fairy Queen's music parodies that of Wagnerian heroines such as Brünnhilde.
The relationship between Gilbert and Sullivan suffered its most serious breach in April 1890, during the run of ''The Gondoliers'', when Gilbert objected to Carte's financial accounts for the production, including a charge to the partnership for the cost of new carpeting for the Savoy Theatre lobby.
Sullivan's longest love affair was with the American socialite, Fanny Ronalds, a woman three years his senior, who had two children.
Sullivan's best known contrapuntal device was "the simultaneous presentation of two or more distinct melodies previously heard independently".
Sullivan invariably conducted the operas on their opening nights.
In "A more humane Mikado", when the Mikado mentions "Bach interwoven with Spohr and Beethoven", the clarinet and bassoon quote the fugue subject of Bach's ''Fantasia and Fugue in G minor''.
This criticism would follow Sullivan throughout his career.
Since then, his music has been made into ballets (''Pineapple Poll'' (1951) and ''Pirates of Penzance - The Ballet!''
In 1901, Fuller Maitland took issue with the generally laudatory tone of most of the obituaries: "Is there anywhere a case quite parallel to that of Sir Arthur Sullivan, who began his career with a work which at once stamped him as a genius, and to the height of which he only rarely attained throughout life?
The overtures from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas remain popular, and there are many recordings of them.
Sullivan flourished under the training of the Reverend Thomas Helmore, master of the choristers, and began to compose anthems and songs.
''The Golden Legend'' shows the influence of Liszt and Wagner.
Sullivan wrote to Gilbert in September 1890 that he was "physically and mentally ill over this wretched business.
His parents were Thomas Sullivan (1805–1866), a military bandmaster, clarinettist and music teacher born in Ireland and raised in Chelsea, London, and Mary Clementina (''née'' Coghlan, 1811–1882), English born, of Irish and Italian descent.
His incidental music to ''The Tempest'' received an acclaimed premiere at the Crystal Palace just before Sullivan's 20th birthday in April 1862.
In composing the Savoy operas, Sullivan wrote the vocal lines of the musical numbers first, and these were given to the actors.
Sullivan then produced his ''Festival Te Deum'' (1872), an oratorio, ''The Light of the World'' (1873), and incidental music for West End productions of several Shakespeare plays.
He also liked to evoke familiar musical styles, such as his madrigals in ''The Mikado'', ''Ruddigore'' and ''The Yeomen of the Guard'', glees in ''H.M.S.
He chose Henry Hart Milman's 1822 dramatic poem based on the life and death of Saint Margaret the Virgin for its basis.
In addition, biographies and scholarly articles and analyses continue to be written about Sullivan's life and work.
Sullivan was not a showy conductor, and some thought him dull and old fashioned on the podium, but his composition had an enthusiastic reception and was frequently revived.
Sullivan's 1898 ballet ''Victoria and Merrie England'' was one of several late pieces that won praise from most critics:
He studied piano with the head of the academy, William Sterndale Bennett, and with Arthur O'Leary.
His ''Irish Symphony'' of 1866 won similarly enthusiastic praise, but as Arthur Jacobs notes, "The first rapturous outburst of enthusiasm for Sullivan as an orchestral composer did not last."
It was a cantata for the Leeds Festival, ''The Golden Legend'', based on Longfellow's poem of the same name.
The innovations in content and form of the works that he and Gilbert developed directly influenced the development of the modern musical throughout the 20th century.
Ad hoc companies of operatic singers conducted by Sir Malcolm Sargent in the 1950s and 60s and Sir Charles Mackerras in the 1990s have made audio sets of several Savoy operas, and in the 1980s Alexander Faris conducted video recordings of most of the operas with casts including show-business stars as well as professional singers.
The production lasted for 155 consecutive performances, an unprecedented run for a serious opera, and earned good notices for its music.
''Ruddigore'' followed ''The Mikado'' at the Savoy in 1887.
Although his melodies sprang from rhythm, some of his themes may have been prompted by his chosen instrumentation or his harmonic techniques.
These recordings were supervised by Rupert D'Oyly Carte.
He published his only song cycle, ''The Window; or, The Songs of the Wrens'', to words by Tennyson, and he wrote the first of a series of suites of incidental music for West End productions of Shakespeare plays.
In 1885, he told an interviewer, ""The opera of the future is a compromise among the French, German and Italian schools – a sort of eclectic school, a selection of the merits of each one.
He began building a reputation as England's most promising young composer.
Sullivan and Burnand were soon commissioned by Thomas German Reed for a two-act opera, ''The Contrabandista'' (1867; revised and expanded as ''The Chieftain'' in 1894), but it did not do as well.
In general, Sullivan preferred to write in major keys.
In all, Sullivan's artistic output included 23 operas, 13 major orchestral works, eight choral works and oratorios, two ballets, one song cycle, incidental music to several plays, numerous hymns and other church pieces, and a large body of songs, parlour ballads, part songs, carols, and piano and chamber pieces.
He had collaborated with no other librettist since 1875.
from ''Cox and Box''.
It enjoyed a modest popularity, running for 204 performances, and earned critical praise.
In 1867, his overture ''Marmion'' was premiered by the Philharmonic Society.
The long-running Broadway production of ''The Pirates of Penzance'' presented by Joseph Papp, re-orchestrated with synthesisers replacing the strings, was put on record in 1981.
Gilbert from his friend Arthur Sullivan."
Sullivan wished to produce further serious works with Gilbert.
Their 1878 opera ''H.M.S.
During a spell as organist at Covent Garden, he composed his first ballet, ''L'Île Enchantée'' (1864).
Therefore, he concluded that his financial needs required him to continue writing Savoy operas.
After dinner, he recorded a speech to be sent to Edison, saying, in part:
Throughout the rest of his life, and in his will, he contributed financially to Fred's children, continuing to correspond with them and to be concerned with their education, marriages and financial affairs.
One wrote, "it seems, as in the great Wagnerian operas, as though poem and music had proceeded simultaneously from one and the same brain."
Kate was a chorister who defected to the Comedy Opera Company's rival production of ''H.M.S.
He replied, "I have lost the liking for writing comic opera, and entertain very grave doubts as to my power of doing it."
Even so, on those occasions when Gilbert wrote in unvaried metre, Sullivan often followed suit and produced phrases of simple repetition, such as "Love is a plaintive song" (''Patience'') and "A man who would woo a fair maid" (''The Yeomen of the Guard'').
She became particularly associated with "The Lost Chord", singing it both in private and in public, often with Sullivan accompanying her.
Since then, much of Sullivan's serious music and his operas without Gilbert have been recorded.
5 in A-flat Major (Op.
Rachel's parents did not approve of a possible union with a young composer with uncertain financial prospects, but the two continued to see each other covertly.
As early as 1877 ''The Figaro'' wrote that Sullivan "has all the ability to make him a great composer, but he wilfully throws his opportunity away.
Sullivan's association with works for voice and orchestra began with ''The Masque at Kenilworth'' (Birmingham Festival, 1864).
The D'Oyly Carte Opera Company continued to produce recordings until 1979.
... Sullivan's tunes, in these operas, also exist in a make-believe world of their own.
Later in 1891, Sullivan composed music for Tennyson's ''The Foresters'', which ran well at Daly's Theatre in New York in 1892, but failed in London the following year.
Pinafore'' and ''The Mikado'' and gavottes in ''Ruddigore'' and ''The Gondoliers''.
His ''Te Deum Laudamus'', written to commemorate the end of the Boer War, was performed posthumously.
He was trained in Mendelssohn's ideas and techniques but was also exposed to a variety of musical styles, including Schubert, Verdi, Bach, and Wagner.
The musical scholar and conductor David Russell Hulme writes that the work influenced Elgar and Walton.
Sullivan was also very fond of his brother Fred, whose acting career he assisted whenever possible, and of Fred's children.
Sullivan's only wholly serious opera, ''Ivanhoe'' (1891), received generally favourable reviews, although J.
When reproached for using consecutive fifths in ''Cox and Box'', he replied "if 5ths turn up it doesn't matter, so long as there is no offence to the ear."
The work of the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society, founded in 1977, books about Sullivan by musicians such as Young (1971) and Jacobs (1986), and a growing number of recordings have contributed to the re-evaluation of Sullivan's serious music.
A monument in the composer's memory featuring a weeping Muse was erected in the Victoria Embankment Gardens in London and is inscribed with Gilbert's words from ''The Yeomen of the Guard'': "Is life a boon?
Sullivan's first attempt at opera, ''The Sapphire Necklace'' (1863–64) to a libretto by Henry F. Chorley, was not produced and is now lost, except for the overture and two songs from the work, which were separately published.
Sullivan's score, moreover, was too serious for the Savoy audiences' tastes.
The best known of his hymns and songs include "Onward Christian Soldiers" and "The Lost Chord".
The ''Athenaeum'' wrote:
In 1866, Sullivan composed a one-act comic opera, ''Cox and Box'', which is still widely performed.
When Sullivan turned to comic opera with Gilbert, the serious critics began to express disapproval.
He enjoyed hosting private dinners and entertainments at his home, often featuring famous singers and well-known actors.
But Gilbert felt that the reaction to ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' had "not been so convincing as to warrant us in assuming that the public want something more earnest still."
In February 1883, he and Gilbert signed a five-year agreement with Carte, requiring them to produce a new comic opera on six months' notice.
Helmore encouraged the young Sullivan's composing talent and arranged for one of his pieces, "O Israel", to be published in 1855, Sullivan's first published work.
Sullivan wrote a group of seven part songs in 1868, the best-known of which is "The Long Day Closes".
Still in 1871, Sullivan composed a dramatic cantata, ''On Shore and Sea'', for the opening of the London International Exhibition, and the hymn ''Onward, Christian Soldiers'', with words by Sabine Baring-Gould.
It was profitable, but its nine-month run was disappointing compared with most of the earlier Savoy operas.
Sullivan's talent and native charm gained him the friendship of many not only in the musical establishment, such as Grove, Chorley, and Herman Klein, but also in society circles, such as Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh.
Sullivan had an early chance to compose several pieces for royalty in connection with the wedding of the Prince of Wales in 1863.
The Salvation Army adopted the latter as its favoured processional, and it became Sullivan's most enduring hymn.
He continued to compose hymns throughout the decade.
In addition to his knighthood, honours awarded to Sullivan in his lifetime included Doctor in Music, ''honoris causa'', by the universities of Cambridge (1876) and Oxford (1879); Chevalier, Légion d'honneur, France (1878); The Order of the Medjidieh conferred by the Sultan of Turkey (1888); and appointment as a Member of the Fourth Class of the Royal Victorian Order (MVO) in 1897.
When Sullivan died, he left her the autograph manuscript of that song, along with other bequests.
The next opera, ''Princess Ida'' (1884, the duo's only three-act, blank verse work), had a noticeably shorter run than its four predecessors, although Sullivan's score was praised.
One of the most recognisable features in Sullivan's orchestration is his woodwind scoring.
He, or an assistant, improvised a piano accompaniment at the early rehearsals; he wrote the orchestrations later, after he had seen what Gilbert's stage business would be.
When Fred died at the age of 39, he left his pregnant wife, Charlotte, with seven children under the age of 14.
In 1895, Sullivan once more provided incidental music for the Lyceum, this time for J. Comyns Carr's ''King Arthur''.
The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert's plots is perfectly matched by his language.
Sullivan was a frequent visitor at the Scott Russell home in the mid-1860s, and by 1865 the affair was in full bloom.
Although it was not a grand opera, ''The Yeomen of the Guard'' (1888) provided him with the opportunity to compose his most ambitious stage work to date.
Only a year later, in January 1885, Charlotte died, leaving the six children to be raised mostly by her brother and the older girls.
The ''Symphony in E'' had its first professional recording in 1968, and a considerable number of Sullivan's non-Gilbert works have since been recorded.
Sullivan argued hard for an increase in the pit orchestra's size, and starting with ''The Yeomen of the Guard'', the orchestra was augmented with a second bassoon and a bass trombone.
Examples of Sullivan's rare excursions into minor keys include the long E minor melody in the first movement of the ''Irish Symphony'', "Go away, madam" in the Act I finale of ''Iolanthe'' (echoing Verdi and Beethoven) and the funeral march in the Act I finale of ''The Yeomen of the Guard''.
Sullivan's scholarship was extended to a second year, and in 1858 in what the biographer Arthur Jacobs calls an "extraordinary gesture of confidence" the scholarship committee extended his grant for a third year so that he could study in Germany, at the Leipzig Conservatoire.
W. S. Gilbert, writing in ''Fun'' magazine, pronounced the score superior to F. C. Burnand's libretto.
He is best known for his series of 14 operatic collaborations with the dramatist W. S. Gilbert, including ''H.M.S.
Gilbert adapted the libretto for Sullivan.
Other examples of opera parody include Mabel's aria "Poor Wand'ring One" in ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and the duet "Who are you, sir?"
Sullivan's talent and native charm earned him many friends in musical and social circles, including Queen Victoria's son Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh.
She was a constant companion up to the time of Sullivan's death, but around 1889 or 1890, the sexual relationship seems to have ended.
Sullivan, reflecting on this, on his own longstanding kidney problems, and on his desire to devote himself to more serious music, replied to Carte, "It is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself."
After the death of his brother Fred in 1877, Sullivan supported Fred's large family financially for the rest of his life, effectively adopting his nephew Bertie.
''The Chieftain'' (1894), a heavily-revised version of their earlier two-act opera, ''The Contrabandista'', flopped.
:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In the stalls,—''with a'' KNIGHT ''behind him!'"
In the decade after his death, Sullivan's reputation sank considerably.
In 1871, Sullivan wrote his first opera with W. S. Gilbert, ''Thespis''.
His works comprise 23 operas, 13 major orchestral works, eight choral works and oratorios, two ballets, incidental music to several plays, and numerous hymns and other church pieces, songs, and piano and chamber pieces.
For his last year at Leipzig, his father scraped together the money for living expenses, and the conservatoire assisted by waiving its fees.
Carte was building a new theatre to present Sullivan's forthcoming grand opera, and Sullivan sided with Carte, going so far as to testify erroneously as to certain old debts.
I should like to set a story of human interest & probability where the humorous words would come in a humorous (not serious) situation, & where, if the situation were a tender or dramatic one the words would be of similar character."
Ronalds was separated from her American husband, but they never divorced.
Hughes instances "If you go in" (''Iolanthe'') as a good example.
