All this means they can deliver fire with a steep angle of descent.
*ramjet-assisted, similar to rocket-assisted, but using a ramjet instead of a rocket motor; it is anticipated that a ramjet-assisted 120-mm mortar shell could reach a range of .
The latest, such as Junghan's DM84U provide options giving, superquick, delay, a choice of proximity heights of burst, time and a choice of foliage penetration depths.
However, guns capable of burst fire can deliver several rounds in 10 seconds if they use the same firing data for each, and if guns in more than one location are firing on one target they can use Time on Target procedures so that all their shells arrive at the same time and target.
These air-bursts are much more lethal against personnel than ground bursts because they deliver a greater proportion of useful fragments and deliver them into terrain where a prone soldier would be protected from ground bursts.
In a campaign to suppress a local minority rebellion near today's Burmese border, the Ming army used a 3-line formation of arquebuses/muskets to destroy an elephant formation.
Three of its features particularly stand out.
The larger calibers of anti-aircraft artillery are almost always used airburst.
They are mostly tracked vehicles, but wheeled SPs started to appear in the 1970s.
Cannons were only useful for the defense of a castle, as demonstrated at Breteuil in 1356, when the besieged English used a cannon to destroy an attacking French assault tower.
Some offered a go/no-go functional test through the fuze setter.
The tube would then be heated to allow it to expand and fit over the previous tube.
The extent to which the process is formal or informal and makes use of computer based systems, documented norms or experience and judgement also varies widely armies and other circumstances.
*''time on target'', fire units fire at the time less their time of flight, this works well with prearranged scheduled fire but is less satisfactory for opportunity targets because it means delaying the delivery of fire by selecting a 'safe' time that all or most fire units can achieve.
The outcome of battles was still determined by the clash of infantry.
From about 1980, electronic time fuzes started replacing mechanical ones for use with cargo munitions.
The traditional definitions differentiated between guns and howitzers in terms of maximum elevation (well less than 45° as opposed to close to or greater than 45°), number of charges (one or more than one charge), and having higher or lower muzzle velocity, sometimes indicated by barrel length.
As small smooth-bore tubes these were initially cast in iron or bronze around a core, with the first drilled bore ordnance recorded in operation near Seville in 1247.
In 1846, nitrocellulose (also known as guncotton) was discovered, and the high explosive nitroglycerin was discovered at much the same time.
While there were many early attempts at breech-loading designs, a lack of engineering knowledge rendered these even more dangerous to use than muzzle-loaders.
The British major-general Henry Hugh Tudor pioneered armour and artillery cooperation at the breakthrough Battle of Cambrai.
"Gunner" is also the lowest rank and junior non-commissioned officers are "Bombardiers" in some artillery arms.
Artillery command may impose priorities and constraints to support their combined arms commander's plans.
Historically most casualties occur in the first 10–15 seconds of fire, i.e.
In 1415, the Portuguese invaded the Mediterranean port town of Ceuta.
The "built-up" method involved assembling the barrel with wrought-iron (later mild steel was used) tubes of successively smaller diameter.
Military doctrine has played a significant influence on the core engineering design considerations of artillery ordnance through its history, in seeking to achieve a balance between delivered volume of fire with ordnance mobility.
One such characteristic is the type of obturation used to seal the chamber and prevent gases escaping through the breech.
Many SPs cannot fire without deploying stabilizers or spades, sometimes hydraulic.
*Nose Ejection: shrapnel, star, incendiary and flechette (a more modern version of shrapnel).
*proximity sensor including airburst
In some armies mapping and amp supply has also been an artillery responsibility.
However, two new branches of artillery emerged during that war and its aftermath, both used specialised guns (and a few rockets) and used direct not indirect fire, in the 1950s and 1960s both started to make extensive use of missiles:
The introduction of these led to a new issue, the need for very accurate three dimensional target coordinates – the mensuration process.
Both base and nose ejection are almost always used with airburst fuzes.
However, in more advanced artillery units, this data is relayed through a digital radio link.
Self-propelled howitzers are permanently mounted on a carriage or vehicle with room for the crew and ammunition and are thus capable of moving quickly from one firing position to another, both to support the fluid nature of modern combat and to avoid counter-battery fire.
*''Suppression fire'': that degrades the performance of a target below the level needed to fulfill its mission.
Combined with TOT or MRSI tactics that give no warning of the incoming rounds, these rounds are especially devastating because many enemy soldiers are likely to be caught in the open.
The English, French, and Burgundians all advanced in military technology, and as a result the traditional advantage that went to the defense in a siege was lost.
*''Harassing fire'': a random number of shells are fired at random intervals, without any pattern to it that the enemy can predict.
Most armies now place these services in specialist branches with specialist repair elements in batteries and units.
The cannon during this period were elongated, and the recipe for gunpowder was improved to make it three times as powerful as before.
Howitzers can fire at maximum elevations at least close to 45°; elevations up to about 70° are normal for modern howitzers.
Generally it is a battery, but sub-divided batteries are quite common, and in some armies very common.
The projectile is the munition or "bullet" fired downrange.
It was not precision fire, but it was good enough for concentrations and barrages.
An early specialist development was coastal artillery for use against enemy ships.
Some armies also consider infantry operated mortars to be more responsive than artillery, but this is a function of the control arrangements and not the case in all armies.
During World War II UK researchers concluded that for impact fuzed munitions the relative risk were as follows:
*Laser guided shells require laser target designators, usually with observation teams on the ground but UAV installations are possible.
Armor- or concrete-piercing fuzes are specially hardened.
Typically, the former mostly provide close support to manoeuvre units, while the latter may provide close support and or depth fire, notably counter-battery.
The manner in which artillery units or formations are employed is called artillery support, and may at different periods in history refer to weapons designed to be fired from ground-, sea-, and even air-based weapons platforms.
Indirect firing data was based on standard conditions including a specific muzzle velocity, zero wind, air temperature and density, and propellant temperature.
These were rates that contemporary bolt action rifles could not match.
In addition, she led assaults against the English-held towns of Jargeau, Meung, and Beaugency, all with the support of large artillery units.
Broadly, these effects fall into two categories, either to suppress or neutralize the enemy, or to cause casualties, damage, and destruction.
When she led the French against the English at the Battle of Tourelles, in 1430, she faced heavy gunpowder fortifications, and yet her troops prevailed in that battle.
Artillery's "Christmas present", and were much appreciated when they arrived during the Battle of the Bulge.
In some armies, only designated artillery HQs have the tactical fire control authority to order fire units to engage a target, all 'calls for fire' being requests to these HQs.
The Fall of Constantinople was perhaps "the first event of supreme importance whose result was determined by the use of artillery" when the huge bronze cannons of Mehmed II breached the city's walls, ending the Byzantine Empire, according to Sir Charles Oman.
Several such crews and teams with other functions are combined into a unit of artillery, usually called a battery, although sometimes called a company.
Since that time, a few mortars have become rifled and adopted breech loading.
By the end of the 14th century, cannon were only powerful enough to knock in roofs, and could not penetrate castle walls.
To engage targets using MRSI requires two things, firstly guns with the requisite rate of fire and sufficiently different size propelling charges, secondly a fire control computer that has been designed to compute such missions and the data handling capability that allows all the firing data to be produced, sent to each gun and then presented to the gun commander in the correct order.
The barrage of Ottoman cannon fire lasted forty days, and they are estimated to have fired 19,320 times.
After the British artillery was shown up in the Crimean War as having barely changed since the Napoleonic Wars the industrialist William Armstrong was awarded a contract by the government to design a new piece of artillery.
Of course importance is a matter of perspective; what is important to a divisional commander is rarely the same as what is important to an infantry platoon commander.
These rules of thumb apply to NATO armies.
After that war, most mortars settled on the Stokes pattern, characterized by a short barrel, smooth bore, low muzzle velocity, elevation angle of firing generally greater than 45°, and a very simple and light mounting using a "baseplate" on the ground.
Finally, hand-held firearms and riflemen appear in Morocco, in 1437, in an expedition against the people of Tangiers.
Fire may be directed by an artillery observer or other observer, including manned and unmanned aircraft pilots, or called onto map coordinates.
This is called "BL" or "breech loading" by some nations.
The return of the weak radar signal completes an electrical circuit in the fuze which explodes the shell.
He developed a  field howitzer whose gun barrel, carriage assembly and ammunition specifications were made uniform for all French cannons.
First, the piece was rifled, which allowed for a much more accurate and powerful action.
The cast iron shell of the Armstrong gun was similar in shape to a Minié ball and had a thin lead coating which made it fractionally larger than the gun's bore and which engaged with the gun's rifling grooves to impart spin to the shell.
*Fortress or garrison artillery, manned a nation's fixed defences using guns, howitzers or mortars, either on land or coastal frontiers.
There is no generally accepted minimum muzzle velocity or barrel length associated with a gun.
It appears to have been introduced in World War I, which spawned a very wide array of artillery in all sorts of sizes so a simple categorical system was needed.
Fire plans may also involve use of non-artillery assets, such as mortars and aircraft.
Today most artillery battalions use a(n) "Aiming Circle" which allows for faster setup and more mobility.
Payloads have included:
A mortar is sometimes carried in an armored vehicle and can either fire from it or be dismounted to fire from the ground.
The proximity fuse itself was developed by the British to increase the effectiveness of anti-aircraft warfare.
Hence, the naming of the Honourable Artillery Company an essentially infantry unit until the 19th century.
They are typically longer-barreled, low-trajectory, high-velocity weapons designed primarily for a direct-fire role.
Artillery observation teams are the most common means of target acquisition.
Technical fire control has been performed in various places, but mostly in firing batteries.
The latter often led to fixed ammunition where the projectile is locked to the cartridge case.
Those that do not use this approach tend to put these officers close to the guns.
The Battery FDC computes firing data—ammunition to be used, powder charge, fuse settings, the direction to the target, and the quadrant elevation to be fired at to reach the target, what gun will fire any rounds needed for adjusting on the target, and the number of rounds to be fired on the target by each gun once the target has been accurately located—to the guns.
At least one nuclear shell and its non-nuclear spotting version also used a multi-deck mechanical time fuze fitted into its base.
'''Command''' is the authority to allocate resources, typically by assigning artillery formations or units.
In the early 1900s, Goertz in Germany developed an optical sight for azimuth laying.
However, they are all suitable for providing ''deep supporting fire'' although the limited range of many mortars tends to exclude them from the role.
As tactical data networks become pervasive, they will provide any connected soldier with a means for reporting target information and requesting artillery fire.
Railway artillery took two forms, railway mountings for heavy and super-heavy guns and howitzers and armored trains as "fighting vehicles" armed with light artillery in a direct fire role.
*Self-propelled artillery: typically guns, mortars or gun howitzers mounted on a vehicle.
Accurate running time was less important with cargo munitions that burst much higher.
During military operations, the role of field artillery is to provide support to other arms in combat or to attack targets, particularly in depth.
Artillery is arguably the most lethal form of land-based armament currently employed, and has been since at least the early Industrial Revolution.
Also radar is used both for determining the location of enemy artillery and mortar batteries and to determine the precise actual strike points of rounds fired by battery and comparing that location with what was expected to compute a registration allowing future rounds to be fired with much greater accuracy.
Differences include where the logistic service transfers artillery ammunition to artillery, the amount of ammunition carried in units and extent to which stocks are held at unit or battery level.
However, there is no generally recognised generic term for a gun, howitzer, mortar, and so forth: the United States uses "artillery piece", but most English-speaking armies use "gun" and "mortar".
The official military spelling is "fuze".
A few years later, the Richtfläche (lining-plane) sight was invented in Germany and provided a means of indirect laying in azimuth, complementing the clinometers for indirect laying in elevation which already existed.
Counter-battery fire may be adjusted by some of the systems, for example the operator of an unmanned aircraft can 'follow' a battery if it moves.
With bagged charges, the breech itself provides obturation and holds the primer.
In the Battle of Pollilur, the Siege of Seringapatam (1792) and in Battle of Seringapatam in 1799 these rockets were used with considerable effect against the British."
Traditional survey methods of measurement and calculation have been replaced by inertial orientation and navigators and GPS.
This NATO definition, of course, makes artillery a supporting arm although not all NATO armies agree with this logic.
Otherwise the several FOs communicate with a higher FDC such as at a Battalion level, and the higher FDC prioritizes the targets and allocates fires to individual batteries as needed to engage the targets that are spotted by the FOs or to perform preplanned fires.
The first indirect counter-battery fire was in May 1900 by an observer in a balloon.
*''Counterbattery fire'': delivered for the purpose of destroying or ''neutralizing'' the enemy's fire support system.
The standardized interchangeable parts of these cannons down to the nuts, bolts and screws made their mass production and repair much easier.
*Survey: accurate fixation and orientation of the guns, historically this involved specialists within field artillery units and specialist units.
*burst fire, a rate of fire to deliver three rounds from each gun within 10 or 15 seconds, this reduces the number of guns and hence fire units needed, which means they may be less dispersed and have less variation in their times of flight.
Nevertheless, most armies seemed to have retained it within firing batteries, and some duplicated the technical fire control teams in a battery to give operational resilience and tactical flexibility.
If it is the latter it may be either ''on-call'' or ''scheduled''.
The actions involved in operating the piece are collectively called "serving the gun" by the "detachment" or gun crew, constituting either direct or indirect artillery fire.
However, modern "howitzers" have higher velocities and longer barrels than the equivalent "guns" of the first half of the 20th century.
Generally, 'direct support' also means that the artillery unit provides artillery observation and liaison teams to the supported units.
That leaves six combinations of the three criteria, some of which have been termed gun howitzers.
Air strike is another option.
Terminology and its implications vary widely.
Some SPs have no armor and carry little or no ammunition.
Because the higher trajectories cause the shells to arc higher into the air, they take longer to reach the target and so if the shells are fired on these trajectories for the first volleys (starting with the shell with the most propellant and working down) and then after the correct pause more volleys are fired on the lower trajectories, the shells will all arrive at the same time.
Propelling charges for tube artillery can be provided in one of two ways: either as cartridge bags or in metal cartridge cases.
*when the targets should be attacked and possibly for how long;
They used light guns or howitzers, usually designed for pack animal transport and easily broken down into small easily handled loads
A technique called Time on Target was developed by the British Army in North Africa at the end of 1941 and early 1942 particularly for counter-battery fire and other concentrations, it proved very popular.
Different bands were used for different types of weapons—field guns, mortars, anti-aircraft guns and coast guns.
*Special equipment for locating hostile artillery: flash spotting and notably sound ranging appeared in World War I the latter has been undergone increasing refinement as technology has improved.
Target acquisition may also be by anyone that can get the information into the artillery system.
Since it did not need to be re-aimed after each shot, the crew could fire as soon as the barrel returned to its resting position.
An added complication was the need for survey to accurately fix the coordinates of the gun position and provide accurate orientation for the guns.
The ''targeting'' process is the key aspect of tactical fire control.
Broadly they can be defined as either:
Some anti-aircraft guns could also be used as field or anti-tank artillery, providing they had suitable sights.
Since the introduction of gunpowder and cannon, the word "artillery" has largely meant cannon, and in contemporary usage, it usually refers to shell-firing guns, howitzers, mortars, rockets and guided missiles.
Geographically dispersed fire units may or may not have an integral capability for technical fire control.
There are other recognized typifying characteristics for artillery.
Some armies defined these categories by bands of calibers.
Control of fire against opportunity targets is an important differentiator between different types of artillery system.
As the name suggests, towed artillery has a prime mover, usually a jeep or truck, to move the piece, crew, and ammunition around.
Modern artillery is most obviously distinguished by its long range, firing an explosive shell or rocket and a mobile carriage for firing and transport.
It is unclear how many fire control computers have the necessary capabilities.
Although rifling had been tried on small arms since the 15th century, the necessary machinery to accurately rifle artillery was only available by the mid-19th century.
A '''fire unit''' is the smallest artillery or mortar element, consisting of one or more weapon systems, capable of being employed to execute a fire assigned by a tactical fire controller.
The flintlock was a far more reliable (and safe) mechanism.
It involves decisions about:
In gun detachments, each role is numbered, starting with "1" the Detachment Commander, and the highest number being the Coverer, the second-in-command.
In typical use, the French 75 could deliver fifteen rounds per minute on its target, either shrapnel or melinite high-explosive, up to about 5 miles (8,500 m) away.
These three criteria give eight possible combinations, of which guns and howitzers are but two.
Airburst munitions significantly increase the relative risk for lying men, etc.
Nevertheless, the batteries' fire can be ''concentrated'' onto a single target, as can the fire of units in range and with the other tactical missions.
A new type of artillery fuze will appear soon.
Some guns were suitable for dual-role anti-aircraft and field (anti-tank) use.
However, in the early 21st Century, the Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled relatively cheap and accurate guidance for shells and missiles, notably the US 155&nbsp;mm Excalibur and the 227&nbsp;mm GMLRS rocket.
*what methods should be used, for example, ''converged'' or ''distributed'', whether adjustment is permissible or surprise essential, the need for special procedures such as precision or danger close
The first land-based mobile weapon is usually credited to Jan Žižka, who deployed his oxen-hauled cannon during the Hussite Wars of Bohemia (1418–1424).
the time needed to react and improve protective posture, however, this is less relevant if airburst is used.
British heavy artillery worked energetically to progressively solve all these problems from late 1914 onwards, and by early 1918, had effective processes in place for both field and heavy artillery.
Although attempts at breech-loading mechanisms had been made since medieval times, the essential engineering problem was that the mechanism couldn't withstand the explosive charge.
*''Deep supporting fire'': directed at objectives not in the immediate vicinity of own force, for neutralizing or destroying enemy reserves and weapons, and interfering with enemy command, supply, communications and observation; or
The projectile with its integral propelling charge was dropped down the barrel from the muzzle to hit a fixed firing pin.
'''Control''', sometimes called tactical fire control, is primarily concerned with 'targeting' and the allotment of fire units to targets.
This technique is tricky and slight variations in the functioning of the fuse can cause it to explode too high and be ineffective, or to strike the ground instead of exploding above it.
Until the late 19th century, the only available propellant was black powder.
The new Ming Dynasty established the "Divine Engine Battalion" (神机营), which specialized in various types of artillery.
The process of delivering fire onto the target is called gunnery.
This led to 'controlled variable time' (CVT) after World War II.
*''Close supporting fire'': placed on enemy troops, weapons or positions which, because of their proximity present the most immediate and serious threat to the supported unit.
*Naval artillery: guns mounted on warships and used either against other ships or in support of ground forces.
Most artillery fuzes are nose fuzes.
Nevertheless, the mean point of impact was still some tens of yards from the target-centre aiming point.
The proximity fuze emerged on the battlefields of Europe in late December 1944.
It seems that not all NATO nations use the terms and outside NATO others are probably used.
The majority of combat deaths in the Napoleonic Wars, World War I, and World War II were caused by artillery.
Weapons covered by the term 'modern artillery' include "cannon" artillery (such as howitzer, mortar, and field gun) and rocket artillery.
This is useful because many more shells can land on the target with no warning.
Not needing to be mobile, coastal artillery used to be much larger than equivalent field artillery pieces, giving them longer range and more destructive power.
Radio has included HF, VHF, satellite and radio relay as well as modern tactical trunk systems.
His gun was also a breech-loader.
*Calibration: periodically establishing the "normal" muzzle velocity of each gun as it wears.
In the contemporary era, the artillery and crew rely on wheeled or tracked vehicles as transportation, though some of the largest were railway guns.
Towing by horse teams lasted throughout World War II in some armies, but others were fully mechanized with wheeled or tracked gun towing vehicles by the outbreak of that war.
When observers or cells are not authorised, they can still request fire.
This means they generally do not have to ''concentrate'' their fire so their shorter range is not a disadvantage.
The result was accompanying or infantry guns.
The gun combined all the properties that make up an effective artillery piece.
As a result, most of the battles of the Hundred Years' War that Joan of Arc participated in were fought with gunpowder artillery.
In armies practicing control from the front, most of the process may be undertaken by a forward observer or other target acquirer.
'''Communications''' underpin the artillery system, as it must be reliable and available in real-time.
**anti-aircraft artillery: weapons, usually mobile, designed for attacking aircraft from the ground.
Indirect fire was the defining characteristic of 20th-century artillery and led to undreamt of changes in the amount of artillery, its tactics, organisation, and techniques, most of which occurred during World War I.
Typically such fire was used to suppress enemy batteries when they were or were about to interfere with the activities of friendly forces (such as to prevent enemy defensive artillery fire against an impending attack) or to systematically destroy enemy guns.
These processes remain in use into the 21st Century with refinements to calculations enabled by computers and improved data capture about non-standard conditions.
