Toscanini is the subject of the 1988 fictionalized biography ''Il giovane Toscanini'' (Young Toscanini), starring C. Thomas Howell and Dame Elizabeth Taylor, and directed by Franco Zeffirelli.
In December 1943, Toscanini made a 31-minute film for the United States Office of War Information called ''Hymn of the Nations'', directed by Alexander Hammid.
In 2012, RCA Red Seal released a new 84 CD boxed set reissue of Toscanini's complete RCA Victor recordings and commercially issued HMV recordings with the BBC Symphony Orchestra.
In 1945, he led the orchestra in recording sessions of the ''Grand Canyon Suite'' by Ferde Grofé in Carnegie Hall (supervised by Grofé) and ''An American in Paris'' by George Gershwin in NBC's Studio 8-H.
RCA finally released a complete edition of the recordings in 1977 and, as Sachs noted, by that time some of the masters may have deteriorated further.
In 1986, the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts purchased the bulk of Toscanini's papers, scores and sound recordings from his heirs.
In Toscanini's later years the conductor expressed dislike for the work and amazement that he had actually conducted it.
1, which had been recently rediscovered.
Toscanini married Carla De Martini on June 21, 1897, when she was not yet 20 years old.
Although nearly all of the plot is embellished, the events surrounding the sudden and unexpected conducting debut are based on fact.
His epitaph is taken from one account of his remarks concluding the 1926 premiere of Puccini's unfinished ''Turandot'': "''Qui finisce l'opera, perché a questo punto il maestro è morto''" ("Here the opera ends, because at this point the maestro died").
On November 13, 1948, there was an all-Brahms program, including the Concerto for Violin, Cello, and Orchestra in A minor (Mischa Mischakoff, violin; Frank Miller, cello); ''Liebeslieder-Walzer'', Op.
As the recording process improved, so did Toscanini's negative attitude towards making records and he eventually became more interested in preserving his performances for posterity.
4, Mendelssohn's "Scottish" Symphony, dating from the same NBC period; and a Rossini-Verdi-Puccini LP emanating from the post-War reopening of La Scala on May 11, 1946, with the Maestro conducting.
Verdi said that he had left it out for fear that "certain interpreters would have exaggerated the marking".
Living conditions at the conservatory were harsh.
The majority of Toscanini's recordings were made with the NBC Symphony and cover the bulk of his repertoire.
Frank and Dyment also discuss Maestro Toscanini's performance history in the 50th anniversary issue of Classic Record Collector (2006, 47) Frank with 'Toscanini – Myth and Reality' (10–14) and Dyment 'A Whirlwind in London' (15–21) This issue also contains interviews with people who performed with Toscanini – Jon Tolansky 'Licia Albanese – Maestro and Me' (22–6) and 'A Mesmerising Beat: John Tolansky talks to some of those who worked with Arturo Toscanini, to discover some of the secrets of his hold over singers, orchestras and audiences.'
Toscanini was 87 years old when he finally retired.
Toscanini conducted the world premieres of many operas, four of which have become part of the standard operatic repertoire: ''Pagliacci'', ''La bohème'', ''La fanciulla del West'' and ''Turandot''; he took an active role in Alfano's completion of Puccini's ''Turandot''.
According to Harvey Sachs, Mortimer Frank, and B. H. Haggin, this criticism can be traced to the lack of focus on Toscanini as a conductor rather than his legacy.
During Toscanini's middle years, however, such now widely accepted composers as Richard Strauss and Claude Debussy, whose music the conductor held in very high regard, were considered to be radical and modern.
In addition, there are many recordings available of his broadcast performances, as well as his remarkable rehearsals with the NBC Symphony.
NBC employed special RCA high fidelity microphones for the broadcasts, and they can be seen in some photographs of Toscanini and the orchestra.
Toscanini also performed excerpts from Igor Stravinsky's ''Petrouchka'', two of Dmitri Shostakovich's symphonies (nos.1 and 7), and three of George Gershwin's most famous works, ''Rhapsody in Blue'', ''An American in Paris'', and the ''Piano Concerto in F'', though his performances of these last three works have been criticized as not being "jazzy" enough.
In addition, hundreds of hours of Toscanini's rehearsals with the NBC were preserved and are now housed in the Toscanini Legacy archive at The New York Public Library.
These recordings document the final phase of his 68-year conducting career.
On December 29, 1951, there was another all-Wagner program that included the two excerpts from ''Siegfried'' and ''Die Walküre'' featured on the March 1948 telecast, plus the Prelude to Act II of ''Lohengrin''; the Prelude and Liebestod from ''Tristan und Isolde''; and "Siegfried's Death and Funeral Music" from ''Götterdämmerung''.
In 2013, EMI Classics issued a 6-CD set containing Toscanini's complete HMV recordings with the BBC Symphony.
Two days after the final concert, Guido Cantelli took the podium in a hastily organized session to record the Franck SYMPHONY for RCA Victor using the same microphone and equipment set-up put in place for the Maestro, and the stereo version of the recording was finally released on LP by RCA in 1979 (EMI holds the rights and has issued several CD versions).
This was the beginning of Toscanini's lifelong friendship and championing of Catalani; he even named his first daughter Wally after the heroine of Catalani's opera ''La Wally''.
Additional releases included a number of Beethoven symphonies recorded with the New York Philharmonic during the 1930s, a performance of Mozart's Piano Concerto No.
For example, his diet consisted almost completely of fish.
Charles O'Connell, who produced many of Toscanini's RCA Victor recordings in the 1930s and early 1940s, said that RCA Victor decided to record the NBC Symphony Orchestra in Carnegie Hall, whenever possible, after numerous customer complaints about the flat and dull-sounding early recordings made in Studio 8-H in 1938 and 1939.
Toscanini died on January 16, 1957 at the age of 89 at his home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx in New York City.
Toscanini was especially famous for his performances of Beethoven, Brahms, Wagner, Richard Strauss, Debussy and his own compatriots Rossini, Verdi, Boito and Puccini.
It was Wanda's daughter, Sonia, who was once photographed by ''Life'' playing with the conductor.
In 1933, Wanda Toscanini married Horowitz, with the conductor's blessings and warnings.
One more example of Toscanini and the NBC Symphony in stereo now also exists in a commercially available edition.
It has been home to NBC's ''Saturday Night Live'' since 1975.
That same year it released a Beethoven bicentennial set that included the 1935 ''Missa Solemnis'' with the Philharmonic and LPs of the 1948 televised concert of the ninth symphony taken from an FM radio transcription, complete with Ben Grauer's comments.
Toscanini became disillusioned with fascism already before the March on Rome and repeatedly defied the Italian dictator.
Toscanini has also been criticized for metronomic (rhythmically too rigid) performances:
Many broadcast recordings with orchestras other than the NBC have also survived, including: The New York Philharmonic from 1933 to 1936, 1942, and 1945; The BBC Symphony Orchestra from 1935 to 1939; The Lucerne Festival Orchestra; and broadcasts from the Salzburg Festival in the late 1930s.
Verdi, who habitually complained that conductors never seemed interested in directing his scores the way he had written them, was impressed by reports from Arrigo Boito about Toscanini's ability to interpret his scores.
Because of World War II, the score was microfilmed in the Soviet Union and brought by courier to the United States.
His body was returned to Italy and was buried in the Cimitero Monumentale in Milan.
Toscanini had listened to some of the test pressings and had given his approval to some of the recordings, rejected others and was prepared to re-record the rejected sides.
Stokowski had previously given the US premieres of Shostakovich's 1st, 3rd and 6th Symphonies in Philadelphia, and in December 1941 urged NBC to obtain the score of the 7th as he wanted to conduct its premiere as well.
Mussolini, incensed by the conductor's refusal, had his phone tapped, placed him under constant surveillance, and confiscated his passport.
27 on February 20, 1936, at which Rudolf Serkin made his New York debut, and one of the most celebrated underground Toscanini recordings of all, the legendary 1940 broadcast version of Beethoven's ''Missa Solemnis'', which has better soloists (Zinka Milanov, Jussi Bjoerling, both in their prime) and a more powerful style than the 1953 RCA Victor studio recording, although the microphone placement was kinder to the soloists in 1953.
Toscanini was often criticized for neglecting American music.
52 (with two pianists and a small chorus); and ''Hungarian Dance No.
Unfortunately, the Petrillo/AFM recording ban from 1942 to 1944 prevented immediate retakes; by the time the ban ended, the Philadelphia Orchestra had left RCA Victor for Columbia Records and RCA apparently was hesitant to promote the orchestra any further.
Afterwards, he was, in his own words, "attacked, injured and repeatedly hit in the face" by a group of blackshirts.
On December 3, 1948, Toscanini conducted Mozart's Symphony No.
With RCA's experiments in stereo beginning in early 1953 when two-track decks were first delivered by the engineers to the record producers (per Jack Pfeiffer, 11/77 interview, NYC, by CWR), stereo tapes were eventually made of Toscanini's final two broadcast concerts, plus the dress rehearsal for the final broadcast, as documented by Samuel Antek in ''This Was Toscanini'' and by Pfeiffer.
Instead, he cut his concert schedule short and left a week earlier, apparently aboard the Italian liner ''Duca degli Abruzzi''.
In his will, he left his baton to his protégée Herva Nelli, who sang in the broadcasts of ''Otello'', ''Aida'', ''Falstaff'', the Verdi Requiem, and ''Un ballo in maschera''.
During his engagement with the New York Philharmonic, Hans Lange, the son of the last Master of the Sultan's Music in Istanbul, who, later, became conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the legendary founder of the New Mexico Symphony Orchestra as a professional ensemble,  was his concert master.
Some of Toscanini's recording sessions for RCA Victor were mastered on sound film in a process developed about 1930, as detailed by RCA producer Charles O'Connell in his memoirs, ''On and Off The Record''.
This, among other reasons, resulted in a letter which Toscanini wrote on March 10, 1941, to RCA's David Sarnoff.
He stated that he now wished "to withdraw from the militant scene of Art" and thus declined to sign a new contract for the up-coming winter season, but left the door open for an eventual return "if my state of mind, health and rest will be improved enough".
There was speculation that the Toscanini family itself, prodded by his daughter Wanda, had sought to defend the Maestro's original decisions (made mostly during his last years) on what should be released.
During his career, Toscanini collaborated with such legendary artists as Enrico Caruso, Feodor Chaliapin, Ezio Pinza, Jussi Björling, Geraldine Farrar and Lauritz Melchior.
Toscanini and the musicians traveled on a special train chartered by NBC.
However, he also returned to his chair in the cello section, and participated as cellist in the world premiere of Verdi's ''Otello'' (La Scala, Milan, 1887) under the composer's supervision.
The film is a fictional recounting of the events that led up to Toscanini making his conducting debut in Rio de Janeiro in 1886.
But Toscanini coveted this for himself and there were a number of remarkable letters between the two conductors (reproduced by Harvey Sachs in his biography) before Stokowski agreed to let Toscanini have the privilege of conducting the first performance.
Documents of Toscanini's guest appearances with the La Scala Orchestra from 1946 until 1952 include a live recording of Verdi's ''Requiem'' with the young Renata Tebaldi.
As part of a restoration project initiated by the Toscanini family in the late 1980s, the kinescopes were fully restored and issued by RCA on VHS and laser disc beginning in 1989.
The public was taken by surprise, at first by the youth and sheer aplomb of this unknown conductor, then by his solid mastery.
It included about 50 concerts that were never broadcast, but which were recorded surreptitiously by engineers supposedly testing their equipment.
''Toscanini: The Maestro'' is a 1985 documentary made for cable television.
He refused to display Mussolini's photograph or conduct the Fascist anthem ''Giovinezza'' at La Scala.
Upon returning to Italy, Toscanini set out on a dual path for some time.
Toscanini's state of mind soon underwent a change and he returned as Stokowski's co-conductor for the latter's second and third seasons resuming full control in 1944.
Harvey Sachs also recounts that the masters were damaged, possibly because of the use of somewhat-inferior materials imposed by wartime restrictions.
In ''Testimony'' Shostakovich himself expressed a dislike for the performance, after he heard a recording of the broadcast.
He was one of the most acclaimed musicians of the late 19th and of the 20th century, renowned for his intensity, his perfectionism, his ear for orchestral detail and sonority, and his photographic memory.
O'Connell also extensively documented RCA's technical problems with the Philadelphia Orchestra recordings of 1941/42, which required extensive electronic editing before they could be released (well after Toscanini's death, beginning in 1963, with the rest following in the 1970s).
Later in his career he was appointed the first music director of the NBC Symphony Orchestra (1937–54), and this led to his becoming a household name (especially in the United States) through his radio and television broadcasts and many recordings of the operatic and symphonic repertoire.
Sachs wrote that an Italian journalist, Raffaele Calzini, said Toscanini told him, "My son Walter sent me the test pressing of the Beethoven Ninth from America; I want to hear and check how it came out, and possibly to correct it.
Using modern digital technology the company constructed a stereophonic version of the performance from the two recordings which it made available in 2009.
A finding aid for the scores and sound recordings is available on the library's website.
Key's first package offering included Brahms' ''German Requiem'', Haydn's Symphonies Nos.
The series was rebroadcast by PBS radio in the late 1970s.
Their first child, Walter, was born on March 19, 1898.
Original introductions by NBC's longtime announcer Ben Grauer were replaced with new commentary by Martin Bookspan.
(Earlier, while music director of the New York Philharmonic, he conducted music by Abram Chasins, Bernard Wagenaar, and Howard Hanson.)
Outside Europe, Toscanini conducted at the Metropolitan Opera in New York (1908–1915) as well as the New York Philharmonic Orchestra (1926–1936).
In 1919, Toscanini ran unsuccessfully as a Fascist parliamentary candidate in Milan.
In the late 1940s when magnetic tape replaced direct wax disc recording and high fidelity long-playing records were introduced, the conductor said he was much happier making recordings.
There were two Toscanini telecasts in 1949, both devoted to the concert performance of Verdi's ''Aida'' from studio 8H.
Its dry acoustics lacking in much reverberation, while ideal for broadcasting, were unsuited for symphonic concerts and opera.
Toscanini favored the traditional orchestral seating plan with the first violins and cellos on the left, the violas on the near right, and the second violins on the far right.
Carla gave birth to another boy, Giorgio, in September 1901, but he died of diphtheria on June 10, 1906.
In the magazine's history, he is the only conductor to have been so honored.
One outstanding example of a remarkable performance not approved by the Maestro was his December 1948 NBC broadcast of Dvořák's ''Symphonic Variations'', released on an LP by the Society.
Toscanini made his first recordings in December 1920 with the La Scala Orchestra in the Trinity Church studio of the Victor Talking Machine Company in Camden, New Jersey and his last with the NBC Symphony Orchestra in June 1954 in Carnegie Hall.
9 (The "Great"), which had been successfully restored and issued by RCA in 1963.
The acoustics of the specially built studio were very dry; some remodeling in 1942 for Leopold Stokowski  added a bit more reverberation.
Toscanini himself was often disappointed that the 78-rpm discs failed to fully capture all of the instruments in the orchestra or altered their sound to such an extent they became unrecognizable.
Frank, in his 2002 book ''Toscanini: The NBC Years'', rejects this revisionism quite strongly, and cites the author Joseph Horowitz (author of ''Understanding Toscanini'') as perhaps the most extreme of these critics.
At a memorial concert for Italian composer Giuseppe Martucci on May 14, 1931, at the ''Teatro Comunale'' in Bologna, Toscanini was ordered to begin by playing ''Giovinezza'', but he refused, despite the presence of fascist foreign minister Galeazzo Ciano in the audience.
For the rest of that season, Toscanini conducted eighteen operas, all with absolute success.
Throughout his career, Toscanini was virtually idolized by the critics, as well as by most fellow musicians and the public alike.
At the end of a piece, Toscanini generally nodded rather than bowed and exited the stage quickly.
There are also recorded concerts with various European orchestras, especially with La Scala Orchestra and the Philharmonia Orchestra.
They worked together a number of times and recorded Brahms' second piano concerto and Tchaikovsky's first piano concerto with the NBC Symphony for RCA Victor.
Others state (and there is some evidence from the recordings) that Toscanini's tempos, quite flowing in his earlier recordings, ''became'' stricter as he got older, although this is not to be taken as a literally true statement.
He also conducted the first Italian performances of ''Siegfried'', ''Götterdämmerung'', ''Salome'', ''Pelléas et Mélisande'', and ''Euryanthe'', as well as the South American premieres of ''Tristan und Isolde'' and ''Madama Butterfly'' and the North American premieres of ''Boris Godunov'' and Dmitri Shostakovich's ''Symphony No.
His entire catalog of commercial recordings was issued by RCA Victor, save for two recordings for Brunswick in 1926 (his first by the electrical process) with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra and a series of excellent recordings with the BBC Symphony Orchestra from 1937 to 1939 for EMI's His Master's Voice label (which was RCA Victor's European affiliate).
RCA had declared the defective masters unsalvageable and Toscanini eventually re-recorded all of the same music with the NBC Symphony.
(The two Toscanini concerts recorded in stereo have been issued on LP and CD and have also been offered for download in digitally enhanced sound by Pristine Classical, a company which produces digitally enhanced versions of older classical recordings.)
The performance received significant critical acclaim.
The best sounding of the recordings is the Schubert Symphony No.
These critics contend that Toscanini was ultimately a detriment to American music rather than an asset because of the tremendous marketing of him by RCA as the greatest conductor of all time and his preference to perform mostly older European music.
He brought the La Scala Orchestra to the United States on a concert tour in 1920/21, during which he made his first recordings (for the Victor Talking Machine Company).
The film was released by RCA/BMG on DVD in 2004.
He had been called "the greatest conductor in the world" by Fascist leader Benito Mussolini.
O'Connell and others often complained the Maestro was little interested in the details of recorded sound and, as Harvey Sachs wrote, Toscanini was frequently disappointed that the microphones failed to pick up everything he heard as he led the orchestra.
Nevertheless, despite the occasional problems, the sound has been markedly improved on CD, and the entire set is an impressive document of Toscanini's collaboration with the Philadelphia musicians.
Gradually, Toscanini's reputation as an operatic conductor of unusual authority and skill supplanted his cello career.
The program also featured clips from two of Toscanini's television concerts, in the days before they were remastered for video and DVD.
It spotlighted partial or complete rebroadcasts of many of Toscanini's recordings.
''Hymn of the Nations'' was nominated for a 1944 Academy Award for Best Documentary Short.
Key acted on a dream he had of meeting Toscanini by starting the Arturo Toscanini Society to release a number of "unapproved" live performances by Toscanini.
A guide to Toscanini's recording career can be found in Mortimer H. Frank's "From the Pit to the Podium: Toscanini in America" in ''International Classical Record Collector'' (1998, 15 8–21) and Christopher Dyment's "Toscanini's European Inheritance" in ''International Classical Record Collector'' (1998, 15 22–8).
The final live Toscanini telecast, on March 22, 1952, included Beethoven's Symphony No.
During his funeral service, Leyla Gencer sang an aria from Verdi's ''Requiem''.
Between 1948 and 1952, he conducted ten concerts telecast on NBC, including a two-part concert performance of Verdi's complete opera ''Aida'' starring Herva Nelli and Richard Tucker, and the first complete telecast of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
Recently a separate NBC tape of the same performance, using a different microphone in a different location, was acquired by Pristine Audio.
High fidelity quickly became the norm for the company and the industry.
Some contemporary critics, particularly Virgil Thomson, also took Toscanini to task for not paying enough attention to the "modern repertoire" (i.e., 20th-century composers, of which Thomson was one).
These concerts were all shown only once during that four-year span, but they were preserved on kinescopes.
Toscanini fans and record collectors were dismayed because, although Toscanini had not approved the release of these performances in every case, many of them were found to be further proof of the greatness of the Maestro's musical talents.
The NBC concerts continued in Studio 8-H until 1950.
The first Toscanini recording sessions in Carnegie Hall followed immediately thereafter, although individual takes continued as with 78's, each running only about 4-1/2 minutes.
O'Connell even complained of Toscanini's failure to cooperate with him during the sessions.
In the spring of 1950, Toscanini led the orchestra on an extensive transcontinental tour.
He made a series of long-unissued recordings with the Philadelphia Orchestra for RCA Victor in Philadelphia's Academy of Music in 1941 and 1942.
Horowitz also became close to Toscanini and his family.
Later that year, Toscanini had a disagreement with NBC management over their use of his musicians in other NBC broadcasts.
In the 1930s, he conducted at the Salzburg Festival (1934–1937), as well as the 1936 inaugural concert of the Palestine Orchestra (later renamed the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra) in Tel Aviv, later conducting them in Jerusalem, Haifa, Cairo and Alexandria.
Toscanini returned to the United States where the NBC Symphony Orchestra was created for him in 1937.
He continued to conduct, his first appearance in Italy being at the Teatro Carignano in Turin, on November&nbsp;4, 1886, in the world premiere of the revised version of Alfredo Catalani's ''Edmea'' (it had had its premiere in its original form at La Scala, Milan, on February 27, of that year).
In-house finding aids are available for other parts of the collection.
However, it is widely believed that Toscanini favored it because its close miking enabled listeners to hear every instrumental strand in the orchestra clearly, something that the conductor strongly believed in.
Toscanini's June sessions were done monophonically, the tapes being intended as inserts in otherwise complete monophonic recordings.
Thus began his career as a conductor, at age 19.
During this final concert, the aging Toscanini suffered a minor lapse of concentration  which became a ''cause célèbre'' when broadcast technicians panicked and took the broadcast off-air for about a minute, making the lapse appear much worse than it was.
Some of these have circulated in limited edition recordings.
At La Scala, which had what was then the most modern stage lighting system installed in 1901 and an orchestral pit installed in 1907, Toscanini pushed through reforms in the performance of opera.
Over the past thirty years or so, however, as a new generation has appeared, there has been an increasing amount of revisionist criticism directed at Toscanini.
(A kinescope of the same performance, from the television simulcast, has been released on VHS and laser disc by RCA/BMG and on DVD by Testament.)
Acts I and II were telecast on March 26 and III and IV on April 2.
In May 1915, Toscanini was set to return to Europe aboard the doomed RMS ''Lusitania'' when his season at New York’s Metropolitan Opera ended.
On March 15, 1952, Toscanini conducted the Symphonic Interlude from Franck's ''Rédemption''; Sibelius's ''En saga''; Debussy's "Nuages" and "Fetes" from ''Nocturnes''; and the overture of Rossini's ''William Tell''.
(In the early 1990s, the kinescopes of these and the other televised concerts were released by RCA with soundtracks dubbed in from the NBC radio transcriptions; in 2006, they were re-released by Testament on DVD.)
They performed Weber's overture to ''Der Freischutz'' and Rachmaninoff's Symphony no.
Magazine and newspaper reports subsequently detailed legal action taken against Key and the Society, presumably after some of the LPs began to appear in retail stores.
Despite the reported infidelities revealed in Toscanini's letters documented by Harvey Sachs, he remained married to Carla until she died on June 23, 1951.
It was later issued by RCA Victor in the 1967 centennial boxed set tribute to Toscanini, which included a number of NBC broadcasts never released on discs.
Frank writes that this revisionism has unfairly influenced younger listeners and critics, who may have not heard as many of Toscanini's performances as older listeners, and as a result, Toscanini's reputation, extraordinarily high in the years that he was active, has suffered a decline.
He insisted on dimming the house-lights during performances.
These long-playing records often make me happy."
During World War II, Toscanini lived in Wave Hill, a historic home in Riverdale.
He was at various times the music director of La Scala Milan, the Metropolitan Opera in New York, and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra.
He also conducted the world premiere of Samuel Barber's most famous work, the ''Adagio for Strings''.
The result was astounding acclaim.
Less than a month after the first Toscanini televised concert, a complete performance by the conductor of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony was telecast on April 3, 1948.
So Leopold Stokowski was engaged on a three-year contract instead and served as the NBC Symphony's music director from 1941 until 1944.
Tenor Jan Peerce and the Westminster Choir performed in the latter work and the film was narrated by Burgess Meredith.
The passport was returned only after a world outcry over Toscanini's treatment.
There is also a feature article on Toscanini's interpretation of Brahms's First Symphony – Norman C. Nelson, 'First Among Equals ... Toscanini's interpretation of Brahms's First Symphony in the context of others' (28–33)
Toscanini was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1987.
This one is of the January 27, 1951 concert devoted to the Verdi ''Requiem'', previously recorded and released in high-fidelity monophonic sound by RCA Victor.
Both works had earlier been performed in broadcast concerts.
There were no Toscanini telecasts in 1950, but they resumed from Carnegie Hall on November 3, 1951, with Weber's overture to ''Euryanthe'' and Brahms' Symphony No.
Those fortunate to attend Toscanini's concerts later said the NBC string section was especially outstanding.
Toscanini was the first non-German conductor to appear at Bayreuth (1930–1931), and the New York Philharmonic was the first non-German orchestra to play there.
However, on November 5, 1938, he conducted the world premieres of two orchestral works by Samuel Barber, ''Adagio for Strings'' and ''Essay for Orchestra''.
It was mostly filmed in NBC's Studio 8-H and consists of Toscanini conducting the NBC Symphony in a performance of Verdi's Overture to ''La Forza del Destino'' and Verdi's "Hymn of the Nations" (''Inno delle nazioni''), which contains national anthems of England, France, and Italy (the World War I allied nations), to which Toscanini added the Soviet "Internationale" and "The Star Spangled Banner".
In 1980, Zubin Mehta and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra began a series of special televised NBC concerts called ''Live From Studio 8H'', the first one being a tribute to Toscanini, punctuated by clips from his television concerts.)
He joined the orchestra of an opera company, with which he toured South America in 1886.
The program ran for at least three years, and did not feature any of the revisionist commentary about the conductor one finds so often today in magazines such as American Record Guide.
The NBC cameras were often left on Toscanini for extended periods, documenting not only his baton techniques but his deep involvement in the music.
40 in G minor; Dvořák's ''Symphonic Variations''; and Wagner's original overture to ''Tannhäuser''.
Toscanini disliked recording, especially the acoustic method, and for several years recorded only sporadically as a result.
Because the Arturo Toscanini Society was nonprofit, Key said he believed he had successfully bypassed both copyright restrictions and the maze of contractual ties between RCA and the Maestro's family.
He raged to a friend, "If I were capable of killing a man, I would kill Mussolini."
Toscanini worked with many great singers and musicians throughout his career, but few impressed him as much as  Vladimir Horowitz.
He even wrote his own orchestral arrangement of ''The Star-Spangled Banner'', which was incorporated into the NBC Symphony's performances of Verdi's ''Hymn of the Nations'', together with the Soviet Internationale.
In 1896, Toscanini conducted his first symphonic concert (in Turin, with works by Schubert, Brahms, Tchaikovsky, and Wagner).
However, RCA's attorneys were soon looking into the matter to see if they agreed.
Toscanini also recorded with the New York Philharmonic in Carnegie Hall for RCA Victor in a series of recording sessions in 1929 and 1936.
In 1968, the Philadelphia Orchestra returned to RCA and the company was more favorable toward issuing all of the discs.
That fall, needing 8-H for television broadcasting, they were moved to Manhattan Center, then soon thereafter moved again to Carnegie Hall at Toscanini's insistence, where many of the orchestra's recording sessions had been held due to the acrid acoustics of Studio 8-H. Toscanini's final broadcast performance, an all-Wagner program, took place on April 4, 1954, in Carnegie Hall.
As for the historic recordings, even on the CD versions, first released in 1991, some of the sides have considerable surface noise and some distortion, especially during the louder passages.
