Cambodians, Hmong, and Laotians (and to a lesser extent, Vietnamese), all of whose relatively low achievement rates are possibly due to their refugee status, and that they are non-voluntary immigrants; additionally, one in five Hmong and Bangladeshi people live in poverty.
Harold Sakata won a weightlifting silver medal in the 1948 Olympics, while Tommy Kono (weightlifting), Yoshinobu Oyakawa (100-meter backstroke), and Ford Konno (1500-meter freestyle) each won gold and set Olympic records in the 1952 Olympics.
Hines Ward who was born to a Korean mother and an African American father, is a former NFL wide receiver who was the MVP of Super Bowl XL and Ward also won the 12th season of the ''Dancing with the Stars'' television series.
The study did find several positive perceptions of Chinese Americans: strong family values (91%); honesty as business people (77%); high value on education (67%).
Additionally, the American definition of 'Asian' originally included West Asian ethnic groups, particularly Afghan Americans, Jewish Americans, Armenian Americans, Assyrian Americans, and Arab Americans, although these groups are now considered Middle Eastern American.
Immigration status, citizenship (by birthright and by naturalization), acculturation, and language ability are some variables that are used to define ''American'' for various purposes and may vary in formal and everyday usage.
and Bloomington, Indiana.
Erik Spoelstra became the youngest coach ever in NBA history.
During the 1992 Los Angeles riots, more than 2000 Korean-owned businesses were looted or burned by groups of African Americans.
Charles Wang founded Computer Associates, later became its CEO and chairman.
Today, ''Asian American'' is the accepted term for most formal purposes, such as government and academic research, although it is often shortened to ''Asian'' in common usage.
Asian immigrants are also changing the American medical landscape through increasing number of Asian medical practitioners in the United States.
For example, in 2008 Asian Americans had the highest median household income overall of any racial demographic.
Percentage of Total INGs in US
Dat Nguyen was an NFL middle linebacker who was an all-pro selection in 2003 for the Dallas Cowboys.
While there are some commonalities across ethnic sub-groups, there are significant differences among different Asian ethnicities that are related to each group's history.
She has since been followed by CDR Sunita Williams in 2006.
Asians have experienced discrimination and have been victims of hate crimes related to their ethnic stereotypes.
Additionally, from 2000 to 2010, the Asian American population was the fastest growing group according to the 2010 U.S. Census.
There were thousands of Asians in Hawaii when it was annexed to the United States in 1898.
In contrast, leading social sciences and humanities scholars of race and Asian American identity point out that because of the racial constructions in the United States, including the social attitudes toward race and those of Asian ancestry, Asian Americans have a "shared racial experience."
Nam Phan is UFC featherweight fighter.
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar shared the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physics and had the Chandra X-ray Observatory named after him.
World War II-era legislation and judicial rulings gradually increased the ability of Asian Americans to immigrate and become naturalized citizens.
While working for the University of New Hampshire as a lecturer, Zhang submitted an article to the Annals of Mathematics in 2013 which established the first finite bound on gaps between prime numbers, which lead to a 2014 MacArthur award.
They have started convenience and grocery stores, professional offices such as medical and law practices, laundries, restaurants, beauty-related ventures, hi-tech companies, and many other kinds of enterprises, becoming very successful and influential in American society.
By 2000, a plurality of undergraduates at such elite public California schools as UC Berkeley and UCLA, which are obligated by law to not consider race as a factor in admission, were Asian American.
Asian Americans have made major contributions to the American economy.
Fareed Zakaria, a naturalised Indian-born immigrant, is a prominent journalist, and author specialising in international affairs.
In 1990, Sheryl WuDunn, a foreign correspondent in the Beijing Bureau of The New York Times, became the first Asian American to win a Pulitzer Prize.
+'''Origins of foreign nurses in the US'''
Deportation of Cambodians from the United States typically refers to the forced repatriation of Cambodians who are convicted criminals in the United States and lack United States citizenship.
Studies have shown that some Asian Americans suffer from higher rates of stress, depression, mental illnesses, and suicides in comparison to other races, indicating that the pressures to achieve and live up to the model minority image may take a mental and psychological toll on some Asian Americans.
They are also part of the spiritual practice of the many Americans who are not affiliated with a mainline religious group.
It is well documented that Asian American international medical graduates including highly skilled guest workers using the J1 Visa program for medical workers, tend to serve in health professions shortage areas (HPSA) and specialties that are not filled by US medical graduates especially primary care and rural medicine.
Scholars have grappled with the accuracy, correctness, and usefulness of the term Asian American.
He has won a total of fifteen medals in major international competitions, twelve gold, two silver, and one bronze spanning the Olympics, the World, and the Pan Pacific Championships.
The most commonly used definition of ''Asian American'' is the US Census Bureau definition, which includes all people with origins in the Far East, Southeast Asia, and the Indian Subcontinent.
By comparison with other minorities, Asians often achieve higher test scores and grades compared to other Americans.
In the US Census, people with origins or ancestry in the Far East, Southeast Asia, and the Indian subcontinent are classified as part of the Asian race; while those with origins or ancestry in North Asia (Russians, Siberians), Central Asia (Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Turkmens, etc.
After the September 11 attacks, Sikh Americans were targeted, being the recipient of numerous hate crimes including murder.
In 2003, Kalpana Chawla became the first Indian American in space, but died aboard the ill fated Space Shuttle Columbia.
Forming part of the California gold rush, these early Chinese immigrants participated intensively in the mining business and later in the construction of the transcontinental railroad.
Shuji Nakamura won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention of efficient blue light-emitting diodes.
A lasting legacy of Asian American involvement in medicine is the forcing of US medical establishment to accept minority medical practitioners.
Because Asian Americans comprise 5% of the entire U.S. population, the diversity of the group is often disregarded in media and news discussions of "Asians" or of "Asian Americans."
The Immigration Act of 1924 provided that no "alien ineligible for citizenship" could be admitted as an immigrant to the United States, consolidating the prohibition of Asian immigration.
Konno won another gold and silver swimming medal at the same Olympics and added a silver medal in 1956, while Kono set another Olympic weightlifting record in 1956.
For instance, in the early 1970s the US medical establishment did not believe in the usefulness of acupuncture.
Although the absolute numbers of Asian immigrants were small compared to that of immigrants from other regions, much of it was concentrated in the West, and the increase caused some nativist sentiment known as the "yellow peril".
Also at the 1952 Olympics, Evelyn Kawamoto won two bronze medals in swimming.
In 2015, the racial group with the highest earnings was Asian American men at $24/hour.
In 2012, there are 1.3 million alien Asian Americans; and for those awaiting visas, there are lengthy backlogs with over 450 thousand Filipinos, over 325 thousand Indians, over 250 thousand Vietnamese, and over 225 thousand Chinese are awaiting visas.
Eric Koston is one of the top street skateboarders and placed first in the 2003 X-Games street competition.
More recently, young Asian American comedians and film-makers have found an outlet on YouTube allowing them to gain a strong and loyal fanbase among their fellow Asian Americans.
LTC Ellison Onizuka became the first Asian American (and third person of East Asian descent) when he made his first space flight aboard STS-51-C in 1985.
Yitang Zhang is a Chinese-born American mathematician working in the area of number theory.
The first Japanese person to come to the United States, and stay any significant period of time was Nakahama Manjirō who reached the East Coast in 1841, and Joseph Heco became the first Japanese American naturalized US citizen in 1858.
Cung Le is a former Strikeforce middleweight champion.
Since then, a variety of sectors (including nonprofits, universities, the government) have discussed the impact of the ceiling as it relates to Asians and the challenges they face.
According to Carolyn Chen, director of the Asian American Studies Program at Northwestern University,  Asian Americans made up twelve to eighteen percent of the student population at Ivy League schools, larger than their share of the population.
Manjul Bhargava, an American Canadian of Indian origins won the Fields Medal in mathematics in 2014.
The term refers to a panethnic group that includes diverse populations who have ancestral origins in East Asia, Southeast Asia, or South Asia, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau.
By the 1990 census, "Asian or Pacific Islander (API)" was included as an explicit category, although respondents had to select one particular ancestry as a subcategory.
There are several active Asian Americans in the United States Congress.
Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang received the 1957 Nobel Prize in Physics for theoretical work demonstrating that the conservation of parity did not always hold and later became American citizens.
Stereotypes of Asians have been largely collectively internalized by society and these stereotypes have mainly negative repercussions for Asian Americans and Asian immigrants in daily interactions, current events, and governmental legislation.
According to William Wei, the movement was "rooted in a past history of oppression and a present struggle for liberation."
In a pair of cases, ''Ozawa v. United States'' (1922) and ''United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind'' (1923), the Supreme Court upheld the racial qualification for citizenship and ruled that Asians were not "white persons."
Taylor Gun-Jin Wang became the first person of Chinese ethnicity and first Chinese American, in space in 1985; he has since been followed by Leroy Chiao in 1994, and Ed Lu in 1997.
Michio Kaku has popularized science and has appeared on multiple programs on television and radio.
Many Asian Americans are themselves not immigrants but rather born in the United States.
Kristi Yamaguchi won three national championships, two world titles, and the 1992 Olympic Gold medal.
John Yang won a Peabody Award.
Le, Director of the Asian & Asian American Studies Certificate Program at the University of Massachusetts, writes that although 42% of all Asian American adults have at least a college degree, Vietnamese Americans have a degree attainment rate of only 16% while Laotians and Cambodians only have rates around 5%.
Amar Bose founded the Bose Corporation in 1964.
While playing for the Patriots, Bruschi won three Super Bowl rings and was a two-time All-Pro selection.
Asian Americans had also been classified as "other".
This concept appears to elevate Asian Americans by portraying them as an elite group of successful, highly educated, intelligent, and wealthy individuals, but it can also be considered an overly narrow and overly one-dimensional portrayal of Asian Americans, leaving out other human qualities such as vocal leadership, negative emotions, risk taking, ability to learn from mistakes, and desire for creative expression.
From 1990 to 1991, a high-profile, racially-motivated boycott of an Asian-owned shop in Brooklyn was organized by a local black nationalist activist, eventually resulting in the owner being forced to sell his business.
In 1635, an "East Indian" is listed in Jamestown, Virginia; preceding wider settlement of Indian immigrants on the East Coast in the 1790s and the West Coast in the 1800s.
Because of this shared experience, the term Asian American is still a useful panethnic category because of the similarity of some experiences among Asian Americans, including stereotypes specific to people in this category.
Bruschi is currently a NFL analyst at ESPN.
Twenty-one of these were conferred upon members of the mostly Japanese American 100th Infantry Battalion of the 442nd Regimental Combat Team of World War II, the most highly decorated unit of its size in the history of the United States Armed Forces.
This includes, but are not limited to, such events as the Rock Springs massacre, Watsonville Riots, attacks upon Japanese Americans following the attack on Pearl Harbor., and Korean American businesses targeted during the 1992 Los Angeles riots.
The term "Asian" in Asian American most often comes under fire for encompassing a huge number of people with ancestry from (or who have immigrated from) a wide range of culturally diverse countries and traditions.
Asian American men earned 117% as much as the reference group in the study (white American men at $21/hour) and have been the highest earning racial group since about 2000.
Filipinos have been in the territories that would become the United States since the 16th century.
In 2009, Asian Americans surpassed Hispanic Americans as the largest plurality of immigrants to the United States.
In 2012, Asian Americans had the highest educational attainment level and median household income of any racial demographic in the country.
The Asian American movement refers to a pan-Asian movement in the United States in which Americans of Asian descent came together to fight against their shared oppression and to organize for recognition and advancement of their shared cause during the 1960s to the early 1980s.
Compared to their population base, Asian Americans today are well represented in the professional sector and tend to earn higher wages.
In 1989, Emil Guillermo, a Filipino American born reporter from San Francisco, became the first Asian American male to co-host a national news show when he was senior host at National Public Radio's "All Things Considered."
Most Chinese, Korean and Japanese immigrants in Hawaii arrived in the 19th century as laborers to work on sugar plantations.
This is followed by Koreans (200,000) and Chinese (120,000).
Michelle Kwan has won nine national championships and five world titles, as well as two Olympic medals (silver in 1998, bronze in 2002).
Many East Asian Americans are asked if they are Chinese or Japanese, an assumption based on major groups of past immigrants.
Articles regarding the subject have been published in ''Crains'', ''Fortune magazine'', and ''The Atlantic''.
Daniel Tsui shared the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physics in 1998 for helping discover the fractional Quantum Hall effect.
Har Gobind Khorana shared the 1968 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work in genetics and protein synthesis.
The Asiatic Barred Zone Act in 1917 further barred immigration from South Asia (then-British India), Southeast Asia, and the Middle East.
Furthermore, it has been reported that young Asian Americans are more likely to be a target of violence than their peers.
Japanese immigration was sharply curtailed by a diplomatic agreement in 1907.
From the 1880s to the 1920s, the United States passed laws inaugurating an era of exclusion of Asian immigrants.
Dr. Sanjay Gupta is currently CNN's chief health correspondent.
Second-generation Asian Americans, however, could become US citizens due to the birthright citizenship clause of the Fourteenth Amendment; this guarantee was confirmed as applying regardless of race or ancestry by the Supreme Court in ''United States v. Wong Kim Ark'' (1898).
Norm Chow is currently the head coach for the University of Hawaii and former offensive coordinator for UCLA after a short stint with the Tennessee Titans of the NFL, after 23 years of coaching other college teams, including four years as offensive coordinator at USC.
*'''Southeast Asian Americans''', including Burmese Americans, Cambodian Americans, Filipino Americans, Hmong Americans, Indonesian Americans, Laotian Americans, Malaysian Americans, Mien Americans, Singaporean Americans, Thai Americans, and Vietnamese Americans.
Asian Americans first made an impact in Olympic sports in the late 1940s and in the 1950s.
In 2001, Mark L. Polansky, a Jewish Korean American, made his first of three flights into space.
Ching W. Tang was the inventor of the Organic light-emitting diode and Organic solar cell and was awarded the 2011 Wolf Prize in Chemistry for this achievement.
He became the youngest U.S. national champion in 1997 and was the reigning champion from 2001 to 2009, winning the title a total of 12 times.
When divided up by ethnicity, it can be seen that the economic and academic successes supposedly enjoyed by Asian Americans are concentrated into a few ethnic groups.
Once country of birth and other demographic factors are taken into account, Asian Americans are no more likely than non-Hispanic whites to live in poverty.
Indian Americans are also the fastest growing alien immigrant group in the United States, an increase in illegal immigration of 125% since 2000.
T and Tina'' in 1976, and as recent as ''Fresh Off the Boat'' in 2015.
Under United States law during this period, particularly the Naturalization Act of 1790, only "free white persons" were eligible to naturalize as American citizens.
To name a few: Merle Woo (1941),  Willyce Kim (1946), Russel Leong (1950),  Kitty Tsui (1952), Dwight Okita (1958), Norman Wong (1963),  Tim Liu (1965), Chay Yew (1965) and Justin Chin (1969).
In 1984, Dr. David D. Ho first reported the "healthy carrier state" of HIV infection, which identified HIV-positive individuals who showed no physical signs of AIDS.
Chinese sailors first came to Hawaii in 1789, a few years after Captain James Cook came upon the island.
The trend in importing foreign medical practitioners, however, became a long-term, chronic solution as US medical schools failed to produce enough physicians to match the increasing American population.
Ann Curry joined NBC News as a reporter in 1990, later becoming prominently associated with ''The Today Show'' in 1997.
Since then studies have proven the efficacy of acupuncture for different applications, especially for treatment of chronic pain.
The Goldsea compilation of Notable Asian American Professionals show that many have come to occupy high positions at leading U.S. corporations, including a surprising number as Chief Marketing Officers.
The very high educational attainments of Asian Americans has often been noted; in 1980, for example, 74% of Chinese Americans, 62% of Japanese Americans, and 55% of Korean Americans aged 20–21 were in college, compared to only a third of the whites.
BJ Penn is a former UFC lightweight and welterweight champion.
Nathan Adrian who is also a Hapa of Half-Chinese descent is a professional American swimmer and three-time Olympic gold medalist who currently holds the American record in the 50 and 100-yard freestyle (short course) events.
The demographics of Asian Americans can further be subdivided into:
It has been noted, however, that 2008 US Census statistics put the bachelor's degree attainment rate of Vietnamese Americans at 26%, which is not very different from the rate of 27% for all Americans.
Yoichiro Nambu received the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the consequences of spontaneously broken symmetries in field theories.
Starting in the first few years of the 2000 decade, Asian-American earnings began exceeding all other racial groups for both men and women.
The disparity at postgraduate levels is even greater, and the differential is especially notable in fields making heavy use of mathematics.
For example, since the removal of restrictive "national origins" quotas in 1965, the Asian American population has diversified greatly to include more of the peoples with ancestry from various parts of Asia.
Juju Chang, James Hatori, John Yang, Veronica De La Cruz, Michelle Malkin, Betty Nguyen, and Julie Chen have become familiar faces on television news.
Herbalism and massage therapy (from Ayurveda) are sweeping the spas across America.
Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, the US government invited a number of foreign physicians particularly from India and the Philippines to address the acute shortage of physicians in rural and medically underserved urban areas.
Eugene H. Trinh became the first Vietnamese American in space in 1992.
Asian Americans often report being asked the question, "Where are you really from?"
According to the Washington Post, "the idea that Asian Americans are distinct among minority groups and immune to the challenges faced by other people of color is a particularly sensitive issue for the community, which has recently fought to reclaim its place in social justice conversations with movements like #ModelMinorityMutiny."
As described by Anne Fisher,the "bamboo ceiling" refers to the processes and barriers that serve to exclude Asians and American people of Asian descent from executive positions on the basis of subjective factors such as "lack of leadership potential" and "lack of communication skills" that cannot actually be explained by job performance or qualifications.
Lisa Ling, a former co-host on ''The View'', now provides special reports for CNN and ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'', as well as hosting National Geographic Channel's ''Explorer.''
This varies, however, for individual ethnic groups.
Furthermore, the model minority concept can be emotionally damaging to some Asian Americans, particularly since they are expected to live up to those peers who fit the stereotype.
The 2000 census onwards separated the category into two separate ones, "Asian American" and "Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander."
For this reason, Asian Americans encounter a "bamboo ceiling", the Asian American equivalent of the glass ceiling in the workplace, with only 1.5% of Fortune 500 CEOs being Asians, a percentage smaller than their percentage of the total United States population.
Jen-Hsun Huang co-founded the NVIDIA corporation in 1993.
Since Tiffany Chin won the women's US Figure Skating Championship in 1985, Asian Americans have been prominent in that sport.
Asian Americans have been disproportionately successful in the hi-tech sectors of California's Silicon Valley, as evidenced by the Goldsea 100 Compilation of America's Most Successful Asian Entrepreneurs.
Immigration rapidly increased following the enactment of the Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments of 1965 as well as the influx of refugees from conflicts occurring in Southeast Asia such as the Vietnam War.
This decline of Christianity has been accompanied by a rise in traditional Asian religions, with the people identifying with them doubling during the same decade.
In a PBS interview from 2004, a panel of Asian American writers discussed how some groups include people of Middle Eastern descent in the Asian American category.
Connie Chung was one of the first Asian American national correspondents for a major TV news network, reporting for CBS in 1971.
In 2012, Asian Americans own 1.5 million businesses, employ around 3 million people who earn an annual total payroll of around $80 billion.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, "Asian person" in the United States is sometimes thought of as a person of East Asian descent.
He is the editor-at-large of Time magazine, and the host of Fareed Zakaria GPS on CNN.
Another racially-motivated boycott against an Asian-owned business occurred in Dallas in 2012, after an Asian American clerk fatally shot an African American who had robbed his store.
In 1977, the federal Office of Management and Budget issued a directive requiring government agencies to maintain statistics on racial groups, including on "Asian or Pacific Islander".
In 1962, half Filipino Roman Gabriel was the first Asian American to start as an NFL quarterback.
At ABC, Ken Kashiwahara began reporting nationally in 1974.
Fashion designer and mogul Vera Wang, who is famous for designing dresses for high-profile celebrities, started a clothing company, named after herself, which now offers a broad range of luxury fashion products.
According to historian Arif Dirlik: "Indian massacres of Chinese was a commonplace experience on the frontier, the most notable being the "legendary slaughter by Paiute Indians of forty to sixty Chinese miners in 1866.
The "model minority" stereotype fails to distinguish between different ethnic groups with different histories.
The next Asian American NBA player was Raymond Townsend, who played for the Golden State Warriors and Indiana Pacers from 1978 to 1982.
In 1999, he became the youngest skater to win a World Cup event title, and became the first American to win a World Cup overall title in 2001, which he won again in 2003 and 2005.
Andrea Jung serves as Chairman and CEO of Avon Products.
*'''East Asian Americans''', including Chinese Americans, Japanese Americans, Korean Americans, Mongolian Americans, Taiwanese Americans, and Tibetan Americans.
Acting roles in television, film, and theater were relatively few, and many available roles were for narrow, stereotypical characters.
by other Americans, regardless of how long they or their ancestors have lived in United States and been a part of its society.
Recent waves of immigration of Asian Americans to largely African American neighborhoods have led to cases of severe racial tensions.
), the Western Asia (diaspora Jews, Turks, Persians, West Asian Arabs, etc.
Asian American women have been the highest earning female group for more than 10 years in a row.
Later, Filipinos also came to work as laborers, attracted by the job opportunities, although they were limited.
Asian Americans include '''multiracial or mixed race''' persons with origins or ancestry in both the above groups and another race, or multiple of the above groups.
Acts of large-scale violence against Asian Americans students by their Black classmates have been reported in multiple cities.
Gymnast Mohini Bhardwaj won a team silver medal in the 2004 Olympics.
In addition to contributing greatly to other fields, Asian Americans have made considerable contributions in science and technology in the United States, in such prominent innovative R&D regions as Silicon Valley and The Triangle.
Study has indicated that most non-Asian Americans do not generally differentiate between Asian Americans of different ethnicities.
The pattern is rooted in the pre-World War II era.
One could speculate that the introduction of Asian physicians and dentists to the American society could have triggered an acceptance of other minority groups by breaking down stereotypes and encouraging trust.
Meditation and yoga (from India) have also been widely adopted by health spas, and spiritual retreats of many religious bases.
Before 1980, Census forms listed particular Asian ancestries as separate groups, along with ''White'' and ''Black or Negro''.
'''Asian Americans''' are Americans of Asian descent.
In 1986, Franklin Chang-Diaz became the first Asian Latin American in space.
Jeff Yang, of the ''Wall Street Journal'', writes that the pan-ethnic definition of Asian American is a unique American construct, and as an identity is "in beta".
The bamboo ceiling is defined as a combination of individual, cultural, and organisational factors that impede Asian Americans' career progress inside organizations.
In 2015, Asian American men were the highest earning racial group as they earned 117% as much as white American men and Asian American women earned 106% as much as white American women.
In the late 1980s, South Asians in New Jersey faced assault and other hate crimes by a group known as the Dotbusters.
Onizuka later died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986.
Among America's major racial categories, Asian Americans have the highest educational qualifications.
The earliest known arrival is that of "Luzonians" in Morro Bay, California on board the Manila-built galleon ship ''Nuestra Senora de Esperanza'' in 1587, when both the Philippines and California were colonies of the Spanish Empire.
Bryan Clay who is of Half-Japanese descent won the decathlon gold medal in the 2008 Olympics, the silver medal in the 2004 Olympics, and was the sport's 2005 world champion.
An Wang founded Wang Laboratories in June 1951.
Since there were no Filipino women with them, these Manilamen, as they were known, married Cajun and Native American women.
The implicit advice is that the other minorities should stop protesting and emulate the Asian American work ethic and devotion to higher education.
Asians are the second largest racial/ethnic alien immigrant group in the U.S. behind Hispanics and Latinos.
UC Berkeley – General Catalog – Asian American Studies Courses; South and Southeast Asian courses are present
Jerry Yang co-founded Yahoo!
As of 2009, Filipinos and Indians accounted for the highest number of alien immigrants for "Asian Americans" with an estimated illegal population of 270,000 and 200,000 respectively.
By 1852, the number of Chinese immigrants in San Francisco had jumped to more than 20,000.
In 1763, Filipinos established the small settlement of Saint-Malo, Louisiana, after fleeing mistreatment aboard Spanish ships.
