File:Hunza Valley from Eagle Point.jpg|Hunza Valley
The Romans named a province Asia, which roughly corresponds with modern-day central-western Turkey.
Jainism is found mainly in India and in oversea Indian communities such as the United States and Malaysia.
Dr. Yunus received his PhD in economics from Vanderbilt University, United States.
Roman authors translated Ἀσία as Asia.
On 22 June 2006, he became one of only four people ever to be recognized with Honorary Citizenship by the Governor General of Canada.
Geographically, Asia is the major eastern constituent of the continent of Eurasia with Europe being a northwestern peninsula of the landmass.
Almost all Asian religions have philosophical character and Asian philosophical traditions cover a large spectrum of philosophical thoughts and writings.
In ancient Greek religion, places were under the care of female divinities, parallel to guardian angels.
The chief factor in determining which islands of the Malay Archipelago are Asian has been the location of the colonial possessions of the various empires there (not all European).
Many companies from Europe, North America, South Korea and Japan have operations in Asia's developing countries to take advantage of its abundant supply of cheap labour and relatively developed infrastructure.
Siberia is one of the coldest places in the Northern Hemisphere, and can act as a source of arctic air masses for North America.
File:1 li jiang guilin yangshuo 2011.jpg|South China Karst
In 2014, Kailash Satyarthi from India and Malala Yousafzai from Pakistan were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education".
The Bahá'í Faith originated in Asia, in Iran (Persia), and spread from there to the Ottoman Empire, Central Asia, India, and Burma during the lifetime of Bahá'u'lláh.
Most Asian countries have more than one language that is natively spoken.
This Aswia appears to have been a remnant of a region known to the Hittites as Assuwa, centered on Lydia, or "Roman Asia."
Other innovations, such as writing, seem to have been developed individually in each area.
The earliest postulated expansion out of the steppe is that of the Indo-Europeans, who spread their languages into the Middle East, South Asia, and the borders of China, where the Tocharians resided.
Before the Mongol invasion, Song dynasty reportedly had approximately 120 million citizens; the 1300 census which followed the invasion reported roughly 60 million people.
In many Chinese communities, Mahayana Buddhism is easily syncretized with Taoism, thus exact religious statistics is difficult to obtain and may be understated or overstated.
Last year Asia had toppled Europe.
Afghanistan (155) ranked lowest amongst Asian countries out of the 169 countries assessed.
Christianity is a widespread religion in Asia with more than 286 million adherents according to Pew Research Center in 2010, and nearly 364 million according to Britannica Book of the Year 2014. constituting around 12.6% of the total population of Asia.
Tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern Asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north.
A number of theories have been published.
Hindu mythology tells about an Avatar of the God Vishnu in the form of a fish who warned Manu of a terrible flood.
The boundary between Asia and Africa is the Red Sea, the Gulf of Suez, and the Suez Canal.
The Islamic Mughal Empire and the Hindu Maratha Empire controlled much of India in the 16th and 18th centuries respectively.
In general terms, Asia is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean.
One in particular, aswiai, identifies "women of Asia."
Also, Mother Teresa of India and Shirin Ebadi of Iran were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their significant and pioneering efforts for democracy and human rights, especially for the rights of women and children.
File:Naadam rider 2.jpg|Mongolian steppe
Reid supports this alternative etymology, noting that the ancient Greek name must have derived from ''asu'', meaning 'east' in Assyrian (''ereb'' for ''Europe'' meaning 'west').
Asia is subdivided into 48 countries, two of them (Russia and Turkey) having part of their land in Europe.
Cities, states and empires developed in these lowlands.
File:Traditional wedding at Meji-jingu 72570539 f30636e2ef o.jpg|Japanese wedding at the Meiji Shrine
The border between Asia and Europe was historically defined by European academics.
They were used in trades, such as cloth-making, and usually came with children.
Amartya Sen, (born 3 November 1933) is an Indian economist who was awarded the 1998 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his contributions to welfare economics and social choice theory, and for his interest in the problems of society's poorest members.
Lotus Temple is a big Baha'i Temple in India.
In 2006, Dr. Muhammad Yunus of Bangladesh was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for the establishment of Grameen Bank, a community development bank that lends money to poor people, especially women in Bangladesh.
The increased use of outsourcing has assisted the rise of India and the China as financial centers.
He won his Nobel Prize in Literature for notable impact his prose works and poetic thought had on English, French, and other national literatures of Europe and the Americas.
It is located to the east of the Suez Canal and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains (or the Kuma–Manych Depression) and the Caspian and Black Seas.
Other recent very-high-growth nations in Asia include Israel, Malaysia, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Thailand, Vietnam, Mongolia, Uzbekistan, Cyprus and the Philippines, and mineral-rich nations such as Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Iran, Brunei, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Oman.
The faith represents around 25% of Asia's population and is the second largest religion in Asia.
The terms Southeast Asia and Oceania, devised in the 19th century, have had several vastly different geographic meanings since their inception.
The Islamic Caliphate took over the Middle East and Central Asia during the Muslim conquests of the 7th century.
From the time of Herodotus a minority of geographers have rejected the three-continent system (Europe, Africa, Asia) on the grounds that there is no or is no substantial physical separation between them.
The study's recommendations ranged from improving the use of climate information in local planning and strengthening weather-based agro-advisory services, to stimulating diversification of rural household incomes and providing incentives to farmers to adopt natural resource conservation measures to enhance forest cover, replenish groundwater and use renewable energy.
The Yangtze River in China is the longest river in the continent.
A major cache discovered by Carl Blegen at the site of ancient Pylos included hundreds of male and female names formed by different methods.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Japan's GDP was almost as large (current exchange rate method) as that of the rest of Asia combined.
It is forecasted that India will overtake Japan in terms of nominal GDP by 2020.
Asian mythology is complex and diverse.
Asia varies greatly across and within its regions with regard to ethnic groups, cultures, environments, economics, historical ties and government systems.
It is moist across southeast sections, and dry across much of the interior.
Since the middle of the 20th century, growth has particularly occurred in other Asian countries, because Bahá'í activities in many Muslim countries has been severely suppressed by authorities.
He is the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China.
Perhaps they were captured in Asia, but some others, Milatiai, appear to have been of Miletus, a Greek colony, which would not have been raided for slaves by Greeks.
In 2010, Asia had 3.3&nbsp;million millionaires (people with net worth over US$1 million excluding their homes), slightly below North America with 3.4&nbsp;million millionaires.
Other Asian writers who won Nobel Prize for literature include Yasunari Kawabata (Japan, 1968), Kenzaburō Ōe (Japan, 1994), Gao Xingjian (China, 2000), Orhan Pamuk (Turkey, 2006), and Mo Yan (China, 2012).
Given its size and diversity, the concept of Asia—a name dating back to classical antiquity—may actually have more to do with human geography than physical geography.
The most active place on Earth for tropical cyclone activity lies northeast of the Philippines and south of Japan.
On 28 May 2005, he received the Christmas Humphreys Award from the Buddhist Society in the United Kingdom.
It appears to be one of the most ancient of recorded names.
For example, Hesiod mentions the daughters of Tethys and Ocean, among whom are a "holy company", "who with the Lord Apollo and the Rivers have youths in their keeping."
Taoism is easily syncretized with Mahayana Buddhism for many Chinese, thus exact religious statistics is difficult to obtain and may be understated or overstated.
Various Christian denominations have adherents in portions of the Middle East, as well as China and India.
The polymath Rabindranath Tagore, a Bengali poet, dramatist, and writer from Santiniketan, now in West Bengal, India, became in 1913 the first Asian Nobel laureate.
China and India alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 A.D. China was a major economic power and attracted many to the east, and for many the legendary wealth and prosperity of the ancient culture of India personified Asia, attracting European commerce, exploration and colonialism.
The Black Death, one of the most devastating pandemics in human history, is thought to have originated in the arid plains of central Asia, where it then travelled along the Silk Road.
The Dalai Lama has received approximately eighty-four awards over his spiritual and political career.
In the 17th century, the Manchu conquered China and established the Qing Dynasty.
Many overseas Indians in countries such as Burma, Singapore and Malaysia also adhere to Hinduism.
There is a masculine form, aswios.
In Greek mythology, "Asia" (''Ἀσία'') or "Asie" (''Ἀσίη'') was the name of a "Nymph or Titan goddess of Lydia."
The civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley and the Yellow River shared many similarities.
It is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean.
Nepal, a South Asian country, emerges as one of the world's fastest movers since 1970 mainly due to health and education achievements.
Over the next century various proposals were made until the Ural River prevailed in the mid-19th century.
'''Asia''' () is Earth's largest and most populous continent, located primarily in the eastern and northern hemispheres and sharing the continental landmass of Eurasia with the continent of Europe.
Some may consider the American writer, Pearl S. Buck, an honorary Asian Nobel laureate, having spent considerable time in China as the daughter of missionaries, and based many of her novels, namely ''The Good Earth'' (1931) and ''The Mother'' (1933), as well as the biographies of her parents of their time in China, ''The Exile'' and ''Fighting Angel'', all of which earned her the Literature prize in 1938.
He is also the writer of the national anthems of Bangladesh and India.
File:Paysan soignant ses boeufs (Kerala).jpg|Kerala backwaters
Over 80% of the populations of both India and Nepal adhere to Hinduism, alongside significant communities in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Bali, Indonesia.
The place name, "Asia", in various forms in a large number of modern languages is of unknown ultimate provenience.
The borrowers typically pay back money within the specified period and the incidence of default is very low.
Mecca, Medina and to a lesser extent Jerusalem are the holiest cities for Islam in all the world.
With 12.7% of the world Muslim population, the country currently with the largest Muslim population in the world is Indonesia, followed by Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Iran and Turkey.
The accidental discovery of America by Columbus in search for India demonstrates this deep fascination.
The central steppe region had long been inhabited by horse-mounted nomads who could reach all areas of Asia from the steppes.
Several trade blocs exist, with the most developed being the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Some of these are of women held in servitude (as study of the society implied by the content reveals).
The Silk Road became the main East-West trading route in the Asian hitherland while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route.
This ended in 2010 when China overtook Japan to become the world's second largest economy.
The continent, which has long been home to the majority of the human population, was the site of many of the first civilizations.
Herodotus comments that he is puzzled as to why three women's names were "given to a tract which is in reality one" (Europa, Asia, and Libya, referring to Africa), stating that most Greeks assumed that Asia was named after the wife of Prometheus (i.e.
Almost all of Europe and the better part of Asia sit atop the Eurasian Plate, adjoined on the south by the Arabian and Indian Plate and with the easternmost part of Siberia (east of the Chersky Range) on the North American Plate.
Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China" on 8 October 2010.
Japan and South Korea continue to dominate in the area of multinational corporations, but increasingly the PRC and India are making significant inroads.
Hesione), but that the Lydians say it was named after Asies, son of Cotys, who passed the name on to a tribe at Sardis.
The Gobi Desert is in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert stretches across much of the Middle East.
They include elements of nonmaterial pursuits, whereas another school of thought from India, Cārvāka, preached the enjoyment of the material world.
More than four of every five children of school age in Nepal now attend primary school, compared to just one in five 40 years ago.
The Himalayas between Nepal and China is the tallest mountain range in the world.
Asia, Europe and Africa make up a single continuous landmass - Afro-Eurasia (except for the Suez Canal) and share a common continental shelf.
Whether all uses and all forms of the name derive also from the Latin of the Roman Empire is much less certain.
He is internationally known for the concept of micro credit which allows poor and destitute people with little or no collateral to borrow money.
In 1995, Japan's economy nearly equaled that of the USA as the largest economy in the world for a day, after the Japanese currency reached a record high of 79 yen/US$.
Each nation's vulnerability was calculated using 42 socio, economic and environmental indicators, which identified the likely climate change impacts during the next 30 years.
Sir C. V. Raman is the first Asian to get a Nobel prize in Sciences.
Geographical Asia is a cultural artifact of European conceptions of the world, beginning with the Ancient Greeks, being imposed onto other cultures, an imprecise concept causing endemic contention about what it means.
She is a Buddhist and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991.
Asia has exhibited economic dynamism (particularly East Asia) as well as robust population growth during the 20th century, but overall population growth has since fallen.
Buddhism has a great following in mainland Southeast Asia and East Asia.
Ancient Greek certainly evidences early and rich uses of the name.
File:A day of devotion – Thaipusam in Singapore (4316108409).jpg|Hindu festival celebrated by Singapore's Tamil community
Asia is home to several language families and many language isolates.
Tatishchev announced that he had proposed the idea to von Strahlenberg.
The Caucasus and Himalaya mountains and the Karakum and Gobi deserts formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could cross only with difficulty.
Confucianism is found predominantly in Mainland China, South Korea, Taiwan and in overseas Chinese populations.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the economies of the China and India have been growing rapidly, both with an average annual growth rate of more than 8%.
Based on Global Office Locations 2011, Asia dominated the office locations with 4 of top 5 being in Asia, Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo, Seoul and Shanghai.
As of 2012, Hinduism has around 1.1 billion adherents.
File:İstanbul 4258.jpg|Muslim men praying in Turkey
Its per capita income increased a stunning 21-fold over the last four decades, also lifting hundreds of millions out of income poverty.
The western boundary with Europe is a historical and cultural construct, as there is no clear physical and geographical separation between them.
Another Nobel Peace Prize winner is Aung San Suu Kyi from Burma for her peaceful and non-violent struggle under a military dictatorship in Burma.
Before Greek poetry, the Aegean Sea area was in a Greek Dark Age, at the beginning of which syllabic writing was lost and alphabetic writing had not begun.
Due to its large and extremely competitive information technology industry, India has become a major hub for outsourcing.
Its etymology and language of origin are uncertain.
Asia is the largest continent on Earth.
Outside of Israel there are small ancient communities of Jewish still live in Turkey (17,400), Azerbaijan (9,100), Iran (8,756), India (5,000) and Uzbekistan (4,000).
The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia, defeated by the Hittites under Tudhaliya I around 1400&nbsp;BC.
The major geographical theorist of the empire was actually a former Swedish prisoner-of-war, taken at the Battle of Poltava in 1709 and assigned to Tobolsk, where he associated with Peter's Siberian official, Vasily Tatishchev, and was allowed freedom to conduct geographical and anthropological studies in preparation for a future book.
Its present life expectancy is 25 years longer than in the 1970s.
For several decades in the late twentieth century Japan was the largest economy in Asia and second-largest of any single nation in the world, after surpassing the Soviet Union (measured in net material product) in 1986 and Germany in 1968.
The English word, "Asia," was originally a concept of Greek civilization.
It covers 8.8% of the Earth's total surface area (or 30% of its land area), and has the largest coastline, at .
Large Buddhist populations also exist in Singapore (33%–51%), Taiwan (35%–93%), South Korea (23%–50%), Malaysia (19%–21%), Nepal (9%–11%), Vietnam (10%–75%), China (20%–50%), North Korea (1.5%–14%), and small communities in India and Bangladesh.
These areas remained very sparsely populated.
Many of these are geographic: Doris, Rhodea, Europa, Asia.
For example, Sir Barry Cunliffe, the emeritus professor of European archeology at Oxford, argues that Europe has been geographically and culturally merely "the western excrescence of the continent of Asia".
The coastal periphery was home to some of the world's earliest known civilizations, each of them developing around fertile river valleys.
In Sweden, five years after Peter's death, in 1730 Philip Johan von Strahlenberg published a new atlas proposing the Urals as the border of Asia.
In Armenia, Cyprus, Georgia and Asian Russia, Eastern Orthodoxy is the predominant religion.
The most likely vehicles were the ancient geographers and historians, such as Herodotus, who were all Greek.
The Russian Empire began to expand into Asia from the 17th century, and would eventually take control of all of Siberia and most of Central Asia by the end of the 19th century.
China has many languages and dialects in different provinces.
The name is also in the singular, Aswia, which refers both to the name of a country and to a female of it.
The monsoon circulation dominates across southern and eastern sections, due to the presence of the Himalayas forcing the formation of a thermal low which draws in moisture during the summer.
Asia is notable for not only its overall large size and population, but also dense and large settlements as well as vast barely populated regions within the continent of 4.4 billion people.
The most commonly accepted boundaries place Asia to the east of the Suez Canal, the Ural River, and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian and Black Seas.
The Mycenaean states were destroyed about 1200&nbsp;BC by unknown agents although one school of thought assigns the Dorian invasion to this time.
The border between the Black Sea and the Caspian is usually placed along the crest of the Caucasus Mountains, although it is sometimes placed further north.
Alternatively, the etymology of the term may be from the Akkadian word ''(w)aṣû(m)'', which means 'to go outside' or 'to ascend', referring to the direction of the sun at sunrise in the Middle East and also likely connected with the Phoenician word ''asa'' meaning east.
The epithet, lawiaiai, "captives," associated with some of them identifies their origin.
However, the lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound force; for this and other reasons, the nomads who conquered states in China, India, and the Middle East often found themselves adapting to the local, more affluent societies.
Most notable was the Nobel Peace Prize, presented in Oslo, Norway on 10 December 1989.
It does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents.
The Asian countries of Bangladesh, India, Vietnam, Thailand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka were among the 16 countries facing extreme risk from climate change.
For instance, according to Ethnologue, more than 600 languages are spoken in Indonesia, more than 800 languages spoken in India, and more than 100 are spoken in the Philippines.
The center and the peripheries were mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts.
Yet it was not among the region's top performers in improving school enrollment and life expectancy.
Taoism is found mainly in Mainland China, Taiwan, Malaysia and Singapore.
However, it is mostly concentrated in South Asia.
Asia was the birthplace of most of the world's mainstream religions including Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism (or Daoism), Jainism, Sikhism, Zoroastranism, as well as many other religions.
He defines it carefully, mentioning the previous geographers whom he had read, but whose works are now missing.
Call centers and business process outsourcing (BPOs) are becoming major employers in India and the Philippines due to the availability of a large pool of highly skilled, English-speaking workers.
The poets detailed their doings and generations in allegoric language salted with entertaining stories, which subsequently playwrights transformed into classical Greek drama and became "Greek mythology."
Around 68 percent of international firms have office in Hong Kong.
Manufacturing in Asia has traditionally been strongest in East and Southeast Asia, particularly in China, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, India, the Philippines, and Singapore.
Indian philosophy includes Hindu philosophy and Buddhist philosophy.
The story of the Great Flood for example, as presented to Christians in the Old Testament in the narrative of Noah, is first found in Mesopotamian mythology, in the ''Epic of Gilgamesh''.
Citigroup in The Wealth Report 2012 stated that Asian centa-millionaire overtook North America's wealth for the first time as the world's "economic center of gravity" continued moving east.
(NB: A number of supernational economies are larger, such as the European Union (EU), the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) or APEC).
Hesiod explains:"For there are three-thousand neat-ankled daughters of Ocean who are dispersed far and wide, and in every place alike serve the earth and the deep waters."
A survey carried out in 2010 by global risk analysis farm Maplecroft identified 16 countries that are extremely vulnerable to climate change.
Buddhism is the religion of the majority of the populations of Cambodia (96%), Thailand (95%), Burma (80%–89%), Japan (36%–96%), Bhutan (75%–84%), Sri Lanka (70%), Laos (60%–67%) and Mongolia (53%–93%).
Asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four-fifths of Eurasia.
Some shifts are already occurring.
English Asia can be traced through the formation of English literature to Latin literature, where it has the same form, Asia.
By it he means Anatolia and the Persian Empire, in contrast to Greece and Egypt.
These civilizations may well have exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel.
The religions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism originated in India, South Asia.
Asia has four main financial centers: Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore and Shanghai.
Iran is the largest Shi'a country and Pakistan has the largest Ahmadiyya population.
The ideas of ''Occidental'' (form Latin ''Occidens'' 'setting') and ''Oriental'' (from Latin ''Oriens'' for 'rising') are also European invention, synonymous with ''Western'' and ''Eastern''.
Economic growth in Asia since World War II to the 1990s had been concentrated in Japan as well as the four regions of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore located in the Pacific Rim, known as the Asian tigers, which have now all received developed country status, having the highest GDP per capita in Asia.
These religious sites attract large numbers of devotees from all over the world, particularly during the Hajj and Umrah seasons.
The latter had suggested the Emba River as the lower boundary.
This makes Egypt a transcontinental country, with the Sinai peninsula in Asia and the remainder of the country in Africa.
Saint Thomas Christians in India trace their origins to the evangelistic activity of Thomas the Apostle in the 1st century.
1970, is the only country on the "Top 10 Movers" list due to income rather than health or education achievements.
Asia has extremely diverse climates and geographic features.
For example, in tropical parts of India with a semi-arid climate, the temperature increased by 0.4&nbsp;°C between 1901 and 2003.
File:Black Nazarene procession.jpg|Catholic procession of the Black Nazarene in Manila
The Russians were enthusiastic about the concept, which allowed them to keep their European identity in geography.
