As the Brahmaputra flows in Assam the climate here is cold and there is rainfall most of the month.Geomorphic studies conclude that the Brahmaputra, the life-line of Assam is an antecedent river, older than the Himalayas.
It was at its zenith during the reign of Sukhrungpha or Sworgodeu Rudra Simha (c. 1696–1714 AD).
Most literary works are written in Assamese although other local language such as Boro and Dimasa are also represented.
The discovery of Camellia sinensis in 1834 in Assam was followed by its tests in 1836–37 in London.
However, Assamese culture in its hybrid form and nature is one of the richest, still developing and in true sense is a 'cultural system' with sub-systems.
Assam receives more rainfall compared to most parts of India.
Medium of instruction is mainly in Assamese, English or Bengali.
Sylheti, an unclear dialect of Bengali is mostly spoken in the region of Barak Valley and Hojai district.
Guwahati Town Committee
''Koldil'' (banana flower) and squash can be cooked into ''sabji's''.
* Assimilation in the Koch Kingdom (15th–16th century AD) of western Assam and Kachari Kingdom (12th–18th century AD) of central and southern Assam.
It does not include those of the dependent Native States:
Christian minorities (3.7%) are found among Scheduled Tribe population.
In 1970, in response to the demands of the tribal peoples of the Meghalaya Plateau, the districts embracing the Khasi Hills, Jaintia Hills, and Garo Hills were formed into an autonomous state within Assam; in 1972 it became a separate state under the name of Meghalaya.
Assamese literature is one of the richest.
Assam has wildlife sanctuaries, the most prominent of which are two UNESCO World Heritage sites-the Kaziranga National Park, on the bank of the Brahmaputra River, and the Manas Wildlife Sanctuary, near the border with Bhutan.
The ''Assam Postage Circle'' was established by 1873 under the headship of the Deputy Post Master General.
Regional autonomy has been ensured for Bodo-Kachari community in Bodoland Territorial Council Areas (BTC), for the Karbis in Karbi Anglong and for the people of Dima Hasao district under the 6th schedule and Autonomous District Councils (ADC) areas under Indian constitution, while Non-6th Schedule States in the North-East where under 73rd and 74th amendments (Panchayati Raj Institutions) have been applied in Assam (excluding ''Karbi Anglong Autonomous District Council'' and ''North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council''), after agitation of the communities due to sluggish rate of development and general apathy of successive state governments towards indigenous communities.
The Assam territory was first separated from Bengal in 1874 as the 'North-East Frontier' non-regulation province, also known as the Assam Chief-Commissionership.
The Assamese economy is aided by wildlife tourism, centred around Kaziranga National Park and Manas National Park which are World Heritage Sites.
in Charyapada (c. 7th–8th century AD).
Assam's agriculture usually depends on the south-west monsoon rains.
Utilities and symbolic articles such as ''Sorai'' and ''Bota'' made from bell metal and brass are found in every Assamese household.
''Khorika'' is the smoked or fired meat eaten with the meal.
Hindi dailies include ''Purvanchal Prahari'', ''Pratah Khabar'' and ''Dainik Purvoday''.
As on 19 May 2016, BJP under the leadership of Sarbananda Sonowal won the Assembly elections, thus forming the first BJP led government in Assam.
Assamese culture is traditionally a hybrid one developed due to assimilation of ethno-cultural groups in the past.
In the south, the Barak originating in the Barail Range (Assam-Nagaland border) flows through the Cachar district with a 25–30&nbsp;miles (40–50&nbsp;km) wide valley and enters Bangladesh with the name Surma River.
Jorhat Municipal Board
Guwahati is the largest metropolitan area and urban conglomeration administered under the highest form of urban local body – Guwahati Municipal Corporation in Assam.
Among other dynasty, the Kacharis (13th century-1854 AD) ruled from Dikhow River to central and southern Assam and had their capital at Dimapur.
Spatial distribution patterns of the ethno-cultural groups, cultural traits and the phenomenon of naming all the major rivers in the North East Region with Bodo-Kachari words (e.g.
The various meats more commonly taken include pork, fowl, duck and goose, fish, goat, beef (among Muslim and Christian communities) and pigeon; these being often involved with religious ceremonies.
A renewed Hinduisation in local forms took place, which was initially greatly supported by the Koch and later by the Ahom Kingdoms.
For the state bird, the white-winged wood duck, Assam is a globally important area.
Sectoral analysis again exhibits a dismal picture.
Guwahati is the headquarters of a number of electronic medias like News Live, DY 365, Pratidin Time, Assam Talks, Prag News and News 18 Assam/North-East.
Two are now extinct.
Geographically, Assam and these states are connected to the rest of India via a  strip of land in West Bengal called the Siliguri Corridor or "Chicken's Neck".
According to a late text, Kalika Purana (c. 9th–10th century AD), the earliest ruler of Assam was Mahiranga Danav of the Danava dynasty, which was removed by Naraka  of Mithila who established the Naraka dynasty.
The major Border checkpoints through which border trade flows to Bangladesh from Assam are :- Sutarkandi (Karimganj), Dhubri, Mankachar (Dhubri) and Golokanj.
The districts are delineated on the basis of the features such as the rivers, hills, forests, etc.
The two main characteristics of a traditional meal in Assam are ''khar'' (named after its main ingredient) and the sour dish ''tenga''.
Reduction of the unemployed has been threatened by illegal immigration from Bangladesh.
The precise etymology of "Assam" came from Ahom Dynasty.
''Asom Bani'' and ''Sadin'' are Assamese weekly newspapers.
According to the recent estimates, Assam's per capita GDP is ₹6,157 at constant prices (1993–94) and ₹10,198 at current prices; almost 40% lower than that in India.
''Khorisa'' (fermented bamboo shoots) are used at times to flavour curries while they can also be preserved and made into pickles.
The food is often served in bell metal dishes and platters like ''Knahi'', ''Maihang'' and so on.
were used for symbolising various purposes and occasions.
The British allowed companies to rent land from 1839 onwards.
Localised forms of the language still exist in Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh.
Of the 32 districts, eight districts registered rise in the decadal population growth rate.
Assam is known for Assam tea and Assam silk.
Industry saw initial growth, when in 1861, investors were allowed to own land in Assam and it saw substantial progress with invention of new technologies and machinery for preparing processed tea during the 1870s.
There are several Land Custom Stations (LCS) in the state bordering Bangladesh and Bhutan to facilitate border trade.
Moreover, there are several other age-old dance-forms such as Barpeta’s ''Bhortal Nritya'', ''Deodhoni Nritya'', ''Ojapali'', ''Beula Dance'', ''Ka Shad Inglong Kardom'', ''Nimso Kerung'', etc.
For the past five decades, the tertiary sector has registered the highest growth rates of the other sectors, which even has slowed down in the 1990s than in the 1980s.
The government has been identifying (via NRC) and deporting illegals.
Nagaon Municipal Board
Although, the region in the eastern periphery of India is landlocked and is linked to the mainland by the narrow Siliguri Corridor (or the Chicken's Neck) improved transport infrastructure in all the three modes — rail, road and air — and developing urban infrastructure in the cities and towns of Assam are giving a boost to the entire industrial scene.
It was suggested by some that the Sanskrit word ''Asama'' ("unequalled", "peerless", etc.)
Unemployment is one of the major problems of Assam which can be attributed to overpopulation, and a faulty education system.
, the state has 35 administrative districts.
Lieutenant-Governor
Officially 27 January has been declared as the day of Bushu Dima festival.
''Shared with Guwahati''
Moreover, various ethno-cultural groups in Assam make different types of cotton garments with unique embroidery designs and wonderful colour combinations.
The state is the last refuge for numerous other endangered and threatened species including the white-winged wood duck or ''deohanh'', Bengal florican, black-breasted parrotbill, red-headed vulture, white-rumped vulture, greater adjutant, Jerdon's babbler, rufous-necked hornbill, Bengal tiger, Asian elephant, pygmy hog, gaur, wild water buffalo, Indian hog deer, hoolock gibbon, golden langur, capped langur, barasingha, Ganges river dolphin, Barca snakehead, Ganges shark, Burmese python, brahminy river turtle, black pond turtle, Asian forest tortoise, and Assam roofed turtle.
Hajo and Sarthebari (''Sorthebaary'') are the most important centres of traditional bell-metal and brass crafts.
There are several other industries, including a chemical fertiliser plant at Namrup, petrochemical industries at Namrup and Bongaigaon, Paper mills at Jagiroad, Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd.
The language was standardised by the American Baptist Missionaries such as Nathan Brown, Dr.
The Ahoms, a Tai group, ruled Upper Assam  for nearly 600 years (1228–1826 AD) while the Sutiya rulers (1187 -1673 AD) held the regions on the north bank of Brahmaputra with its domain from Vishwanath in the west to Parshuram Kund in the east in Upper Assam and in the state of Arunachal Pradesh.
Area ( '0002 miles)
The river with steep gorges and rapids in Arunachal Pradesh entering Assam, becomes a braided river (at times 10&nbsp;mi/16&nbsp;km wide) and with tributaries, creates a flood plain (Brahmaputra Valley: 50–60&nbsp;mi/80–100&nbsp;km wide, 600&nbsp;mi/1000&nbsp;km long).
There is an award given in the honour of Bishnuprasad Rabha for achievements in the cultural/music world of Assam by the State Government.
A total of six Tai language were spoken in Assam.
The rivalry between the Sutiyas and Ahoms for the supremacy of eastern Assam led to a series of battles between them from the early 16th century till the start of the 17th century, which saw great loss of men and money.
Cotton College, Guwahati, dates back to the 19th century.
Assam's economy is based on agriculture and oil.
The tradition of modern moving theatres is typical of Assam with immense popularity of many large theatre groups such as Kohinoor, Sankardev, Abahan, Bhagyadevi, Hengul, Brindabon, Itihas etc.
Assam and adjoining regions have evidences of human settlements from all the periods of the Stone ages.
Naraka's son Bhagadatta became the king, who (it is mentioned in the Mahabharata) fought for the Kauravas in the battle of Kurukshetra with an army of ''kiratas'', ''chinas'' and ''dwellers of the eastern coast''.
In Guwahati and Digboi, many Jr. basic School and Jr. high School are Nepali linguistic and all the teachers are Indian Gorkha.
Guwahati Municipal Corporation
The cities of Guwahati in the West and Dibrugarh in the East with good rail, road and air connectivity are the two important nerve centres of Assam, to be selected by Asian Development Bank for providing $200 million for improvement of urban infrastructure.
The capital, Guwahati, contains institutions of higher education for students of the north-eastern region.
It has its own variety ''Camellia assamica''.
79 (69%) identify themselves regionally, 22 (19%) locally, and 3 trans-nationally.
Assam has several institutions for tertiary education and research.
Most of the schools follow the state’s examination board which is called the Secondary Education Board of Assam.
The problem is exacerbated by the growth in the number of technical institutes in Assam which increases the unemployed community of the State.
Part of Tuensang was added to Nagaland.
Governor-in-Council
There are speakers of Tai languages in Assam.
+''Tier - I City – an urban conglomeration (in true sense) administered by a Municipal Corporation.
A land of high rainfall, Assam displays greenery.
In the 19th and 20th century, Assamese and other literature was modernised by authors including Lakshminath Bezbaroa, Birinchi Kumar Barua, Hem Barua, Dr. Mamoni Raisom Goswami, Bhabendra Nath Saikia, Birendra Kumar Bhattacharya, Hiren Bhattacharyya, Homen Borgohain, Bhabananda Deka, Rebati Mohan Dutta Choudhury, Mahim Bora, Lil Bahadur Chettri, Syed Abdul Malik, Surendranath Medhi, Hiren Gohain etc.
Bihu is a series of three prominent festivals.
Assam schools are run by the Indian government or by private organisations.
Assam is remarkably rich in Orchid species and the Foxtail orchid is the state flower of Assam.
The organisation was very successful in this, and even after India’s independence, conditions of the labourers have improved very little.
These districts are further sub-divided into 54 "Sub-divisions" or ''Mohkuma''.
Other religions followed include Jainism (0.1%), Buddhism (0.2%), Sikhism (0.1%) and Animism (amongst Khamti, Phake, Aiton etc.
Higher population concentration was recorded in the districts of Kamrup, Nagaon, Sonitpur, Barpeta, Dhubri, Darrang, and Cachar.
Ruled by three dynasties Varmanas (c. 350–650 CE), Mlechchha dynasty (c.655–900 CE) and Kamarupa-Palas (c. 900–1100 CE), from their capitals in present-day Guwahati (Pragjyotishpura), Tezpur (Haruppeswara) and North Gauhati (Durjaya) respectively.
In the classical period and up to the 12th century the region east of the Karatoya river, largely congruent to present-day Assam, was called Kamarupa, and alternatively, Pragjyotisha.
The district of Sylhet of Assam (excluding the Karimganj subdivision) was given up to East Pakistan (which later became Bangladesh).
Durga Puja is another festival celebrated with great enthusiasm.
Lieutenant-Governor
Various elements are being used to represent beliefs, feelings, pride, identity, etc.
Other native languages of Tibeto-Burman origin and related to Bodo-Kachari are Deori , Mising, Karbi, Rabha, and Tiwa.
The People of India project has studied 115 of the ethnic groups in Assam.
Despite its rich natural resources, and supplying of up to 25% of India's petroleum needs, Assam’s growth rate has not kept pace with that of India; the difference has increased rapidly since the 1970s.
Continued immigration is exceeding deportation.
To facilitate border trade with Bangladesh, Border Trade Centres have been developed at Sutarkandi and Mankachar.
The movement contributed greatly towards language, literature and performing and fine arts.
With the "Tropical Monsoon Rainforest Climate", Assam is temperate (summer max.
The total population of the state has increased from 26,638,407 to 31,169,272 in the last ten years with a growth rate of 16.93%.
Local news and music are the main priority for that station.
Township Area Panchgram and Jogighopa, sugar mills at Barua Bamun Gaon, Chargola, Kampur, Cement plant at Bokajan and Badarpur, cosmetics plant of Hindustan Unilever (HUL) at Doom Dooma, etc.
Other few yearly celebrations are Doul Utsav of Barpeta, Brahmaputra Beach Festival, Guwahati, Kaziranga Elephant Festival, Kaziranga and Dehing Patkai Festival, Lekhapani, Karbi Youth Festival of Diphu and International Jatinga Festival, Jatinga can not be forgotten.
Apart from houses and livestock being washed away by flood water, bridges, railway tracks and roads are also damaged by the calamity, which causes communication breakdown in many places.
Some Bengali dialects like Maymensinghiya, Noakhaliya, Dhakaya are spoken in Brahmaputra Valley by some East Bengali origin people.
By the 1850s, the industry started seeing some profits.
Miles Bronson and local pundits such as Hemchandra Barua with the form available in the Sibsagar (''Sivasagar'') District (the ex-nerve centre of the Ahom Kingdom).
Assam is the home of several types of silks, the most prestigious are: Muga – the natural golden silk, Pat – a creamy-bright-silver coloured silk and Eri – a variety used for manufacturing warm clothes for winter.
Many of these industries are facing loss and closure due to lack of infrastructure and improper management practices.
After a few initial unsuccessful attempts to gain independence for Assam during the 1850s, anti-colonial Assamese joined and actively supported the Indian National Congress against the British from the early 20th century, with Gopinath Bordoloi emerging as the preeminent nationalist leader in the Assam Congress.
Growth of population in Assam has risen since the mid-decades of the 20th century.
The water levels of the rivers rise because of rainfall resulting in the rivers overflowing their banks and engulfing nearby areas.
Therefore, both local elements or the local elements in Sanskritised forms are distinctly found.
Though the Mughals made seventeen attempts to invade, they were never successful.
As per 2011 census, total population of Assam was 31,169,272.
A recent USGS estimate shows  of oil,  of gas and  of natural gas liquids in the Assam Geologic Province.
Asia's first refinery was set up at Digboi and discoverer of Digboi oilfield was the Assam Railways & Trading Company Limited (AR&T Co. Ltd.), a registered company of London in 1881.
'''Assam''' ( ;  ''Ôxôm''  ;  ''Asam'';  ''Âshám'' ) is a state in northeastern India.
Male literacy rate was 78.81% and female literacy rate was 67.27%.
The war ended under the Treaty of Yandabo in 1826, with the Company taking control of Western Assam and installing Purandar Singha as king of Upper Assam in 1833.
''Shared with Tezpur''
These districts do not share any international border.
The Brahmaputra River tributaries and oxbow lakes provide the region with hydro-geomorphic environment.
The rebellion was suppressed but the kingdom was severely weakened by the civil war.
All other urban centres are managed under Municipal Boards.
This rain feeds the Brahmaputra River, whose tributaries and oxbow lakes provide the region with a hydro-geomorphic and aesthetic environment .
The archaeological sites such as the Madan Kamdev (c. 9th–10th centuries AD) exhibits mass-scale use of lions, dragon-lions and many other figures of demons to show case power and prosperity.
at 43–46&nbsp;°F or 6–8&nbsp;°C) and experiences heavy rainfall and high humidity.
With the partition of India in 1947, Assam became a constituent state of India.
Research institutes present in the state include National Research Centre on Pig, (ICAR) in Guwahati,
It was incorporated into the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam in 1905 after the partition of Bengal (1905–1911) and re-established in 1912 as Assam Province .
Guwahati is the gateway to the North-East India.
On the other hand, after having strong domestic demand, and with 1.5&nbsp;million hectares of inland water bodies, numerous rivers and 165 varieties of fishes, fishing is still in its traditional form and production is not self-sufficient.
* Establishment of the Ahom dynasty in the 13th century AD and assimilation for next 600 years.
Dihing, Dibru, Dihong, D/Tista, Dikrai, etc.)
Initially Assam was made a part of the Bengal Presidency, then in 1906 it was a part of Eastern Bengal and Assam province, and in 1912 it was reconstituted into a chief commissioners' province.
Universities, Colleges and Institutions include:
Productivity has increased marginally, but is still low compared to highly productive regions.
Assamese (''Ôxômiya'') is a rich language due to its hybrid nature with its unique characteristics of pronunciation and softness.
Total population of Assam was 26.66&nbsp;million with 4.91&nbsp;million households in 2001.
Among possible origins are Tai (''A-Cham'') and Bodo (''Ha-Sam'').
It is important to keep the broader system closer to its roots and at the same time to focus on development of the sub-systems.
The Tai Ahom language (brought by Sukaphaa and his followers), is no longer a spoken language today.
The manufacturing sector showed some improvement in the 1990s with a growth rate of 3.4% per annum than 2.4% in the 1980s.
According to recent analysis, Assam’s economy is showing signs of improvement.
Besides Bihu dance and ''Huchory'' performed during the ''Bohag Bihu'', dance forms of tribal minorities such as; ''Kushan nritra'' of Rajbongshi's, ''Bagurumba'' and ''Bordoicikhla'' dance of Bodos, Mishing Bihu, ''Banjar Kekan'' performed during ''Chomangkan'' by Karbis, Jhumur of Tea tribes  are some of the major folk dances.
Assam produces more than half of India's tea.
Asia’s first successful mechanically drilled oil well was drilled in Makum way back in 1867.
In 2011, literacy rate in the state was 73.18%.
Bordoloi's major political rival in this time was Sir Saidullah, who was representing the Muslim League, and had the backing of the influential Muslim cleric Maulana Bhasani.
In November 1990, the Government of India deployed the Indian army, after which low-intensity military conflicts and political homicides have been continuing for more than a decade.
Assam has petroleum, natural gas, coal, limestone and other minor minerals such as magnetic quartzite, kaolin, sillimanites, clay and feldspar.
The hills at the height of 1,500–2,000 feet (460 to 615 m) were popular habitats probably due to availability of exposed dolerite basalt, useful for tool-making.
It increased to 14.63&nbsp;million in 1971 and 22.41&nbsp;million in 1991.
In the Sixth Plan period, Assam experienced a negative growth rate of 3.78% when India's was positive at 6%.
Assam’s agriculture is yet to experience modernisation in a real sense.
Central Provinces and Berar
The post 1970s experienced the growth of armed separatist groups like United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA) and National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB).
Primarily a non-religious festival celebrated to mark the seasons and the significant points of a cultivator's life over a yearly cycle.
Problems with the imported labourers from China and hostilities of native Assamese resulted in migration of forced labourers from central and eastern parts of India.
According to the recent estimates, per capita income in Assam has reached ₹6756 (1993–94 constant prices) in 2004–05, which is still much lower than India's.
A list of 8 oldest recognised / classified prominent and constantly inhabited urban centres before Indian independence based on the earliest years of formation of the civic bodies is tabulated below:
With implications for food security, per capita food grain production has declined in the past five decades.
A significant geographical aspect of Assam is that it contains three of six physiographic divisions of India - The Northern Himalayas (Eastern Hills), The Northern Plains (Brahmaputra plain) and Deccan Plateau (Karbi Anglong).
Silchar, (in the Barak valley) the 2nd most populous city in Assam and an important centre of business, education and tourism.
Bodo is now spoken largely in the Western Assam (Bodo Territorial Council area).
''Tamulpan'', ''Xorai'' and ''Gamosa'' are three important symbolic elements in Assamese culture.
The climate is characterised by heavy monsoon downpours reducing summer temperatures and affecting foggy nights and mornings in winters, frequent during the afternoons.
There are approximately 7 lakhs Nepali speakers spread all over the state forming about 2.2% of Assam's total population.
The following table lists their areas and populations.
A number of employers hire over-qualified or efficient, but under-certified, candidates, or candidates with narrowly-defined qualifications.
Assam's proximity to some neighbouring countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, benefits its trade.
Print media include Assamese dailies "Dainik Asam", ''Dainik Janambhumi'', ''Amar Asom'', ''Dainik Agradoot'', ''Asomiya Pratidin'', ''Asomiya Khobor'', ''Janasadharan'', ''Niyomiya Barta'', ''Gana Adhikar'' and ''Sankar Jyoti''.
The Tamulpan-tradition is an ancient one and is being followed since time-immemorial with roots in the aboriginal Austro-Asiatic culture.
Bengali is the official language in Barak Valley and the widely spoken language.
The last of these rulers, also Naraka, was slain by Krishna.
The Dimasa word "Di" for water forms the root word for many of the major rivers of Assam and the North East India like Dikrang which means green river, Dikhow which means "fetched water", Diyung (huge river) etc.
In 2001, the census had recorded literacy in Assam at 63.3% with male literacy at 71.3% and female at 54.6%.
''Bodosa'' has the highest circulation of any Bodo daily from BTC.
The state has the largest population of the wild water buffalo in the world.
English dailies of Assam include ''The Assam Tribune'', ''The Sentinel'', ''The Telegraph'',  ''The Times of India'' and ''Eastern Chronicle''.
