Football is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules.
After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart.
* Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area.
Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; however, physical contact between opponents is restricted.
The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12.
If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially a penalty shootout are required.
The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials.
The end of the match is known as full-time.
In league competitions, games may end in a draw.
In addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of football.
FIFA, the international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to Laws of the Game of the Football Association.
* South America: Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol/Confederação Sul-americana de Futebol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)
Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play.
paralympic association football).
They all appear to have resembled rugby football, wrestling and volleyball more than what is recognizable as modern football.
A player given a yellow card is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in his official notebook.
In knockout competitions where a winner is required various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock, some competitions may invoke replays.
In particular, the offence of "unsporting behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game, even if they are not listed as specific offences.
After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are the continental championships, which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams.
It had a "golden age" in the United Kingdom in the early 1920s when crowds reached 50,000 at some matches; this was stopped on 5 December 1921 when England's Football Association voted to ban the game from grounds used by its member clubs.
The referee is assisted by two assistant referees.
* Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" fouls.
As with pre-codified "mob football", the antecedent of all modern football codes, these three games involved more handling the ball than kicking.
R. Kapuscinski says that Europeans who are polite, modest, or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games.
These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association (The FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London.
Common reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game.
The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination.
This is generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and does not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself.
It was named the British Ladies' Football Club.
five-a-side football) play in non-field environments (i.e.
Athenaeus, writing in 228 AD, referenced the Roman ball game ''harpastum''.
The object of the game is to score by getting the ball into the opposing goal.
Today, football is played at a professional level all over the world.
An image of an ''episkyros'' player depicted in low relief on a vase at the National Archaeological Museum of Athens appears on the UEFA European Championship Cup.
The Freemason's Tavern was the setting for five more meetings between October and December, which eventually produced the first comprehensive set of rules.
In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules.
It has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, particularly in the United Kingdom.
These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends most time.
The majority of countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions organised on a knock-out basis.
The most successful team of the era was Dick, Kerr's Ladies of Preston, England.
The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final.
According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football.
A rectangular goal is positioned at the middle of each goal line.
At the end of a season, the top team is declared the champion.
* Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team; awarded to attacking team.
Approximately 190–200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals.
The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may be eligible also to play in international club competitions in the following season.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the IFAB experimented with ways of creating a winner without requiring a penalty shootout, which was often seen as an undesirable way to end a match.
The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century AD.
Golden goal was used at the World Cup in 1998 and 2002.
The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations.
Both these experiments have been discontinued by IFAB.
Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, penalty kicks and corner kicks.
The Cambridge Rules were written at Trinity College, Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, Winchester and Shrewsbury schools.
The board was formed in 1886 after a meeting in Manchester of The Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association.
Within normal play, all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch, though the ball cannot be received in an offside position.
The Olympic men's tournament is played at Under-23 level.
IFAB recommends "that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team."
Within the English-speaking world, association football is now usually called ''football'' in the United Kingdom and mainly ''soccer'' in Canada and the United States.
England is also home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor.
The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse.
The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the International Football Association Board in 1913.
Nettie Honeyball is quoted, "I founded the association late last year 1894, with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the 'ornamental and useless' creatures men have pictured.
''Phaininda'' and ''episkyros'' were Greek ball games.
Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these are:
A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game.
If the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of penalty shootouts (known officially in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the penalty mark") to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament.
Where aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home.
The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee.
* Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective.
Evidence shows that an ancient version of the game (Tsu Chu) was played by women during the Han Dynasty (25–220 CE).
The first match recorded by the Scottish Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow.
When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:
The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw.
The most recent edition of the tournament was the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.
The team that scores the most goals by the end of the match wins.
The number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style of play.
Penalties may include fines, points deductions (in league competitions) or even expulsion from competitions.
In England, the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.
Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture.
A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player, substitute or substituted player.
This added time is called ''additional time'' in FIFA documents, but is most commonly referred to as ''stoppage time'' or ''injury time'', while ''loss time'' can also be used as a synonym.
Nets are usually placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws.
This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick.
The finals tournament, which is held every four years, involves 32 national teams competing over a four-week period.
Two female figures are depicted in Han Dynasty (25–220 CE) frescoes, playing Tsu Chu.
The modern rules of association football are based on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England.
In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105&nbsp;m (344&nbsp;ft) long and 68&nbsp;m (223&nbsp;ft) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches; however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented.
If the score is level at the end of the game, either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition.
The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be  apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be  above the ground.
The laws are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game.
Goals scored during extra time periods count towards the final score of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament (with goals scored in a penalty shootout not making up part of the final score).
Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper.
Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play.
Teams are placed into tables, placing them in order according to points accrued.
At a professional level, most matches produce only a few goals.
These are generally synonymous with sovereign states, (for example: the Fédération Camerounaise de Football in Cameroon) but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for example the Scottish Football Association in Scotland).
Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury.
Reports of an annual match being played in Scotland are reported as early as the 1790s.
Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven.
In standard adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match.
The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee.
The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England.
Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players who are sent off in a game.
The eleven remaining clubs, under the charge of Ebenezer Cobb Morley, went on to ratify the original thirteen laws of the game.
Women's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World War, when employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game, much as it had done for men fifty years earlier.
They were not universally adopted.
I must confess, my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation, and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs, especially those which concern them most."
One of the attractions of association football is that a casual game can be played with only minimal equipment&nbsp;– a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to mark the positions of two sets of goalposts.
If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought on in their place.
Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, formed by former public school pupils in 1857, which led to formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867.
During the Han Dynasty (206 BC – 220 AD), ''cuju'' games were standardised and rules were established.
According to FIFA, the Chinese competitive game ''cuju'' (蹴鞠, literally "kick ball") is the earliest form of football for which there is scientific evidence.
While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to international competition, the actual Laws of the Game are set by the International Football Association Board, where each of the UK Associations has one vote, while FIFA collectively has four votes.
The longer boundary lines are ''touchlines'', while the shorter boundaries (on which the goals are placed) are ''goal lines''.
* Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
In game play, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a team-mate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper.
Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations.
The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games.
Added time was introduced because of an incident which happened in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa.
There are, however, a number of opinions about the accuracy of dates, the earliest estimates at 5000 BCE.
209 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations.
For example, there are central defenders, and left and right midfielders.
In many parts of the world football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations.
The score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows that decisions (including awards/non-awards of goals) were incorrect.
In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses.
The first World Cup game decided by a golden goal was France's victory over Paraguay in 1998.
Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA and instead in 1871 formed the Rugby Football Union.
A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic tournament.
A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
At the final meeting, the first FA treasurer, the representative from Blackheath, withdrew his club from the FA over the removal of two draft rules at the previous meeting: the first allowed for running with the ball in hand; the second for obstructing such a run by hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding.
Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh.
The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are maintained by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).
The FA's ban was rescinded in December 1969 with UEFA voting to officially recognise women's football in 1971.
The main exceptions to this system occur in some Latin American leagues, which divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish for ''Opening'' and ''Closing''), awarding a champion for each.
This led to the formation of the English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds.
There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles.
''Phaininda'', ''episkyros'' and ''harpastum'' were played involving hands and violence.
A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods.
People in Australia, Ireland and New Zealand use either or both terms, although national associations in Australia and New Zealand now primarily use "football" for the formal name.
The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number.
Trailing 1–0 and with just two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty.
The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they do use their hands during a throw-in restart.
Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager.
The FIFA headquarters are located in Zürich, Switzerland.
The Côte d'Ivoire national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 2006 and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouaké, an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time.
An annual competition in Mid-Lothian, Scotland during the 1790s is reported, too.
National associations oversee football within individual countries.
Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal.
''Cuju'' players could use any part of the body apart from hands and the intent was kicking a ball through an opening into a net.
The laws of the game are determined by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).
The first official international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of C. W. Alcock.
Association football in itself does not have a classical history.
The Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association in 1863.
The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results.
Football has the highest global television audience in sport.
Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the Laws.
The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution (yellow card) or dismissal (red card).
The most well-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894.
The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, such as futsal and beach soccer) is FIFA.
Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick.
These involved rules ending a game in extra time early, either when the first goal in extra time was scored (''golden goal''), or if one team held a lead at the end of the first period of extra time (''silver goal'').
In matches where a fourth official is appointed, towards the end of the half the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time he intends to add.
Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal.
The basic equipment or ''kit'' players are required to wear includes a shirt, shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards.
Association football has been played by women since at least the time of the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century.
By contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras.
Villa's goalkeeper kicked the ball out of the ground, and by the time the ball had been recovered, the 90&nbsp;minutes had elapsed and the game was over.
In 1863, football governing bodies introduced standardised rules to prohibit violence on the pitch, making it more socially acceptable for women to play.
This area is marked by the goal line, two lines starting on the goal line 16.5&nbsp;m (18&nbsp;yd) from the goalposts and extending 16.5&nbsp;m (18&nbsp;yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a line joining them.
Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game.
Non-competitive games included ''kemari'' in Japan, ''chuk-guk'' in Korea and ''woggabaliri'' in Australia.
Before the inception of the World Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) had the same status as the World Cup.
* Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team; awarded to defending team.
Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to represent his or her team in the coin toss prior to kick-off or penalty kicks.
In front of the goal is the penalty area.
Women may have been playing "football" for as long as the game has existed.
* Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred.
* Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to the opposing team to that which last touched the ball.
A second yellow card at the same game leads to a red card, and therefore to a dismissal.
Women's football has faced many struggles.
* Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between national champions, for example the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America.
The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991 and has been held every four years since, while women's football has been an Olympic event since 1996.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s women's association football was organised in the United Kingdom, eventually becoming the most prominent team sport for British women.
* North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time.
The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors, women and people with physical disabilities are permitted.
The growth in women's football has seen major competitions being launched at both national and international level mirroring the male competitions.
Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player, such as jewellery or watches.
It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the 'masculinity' of the game.
In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together, with a latex bladder for pressurisation, but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic.
* Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world FIFA have recognised that no historical connection exists with any game played in antiquity outside Europe.
There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection of stipulation and guidelines.
The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few seconds".
A standard adult football match consists of two periods of 45 minutes each, known as halves.
beach soccer, indoor soccer, and futsal) and for teams with disabilities (i.e.
The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper, but a number of specialised roles have evolved.
The major international competition in football is the World Cup, organised by FIFA.
