Ceres seems quite different in the glimpses Hubble has provided, with surface features that are unlikely to be due to simple craters and impact basins, but details will be expanded with the ''Dawn'' spacecraft, which entered Ceres orbit on 6 March 2015.
The first true asteroid to be photographed in close-up was 951 Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by 243 Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the ''Galileo'' probe en route to Jupiter.
A family has also been associated with the plutoid dwarf planet .
In addition, names can be proposed by the asteroid's discoverer, within guidelines established by the International Astronomical Union.
The number of asteroids then increases rapidly as their individual masses decrease.
Two events in later decades increased the alarm: the increasing acceptance of Walter Alvarez' hypothesis that an impact event resulted in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction, and the 1994 observation of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashing into Jupiter.
It is thought that planetesimals in the asteroid belt evolved much like the rest of the solar nebula until Jupiter neared its current mass, at which point excitation from orbital resonances with Jupiter ejected over 99% of planetesimals in the belt.
(433) Eros), but dropping the parentheses is quite common.
Measurements of the rotation rates of large asteroids in the asteroid belt show that there is an upper limit.
Of this, Ceres comprises , a third of the total.
Three other asteroids (2 Pallas, 3 Juno, and 4 Vesta) were discovered over the next few years, with Vesta found in 1807.
Asteroids play several potential roles in science fiction: as places human beings might colonize, resources for extracting minerals, hazards encountered by spacecraft traveling between two other points, and as a threat to life on Earth or other inhabited planets, dwarf planets and natural satellites by potential impact.
In the early second half of the nineteenth century, the terms "asteroid" and "planet" (not always qualified as "minor") were still used interchangeably.
Multiple pairs could be taken over a series of days.
The vast majority, however, are much smaller and are irregularly shaped; they are thought to be either surviving planetesimals or fragments of larger bodies.
This means that the cores of the planets could have formed relatively quickly.
In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may have been formed on asteroids and comets in outer space.
Among all the surveys, 4711 near-Earth asteroids have been discovered including over 600 more than  in diameter.
When astronomers started finding more small bodies that permanently resided further out than Jupiter, now called centaurs, they numbered them among the traditional asteroids, though there was debate over whether they should be considered asteroids or as a new type of object.
In September 2007, NASA launched the ''Dawn'' spacecraft, which orbited 4 Vesta from July 2011 to September 2012, and has been orbiting the dwarf planet 1 Ceres since 2015.
Therefore, this article will restrict itself for the most part to the classical asteroids: objects of the asteroid belt, Jupiter trojans, and near-Earth objects.
A few objects have ended up being dual-listed because they were first classified as minor planets but later showed evidence of cometary activity.
On 13 December 2012, China's lunar orbiter ''Chang'e 2'' flew within  of the asteroid 4179 Toutatis on an extended mission.
Organic compounds were also detected on the surface.
Finally, meteoroids can be composed of either cometary or asteroidal materials.
Rarely, small asteroids passing close to Earth may be visible to the naked eye for a short time.
Most of the smaller asteroids are thought to be piles of rubble held together loosely by gravity, though the largest are probably solid.
The number of asteroids decreases markedly with size.
Although asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of similar materials.
Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft en route to other destinations include 9969 Braille (by ''Deep Space 1'' in 1999), and 5535 Annefrank (by ''Stardust'' in 2002).
First, a region of the sky was photographed by a wide-field telescope, or astrograph.
The term "planetule" was coined by the geologist William Daniel Conybeare to describe minor planets, but is not in common use.
The presence of ice on 24 Themis supports this theory.
Scientists hypothesize that some of the first water brought to Earth was delivered by asteroid impacts after the collision that produced the Moon.
He introduced a disk (circle), a traditional symbol for a star, as the generic symbol for an asteroid.
Vesta is the only main-belt asteroid that can, on occasion, be visible to the naked eye.
That year Astraea's number was increased to ⑤, but the first four asteroids, Ceres to Vesta, were not listed by their numbers until the 1867 edition.
About 30–35% of the bodies in the asteroid belt belong to dynamical families each thought to have a common origin in a past collision between asteroids.
On subsequent nights, the sky would be charted again and any moving object would, hopefully, be spotted.
The three largest objects in the asteroid belt, Ceres, Pallas, and Vesta, grew to the stage of protoplanets.
However evidence suggests most of the color change occurs rapidly, in the first hundred thousands years, limiting the usefulness of spectral measurement for determining the age of asteroids.
As of March 2016, the Minor Planet Center had data on more than 1.3 million objects in the inner and outer Solar System, of which 750,000 had enough information to be given numbered designations.
A further distinction is that comets typically have more eccentric orbits than most asteroids; most "asteroids" with notably eccentric orbits are probably dormant or extinct comets.
Asteroids and the asteroid belt are a staple of science fiction stories.
'''Asteroids''' are minor planets, especially those of the inner Solar System.
Second, the two films or plates of the same region were viewed under a stereoscope.
These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroid's surface material.
These first three steps do not constitute asteroid discovery: the observer has only found an apparition, which gets a provisional designation, made up of the year of discovery, a letter representing the half-month of discovery, and finally a letter and a number indicating the discovery's sequential number (example: ).
The first dedicated asteroid probe was ''NEAR Shoemaker'', which photographed 253 Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around 433 Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001.
The difference between asteroids and meteoroids is mainly one of size: meteoroids have a diameter of less than one meter, whereas asteroids have a diameter of greater than one meter.
However, Karl Ludwig Hencke persisted, and began searching for more asteroids in 1830.
* The Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) team
The circle was soon abbreviated to a pair of parentheses, which were easier to typeset and sometimes omitted altogether over the next few decades, leading to the modern convention.
The fact that such large asteroids as Sylvia can be rubble piles, presumably due to disruptive impacts, has important consequences for the formation of the Solar System: Computer simulations of collisions involving solid bodies show them destroying each other as often as merging, but colliding rubble piles are more likely to merge.
The near-Earth asteroid 433 Eros had been discovered as long ago as 1898, and the 1930s brought a flurry of similar objects.
The first object, Ceres, was not discovered by a member of the group, but rather by accident in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi, director of the observatory of Palermo in Sicily.
According to one of the scientists, "The lines are becoming more and more blurred between comets and asteroids."
A couple of trojans have also been found orbiting with Mars.
However, it is becoming increasingly common for the term "asteroid" to be restricted to minor planets of the inner Solar System.
The main difference between an asteroid and a comet is that a comet shows a coma due to sublimation of near surface ices by solar radiation.
This was followed by the discovery of other similar bodies, which, with the equipment of the time, appeared to be points of light, like stars, showing little or no planetary disc, though readily distinguishable from stars due to their apparent motions.
Simulations and a discontinuity in spin rate and spectral properties suggest that asteroids larger than approximately  in diameter accreted during that early era, whereas smaller bodies are fragments from collisions between asteroids during or after the Jovian disruption.
Ceres and Vesta grew large enough to melt and differentiate, with heavy metallic elements sinking to the core, leaving rocky minerals in the crust.
This suggests that most asteroids with a diameter over 100 meters are rubble piles formed through accumulation of debris after collisions between asteroids.
Notable asteroid hunters of this early era were J. R. Hind, Annibale de Gasparis, Robert Luther, H. M. S. Goldschmidt, Jean Chacornac, James Ferguson, Norman Robert Pogson, E. W. Tempel, J. C. Watson, C. H. F. Peters, A. Borrelly, J. Palisa, the Henry brothers and Auguste Charlois.
The three most important groups of near-Earth asteroids are the Apollos, Amors, and Atens.
After eight more years of fruitless searches, most astronomers assumed that there were no more and abandoned any further searches.
A list of teams using such systems includes:
This dramatically increased the rate of detection compared with earlier visual methods: Wolf alone discovered 248 asteroids, beginning with 323 Brucia, whereas only slightly more than 300 had been discovered up to that point.
* The Catalina Sky Survey (CSS)
Ceres appears to be composed of a rocky core covered by an icy mantle, where Vesta is thought to have a nickel-iron core, olivine mantle, and basaltic crust.
This task required that hand-drawn sky charts be prepared for all stars in the zodiacal band down to an agreed-upon limit of faintness.
10 Hygiea, however, which appears to have a uniformly primitive composition of carbonaceous chondrite, is thought to be the largest undifferentiated asteroid.
Discovery program the ''Psyche'' spacecraft proposal to 16 Psyche and ''Lucy'' spacecraft to Jupiter trojans made it to the semifinalist stage of mission selection.
Asteroids become darker and redder with age due to space weathering.
Astronomers began to realize the possibilities of Earth impact.
In addition, asteroids formed closer to the sun, preventing the development of the aforementioned cometary ice.
The location would be measured relative to known star locations.
For asteroids rotating faster than approximately this rate, the inertia at the surface is greater than the gravitational force, so any loose surface material would be flung out.
In May 2016, significant asteroid data arising from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer and NEOWISE missions have been questioned, but the criticism has yet to undergo peer review.
As this ice layer is sublimated, it may be getting replenished by a reservoir of ice under the surface.
Fifteen years later, he found 5 Astraea, the first new asteroid in 38 years.
This prompted the astronomer Sir William Herschel to propose the term "asteroid", coined in Greek as ἀστεροειδής, or ''asteroeidēs'', meaning 'star-like, star-shaped', and derived from the Ancient Greek  ''astēr'' 'star, planet'.
No asteroid with a diameter larger than 100 meters has a rotation period smaller than 2.2 hours.
Asteroids contain traces of amino acids and other organic compounds, and some speculate that asteroid impacts may have seeded the early Earth with the chemicals necessary to initiate life, or may have even brought life itself to Earth ''(also see panspermia)''.
Near-Earth asteroids, or NEAs, are asteroids that have orbits that pass close to that of Earth.
Until the age of space travel, objects in the asteroid belt were merely pinpricks of light in even the largest telescopes and their shapes and terrain remained a mystery.
Asteroids are commonly classified according to two criteria: the characteristics of their orbits, and features of their reflectance spectrum.
So far, every asteroid with moons has turned out to be a rubble pile, a loose conglomeration of rock and metal that may be half empty space by volume.
The first close-up photographs of asteroid-like objects were taken in 1971, when the ''Mariner 9'' probe imaged Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, which are probably captured asteroids.
The LINEAR system alone has discovered 138,393 asteroids, as of 20 September 2013.
The last step of discovery is to send the locations and time of observations to the Minor Planet Center, where computer programs determine whether an apparition ties together earlier apparitions into a single orbit.
The first asteroid to be discovered, Ceres, was found in 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi, and was originally considered to be a new planet.
+Approximate number of asteroids (N) larger than a certain diameter (D)
Individual asteroids are classified by their characteristic spectra, with the majority falling into three main groups: C-type, M-type, and S-type.
Various asteroid deflection strategies have been proposed, as early as the 1960s.
Adding in the next three most massive objects, Vesta (9%), Pallas (7%), and Hygiea (3%), brings this figure up to 51%; whereas the three after that, 511 Davida (1.2%), 704 Interamnia (1.0%), and 52 Europa (0.9%), only add another 3% to the total mass.
Apart from the broadest divisions, it is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered.
The size of asteroids varies greatly, some reaching as much as  across.
The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied.
, 14,464 near-Earth asteroids are known and the number over one kilometre in diameter is estimated to be 900–1,000.
On 7 October 2009, the presence of water ice was confirmed on the surface of 24 Themis using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility.
This belt is now estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than  in diameter, and millions of smaller ones.
Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics.
The former was proposed in 1984 by David J. Tholen, and was based on data collected from an eight-color asteroid survey performed in the 1980s.
If so, the object receives a catalogue number and the observer of the first apparition with a calculated orbit is declared the discoverer, and granted the honor of naming the object subject to the approval of the International Astronomical Union.
Both Earth and Venus are known to have quasi-satellites.
Other recent observations, such as the analysis of the cometary dust collected by the ''Stardust'' probe, are increasingly blurring the distinction between comets and asteroids, suggesting "a continuum between asteroids and comets" rather than a sharp dividing line.
These images revealed the irregular, potato-like shapes of most asteroids, as did later images from the Voyager probes of the small moons of the gas giants.
Most were later ejected by Jupiter, but those that remained may be the D-type asteroids, and possibly include Ceres.
They are thought to be predominantly comet-like in composition, though some may be more akin to asteroids.
The three largest are very much like miniature planets: they are roughly spherical, have at least partly differentiated interiors, and are thought to be surviving protoplanets.
In 2002, the Small Main-Belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey resulted in a modified version of the Tholen taxonomy with 24 different types.
It was known that there were many more, but most astronomers did not bother with them, calling them "vermin of the skies", a phrase variously attributed to Eduard Suess and Edmund Weiss.
* The Campo Imperatore Near-Earth Object Survey (CINEOS) team
Once an asteroid's orbit has been confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g.
Limited information about the shapes and compositions of asteroids can be inferred from their light curves (their variation in brightness as they rotate) and their spectral properties, and asteroid sizes can be estimated by timing the lengths of star occulations (when an asteroid passes directly in front of a star).
Other languages prefer "planetoid" (Greek for "planet-like"), and this term is occasionally used in English especially for larger minor planets such as the dwarf planets as well as an alternative for asteroids since they are not star-like.
After this, other astronomers joined in the search and at least one new asteroid was discovered every year after that (except the wartime year 1945).
On 22 January 2014, European Space Agency (ESA) scientists reported the detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt.
* The Japanese Spaceguard Association
In this article, the term "asteroid" refers to the minor planets of the inner Solar System including those co-orbital with Jupiter.
In 1851, after the fifteenth asteroid (Eunomia) had been discovered, Johann Franz Encke made a major change in the upcoming 1854 edition of the ''Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch'' (BAJ, ''Berlin Astronomical Yearbook'').
Piazzi named it after Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture.
These asteroids may be remnants of the protoplanetary disk, and in this region the accretion of planetesimals into planets during the formative period of the Solar System was prevented by large gravitational perturbations by Jupiter.
The proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type; some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.
Until 1998, asteroids were discovered by a four-step process.
* The Near-Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT) team
In 2006, the term "small Solar System body" was also introduced to cover both most minor planets and comets.
As minor planets in the outer Solar System were discovered and found to have volatile-based surfaces that resemble those of comets, they were often distinguished from asteroids of the asteroid belt.
The surface of the asteroid appears completely covered in ice.
Examples are 3753 Cruithne and .
* The Asiago-DLR Asteroid Survey (ADAS)
Various dynamical groups of asteroids have been discovered orbiting in the inner Solar System.
The word "planetesimal" has a similar meaning, but refers specifically to the small building blocks of the planets that existed when the Solar System was forming.
There is increasing interest in identifying asteroids whose orbits cross Earth's, and that could, given enough time, collide with Earth ''(see Earth-crosser asteroids)''.
This has led to significant confusion.
The two most widely used taxonomies now used are the Tholen classification and SMASS classification.
The European ''Rosetta'' probe (launched in 2004) flew by 2867 Šteins in 2008 and 21 Lutetia, the third-largest asteroid visited to date, in 2010.
These were named after and are generally identified with carbon-rich,  metallic, and silicate (stony) compositions, respectively.
Some asteroids have moons or are co-orbiting binaries: Rubble piles, moons, binaries, and scattered asteroid families are thought to be the results of collisions that disrupted a parent asteroid.
Radar imaging can yield good information about asteroid shapes and orbital and rotational parameters, especially for near-Earth asteroids.
20 Massalia was the first asteroid that was not assigned an iconic symbol, and no iconic symbols were created after the 1855 discovery of 37 Fides.
Conversely, some (perhaps all) comets are eventually depleted of their surface volatile ices and become asteroid-like.
Third, once a moving body was identified, its location would be measured precisely using a digitizing microscope.
However, other orbital families exist with significant populations, including the near-Earth objects.
The mass of all the objects of the asteroid belt, lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, is estimated to be about 2.8–, or about 4% of the mass of the Moon.
The circle was then numbered in order of discovery to indicate a specific asteroid (although he assigned ① to the fifth, Astraea, while continuing to designate the first four only with their existing iconic symbols).
When found, asteroids were seen as a class of objects distinct from comets, and there was no unified term for the two until "small Solar System body" was coined in 2006.
The detection was made by using the far-infrared abilities of the Herschel Space Observatory.
Furthermore, most do not have the highly eccentric orbits associated with comets, and the ones so far discovered are larger than traditional comet nuclei.
Vesta has compression fractures encircling a radius-size crater at its south pole but is otherwise a spheroid.
He also found 6 Hebe less than two years later.
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroid's composition.
The larger ones have also been called '''planetoids'''.
The majority of known asteroids orbit within the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, generally in relatively low-eccentricity (i.e.
In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on color, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by Clark R. Chapman, David Morrison, and Ben Zellner.
Asteroids vary greatly in size, from almost  for the largest down to rocks just 1 meter across.
In order of discovery, these were: 1221 Amor, 1862 Apollo, 2101 Adonis, and finally 69230 Hermes, which approached within 0.005 AU of Earth in 1937.
Both systems have three broad categories of C, S, and X asteroids, where X consists of mostly metallic asteroids, such as the M-type.
In September 2005, the Japanese ''Hayabusa'' probe started studying 25143 Itokawa in detail and was plagued with difficulties, but returned samples of its surface to Earth on 13 June 2010.
Sometimes these horseshoe objects temporarily become quasi-satellites for a few decades or a few hundred years, before returning to their earlier status.
All these considerations helped spur the launch of highly efficient surveys that consist of Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) cameras and computers directly connected to telescopes.
In the Nice model, many Kuiper-belt objects are captured in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU.
For almost two centuries, from the discovery of Ceres in 1801 until the discovery of the first centaur, Chiron, in 1977, all known asteroids spent most of their time at or within the orbit of Jupiter, though a few such as Hidalgo ventured far beyond Jupiter for part of their orbit.
He discovered a new star-like object in Taurus and followed the displacement of this object during several nights.
The innermost of these are the Kuiper-belt objects, called "objects" partly to avoid the need to classify them as asteroids or comets.
As of spring 2011, it was estimated that 89% to 96% of near-Earth asteroids one kilometer or larger in diameter had been discovered.
The expected motion of the missing planet was about 30 seconds of arc per hour, readily discernible by observers.
Even a century later, only a few thousand asteroids were identified, numbered and named.
The large majority of known asteroids orbit in the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, or are co-orbital with Jupiter (the Jupiter trojans).
However, such objects could be associated with outer planets as well.
The finding is unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to "sprout jets and plumes".
* The Lowell Observatory Near-Earth-Object Search (LONEOS) team
In terms of delta-v and propellant requirements, NEOs are more easily accessible than the Moon.
Such objects, if associated with Earth or Venus or even hypothetically Mercury, are a special class of Aten asteroids.
In October 2013, water was detected on an extrasolar body for the first time, on an asteroid orbiting the white dwarf GD 61.
The original classification system had three categories: C-types for dark carbonaceous objects (75% of known asteroids), S-types for stony (silicaceous) objects (17% of known asteroids) and U for those that did not fit into either C or S. This classification has since been expanded to include many other asteroid types.
There are millions of asteroids, many thought to be the shattered remnants of planetesimals, bodies within the young Sun's solar nebula that never grew large enough to become planets.
Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are tighter and result from the catastrophic break-up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past.
A newly discovered asteroid is given a provisional designation (such as ) consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code indicating the half-month of discovery and the sequence within that half-month.
Only half a dozen asteroids are larger than 87 Sylvia, though none of them have moons; however, some smaller asteroids are thought to be more massive, suggesting they may not have been disrupted, and indeed 511 Davida, the same size as Sylvia to within measurement error, is estimated to be two and a half times as massive, though this is highly uncertain.
Under the stereoscope, the image of the body would seem to float slightly above the background of stars.
In 1891, Max Wolf pioneered the use of astrophotography to detect asteroids, which appeared as short streaks on long-exposure photographic plates.
Any body in orbit around the Sun would move slightly between the pair of films.
When the IAU introduced the class small Solar System bodies in 2006 to include most objects previously classified as minor planets and comets, they created the class of dwarf planets for the largest minor planets—those that have enough mass to have become ellipsoidal under their own gravity.
50-km (31-mi) 253 Mathilde is a rubble pile saturated with craters with diameters the size of the asteroid's radius, and Earth-based observations of 300-km (186-mi) 511 Davida, one of the largest asteroids after the big four, reveal a similarly angular profile, suggesting it is also saturated with radius-size craters.
This resulted in 14 asteroid categories.
However, Psyche was given an iconic symbol as well, as were a few other asteroids discovered over the next few years (see chart above).
In the case of comets, the difference is one of composition: while asteroids are mainly composed of mineral and rock, comets are composed of dust and ice.
Then, when the first trans-Neptunian object (other than Pluto), , was discovered in 1992, and especially when large numbers of similar objects started turning up, new terms were invented to sidestep the issue: Kuiper-belt object, trans-Neptunian object, scattered-disc object, and so on.
There are also several smaller classes.
Only one asteroid, 4 Vesta, which has a relatively reflective surface, is normally visible to the naked eye, and this only in very dark skies when it is favorably positioned.
Although this generally follows a power law, there are 'bumps' at  and , where more asteroids than expected from a logarithmic distribution are found.
The physical composition of asteroids is varied and in most cases poorly understood.
Their orbits are perturbed by the gravity of other bodies in the Solar System and by the Yarkovsky effect.
The U.S. military also declassified the information that its military satellites, built to detect nuclear explosions, had detected hundreds of upper-atmosphere impacts by objects ranging from one to 10 metres across.
Composition is calculated from three primary sources: albedo, surface spectrum, and density.
However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and a variety of classifications are in use.
The best modern ground-based telescopes and the Earth-orbiting Hubble Space Telescope can resolve a small amount of detail on the surfaces of the largest asteroids, but even these mostly remain little more than fuzzy blobs.
