The Karin Cluster apparently formed about 5.7 million years ago from a collision with a progenitor asteroid 33&nbsp;km in radius.
The four largest objects, Ceres, 4 Vesta, 2 Pallas, and 10 Hygiea, account for half of the belt's total mass, with almost one-third accounted for by Ceres alone.
Zone I lies between the 4:1 resonance (2.06 AU) and 3:1 resonance (2.5 AU) Kirkwood gaps.
Instead they continued to orbit the Sun as before, occasionally colliding.
Conversely, collisions that occur at low relative speeds may also join two asteroids.
A total of 1,000 asteroids had been found by 1921, 10,000 by 1981, and 100,000 by 2000.
The finding was unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to "sprout jets and plumes".
Neither the appellation of planets, nor that of comets, can with any propriety of language be given to these two stars ...
Approximately one-third of the asteroids in the asteroid belt are members of an asteroid family.
Together they comprise over 75% of the visible asteroids.
The total mass of the asteroid belt is approximately 4% that of the Moon, or 22% that of Pluto, and roughly twice that of Pluto's moon Charon (whose diameter is 1200&nbsp;km).
They have undergone considerable evolution since their formation, including internal heating (in the first few tens of millions of years), surface melting from impacts, space weathering from radiation, and bombardment by micrometeorites.
The asteroid material is so thinly distributed that numerous unmanned spacecraft have traversed it without incident.
The Hungaria group is separated from the main body by the 4:1 Kirkwood gap and their orbits have a high inclination.
Some members belong to the Mars-crossing category of asteroids, and gravitational perturbations by Mars are likely a factor in reducing the total population of this group.
The American astronomer Benjamin Peirce seems to have adopted that terminology and to have been one of its promoters.
The burning of Lilienthal in the Napoleonic wars brought this first period of discovery to a close, and only in 1845 did astronomers detect another object (5 Astraea).
When the asteroid belt was first formed, the temperatures at a distance of 2.7&nbsp;AU from the Sun formed a "snow line"  below the freezing point of water.
In 1866, Daniel Kirkwood announced the discovery of gaps in the distances of these bodies' orbits from the Sun.
The current asteroid belt is believed to contain only a small fraction of the mass of the primordial belt.
This "core" region contains approximately 93.4% of all numbered minor planets within the Solar System.
There are few asteroids beyond 4.2&nbsp;AU, until Jupiter's orbit.
They dominate the asteroid belt's outer regions.
Some asteroid families have formed recently, in astronomical terms.
An asteroid in the 3:1 Kirkwood gap would orbit the Sun three times for each Jovian orbit, for instance.
In an anonymous footnote to his 1766 translation of Charles Bonnet's ''Contemplation de la Nature'', the astronomer Johann Daniel Titius of Wittenberg noted an apparent pattern in the layout of the planets.
Primarily because of gravitational perturbations, most of the material was ejected from the belt within about a million years of formation, leaving behind less than 0.1% of the original mass.
This hypothesis was reinforced by the further discovery in 2007 of two asteroids in the outer belt, 7472 Kumakiri and , with differing basaltic composition that could not have originated from Vesta.
Their surface composition is similar to carbonaceous chondrite meteorites.
They are named after the main member, 434 Hungaria; the group contains at least 52 named asteroids.
Lilienthal is a town near Bremen, Germany that was home to a prominent telescope at the time.
Most bodies formed inside the radius of this gap were swept up by Mars (which has an aphelion at 1.67&nbsp;AU) or ejected by its gravitational perturbations in the early history of the Solar System.
Sometimes, the term ''main belt'' is used to refer only to the more compact "core" region where the greatest concentration of bodies is found.
Other early appearances occur in Robert James Mann's ''A Guide to the Knowledge of the Heavens'', "The orbits of the asteroids are placed in a wide belt of space, extending between the extremes of ...".
Along with the asteroid bodies, the asteroid belt also contains bands of dust with particle radii of up to a few hundred micrometres.
The largest asteroid to be a true member of a family (as opposed to an interloper in the case of Ceres with the Gefion family) is 4 Vesta.
Piazzi initially believed it to be a comet, but its lack of a coma suggested it was a planet.
Other recent cluster formations, such as the Iannini cluster
Eventually, they were dropped from the planet list as first suggested by Alexander von Humboldt in the early 1850s, and Herschel's choice of nomenclature, "asteroids", gradually came into common use.
Computer simulations suggest that the original asteroid belt may have contained mass equivalent to the Earth.
Since their formation, the size distribution of the asteroid belt has remained relatively stable: there has been no significant increase or decrease in the typical dimensions of the main-belt asteroids.
The main or core population of the asteroid belt is sometimes divided into three zones, based on the most prominent Kirkwood gaps.
Over 200 asteroids are known to be larger than 100&nbsp;km, and a survey in the infrared wavelengths has shown that the asteroid belt has 0.7–1.7 million asteroids with a diameter of 1&nbsp;km or more.
In 2006 it was announced that a population of comets had been discovered within the asteroid belt beyond the snow line, which may have provided a source of water for Earth's oceans.
Planetesimals within the region which would become the asteroid belt were too strongly perturbed by Jupiter's gravity to form a planet.
(''circa'' 1–5 million years ago), may have provided additional sources of this asteroid dust.
On its way to Jupiter, ''Juno'' traversed the asteroid belt without collecting science data.
This indicates that their materials have been significantly modified from their primordial composition, probably through melting and reformation.
Some are believed to have formed from the metallic cores of differentiated progenitor bodies that were disrupted through collision.
This fine material is produced, at least in part, from collisions between asteroids, and by the impact of micrometeorites upon the asteroids.
As a result, 99.9% of the asteroid belt's original mass was lost in the first 100 million years of the Solar System's history.
The large amount of energy required to destroy a planet, combined with the belt's low combined mass, which is only about 4% of the mass of the Moon, do not support the hypothesis.
This gravitational accretion led to the formation of the planets.
They were located at positions where their period of revolution about the Sun was an integer fraction of Jupiter's orbital period.
These have a 7:4 orbital resonance with Jupiter.
In 1768, the astronomer Johann Elert Bode made note of Titius's relationship in his ''Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels'' (English: ''Instruction for the Knowledge of the Starry Heavens'') but did not credit Titius until later editions.
Between Mars and Jupiter, however, gravitational perturbations from Jupiter imbued the protoplanets with too much orbital energy for them to accrete into a planet.
(For example, an 8:3 resonance for asteroids with a semi-major axis of 2.71 AU.)
Due to the low density of materials within the belt, the odds of a probe running into an asteroid are now estimated at less than one in a billion.
This lies between the strong 4:1 and 2:1 Kirkwood gaps at 2.06 and 3.27 AU, and at orbital eccentricities less than roughly 0.33, along with orbital inclinations below about 20°.
Fifteen months later, Olbers discovered a second object in the same region, Pallas.
Over time, however, this hypothesis has fallen from favor.
During the early history of the Solar System, the asteroids melted to some degree, allowing elements within them to be partially or completely differentiated by mass.
The asteroid belt is also termed the '''main asteroid belt''' or '''main belt''' to distinguish it from other asteroid populations in the Solar System such as near-Earth asteroids and trojan asteroids.
There are about 20–30 associations that are almost certainly asteroid families.
These share similar orbital elements, such as semi-major axis, eccentricity, and orbital inclination as well as similar spectral features, all of which indicate a common origin in the breakup of a larger body.
Ceres, the asteroid belt's only dwarf planet, is about 950&nbsp;km in diameter, whereas Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea have mean diameters of less than 600&nbsp;km.
The society assigned to each astronomer a 15° region of the zodiac to search for the missing planet.
Carbonaceous asteroids, as their name suggests, are carbon-rich.
From this, their asteroidal appearance, if I take my name, and call them Asteroids; reserving for myself however the liberty of changing that name, if another, more expressive of their nature, should occur.
It was once thought that collisions of asteroids form a major component of the zodiacal light.
Once the clumps reached sufficient mass, they could draw in other bodies through gravitational attraction and become planetesimals.
The main gaps occur at the 3:1, 5:2, 7:3, and 2:1 mean-motion resonances with Jupiter.
The asteroids are not samples of the primordial Solar System.
Notable members included Herschel, the British astronomer royal, Nevil Maskelyne, Charles Messier, and Heinrich Olbers.
Most belt asteroids imaged to date have come from brief flyby opportunities by probes headed for other targets.
The asteroids are spread over such a large volume that it would be improbable to reach an asteroid without aiming carefully.
However, there are also some silicate compounds that can produce a similar appearance.
The Phocaea family orbit between 2.25 and 2.5 AU from the Sun.
The Veritas family formed about 8.3 million years ago; evidence includes interplanetary dust recovered from ocean sediment.
The expression "asteroid belt" came into use in the very early 1850s, although it is hard to pinpoint who coined the term.
Several otherwise unremarkable bodies in the outer belt show cometary activity.
Classes of small Solar System bodies in other regions are the near-Earth objects, the centaurs, the Kuiper belt objects, the scattered disc objects, the sednoids, and the Oort cloud objects.
Likewise, the HED meteorites may also have originated from Vesta as a result of this collision.
Asteroid orbits continue to be appreciably perturbed whenever their period of revolution about the Sun forms an orbital resonance with Jupiter.
Modern asteroid survey systems now use automated means to locate new minor planets in ever-increasing quantities.
One hundred asteroids had been located by mid-1868, and in 1891 the introduction of astrophotography by Max Wolf accelerated the rate of discovery still further.
For example, the large M-type asteroid 22 Kalliope does not appear to be primarily composed of metal.
As Jupiter migrated inward following its formation, these resonances would have swept across the asteroid belt, dynamically exciting the region's population and increasing their velocities relative to each other.
The combination of this fine asteroid dust, as well as ejected cometary material, produces the zodiacal light.
Planetesimals formed beyond this radius were able to accumulate ice.
They have a relatively high albedo, and form about 17% of the total asteroid population.
The age estimate is based on the probability of the members having their current orbits, rather than from any physical evidence.
During the first few million years of the Solar System's history, an accretion process of sticky collisions caused the clumping of small particles, which gradually increased in size.
If one began a numerical sequence at 0, then included 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, etc., doubling each time, and added four to each number and divided by 10, this produced a remarkably close approximation to the radii of the orbits of the known planets as measured in astronomical units.
Graphical displays of these elements, for members of the asteroid belt, show concentrations indicating the presence of an asteroid family.
Shortly thereafter, new objects were found at an accelerating rate, and counting them among the planets became increasingly cumbersome.
The temperature of the asteroid belt varies with the distance from the Sun.
According to one of the scientists, "The lines are becoming more and more blurred between comets and asteroids."
Zone III extends from the outer edge of Zone II to the 2:1 resonance gap (3.28 AU).
Three prominent bands of dust have been found within the asteroid belt.
Although some scientists refer to the asteroids as residual planetesimals, other scientists consider them distinct.
Some of the debris from collisions can form meteoroids that enter the Earth's atmosphere.
Unlike the other known planets, the objects remained points of light even under the highest telescope magnifications instead of resolving into discs.
It became known as "Bode's law".
''Pioneer 11'', ''Voyagers 1'' and ''2'' and ''Ulysses'' passed through the belt without imaging any asteroids.
Upon completing a series of observations of Ceres and Pallas, he concluded,
These are composed primarily of S-type asteroids, whereas the neighboring Hungaria family includes some E-types.
Another high-inclination group in the inner part of the asteroid belt is the Phocaea family.
The first English use seems to be in the 1850 translation (by E. C. Otté) of Alexander von Humboldt's ''Cosmos'': "... and the regular appearance, about the 13th of November and the 11th of August, of shooting stars, which probably form part of a belt of asteroids intersecting the Earth's orbit and moving with planetary velocity".
One mystery of the asteroid belt is the relative rarity of V-type, or basaltic asteroids.
Only the ''Dawn'', NEAR and ''Hayabusa'' missions have studied asteroids for a protracted period in orbit and at the surface.
These have similar orbital inclinations as the Eos, Koronis, and Themis asteroid families, and so are possibly associated with those groupings.
This pattern, now known as the Titius–Bode law, predicted the semi-major axes of the six planets of the time (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn) provided one allowed for a "gap" between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
The remaining bodies range down to the size of a dust particle.
Only a few months later, a non-member of the Celestial Police confirmed their expectations.
At the time there was some concern that the debris in the belt would pose a hazard to the spacecraft, but it has since been safely traversed by 12 spacecraft without incident.
The Vesta family is believed to have formed as the result of a crater-forming impact on Vesta.
Nonetheless, collisions between large asteroids do occur, and these can form an asteroid family whose members have similar orbital characteristics and compositions.
Observations, however, suggest that 99 percent of the predicted basaltic material is missing.
Orbital resonances occurred where the orbital period of an object in the belt formed an integer fraction of the orbital period of Jupiter, perturbing the object into a different orbit; the region lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter contains many such orbital resonances.
The asteroid belt may also be divided into the inner and outer belts, with the inner belt formed by asteroids orbiting nearer to Mars than the 3:1 Kirkwood gap (2.5&nbsp;AU), and the outer belt formed by those asteroids closer to Jupiter's orbit.
Determined to bring the Solar System to order, the group became known as the "Himmelspolizei", or Celestial Police.
A collision may fragment an asteroid into numerous smaller pieces (leading to the formation of a new asteroid family).
Asteroid families can be confirmed when the members display common spectral features.
Individual asteroids within the asteroid belt are categorized by their spectra, with most falling into three basic groups: carbonaceous (C-type), silicate (S-type), and metal-rich (M-type).
The Hungaria asteroids lie closer to the Sun than the 4:1 resonance, but are protected from disruption by their high inclination.
The '''asteroid belt''' is the circumstellar disc in the Solar System located roughly between the orbits of the planets Mars and Jupiter.
On 22 January 2014, ESA scientists reported the detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt.
They are more red in hue than the other asteroids and have a very low albedo.
Of the 50,000 meteorites found on Earth to date, 99.8 percent are believed to have originated in the asteroid belt.
The total mass of the asteroid belt is estimated to be 2.8×1021 to 3.2×1021 kilograms, which is just 4% of the mass of the Moon.
Perturbations by Jupiter send bodies straying there into unstable orbits.
In regions where the average velocity of the collisions was too high, the shattering of planetesimals tended to dominate over accretion, preventing the formation of planet-sized bodies.
The spectra of their surfaces reveal the presence of silicates and some metal, but no significant carbonaceous compounds.
Main-belt comets may have been a major source of the Earth's oceans, because the deuterium–hydrogen ratio is too low for classical comets to have been the principal source.
The first spacecraft to traverse the asteroid belt was ''Pioneer 10'', which entered the region on 16 July 1972.
Smaller associations of asteroids are called groups or clusters.
Accordingly, in 1802, William Herschel suggested they be placed into a separate category, named "asteroids", after the Greek ''asteroeides'', meaning "star-like".
Additional groupings have been found that are less certain.
According to some models, there was insufficient outgassing of water during the Earth's formative period to form the oceans, requiring an external source such as a cometary bombardment.
Within the asteroid belt, the number distribution of M-type asteroids peaks at a semi-major axis of about 2.7&nbsp;AU.
Skirting the outer edge of the asteroid belt is the Cybele group, orbiting between 3.3 and 3.5&nbsp;AU.
They resemble small stars so much as hardly to be distinguished from them.
Chemically, their spectra match the primordial composition of the early Solar System, with only the lighter elements and volatiles removed.
Today, most scientists accept that, rather than fragmenting from a progenitor planet, the asteroids never formed a planet at all.
The Hilda family orbit between 3.5 and 4.2&nbsp;AU, and have relatively circular orbits and a stable 3:2 orbital resonance with Jupiter.
Further, the significant chemical differences between the asteroids become difficult to explain if they come from the same planet.
To date, there is no scientific explanation for the law, and astronomers' consensus regards it as a coincidence.
However, computer simulations by Nesvorný and colleagues attributed 85 percent of the zodiacal-light dust to fragmentations of Jupiter-family comets, rather than to comets and collisions between asteroids in the asteroid belt.
On January 1, 1801, Giuseppe Piazzi, chair of astronomy at the University of Palermo, Sicily, found a tiny moving object in an orbit with exactly the radius predicted by the Titius–Bode law.
These latter two are the only V-type asteroids discovered in the outer belt to date.
S-type (silicate-rich) asteroids are more common toward the inner region of the belt, within 2.5 AU of the Sun.
The orbital distribution of the asteroids reaches a maximum at an eccentricity of around 0.07 and an inclination below 4°.
Here the two families of Trojan asteroids can be found, which, at least for objects larger than 1&nbsp;km, are approximately as numerous as the asteroids of the asteroid belt.
The high population of the asteroid belt makes for a very active environment, where collisions between asteroids occur frequently (on astronomical time scales).
The semi-major axis of an asteroid is used to describe the dimensions of its orbit around the Sun, and its value determines the minor planet's orbital period.
It is not yet clear whether all M-types are compositionally similar, or whether it is a label for several varieties which do not fit neatly into the main C and S classes.
''Dawn'' explored Vesta from July 2011 to September 2012, and has been orbiting Ceres since March 2015.
He dubbed it "Ceres", after the Roman goddess of the harvest and patron of Sicily.
The asteroid belt formed from the primordial solar nebula as a group of planetesimals.
Apart from their rapid movement, they appeared indistinguishable from stars.
The actual spatial density of asteroids in these gaps does not differ significantly from the neighboring regions.
More recently, the Datura cluster appears to have formed about 450 thousand years ago from a collision with a main-belt asteroid.
About half the mass of the belt is contained in the four largest asteroids: Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea.
At most 10 percent of the dust is attributed to the asteroid belt.
Most asteroids within the asteroid belt have orbital eccentricities of less than 0.4, and an inclination of less than 30°.
Some fragments eventually found their way into the inner Solar System, leading to meteorite impacts with the inner planets.
Some of the progenitor bodies may even have undergone periods of explosive volcanism and formed magma oceans.
Some of the most prominent families in the asteroid belt (in order of increasing semi-major axes) are the Flora, Eunoma, Koronis, Eos, and Themis families.
''Galileo'' imaged 951 Gaspra in 1991 and 243 Ida in 1993, NEAR imaged 253 Mathilde in 1997, ''Cassini'' imaged 2685 Masursky in 2000, ''Stardust'' imaged 5535 Annefrank in 2002, ''New Horizons'' imaged 132524 APL in 2006, ''Rosetta'' imaged 2867 Šteins in September 2008 and 21 Lutetia in July 2010, and ''Dawn'' orbited Vesta between July 2011 and September 2012 and has orbited Ceres since March 2015.
The apparent magnitudes of most of the known asteroids are 11–19, with the median at about 16.
When William Herschel discovered Uranus in 1781, the planet's orbit matched the law almost perfectly, leading astronomers to conclude that there had to be a planet between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
The discovery of Neptune in 1846 led to the discrediting of the Titius–Bode law in the eyes of scientists, because its orbit was nowhere near the predicted position.
In 1800 the astronomer Baron Franz Xaver von Zach recruited 24 of his fellows into a club, the Vereinigte Astronomische Gesellschaft ("United Astronomical Society") which he informally dubbed the "Lilienthal Society" for its meetings in Lilienthal.
The Flora family, one of the largest with more than 800 known members, may have formed from a collision less than a billion years ago.
The gaps are not seen in a simple snapshot of the locations of the asteroids at any one time because asteroid orbits are elliptical, and many asteroids still cross through the radii corresponding to the gaps.
M-type (metal-rich) asteroids form about 10% of the total population; their spectra resemble that of iron-nickel.
Because their orbits cannot be explained through capture of classical comets, it is thought that many of the outer asteroids may be icy, with the ice occasionally exposed to sublimation through small impacts.
However, the discovery of the asteroid 1459 Magnya revealed a slightly different chemical composition from the other basaltic asteroids discovered until then, suggesting a different origin.
When the mean orbital period of an asteroid is an integer fraction of the orbital period of Jupiter, a mean-motion resonance with the gas giant is created that is sufficient to perturb an asteroid to new orbital elements.
Despite Herschel's coinage, for several decades it remained common practice to refer to these objects as planets.
Planetesimals are the smaller precursors of the protoplanets.
In his footnote Titius declared, "But should the Lord Architect have left that space empty?
Kirkwood proposed that the gravitational perturbations of the planet led to the removal of asteroids from these orbits.
Collisions between main-belt bodies with a mean radius of 10&nbsp;km are expected to occur about once every 10 million years.
By 1807, further investigation revealed two new objects in the region: 3 Juno and 4 Vesta.
Weaker resonances occur at other semi-major axis values, with fewer asteroids found than nearby.
Theories of asteroid formation predict that objects the size of Vesta or larger should form crusts and mantles, which would be composed mainly of basaltic rock, resulting in more than half of all asteroids being composed either of basalt or olivine.
However, this cluster may have been a source for some zodiacal dust material.
Thus although a typical asteroid has a relatively circular orbit and lies near the plane of the ecliptic, some asteroid orbits can be highly eccentric or travel well outside the ecliptic plane.
Zone II continues from the end of Zone I out to the 5:2 resonance gap (2.82 AU).
In 1802, shortly after discovering Pallas, Olbers suggested to Herschel that Ceres and Pallas were fragments of a much larger planet that once occupied the Mars–Jupiter region, this planet having suffered an internal explosion or a cometary impact many million years before.
The typical lifetimes of main-belt zodiacal cloud particles are about 700,000&nbsp;years.
For dust particles within the belt, typical temperatures range from 200&nbsp;K (−73&nbsp;°C) at 2.2&nbsp;AU down to 165&nbsp;K (−108&nbsp;°C) at 3.2&nbsp;AU However, due to rotation, the surface temperature of an asteroid can vary considerably as the sides are alternately exposed to solar radiation and then to the stellar background.
The 4:1 orbital resonance with Jupiter, at a radius 2.06&nbsp;AU, can be considered the inner boundary of the asteroid belt.
Collisions became too violent, and instead of fusing together, the planetesimals and most of the protoplanets shattered.
Contrary to popular imagery, the asteroid belt is mostly empty.
At these orbital distances, a Kirkwood gap occurs as they are swept into other orbits.
It is occupied by numerous irregularly shaped bodies called asteroids or minor planets.
