Athena also appears to Odysseus's son Telemachos.
Votive bronzes at the site from the Geometric and Archaic periods take the forms of horses and deer; there are sealstone and fibulae.
For the Athenians, Burkert notes, Athena was simply "the Goddess", ''hē theós'' (ἡ θεός), certainly an ancient title.
In the realistic epic mode, however, she largely is confined to aiding him only from ''afar'', as by implanting thoughts in his head during his journey home from Troy.
In every case, Athena kills Pallas, accidentally, and thereby gains the name for herself.
Sanchuniathon's account would make Athena the sister of Zeus and Hera, not Zeus' daughter.
Athena also often is depicted with an owl sitting on one of her shoulders.
They said that Athena was the daughter of Zeus not from intercourse, but when the god had in mind the making of a world through a word (''logos'') his first thought was Athena.
Even beyond recognition, the Athenians allotted the goddess value based on this pureness of virginity as it upheld a rudiment of female behavior in the patriarchal society.
Athena appears in Greek mythology as the patron and helper of many heroes, including Odysseus, Jason, and Heracles.
It is not merely an observation of her virginity, but a recognition of her role as enforcer of rules of sexual modesty and ritual mystery.
She appears in Nausicaa's dreams to ensure that the princess rescues Odysseus and plays a role in his eventual escort to Ithaca.
In one telling, they practice the arts of war together until one day they have a falling out.
When Pallas is Athena's sister or foster-sister, Athena's father or foster-father is Triton, the son and herald of Poseidon.
It had been prophesied that Metis would bear children more powerful than the sire, even Zeus himself.
In a Mycenean fresco, there is a composition of two women extending their hands towards a central figure who is covered by an enormous figure-eight shield and could also depict the war-goddess with her palladium, or her palladium in an aniconic representation.
Her helmet appears upon the shield of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York.
Her guiding actions reinforce her role as the "protectress of heroes" or as mythologian Walter Friedrich Otto dubbed her the "goddess of nearness" due to her mentoring and motherly probing.
Some authors believe that, in early times, Athena was either an owl herself or a bird goddess in general: In the third Book of the ''Odyssey'', she takes the form of a sea-eagle.
Only Eris, goddess of discord, was not invited.
Unsurprisingly, the owl became a sort of Athenian mascot.
The Christian apologist of the 2nd century Justin Martyr takes issue with those pagans who erect at springs images of Kore, whom he interprets as Athena:
Renan's head was turned away from the building, while Athena, beside him, was depicted raising her arm, which was interpreted as indicating a challenge to the church during an anti-clerical phase in French official culture.
When Hermes arrives to seduce Herse, Aglaulus stands in his way instead of helping him as she had agreed.
One of these is Pallas, a daughter of Triton (a sea god), and, according to some later sources, a childhood friend of Athena.
Eventually Zeus experienced an enormous headache; Prometheus, Hephaestus, Hermes, Ares, or Palaemon (depending on the sources examined) cleaved Zeus’ head with the double-headed Minoan axe, the ''labrys''.
A large snake accompanied her and she held Nike, the goddess of victory, in her hand.
Medusa's hair turned into snakes, her lower body was transformed also, and meeting her gaze would turn any living man to stone.
Poseidon struck the ground with his trident and a salt water spring sprang up; this gave them a means of trade and water—Athens at its height was a significant sea power, defeating the Persian fleet at the Battle of Salamis—but the water was salty and not very good for drinking.
It took a triad form, one phase being Athena along with Hera and Aphrodite and others in her matrilineal line (grandmother, mother, etc.)
As patron of Athens she fought in the Trojan war on the side of the Achaeans.
Athena often was equated with Aphaea, a local goddess of the island of Aegina, located near Athens, once Aegina was under Athenian's power.
And Ouranos trembled to hear, and Mother Gaia…" (Pindar, ''Seventh Olympian Ode'').
The serpent, or insanity induced by the sight, drives Herse and Aglaulus to throw themselves off the Acropolis.
In the earliest myths, there is only one Gorgon, but there are two snakes that form a belt around her waist.
Athena (Minerva) is the subject of the $50 1915-S Panama-Pacific commemorative coin.
In the one most commonly cited, Zeus lay with Metis, the goddess of crafty thought and wisdom, but he immediately feared the consequences.
Though Athena is a goddess of war strategy, she disliked fighting without purpose and preferred to use wisdom to settle predicaments.
Miriam Robbins Dexter has suggested that, at least at some point in her history, Athena has been a solar deity.
Renan's 1862 biography of Jesus had denied his divinity, and he had written the " Prayer on the Acropolis" addressed to the goddess Athena.
The fable suggests that the origin of weaving lay in imitation of spiders and that it was considered to have been perfected first in Asia Minor.
The word ''aethyia'' () signifies a ''diver'', and figuratively, a ''ship'', so the name must reference Athena teaching the art of shipbuilding or navigation.
She was given the epithet '''Hippia''' ("of the horses", "equestrian"), as the inventor of the chariot, and was worshiped under this title at Athens, Tegea and Olympia.
In Classical Greek myths, she never consorts with a lover, nor does she ever marry, earning the title ''Athena Parthenos'' (Athena the Virgin).
Athena also was the patron goddess of several other Greek cities, notably Sparta, where the archaic cult of Athena Alea had its sanctuaries in the surrounding villages of Mantineia and, notably, Tegea.
She instructed Heracles to skin the Nemean Lion by using its own claws to cut through its thick hide.
In a temple at Phrixa in Elis, which was reportedly built by Clymenus, she was known as '''Cydonia'''.
The forecourt of the Brazen House was the place where the most solemn religious functions in Sparta took place.
In this interpretation, Athena was demoted to be only Zeus's daughter, never allowed the expression of motherhood.
Other commonly received and repeated types of Athena in sculpture may be found in this list.
Later myths of the Classical Greeks relate that Athena guided Perseus in his quest to behead Medusa.
These interpretations relate to a concept of a ''Great Goddess'', a ''Mother Goddess'', and the religious worship of such a deity in very ancient Greek culture.
Thus for Plato her name was to be derived from Greek , ''Atheonóa''—which the later Greeks rationalised as from the deity’s (θεός ''theos'') mind (νοῦς ''nous'').
Another interpretation is that the apple was being given to the man by the three goddesses, instead of to one of the goddesses.
This woman was Helen, who was, unfortunately for Paris, already married to King Menelaus of Sparta.
Athens may have fallen in 404 BC but the cult of Athena was so dominant in the culture that it survived the transitions seen in the mythic roles of other goddesses, albeit with a juggling of "family" relationships.
Similarly, at Athens she was called Athena, and the city Athenae (or Athens, again a plural).
Impressed by his resolve and shrewdness, she reveals herself and tells him what he needs to know in order to win back his kingdom.
As Athena Hippia she was given an alternative parentage: Poseidon and Polyphe, daughter of Oceanus.
The goddesses undressed before him to be evaluated, either at his request or by their own choice.
With the epithet ''Promachos'' she led in battle (see Promachos).
Kerenyi's study and theory of Athena accredits her virginal epithet to be a result of the relationship to her father Zeus and a vital, cohesive piece of her character throughout the ages.
Likewise, Pallas may be Athena's father or opponent, without involving Triton.
Jane Harrison (''Prolegomena'') finds this to be a simple cautionary tale directed at young girls carrying the ''cista'' in the Thesmophoria rituals, to discourage them from opening it outside the proper context.
In Ovid's ''Metamorphoses'' Athena is occasionally referred to as "Tritonia".
Athena had a special relationship with Athens, as is shown by the etymological connection of the names of the goddess and the city.
Other epithets include: '''Aethyia''' under which she was worshiped in Megara.
Her actions lead him to travel around to Odysseus's comrades and ask about his father.
She has the epithet '''Ergane''' as the patron of craftsmen and artisans.
With the epithet ''Parthenos'' ("virgin") she was especially worshipped in the festivals of the Panathenaea and Pamboeotia where both militaristic and athletic displays took place.
The bird which sees well in the night is closely associated with the goddess of wisdom: in archaic images, Athena is frequently depicted with an owl (or "owl of Athena" and later under the Roman Empire, "owl of Minerva") perched on her hand.
Whether her name is attested in Eteocretan or not will have to wait for decipherment of Linear A.
Her owl is also a symbol of the fraternity.
In Mycenaean Greek, at Knossos a single inscription   ''A-ta-na po-ti-ni-ja'' /Athana potniya/ appears in the Linear B tablets from the Late Minoan II-era "Room of the Chariot Tablets"; these comprise the earliest Linear B archive anywhere.
(A statue of the goddess was centered on the Place de la Revolution in Paris.)
The unsmiling lips are usually full, but the mouth is depicted fairly narrow, usually just slightly wider than the nose.
Athena appears in disguise to Odysseus upon his arrival, initially lying and telling him that Penelope, his wife, has remarried and that he is believed to be dead; but Odysseus lies back to her, employing skillful prevarications to protect himself.
Still, Paris could not decide, as all three were ideally beautiful, so they resorted to bribes.
She is the virgin patroness of Athens.
The story that Athena kills a friend or relation called "Pallas" and takes the name to honor her is only attested quite late, in Apollodorus and Philodemus;  it seems to have been invented to explain the name.
As punishment for Aglaulus's greed, Athena asks the goddess Envy to make Aglaulus jealous of Herse.
The goddess adapted but could very easily be seen as a god.
She is noted to have only fought for just reasons, and would not fight without a purpose.
Athena is the goddess of knowledge, purity, arts, crafts, learning, justice and wisdom.
''Divine'' Athena also was a weaver and the deity of crafts (see ''dyeus'').
At Thebes she was called Thebe, and the city again a plural, Thebae (or Thebes, where the ‘s’ is the plural formation).
Athena's owl also serves as the mascot of the college, and one of the college hymns is "Pallas Athena".
Another version of the myth of the Athenian maidens is told in ''Metamorphoses'' by the Roman poet Ovid (43 BC17 AD); in this late variant Hermes falls in love with Herse.
It is interesting to note that ''glaux'' (, "little owl") is from the same root, presumably according to some, because of the bird's own distinctive eyes.
The neck is somewhat long.
The ''temenos'' was founded by Aleus, Pausanias was informed.
It is traditional at exam time for students to leave offerings to the goddess with a note asking for good luck, or to repent for accidentally breaking any of the college's numerous other traditions.
Some origin stories tell of Athena having been born outside of Olympus and raised by the god Triton.
Another possible meaning may be ''triple-born'' or ''third-born'', which may refer to a triad or to her status as the third daughter of Zeus or the fact she was born from Metis, Zeus, and herself; various legends list her as being the first child after Artemis and Apollo, though other legends identify her as Zeus' first child.
Some modern authors classify the changes as an "androgynous compromise" that allowed her traits and what she stood for to be attributed to male and female rulers alike over the course of history (such as Marie de' Medici, Anne of Austria, Christina of Sweden, and Catherine the Great).
Some Greek authors have derived natural symbols from the etymological roots of Athena’s names to be aether, air, earth, and moon.
Fragments attributed by the Christian Eusebius of Caesarea to the semi-legendary Phoenician historian Sanchuniathon, which Eusebius thought had been written before the Trojan war, make Athena instead the daughter of Cronus, a king of Byblos who visited 'the inhabitable world' and bequeathed Attica to Athena.
The connection with Neith was later rejected by other scholars in view of formal difficulties.
Athena is associated with Athens, a plural name, because it was the place where she presided over her sisterhood, the ''Athenai'', in earliest times.
She led battles (''Athena Promachos'' or the warrior maiden ''Athena Parthenos'') as the disciplined, strategic side of war, in contrast to her brother Ares, the patron of violence, bloodlust and slaughter—"the raw force of war".
The Athenians (or their king, Cecrops) accepted the olive tree and with it the patronage of Athena, for the olive tree brought wood, oil, and food.
In classical times the Plynteria, or “Feast of Adorning”, was observed every May, it was a festival lasting five days.
In one myth, all the gods and goddesses as well as various mortals were invited to the marriage of Peleus and Thetis (the eventual parents of Achilles).
The state seal of California features an image of Athena (or Minerva) kneeling next to a brown grizzly bear.
When Pallas is Athena's father, the events, including her birth, are located near a body of water named Triton or Tritonis.
Aglaulus demands money in exchange.
In history, the citizens of Athens built a statue of Athena as a temple to the goddess, which had piercing eyes, a helmet on her head, attired with an aegis or cuirass, and an extremely long spear.
She plays a tough, clever and independent role.
In some versions, the destruction of her loom leads Arachne to hang herself in despair; Athena takes pity on her, and transforms her into a spider.
Other epithets were Ageleia and Itonia.
She is the patroness of various crafts, especially of weaving, as ''Athena Ergane'', and was honored as such at festivals such as Chalceia.
The later interpretation is considered a variant interpretation of icons of great antiquity, to conform to the changes in the evolution of the Greek pantheon in myths.
Not only was this version of Athena the opposite of Ares in combat, it was also the polar opposite of the serene earth goddess version of the deity, ''Athena Polias''.
Athena has been used numerous times as a symbol of a republic by different countries and appears on currency as she did on the ancient drachma of Athens.
She represents intelligence, humility, consciousness, cosmic knowledge, creativity, education, enlightenment, the arts, eloquence and power.
According to mythical lore, she competed with Poseidon and she won by creating the olive tree; the Athenians would accept her gift and name the city after her.
Classical myths thereafter note that Hera was so annoyed at Zeus for having produced a child that she conceived and bore Hephaestus by herself, but in Philostratus the Elder (Greek rhetorician 3rd century AD), Imagines  2.
Scholar Martin Bernal created the controversial Black Athena theory to explain this associated origin by claiming that the conception of Neith was brought to Greece from Egypt, along with "an enormous number of features of civilization and culture in the third and second millennia".
She disguises him as an elderly man or beggar so that he cannot be noticed by the suitors or Penelope, and helps him to defeat the suitors.
These authors argue that she dropped her prophylactic owl-mask before she lost her wings.
Still more different from Bachofen's perspective is the lack of role permanency in Freud's view: Freud held that time and differing cultures would mold Athena to stand for what was necessary to them.
J.J. Bachofen advocated that Athena was originally a maternal figure stable in her security and poise but was caught up and perverted by a patriarchal society; this was especially the case in Athens.
The other two goddesses were enraged by this and through Helen's abduction by Paris they brought about the Trojan War.
Hera tried to bribe Paris with control over all Asia and Europe, while Athena offered wisdom, fame and glory in battle, but Aphrodite came forth and whispered to Paris that if he were to choose her as the fairest he would have the most beautiful mortal woman in the world as a wife, and he accordingly chose her.
Here Athena's statue was undressed, her clothes washed, and body purified.
The ''Mourning Athena'' is a relief sculpture that dates around 460 BC and portrays a weary Athena resting on a staff.
With Pallas stunned by a blow from Zeus, Athena takes advantage and kills her.
The meaning of this term is unclear; it could mean various things, including "Triton-born", perhaps indicating that the sea-deity was her parent according to some early myths.
Additionally, she is also equated with the Celtic Sulis, a deity whose name is derived from the common proto-Indo-European root for many solar deities.
For over a century a full-scale replica of the Parthenon has stood in Nashville, Tennessee, which is known as ''the Athens of the South''.
She was annoyed at this, so she arrived with a golden apple inscribed with the word καλλίστῃ (kallistēi, "for the fairest"), which she threw among the goddesses.
Hephaestus attempted to rape Athena, but she eluded him.
He hears stories about some of Odysseus's journey.
Tegea was listed in Homer's Catalogue of Ships as one of the cities that contributed ships and men for the Achaean assault on Troy.
In his dialogue ''Cratylus'', the Greek philosopher Plato (428–347 BC), gives the etymology of Athena’s name, based on the views of the ancient Athenians and his own etymological speculations:
Marinus of Neapolis reports that when Christians removed the statue of the Goddess from the Parthenon, a beautiful woman appeared in a dream to Proclus, a devotee of Athena, and announced that the ''"Athenian Lady"'' wished to dwell with him.
In 1990, a gilded 41 feet (12.5 m) tall replica of Phidias' statue of Athena Parthenos was added.
But having lost his eyesight, he was given a special gift—to be able to understand the language of the birds (and thus to foretell the future).
In one version of the Tiresias myth, Tiresias stumbled upon Athena bathing, and he was struck blind by her to ensure he would never again see what man was not intended to see.
During the Renaissance she donned the mantle of patron of the arts and human endeavor and finally although not ultimately, Athena personified the miracles of freedom and republic during the French Revolution.
Athena competed with Poseidon to be the patron deity of Athens, which was yet unnamed, in a version of one founding myth.
As Pallas is about to strike Athena, Zeus intervenes.
He was too late: Metis had already conceived.
This pairing evolved in tandem so that even today the owl is a symbol of perspicacity and erudition.
Athena puts the infant Erichthonius into a small box (''cista'') which she entrusts to the care of three sisters, Herse, Pandrosus, and Aglaulus of Athens.
This role is expressed in a number of stories about Athena.
Apart from her attributes, there seems to be a relative consensus in late sculpture from the Classical period, the 5th century onward, as to what Athena looked like.
He viewed it as "motherless paternity in the place of fatherless maternity" where once altered, Athena's character was to be crystallized as that of a patriarch.
(She may be found on some family crests of nobility.)
In each of these cities her temple frequently was the major temple on the acropolis.
Athena's push for Telemachos's journey helps him grow into the man role, that his father once held.
Athena, however, offered them the first domesticated olive tree.
Athena never had a consort or lover and is thus known as ''Athena Parthenos'', "Virgin Athena".
The net result is a serene, serious, somewhat aloof, and very classical beauty.
The latter would have to be drawn from Classical myths, however, rather than earlier ones.
Hermes demands help from Aglaulus to seduce Herse.
Arachne scoffed and wished for a weaving contest, so she could prove her skill.
Pallas Athena is the tutelary goddess of the international social fraternity Phi Delta Theta.
While the city of Athens and the goddess Athena essentially bear the same name (''Athena'' the goddess, ''Athenai'' the city), it is not known which of the two words is derived from the other.
Athena admitted that Arachne's work was flawless, but was outraged at Arachne's offensive choice of subjects that displayed the failings and transgressions of the deities.
Most noticeable in the face is perhaps the full round strong, chin with a high nose that has a high bridge as a natural extension of the forehead.
Mycenae was the city where the Goddess was called Mykene, and Mycenae is named in the plural for the sisterhood of females who tended her there.
Although ''Athana potniya'' often is translated ''Mistress Athena'', it literally means "the ''Potnia'' of At(h)ana", which perhaps, means ''the Lady of Athens''; any connection to the city of Athens in the Knossos inscription is uncertain.
The metalwork of weapons also fell under her patronage.
She stands for Truth, Justice, and Moral values.
This also was suggested in the early versions of an extensive analysis of Greek mythology, ''The Golden Bough'' by James George Frazer.
Although Athena appears before Zeus at Knossos—in Linear B, as , ''a-ta-na po-ti-ni-ja'', “Mistress Athena”—in the Classical Olympian pantheon, Athena was remade as the favourite daughter of Zeus, born fully armed from his forehead.
The eyes typically are somewhat deeply set.
Her shield bears at its centre the aegis with the head of the gorgon (gorgoneion) in the center and snakes around the edge.
She became so conceited of her skill as a weaver that she began claiming that her skill was greater than that of Athena herself.
The  tradition regarding Athena's parentage involves some of her more mysterious epithets: Pallas, as in the ancient-Greek  (also Pallantias) and Tritogeneia (also Trito, Tritonis, Tritoneia, Tritogenes).
Distraught over what she has done, Athena takes the name Pallas for herself.
This was one of the primary developments of scholarly exploration in the ancient world.
Herse, Aglaulus, and Pandrosus go to the temple to offer sacrifices to Athena.
Robert Graves was a strong proponent of this theory and it is written about in many of his publications, such as ''The Greek Myths'' and ''The White Goddess''.
such as (Gaia, Rhea, Hera, Metis), and myths that arose through interpretations (or misinterpretations) of icons from earlier cultural periods.
In earlier times, Athena may well have been a bird goddess, similar to the unknown goddess depicted with owls, wings, and bird talons on the Burney relief, a Mesopotamian terracotta relief of the early second millennium BC.
Fairbanks) Hera "rejoices" at Athena's birth "as though Athena were her daughter also."
Athena is a natural patron of universities: she is the symbol of the Darmstadt University of Technology, in Germany, and the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil.
In order to prevent this, Zeus swallowed Metis.
Jean Boucher's statue of the seated skeptical thinker Ernest Renan caused great controversy when it was installed in Tréguier, Brittany in 1902.
Athena then raised the baby as a foster mother.
The Athenians founded the Parthenon on the Acropolis of her namesake city, Athens (Athena Parthenos), in her honour.
One or two sisters opened the ''cista'' to reveal Erichthonius, in the form (or embrace) of a serpent.
In earlier, archaic portraits of Athena in Black-figure pottery, the goddess retains some of her Minoan-Mycenaean character, such as great bird wings although this is not true of archaic sculpture such as those of Aphaean Athena, where Athena has subsumed an earlier, invisibly numinous—''Aphaea''—goddess with Cretan connections in her ''mythos''.
In ''The Odyssey'', Odysseus' cunning and shrewd nature quickly won Athena's favour.
In accordance with this mythological tradition, Plato, in ''Cratylus'' (407B), gave the etymology of her name as signifying “the mind of god”, ''theou noesis''.
In earlier mythology she is identified as a parthenogenic daughter of a goddess, but the classical myths fashion for her a peculiar "birth from the head of Zeus" that assigns a father for Athena and eliminates a mother for her, identifying the father as a deity who at one time was portrayed as her brother.
Athena was given many other cult titles.
Tegea was an important religious center of ancient Greece, containing the Temple of Athena Alea.
With this mythic origin, Erichthonius became the founder-king of Athens, and many beneficial changes to Athenian culture were ascribed to him.
The fable of Arachne is a late Roman addition to Classical Greek mythology but does not appear in the myth repertoire of the Attic vase-painters.
In a later editions Frazer completely revised the book and left out his research and discussion of these rituals in the abbreviated edition that is known by that title today.
Athena wove the scene of her victory over Poseidon that had inspired her patronage of Athens.
Upon discovering the desecration of her temple, Athena changed Medusa's form to match that of her sister Gorgons as punishment.
After Erechthonius was born, Gaia gave him to Athena.
'''Athena''' (; Attic Greek: , ''Athēnā'', or , ''Athēnaia''; Epic: , ''Athēnaiē''; Doric: , ''Athānā'') or '''Athene''' (; Ionic: , ''Athēnē''), often given the epithet '''Pallas''' (; ), is the goddess of wisdom, courage, inspiration, civilization, law and justice, mathematics, strength, war strategy, the arts, crafts, and skill in ancient Greek religion and mythology.
Plato also noted that the citizens of Sais in Egypt worshipped a goddess whose Egyptian name was Neith, and which was identified with Athena.
This was the first $50 coin issued by the U.S. Mint and no higher was produced until the production of the $100 platinum coins in 1997.
Other variants relate that Erichthonius, the serpent that accompanied Athena, was born to Gaia: when the rape failed, the semen landed on Gaia and impregnated her.
