The Port of Piraeus connects Athens to the numerous Greek islands of the Aegean Sea, with ferries departing, while also serving the cruise ships that arrive.
Daily average highs for July (1986–2015) have been measured at , but some parts of the city may be even warmer, in particular its western areas partly because of industrialization and partly because of a number of natural factors, knowledge of which has been available from the mid-19th century.
In addition to a large number of multiplexes, Athens plays host to open air garden cinemas.
The heritage of the classical era is still evident in the city, represented by ancient monuments and works of art, the most famous of all being the Parthenon, considered a key landmark of early Western civilization.
The new stations will be Agia Barvara, Koridallos, Nikaia, Maniatika, Piraeus and Dimotiko Theatro station.
Some of them are PAO Rouf (Rouf) with earlier presence in Gamma Ethniki, Petralona F.C.
At any given time, hundreds of international scholars and researchers in all disciplines of archaeology are to be found in the city.
The Proastiakos will be extended to Xylokastro west of Athens and Chalkida.
In ancient times the port of Piraeus was a separate city, but it has now been absorbed into the Athens Urban Area.
The Kallimarmaro is a replica of the ancient Athenian stadiums, and the only major stadium (in its capacity of 60,000) to be made entirely of white marble from Mount Penteli, the same material used for construction of the Parthenon.
All routes run entirely underground and a fleet of 42 trains consisting of 252 cars operate within the network, with a daily occupancy of 550,000 passengers.
After an unsuccessful bid in 1990, the 1997 bid was radically improved, including an appeal to Greece's Olympic history.
The airport accommodates 65 landings and take-offs per hour, with its 24-passenger boarding bridges, 144 check-in counters and broader  main terminal; and a commercial area of  which includes cafes, duty-free shops, and a small museum.
These clubs also have basketball teams; Panathinaikos and Olympiacos are among the top powers in European basketball, having won the Euroleague six times and three respectively, whilst AEK Athens was the first Greek team to win a European trophy in any team sport.
1891(originally in Smyrni)
Although the heavy cost was criticized, estimated at $1.5&nbsp;billion, Athens was transformed into a more functional city that enjoys modern technology both in transportation and in modern urban development.
Athens Tram SA operates a fleet of 35 vehicles, called 'Sirios', which serve 48 stations, employ 345 people with an average daily occupancy of 65,000 passengers.
Prior to this round, the cities of Buenos Aires, Stockholm and Cape Town had been eliminated from competition, having received fewer votes.
Besides being served by a fleet of natural-gas and diesel buses, the Athens Urban Area is also served by trolleybuses – or electric buses, as they are referred to in the name of the operating company.
Originally intended as an association of Greek city-states to continue the fight against the Persians, the league soon turned into a vehicle for Athens's own imperial ambitions.
The annual precipitation of Athens is typically lower than in other parts of Greece, mainly in western Greece.
This idea later lost support from the IOC and these games were discontinued.
Athens is home to two UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the Acropolis of Athens and the medieval Daphni Monastery.
In 1896, the city had a population of 123,000 and the event helped boost the city's international profile.
The games welcomed over 10,000 athletes from all 202 countries.
In late June 2007, the Attica region experienced a number of brush fires, including a blaze that burned a significant portion of a large forested national park in Mount Parnitha, considered critical to maintaining a better air quality in Athens all year round.
The network is operated by ''Electric Buses of the Athens and Piraeus Region'', or ILPAP () and consists of 22 lines with an operating staff of 1,137.
Damage to the park has led to worries over a stalling in the improvement of air quality in the city.
Many of the southern suburbs (such as Alimos, Palaio Faliro, Elliniko, Voula, Vouliagmeni and Varkiza) host a number of sandy beaches, most of which are operated by the Greek National Tourism Organisation and require an entrance fee.
1929 (originally as Hephaestus Athens)
Athens became the capital of Greece in 1834, following Nafplion, which was the provisional capital from 1829.
Football, Basketball
The airport, awarded the "European Airport of the Year 2004" Award, is intended as an expandable hub for air travel in southeastern Europe and was constructed in 51 months, costing 2.2&nbsp;billion euros.
July and August are the driest months, where thunderstorms occur sparsely once or twice a month.
The expansion to Piraeus will include 12 new stations, increase the overall length of tram route by , and increase the overall transportation network.
The National Garden of Athens was completed in 1840 and is a green refuge of 15.5 hectares in the centre of the Greek capital.
There are overall eleven state-supported Institutions of Higher (or Tertiary) education located in the Metropolitan Area of Athens, these are by chronological order: Athens School of Fine Arts (1837), National Technical University of Athens (1837), National and Kapodistrian University of Athens (1837), Agricultural University of Athens (1920), Athens University of Economics and Business (1920), Panteion University of Social and Political Sciences (1927), University of Piraeus (1938), Technological Educational Institute of Piraeus (1976), Technological Educational Institute of Athens (1983), Harokopio University (1990), School of Pedagogical and Technological Education (2002).
Notable actors of Greek operettas, who made also a series of melodies and songs popular at that time, include Orestis Makris, Kalouta sisters, Vasilis Avlonitis, Afroditi Laoutari, Eleni Papadaki, Marika Nezer, Marika Krevata and others.
Of the venues used for these Olympics, the Kallimarmaro Stadium, and Zappeion were most crucial.
The landmark Dionysiou Areopagitou Street has been pedestrianised, forming a scenic route.
The Saronic Gulf lies to the southwest.
Both composers have achieved fame abroad for their composition of film scores.
The Greek Government has created a corporation, Olympic Properties SA, which is overseeing the post-Olympics management, development and conversion of these facilities, some of which will be sold off (or have already been sold off) to the private sector, while other facilities are still in use just as during the Olympics, or have been converted for commercial use or modified for other sports.
Until 2010, the first four regional units above also made up the abolished Athens Prefecture (what is referred to as Greater Athens), which was the most populous of the Prefectures of Greece at the time, accounting for 2,640,701 people (in 2011) within an area of .
The 2004 Olympic Games were described as ''Unforgettable, dream Games'', by IOC President Jacques Rogge for their return to the birthplace of the Olympics, and for meeting the challenges of holding the Olympic Games.
During the 1920s a number of Greek refugees, expelled from Asia Minor after the Greco-Turkish War, swelled Athens's population; nevertheless it was most particularly following World War II, and from the 1950s and 1960s, that the population of the city exploded, and Athens experienced a gradual expansion.
The geomorphology of Athens is deemed to be one of the most complex in the world because its mountains cause a temperature inversion phenomenon which, along with the Greek Government's difficulties controlling industrial pollution, was responsible for the air pollution problems the city has faced.
Snowfalls are more frequent in the northern suburbs of the city.
In 700&nbsp;BC the population grew to 10,000.
Another important Athenian sport club is the Athens Tennis Club founded in 1895 with important offer for the Greek tennis.
From that point forward, preparations continued at a highly accelerated, almost frenzied pace.
The Athens Metro is more commonly known in Greece as the Attiko Metro () and provides public transport throughout the Athens Urban Area.
The biggest stadium in the country, it hosted two finals of the UEFA Champions League, in 1994 and 2007.
The length of Athens's commuter rail network extends to , and is expected to stretch to  by 2010.
During the medieval period the name of the city was rendered once again in the singular as .
Localities with a great number of such buildings include Kolonaki, and some areas of the centre of the city; neighbourhoods developed in this period include Kypseli.
Athens has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen ''Csa'').
Athens is home to 148 theatrical stages, more than any other city in the world, including the ancient Odeon of Herodes Atticus, home to the Athens Festival, which runs from May to October each year.
More than 240,000 people voted.
In the northern suburb of Maroussi, the upgraded main Olympic Complex (known by its Greek acronym OAKA) dominates the skyline.
There are also several other private ''colleges'', as they called formally in Greece, as the establishment of private universities is prohibited by the constitution.
(el) (Agios Panteleimonas), basketball club founded in 1992 with earlier presence in A2 Ethniki Basketball.
Unlike other Mycenaean centers, such as Mycenae and Pylos, it is not known whether Athens suffered destruction in about 1200&nbsp;BC, an event often attributed to a Dorian invasion, and the Athenians always maintained that they were "pure" Ionians with no Dorian element.
It employs a staff of 14,000.
The Athens Planetarium, located in Andrea Syngrou Avenue, is one of the largest and best equipped digital planetaria in the world.
Winters are mild and rainy, with a January average of near ; Snowfall is infrequent but can cause disruption when it occurs.
Other etymologies, now rejected, were proposed the 19th century.
The expansion is now particularly toward the East and North East (a tendency greatly related to the new Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport and the Attiki Odos, the freeway that cuts across Attica).
This is today the '''Green Line''' (line 1) of the Athens Metro network as shown on maps, and unlike the red and blue lines, ISAP has many above-ground sections on its route.
Athens hosts 17 Foreign Archaeological Institutes which promote and facilitate research by scholars from their home countries.
In the 1950s and 1960s during the extension and development of Athens, other modern movements such as the International style played an important role.
This was the location where on 17 November 1973, more than 13 students were killed and hundreds injured inside the university during the Athens Polytechnic uprising, against the military junta that ruled the nation from 21 April 1967 until 23 July 1974.
Athens is recognised as a global city because of its location and its importance in shipping, finance, commerce, media, entertainment, arts, international trade, culture, education and tourism.
As a result, Athens has more than a dozen archaeological libraries and three specialized archaeological laboratories, and is the venue of several hundred specialized lectures, conferences and seminars, as well as dozens of archaeological exhibitions, each year.
Landmarks of the modern era, dating back to the establishment of Athens as the capital of the independent Greek state in 1834, include the Hellenic Parliament (19th century) and the Athens Trilogy, consisting of the National Library of Greece, the Athens University and the Academy of Athens.
The urban area of Athens (Greater Athens and Greater Piraeus) extends beyond its administrative municipal city limits, with a population of 3,090,508 (in 2011) over an area of .
Beginning in the 1920s, Modern architecture including Bauhaus and Art Deco began to exert an influence on almost all Greek architects, and buildings both public and private were constructed in accordance with these styles.
The stations will be ready in 2017, connecting the biggest port of Greece Piraeus Port with the biggest airport of Greece the Athens International Airport.
Athens is the financial capital of Greece, and multinational companies such as Ericsson, Siemens, Motorola and Coca-Cola have their regional research and development headquarters there.
After World War II, internationally known architects to have designed and built in the city included Walter Gropius, with his design for the US Embassy, and, among others, Eero Saarinen, in his postwar design for the east terminal of the Ellinikon Airport.
Later, under Rome, Athens was given the status of a free city because of its widely admired schools.
The crisis eased by mid-January when authorities began taking the garbage to a temporary landfill.
'''The Red Line''' (line 2) runs from Anthoupoli station to Elliniko station and covers a distance of .
In an attempt to compel the people, Poseidon created a salt water spring by striking the ground with his trident, symbolizing naval power.
Following the Greek War of Independence and the establishment of the Greek Kingdom, Athens was chosen as the capital of the newly independent Greek state in 1834, largely because of historical and sentimental reasons.
As an example, Ioannina receives around  per year, and Agrinio around  per year.
On the other hand, specific meteorological stations, such as the National Garden station and Thiseio meteorological station, are less affected or do not experience the urban heat island.
In 1458 it was conquered by the Ottoman Empire and entered a long period of decline.
Lycabettus, Philopappos hill and the area around it, including Pnyx and Ardettos hill, are planted with pines and other trees, with the character of a small forest rather than typical metropolitan parkland.
In 2008 it was reported that most of the Olympic venues had fallen into disrepair: according to those reports, 21 of the 22 facilities built for the games had either been left abandoned or are in a state of dereliction, with several squatter camps having sprung up around certain facilities, and a number of venues afflicted by vandalism, graffiti or strewn with rubbish.
Nevertheless, air pollution still remains an issue for Athens, particularly during the hottest summer days.
However, this did not prevent Athens from being captured and sacked twice by the Persians within one year, after a heroic resistance at Thermopylae by Spartans and other Greeks led by King Leonidas, after both Boeotia and Attica fell to the Persians.
Temperatures often surpass  during the city's notorious heatwaves.
Concerts and theatrical shows, such as those by the troupe Cirque du Soleil, have recently been held in the complex.
Mount Parnitha is the tallest of the four mountains (), and has been declared a national park.
Beside the above clubs, inside the boundaries of Athens municipality there are some more clubs with presence in national divisions or notable action for short periods.
Football, Basketball, Volleyball, Water Polo, Track and Field and others
Earlier presence in A1 Ethniki basketball
In 2015, Athens was ranked the world's 29th richest city by purchasing power and the 67th most expensive in a UBS study.
Greece's most notable, and internationally famous, composers of Greek song, mainly of the entechno form, are Manos Hadjidakis and Mikis Theodorakis.
The zoo is home to around 2000 animals representing 400 species, and is open 365 days a year.
When Demetrius of Phalerum conducted a population census in 317&nbsp;BC the population was 21,000 free citizens, plus 10,000 resident aliens and 400,000 slaves.
1921 (Pre-Population exchange)
Earlier presence in A1 Ethniki basketball
The 1906 Summer Olympics, or the 1906 Intercalated games, were held in Athens.
By this process Athens has engulfed many former suburbs and villages in Attica, and continues to do so.
Measures taken by the Greek authorities throughout the 1990s have improved the quality of air over the Attica Basin.
Of those 1,839 buses 416 run on compressed natural gas, making up the largest fleet of natural gas-powered buses in Europe.
The Greek Government, aided by the EU, has funded major infrastructure projects such as the state-of-the-art Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport, the expansion of the Athens Metro system, and the new Attiki Odos Motorway.
''Athens'' can refer either to the municipality of Athens, to Greater Athens, or to the entire Athens Urban Area.
The Roman emperor Hadrian, in the 2nd century AD, constructed a library, a gymnasium, an aqueduct which is still in use, several temples and sanctuaries, a bridge and financed the completion of the Temple of Olympian Zeus.
Parts of the city centre have been redeveloped under a masterplan called the ''Unification of Archeological Sites of Athens'', which has also gathered funding from the EU to help enhance the project.
Classical Athens was a powerful city-state that emerged in conjunction with the seagoing development of the port of Piraeus, which had been a distinct city prior to its 5th century BC incorporation with Athens.
In modern times, Athens is a large cosmopolitan metropolis and central to economic, financial, industrial, maritime, political and cultural life in Greece.
Over 7,500 athletes, from 185 countries, competed in a total of 22 sports.
1896 brought forth the revival of the modern Olympic Games, by Frenchman Pierre de Coubertin.
Thanks to his efforts, Athens was awarded the first modern Olympic Games.
The route starts from the Temple of Olympian Zeus at Vasilissis Olgas Avenue, continues under the southern slopes of the Acropolis near Plaka, and finishes just beyond the Temple of Hephaestus in Thiseio.
Also the line connected with the Blue (line 3) at Syntagma Square station and connected with Tram at Syntagma Square, Sygrou-Fix and Agios Ioannis station.
The municipality (City) of Athens had a population of 664,046 (in 2011, 796,442 in 2004) within its administrative limits, and a land area of .
The first King of Greece, Otto of Bavaria, commissioned the architects Stamatios Kleanthis and Eduard Schaubert to design a modern city plan fit for the capital of a state.
The Athens Metro has an operating staff of 387 and runs two of the three metro lines; namely the Red (line 2) and Blue (line 3) lines, which were constructed largely during the 1990s, with the initial sections opened in January 2000.
Lycabettus is one of the tallest hills of the city proper and provides a view of the entire Attica Basin.
The service is sometimes considered the fourth line of the Athens Metro.
The goddess of wisdom, Athena, and the god of the seas, Poseidon encountered many disagreements and battles between them, and one of these was a race to be the Patron God of the city.
International and regional bus links are provided by KTEL from two InterCity Bus Terminals, Kifissos Bus Terminal A and Liosion Bus Terminal B, both located in the north-western part of the city.
According to Eurostat in 2004, the Athens Larger Urban Zone (LUZ) was the 7th most populous LUZ in the European Union (the 5th most populous capital city of the EU), with a population of 4,013,368.
Parnitha National Park is punctuated by well-marked paths, gorges, springs, torrents and caves dotting the protected area.
''Kifissos'' provides connections towards the Peloponnese and Attica, whereas ''Liosion'' is used for most northerly mainland destinations.
Football, Basketball
Work is underway to transform the grounds of the old Athens Airport – named Elliniko – in the southern suburbs, into one of the largest landscaped parks in Europe, to be named the Hellenikon Metropolitan Park.
In 500&nbsp;BC the area probably contained 200,000 people.
Many honours in Athletics and Wrestling
Eventually, however, a total of more than 3.5&nbsp;million tickets were sold, which was higher than any other Olympics with the exception of Sydney (more than 5&nbsp;million tickets were sold there in 2000).
In football, Olympiacos have dominated the domestic competitions, Panathinaikos made it to the 1971 European Cup Final, while AEK Athens is the other member of the big three.
An etiological myth explaining how Athens has acquired this name was well known among ancient Athenians and even became the theme of the sculpture on the West pediment of the Parthenon.
In the last round of voting, Athens defeated Rome with 66 votes to 41.
The line is set to be extended to Agios Stefanos, a suburb located  to the north of Athens, reaching to .
They together with the regional unit of Piraeus (Greater Piraeus) make up the dense Athens Urban Area which reaches a total population of 3,090,508 inhabitants (in 2011).
Athens sprawls across the central plain of Attica that is often referred to as the ''Athens or Attica Basin'' (Greek: Λεκανοπέδιο Αττικής).
The Athens Mass Transit System consists of a large bus fleet, a trolleybus fleet that mainly serves Athens's city center, the city's Metro, a commuter rail service and a tram network, connecting the southern suburbs to the city centre.
Numerous outdoor clubs serve these sports, including the Athens Chapter of the Sierra Club, which leads over 4,000 outings annually in the area.
1930 (originally as Doxa Athens)
The intercalated competitions were intermediate games to the internationally organized Olympics, and were meant to be organized in Greece every four years, between the main Olympics.
The architects of this era employed materials such as glass, marble and aluminium, and many blended modern and classical elements.
There are also some inter-municipal centres serving specific areas.
Athens was awarded the 2004 Summer Olympics on 5 September 1997 in Lausanne, Switzerland, after having lost a previous bid to host the 1996 Summer Olympics, to Atlanta, United States.
Beyond Athens and across the prefecture of Attica, outdoor activities include skiing, rock climbing, hang gliding and windsurfing.
Athens is built around a number of hills.
A centre for the arts, learning and philosophy, home of Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum, it is widely referred to as the cradle of Western civilization and the birthplace of democracy, largely because of its cultural and political impact on the European continent, and in particular the Romans.
Other notable clubs within Athens are Athinaikos, Panionios, Atromitos, Apollon, Panellinios, Ethnikos Piraeus, Maroussi BC and Peristeri B.C.. Athenian clubs have also had domestic and international success in other sports.
The four regional units that make up what is referred to as Greater Athens have a combined population of 2,640,701.
The network covers the majority of the Saronic coastline.
The Cephissus river, the Ilisos and the Eridanos stream are the historical rivers of Athens.
Athens is the hub of the country's national railway system (OSE), connecting the capital with major cities across Greece and abroad (Istanbul, Sofia and Bucharest).
The basin is bounded by four large mountains: Mount Aigaleo to the west, Mount Parnitha to the north, Mount Pentelicus to the northeast and Mount Hymettus to the east.
Earlier presence in A1 Ethniki women basketball
1921 (Post-Population exchange)
The city is a world centre of archaeological research.
The '''Athens Metropolitan Area''' spans  within the Attica region and includes a total of 58 municipalities, which are organized in 7 regional units (those outlined above, along with East Attica and West Attica), having reached a population of 3,737,550 based on the preliminary results of the 2011 census.
Hiking and mountain-biking in all four mountains are popular outdoor activities for residents of the city.
** '''A8 (GR-8A)/E94 W''' ''(Elefsina, Corinth, Patras)''
Lobeck proposed as the root of the name the word  (''athos'') or  (''anthos'') meaning flower, to denote Athens as the ''flowering'' city.
'''Athens''' (; , ''Athína'' , ) is the capital and largest city of Greece.
Other forms of song popular today in Greece are elafrolaika, entechno, dimotika, and skyladika.
Along with  national institutions, such as the Athens University and  the Archaeological Society, there are multiple archaeological Museums including the National Archaeological Museum, the Cycladic Museum, the Epigraphic Museum, the Byzantine & Christian Museum, as well as museums at the ancient Agora, Acropolis, Kerameikos, and the Kerameikos Archaeological Museum.
The city is also home to the Demokritos laboratory for Archaeometry, alongside regional and national archaeological authorities that form part of the Greek Department of Culture.
The network runs from Syntagma Square to the southwestern suburb of Palaio Faliro, where the line splits in two branches; the first runs along the Athens coastline toward the southern suburb of Voula, while the other heads toward the Piraeus district of Neo Faliro.
The playwrights Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides flourished in Athens during this time, as did the historians Herodotus and Thucydides, the physician Hippocrates, and the philosopher Socrates.
By the 6th century BC, widespread social unrest led to the reforms of Solon.
All of the 366 trolleybuses are equipped to enable them to run on diesel in case of power failure.
Notable sport clubs based inside the boundaries of Athens Municipality
These claims, however, are disputed and likely to be inaccurate, as most of the facilities used for the Athens Olympics are either in use or in the process of being converted for post-Olympics use.
** '''A6 W''' ''(Elefsina)'' '''E''' ''(Airport)''
Athens was voted as the third best European city to visit in 2015 by European Best Destination.
However, when Athena created the olive tree, symbolizing peace and prosperity, the Athenians, under their ruler Cecrops, accepted the olive tree and named the city after Athena.
Athens is served by the Athens International Airport (ATH), located near the town of Spata, in the eastern Messoghia plain, some  east of Athens.
** '''A1/E75 N''' ''(Lamia, Larissa, Thessaloniki)''
The urban heat island of the city has also been found to be partially responsible for alterations of the climatological temperature time-series of specific Athens meteorological stations, because of its impact on the temperatures and the temperature trends recorded by some meteorological stations.
Many of them are accredited by a foreign state or university such as the American College of Greece and the Athens Campus of the University of Indianapolis.
Events in other sports such as athletics, volleyball, water polo etc., have been hosted in the capital's venues.
In the ensuing Greco-Persian Wars Athens, together with Sparta, led the coalition of Greek states that would eventually repel the Persians, defeating them decisively at Marathon in 490&nbsp;BC, and crucially at Salamis in 480&nbsp;BC.
The Athens Metropolitan Railway system is managed by three companies; namely ISAP (line 1), Attiko Metro (lines 2 & 3), while its commuter rail, the Proastiakós is considered as line 4.
The span of the Attiki Odos in all its length is , making it the largest metropolitan motorway network in all of Greece.
The line connects the western suburbs of Athens with the southeast suburbs passing through the center of Athens.
While its main purpose is transport, it also houses Greek artifacts found during construction of the system.
The spring 2007 extension from Monastiraki westwards, to Egaleo, connected some of the main night life hubs of the city, namely the ones of Gazi (Kerameikos station) with Psirri (Monastiraki station) and the city centre (Syntagma station).
The line associated with Green (line 1) stations at Attiki and Omonoia Square station.
A second Olympic complex, next to the sea at the beach of Palaio Faliro, also features modern stadia, shops and an elevated esplanade.
Located on Panepistimiou Street, the old campus of the University of Athens, the National Library, and the Athens Academy form the "Athens Trilogy" built in the mid-19th century.
Most of the university's workings have been moved to a much larger, modern campus located in the eastern suburb of Zografou.
The rapid expansion of the city, which continues to this day, was initiated in the 1950s and 1960s, because of Greece's transition from an agricultural to an industrial nation.
The resulting tensions brought about the Peloponnesian War (431–404&nbsp;BC), in which Athens was defeated by its rival Sparta.
In 2000 the Organising Committee's president was replaced by Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, who was the president of the original Bidding Committee in 1997.
The hills of Athens also provide green space.
Track and Field, Wrestling, Shooting and others
Notable composers of operettas or nocturnes were Kostas Giannidis, Dionysios Lavrangas, Nikos Hatziapostolou, while Theophrastos Sakellaridis' ''The Godson'' remains probably the most popular operetta.
During the classical period the city's population is estimated from 150,000 – 350,000 and up to 610,000 according to Thucydides.
The Athens commuter rail service, referred to as the "Proastiakós", connects Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport to the city of Corinth,  west of Athens, via Larissa station, the city's central rail station and the port of Piraeus.
Nikos Gounaris was probably the most renowned composer and singer of the time.
