In 1661 he published his ''Short Treatise on God''.
A study noted positive correlations between levels of education and secularism, including atheism, in America.
Less broadly, atheism is the rejection of belief that any deities exist.
The foundation of epistemological atheism is agnosticism, which takes a variety of forms.
Individuals and groups such as Johannes Scotus Eriugena, David of Dinant, Amalric of Bena, and the Brethren of the Free Spirit maintained Christian viewpoints with pantheistic tendencies.
Theoretical (or theoric) atheism explicitly posits arguments against the existence of gods, responding to common theistic arguments such as the argument from design or Pascal's Wager.
Attempts to enforce it led to anti-clerical violence and the expulsion of many clergy from France, lasting until the Thermidorian Reaction.
The criticism of religion is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo."
According to one study, less than 1% did in Morocco, Egypt, Saudia Arabia, or Jordan; only 3% to 7% in the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Palestine.
Naturalists and materialistic monists such as John Dewey considered the natural world to be the basis of everything, denying the existence of God or immortality.
The term ''atheism'' originated from the Greek  (''atheos''), meaning "without god(s)", used as a pejorative term applied to those thought to reject the gods worshiped by the larger society.
The term 'atheist' was an insult.
Despite being relatively prolific writers, nearly none of their writing survives to the modern day, most of what little remains being preserved through quotations and excerpts in later works by Muslim apologists attempting to refute them.
Although some atheists have adopted secular philosophies (eg.
By the late 17th century, deism came to be openly espoused by intellectuals such as John Toland who coined the term "pantheist".
Definitions of atheism also vary in the degree of consideration a person must put to the idea of gods to be considered an atheist.
A. J. Ayer asserted the unverifiability and meaninglessness of religious statements, citing his adherence to the empirical sciences.
There are another four countries where the unaffiliated make up a majority of the population: North Korea (71%), Japan (57%), Hong Kong (56%), and China (52%).
Blainey notes that, although Voltaire is widely considered to have strongly contributed to atheistic thinking during the Revolution, he also considered fear of God to have discouraged further disorder, having said "If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him."
Positive atheism is the explicit affirmation that gods do not exist.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the number of actively anti-religious regimes has reduced considerably.
In the course of the 18th century, other openly atheistic thinkers followed, such as Baron d'Holbach, Jacques-André Naigeon, and other French materialists.
In 2012, the first "Women in Secularism" conference was held in Arlington, Virginia.
Protagoras has sometimes been taken to be an atheist but rather espoused agnostic views, commenting that "Concerning the gods I am unable to discover whether they exist or not, or what they are like in form; for there are many hindrances to knowledge, the obscurity of the subject and the brevity of human life."
After Mao, the Chinese Communist Party remains an atheist organization, and regulates, but does not completely forbid, the practice of religion in mainland China.
The plurality of wildly different conceptions of God and deities leads to differing ideas regarding atheism's applicability.
Followers of Ockham, such as John of Mirecourt and Nicholas of Autrecourt furthered this view.
We do not have words for people who doubt that Elvis is still alive or that aliens have traversed the galaxy only to molest ranchers and their cattle.
Writers disagree on how best to define and classify ''atheism'', contesting what supernatural entities it applies to, whether it is a philosophic position in its own right or merely the absence of one, and whether it requires a conscious, explicit rejection.
The term found frequent use in the debate between early Christians and Hellenists, with each side attributing it, in the pejorative sense, to the other.
Atheist Vashti McCollum was the plaintiff in a landmark 1948 Supreme Court case that struck down religious education in US public schools.
The aim of the Epicureans was to attain peace of mind and one important way of doing this was by exposing fear of divine wrath as irrational.
The term ''theism'' came to be contrasted with deism.
Atheist and anti-religious policies in the Soviet Union included numerous legislative acts, the outlawing of religious instruction in the schools, and the emergence of the League of Militant Atheists.
John Locke in contrast, though an advocate of tolerance, urged authorities not to tolerate atheism, believing that the denial of God's existence would undermine the social order and lead to chaos.
One of the most common criticisms of atheism has been to the contrary—that denying the existence of a god leads to moral relativism, leaving one with no moral or ethical foundation, or renders life meaningless and miserable.
Although such an interpretation misrepresents his thought he was portrayed in such a way in Aristophanes' comic play ''Clouds'' and was later to be tried and executed for impiety and corrupting the young.
Any such scientific system must, nevertheless, respond to the criticism embodied in the naturalistic fallacy.
Some Protestant thinkers, such as Thomas Hobbes, espoused a materialist philosophy and skepticism toward supernatural occurrences, while Spinoza rejected divine providence in favor of a panentheistic naturalism.
He reversed Voltaire's famous aphorism that if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him, writing instead that "if God really existed, it would be necessary to abolish him."
That does not, however, show that the atrocities committed by these totalitarian dictatorships were the result of atheist beliefs, carried out in the name of atheism, or caused primarily by the atheistic aspects of the relevant forms of communism."
This object they pursued with a degree of zeal which hitherto had been discovered only in the propagators of some system of piety&nbsp;...
In the US, there was a 1% to 5% increase in self-reported atheism from 2005 to 2012, and a larger drop in those who self-identified as "religious", down by 13%, from 73% to 60%.
While the earliest-found usage of the term ''atheism'' is in 16th-century France, ideas that would be recognized today as atheistic are documented from the Vedic period and the classical antiquity.
It is the opium of the people".
While Geoffrey Blainey has written that "the most ruthless leaders in the Second World War were atheists and secularists who were intensely hostile to both Judaism and Christianity", Richard Madsen has pointed out that Hitler and Stalin each opened and closed churches as a matter of political expedience, and Stalin softened his opposition to Christianity in order to improve public acceptance of his regime during the war.
'''Atheism''' is, in the broadest sense, the absence of belief in the existence of deities.
French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre identified himself as a representative of an "atheist existentialism"
Historian Geoffrey Blainey wrote that the Reformation had paved the way for atheists by attacking the authority of the Catholic Church, which in turn "quietly inspired other thinkers to attack the authority of the new Protestant churches".
and Strato of Lampsacus did not believe in the existence of gods.
Philosophers Susan Neiman
The term ''atheism'' was derived from the French '''', and appears in English about 1587.
The resulting division between faith and reason influenced later radical and reformist theologians such as John Wycliffe, Jan Hus, and Martin Luther.
Atheism has sometimes been defined to include the simple absence of belief that any deities exist.
and Michael Martin have contrasted positive (strong/hard) atheism with negative (weak/soft) atheism.
He was followed by two other explicit atheist writers, the Polish ex-Jesuit philosopher Kazimierz Łyszczyński and in the 1720s by the French priest Jean Meslier.
Axiological, or constructive, atheism rejects the existence of gods in favor of a "higher absolute", such as humanity.
As far back as 1772, Baron d'Holbach said that "All children are born Atheists; they have no idea of God."
It was first used as a term of censure roughly meaning "ungodly" or "impious".
Related words emerged later: ''deist'' in 1621,
concerned less with denying the existence of God than with establishing that "man needs&nbsp;... to find himself again and to understand that nothing can save him from himself, not even a valid proof of the existence of God."
Skepticism, based on the ideas of Hume, asserts that certainty about anything is impossible, so one can never know for sure whether or not a god exists.
J. N. Findlay and J. J. C. Smart argued that the existence of God is not logically necessary.
Madalyn Murray O'Hair was perhaps one of the most influential American atheists; she brought forth the 1963 Supreme Court case ''Murray v. Curlett'' which banned compulsory prayer in public schools.
Secular Buddhism does not advocate belief in gods.
The average annual change for atheism from 2000 to 2010 was −0.17%.
The practical consequence of this atheism was described by Sartre as meaning that there are no ''a priori rules'' or absolute values that can be invoked to govern human conduct, and that humans are "condemned" to invent these for themselves, making "man" absolutely "responsible for everything he does".
William of Ockham inspired anti-metaphysical tendencies with his nominalistic limitation of human knowledge to singular objects, and asserted that the divine essence could not be intuitively or rationally apprehended by human intellect.
Smith coined the term ''implicit atheism'' to refer to "the absence of theistic belief without a conscious rejection of it" and ''explicit atheism'' to refer to the more common definition of conscious disbelief.
Several comprehensive global polls on the subject have been conducted by Gallup International: their 2015 poll featured over 64,000 respondents and indicated that 11% were "convinced atheists" whereas an earlier 2012 poll found that 13% of respondents were "convinced atheists."
A 2012 poll by Gallup International revealed that 5% of Saudis considered themselves to be "convinced atheists."
Respondents to religious-belief polls may define "atheism" differently or draw different distinctions between ''atheism'', non-religious beliefs, and non-theistic religious and spiritual beliefs.
Baron d'Holbach was a prominent figure in the French Enlightenment who is best known for his atheism and for his voluminous writings against religion, the most famous of them being ''The System of Nature'' (1770) but also ''Christianity Unveiled''.
There exist normative ethical systems that do not require principles and rules to be given by a deity.
Lenin said that "every religious idea and every idea of God is unutterable vileness&nbsp;... of the most dangerous kind, 'contagion' of the most abominable kind.
In 1966, ''''Time'''' magazine asked "Is God Dead?"
No one ever needs to identify himself as a "non-astrologer" or a "non-alchemist".
These atheists generally seek to disassociate themselves from the mass political atheism that gained ascendency in various nations in the 20th century.
This broad definition would include newborns and other people who have not been exposed to theistic ideas.
Then he is malevolent.
"Is God willing to prevent evil, but not able?
According to Mikhail Bakunin, "the idea of God implies the abdication of human reason and justice; it is the most decisive negation of human liberty, and necessarily ends in the enslavement of mankind, in theory and practice."
The early Christians were labeled atheists by non-Christians because of their disbelief in pagan gods.
The atheist feminist movement has also become increasingly focused on fighting sexism and sexual harassment within the atheist movement itself.
Both philosophers undermined the metaphysical basis of natural theology and criticized classical arguments for the existence of God.
Al-Ma'arri wrote and taught that religion itself was a "fable invented by the ancients" and that humans were "of two sorts: those with brains, but no religion, and those with religion, but no brains."
Neopositivism and analytical philosophy discarded classical rationalism and metaphysics in favor of strict empiricism and epistemological nominalism.
When asked whether they have "seen or heard traces of atheism in their locality, community, and society" only about 3% to 8% responded yes in all the countries surveyed.
In 2006, Timothy Shah of the Pew Forum noted "a worldwide trend across all major religious groups, in which God-based and faith-based movements in general are experiencing increasing confidence and influence vis-à-vis secular movements and ideologies."
Philodemus reports that Prodicus believed that "the gods of popular belief do not exist nor do they know, but primitive man, out of admiration, deified the fruits of the earth and virtually everything that contributed to his existence".
Early Buddhism was atheistic as Gautama Buddha's path involved no mention of gods.
Atheism is contrasted with theism, which, in its most general form, is the belief that at least one deity exists.
Individuals such as Leonardo da Vinci sought experimentation as a means of explanation, and opposed arguments from religious authority.
Cohen extends this argument in more detail in ''Political Philosophy from Plato to Mao'', where he argues that the Qur'an played a role in perpetuating social codes from the early 7th century despite changes in secular society.
Other Indian philosophies generally regarded as atheistic include Classical Samkhya and Purva Mimamsa.
Theoretical atheism is mainly an ontology; more precisely, a physical ontology.
Many prominent German philosophers of this era denied the existence of deities and were critical of religion, including Ludwig Feuerbach, Arthur Schopenhauer, Max Stirner, Karl Marx, and Friedrich Nietzsche.
However, very few young people in the Arab world have atheists in their circle of friends or acquaintances.
Then whence cometh evil?
At that time "deist" and "deism" already carried their modern meaning.
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 22% of Australians have "no religion", a category that includes atheists.
Spinoza believed that natural laws explained the workings of the universe.
In recent years, the profile of atheism has risen substantially in the Arab world.
Hume, however, held that such unobservable metaphysical concepts should be rejected as "sophistry and illusion".
Ernest Nagel contradicts Smith's definition of atheism as merely "absence of theism", acknowledging only explicit atheism as true "atheism".reprinted in ''Critiques of God'', edited by Peter A. Angeles, Prometheus Books, 1997.
In a sample of 137 countries, the correlation between national IQ and disbelief in God was found to be 0.60.
A 2010 survey published in ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' found that the non-religious made up about 9.6% of the world's population, and atheists about 2.0%, with a very large majority based in Asia.
The radical Jacobins seized power in 1793, ushering in the Reign of Terror.
However, the same survey showed that 11.1% of all respondents stated "no" when asked if they believed in God.
An earlier work, from about 1534, used the term ''atheonism''.
His findings relating specifically to atheism in the US were that compared to religious people in the US, "atheists and secular people" are less nationalistic, prejudiced, antisemitic, racist, dogmatic, ethnocentric, closed-minded, and authoritarian, and in US states with the highest percentages of atheists, the murder rate is lower than average.
Then he is impotent.
His relatively large volume of surviving works had a lasting influence on later philosophers.
Then why call him God?"
During the Roman Empire, Christians were executed for their rejection of the Roman gods in general and Emperor-worship in particular.
The Roman philosopher Sextus Empiricus held that one should suspend judgment about virtually all beliefs—a form of skepticism known as Pyrrhonism—that nothing was inherently evil, and that ataraxia ("peace of mind") is attainable by withholding one's judgment.
The figures for a 2010 Eurobarometer survey in the European Union (EU) reported that 20% of the EU population claimed not to believe in "any sort of spirit, God or life force".
According to a Pew Research Center survey in 2012 religiously unaffiliated (including agnostics and atheists) make up about 18% of Europeans.
The contemporary British political philosopher Martin Cohen has offered the more historically telling example of Biblical injunctions in favor of torture and slavery as evidence of how religious injunctions follow political and social customs, rather than vice versa, but also noted that the same tendency seems to be true of supposedly dispassionate and objective philosophers.
Arguments for atheism range from the philosophical to social and historical approaches.
in response to the Death of God theological movement, citing the estimation that nearly half of all people in the world lived under an anti-religious power, and millions more in Africa, Asia, and South America seemed to lack knowledge of the Christian view of theology.
Drawing on the ideas of Democritus and the Atomists, he espoused a materialistic philosophy according to which the universe was governed by the laws of chance without the need for divine intervention (see scientific determinism).
At his trial Socrates is reported as vehemently denying that he was an atheist and contemporary scholarship provides little reason to doubt this claim.
Rationales for not believing in deities include arguments that there is a lack of empirical evidence; the problem of evil; the argument from inconsistent revelations; the rejection of concepts that cannot be falsified; and the argument from nonbelief.
It is difficult to quantify the number of atheists in the world.
According to the same survey, the religiously unaffiliated are the majority of the population only in two European countries: Czech Republic (75%) and Estonia (60%).
Some include virtue ethics, social contract, Kantian ethics, utilitarianism, and Objectivism.
Marx and Freud used this argument to convey messages of liberation, full-development, and unfettered happiness.
This form of atheism favors humanity as the absolute source of ethics and values, and permits individuals to resolve moral problems without resorting to God.
The French Revolution, noted for its "unprecedented atheism," witnessed the first major political movement in history to advocate for the supremacy of human reason.
This category would also include the child with the conceptual capacity to grasp the issues involved, but who is still unaware of those issues.
Blackford and Schüklenk have written that "the Soviet Union was undeniably an atheist state, and the same applies to Maoist China and Pol Pot's fanatical Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia in the 1970s.
Atheism is nothing more than the noises reasonable people make in the presence of unjustified religious beliefs.
The ancient Romans accused Christians of being atheists for not worshiping the pagan deities.
A broad figure estimates the number of atheists and agnostics on Earth at 1.1 billion.
In his early work, Ludwig Wittgenstein attempted to separate metaphysical and supernatural language from rational discourse.
Blaise Pascal argued this view in his ''Pensées''.
Is he neither able nor willing?
Modern translations of classical texts sometimes render '''' as "atheistic".
While Martin, for example, asserts that agnosticism entails negative atheism, many agnostics see their view as distinct from atheism,
Proponents such as Bertrand Russell emphatically rejected belief in God.
In a 2008 study, researchers found intelligence to be negatively related to religious belief in Europe and the United States.
The term ἀσεβής ('''') then came to be applied against those who impiously denied or disrespected the local gods, even if they believed in other gods.
But almost every work of the other schools states, for refutation, the materialistic views.
The philosopher Baruch Spinoza was "probably the first well known 'semi-atheist' to announce himself in a Christian land in the modern era", according to Blainey.
Euhemerus (c. 300 BCE) published his view that the gods were only the deified rulers, conquerors and founders of the past, and that their cults and religions were in essence the continuation of vanished kingdoms and earlier political structures.
The first known explicit atheist was the German critic of religion Matthias Knutzen in his three writings of 1674.
The first individuals to identify themselves using the word ''atheist'' lived in the 18th century during the Age of Enlightenment.
A Hindu atheist would declare oneself as a Hindu, although also being an atheist at the same time.
According to this form of agnosticism, this limitation in perspective prevents any objective inference from belief in a god to assertions of its existence.
In the 20th century, globalization contributed to the expansion of the term to refer to disbelief in all deities, though it remains common in Western society to describe atheism as simply "disbelief in God".
The Napoleonic era further institutionalized the secularization of French society.
Under this demarcation of atheism, most agnostics qualify as negative atheists.
In the 3rd-century BCE the Greek philosophers Theodorus Cyrenaicus
Theological noncognitivism holds that the statement "God exists" does not express a proposition, but is nonsensical or cognitively meaningless.
Atheism has been regarded as compatible with agnosticism, and has also been contrasted with it.
In early ancient Greek, the adjective '''' (, from the privative ἀ- +  "god") meant "godless".
With the spread of freethought, skeptical inquiry, and subsequent increase in criticism of religion, application of the term narrowed in scope.
A variety of categories have been used to distinguish the different forms of atheism.
Although not strictly an atheist, Euhemerus was later criticized for having "spread atheism over the whole inhabited earth by obliterating the gods".
Other arguments for atheism that can be classified as epistemological or ontological, including logical positivism and ignosticism, assert the meaninglessness or unintelligibility of basic terms such as "God" and statements such as "God is all-powerful."
The broadest demarcation of atheistic rationale is between practical and theoretical atheism.
The 19th-century German political theorist and sociologist Karl Marx called religion "the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions.
In 2013 the first atheist monument on American government property was unveiled at the Bradford County Courthouse in Florida: a 1,500-pound granite bench and plinth inscribed with quotes by Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, and Madalyn Murray O'Hair.
According to the World Values Survey, 4.4% of Americans self-identified as atheists in 2014.
Cicero transliterated the Greek word into the Latin ''''.
In the most religious states, the murder rate is higher than average.
To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions.
The term ''atheist'' (from Fr.
Nobody would have dreamed of calling ''himself'' an atheist."
According to these polls, Europe and East Asia are the regions with the highest rates of atheism.
Some atheists surrounding Jacques Hébert instead sought to establish a Cult of Reason, a form of atheistic pseudo-religion with a goddess personifying reason.
Many atheists hold that atheism is a more parsimonious worldview than theism and therefore that the burden of proof lies not on the atheist to disprove the existence of God but on the theist to provide a rationale for theism.
By contrast, in underdeveloped countries, there are virtually no atheists.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, influenced by the work of Feuerbach, argued that belief in God and religion are social functions, used by those in power to oppress the working class.
Epistemological atheism argues that people cannot know a God or determine the existence of a God.
In ''Reflections on the Revolution in France'' (1790), the philosopher Edmund Burke denounced atheism, writing of a "literary cabal" who had "some years ago formed something like a regular plan for the destruction of the Christian religion.
The Renaissance did much to expand the scope of free thought and skeptical inquiry.
Nicholas of Cusa held to a form of fideism he called ''docta ignorantia'' ("learned ignorance"), asserting that God is beyond human categorization, and thus our knowledge of him is limited to conjecture.
When Christianity became the state religion of Rome under Theodosius I in 381, heresy became a punishable offense.
The philosopher David Hume developed a skeptical epistemology grounded in empiricism, and Immanuel Kant's philosophy has strongly questioned the very possibility of a metaphysical knowledge.
Nonbelievers scored better on questions about tenets central to Protestant and Catholic faiths.
He goes on to say, "The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness.
These arguments—combined with historical events that are argued to demonstrate the dangers of religion, such as the Crusades, inquisitions, witch trials, and terrorist attacks—have been used in response to claims of beneficial effects of belief in religion.
predates ''atheism'' in English, being first found as early as 1566,
With the associated advances in science and philosophy, Arab and Persian lands produced outspoken rationalists and atheists, including Muhammad al Warraq (fl.
In an even narrower sense, atheism is specifically the position that there are no deities.
Is he able, but not willing?
As of 2012, the top ten countries with people who viewed themselves as "convinced atheists" were China (47%), Japan (31%), the Czech Republic (30%), France (29%), South Korea (15%), Germany (15%), Netherlands (14%), Austria (10%), Iceland (10%), Australia (10%), and the Republic of Ireland (10%)
and Eternal Buddha.
Our knowledge of Indian materialism is chiefly based on these."
The terms ''weak'' and ''strong'' are relatively recent, while the terms ''negative'' and ''positive'' atheism are of older origin, having been used (in slightly different ways) in the philosophical literature and in Catholic apologetics.
Other critics of religion and the Church during this time included Niccolò Machiavelli, Bonaventure des Périers, Michel de Montaigne, and François Rabelais.
It promotes the separation of church and state.
and is cited as such by Cicero in his ''De Natura Deorum''.
It has been argued both ways as to whether such individuals can be classified into some form of atheism or agnosticism.
In response to those claims, atheists such as Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins have stated that Stalin's atrocities were influenced not by atheism but by dogmatic Marxism, and that while Stalin and Mao happened to be atheists, they did not do their deeds in the name of atheism.
During the Early Middle Ages, the Islamic world underwent a Golden Age.
Gradually, this view fell into disfavor as ''theism'' came to be understood as encompassing belief in any divinity.
Holyoake was the last person (1842) imprisoned in Great Britain due to atheist beliefs.
