In August 2007, the Atlantic puffin was proposed as the official symbol of the Liberal Party of Canada by its deputy leader Michael Ignatieff, after he observed a colony of these birds and became fascinated by their behaviour.
Some birds collect stems and fragments of dry grasses as nesting materials but others do not bother.
Other fleas which have been found on the birds include ''Ceratophyllus borealis'', ''Ceratophyllus gallinae'', ''Ceratophyllus garei'', ''Ceratophyllus vagabunda'' and the common rabbit flea ''Spilopsyllus cuniculi''.
They are monogamous (they mate for life) and give biparental care to their young.
Most puffin colonies are on small islands, and this is no coincidence as it avoids predation by ground-based mammals such as foxes, rats, stoats and weasels, cats and dogs.
When oiled birds get washed up on beaches around Atlantic coasts, only about 1.5% of the dead auks are puffins, but many others may have died far from land and sunk.
The male is generally slightly larger than the female, but they are coloured alike.
The chick mostly feeds on whole fish and grows rapidly.
During the last few days underground, the chick sheds its down and the juvenile plumage is revealed.
In Norway it is the herring (''Clupea harengus'') that is the mainstay of the diet.
The eye looks almost triangular in shape because of a small, peaked area of horny blue-grey skin above it and a rectangular patch below.
After fledging, it will make its way to the water and will head out to sea and not return to land for several years.
The LPO, a French biodiversity charity focussing on the protection of birds, uses a pair of Atlantic puffins as its emblem.
Each large puffin colony is subdivided into sub-colonies by physical boundaries such as stands of bracken or gorse.
SOS Puffin is a conservation project at the Scottish Seabird Centre at North Berwick to save the puffins on islands in the Firth of Forth.
A flick of the wrist would flip the noose over the victim's head and it was promptly killed, before its struggles could alarm other birds nearby.
It was found that, in years where the availability of sand eels was low, breeding success rates fell, with many chicks starving to death.
Observations of a nest chamber have been made from an underground hide with peephole.
A typical device used in the Faroes was a "fleyg".
Early arrivals take control of the best locations, the most desirable nesting sites being the densely packed burrows on grassy slopes just above the cliff edge where take-off is most easily accomplished.
Their feathers were used in bedding and their eggs were eaten, but not to the same extent as those of some other seabirds, being more difficult to extract from the nest.
This leads to inflammation of the airways and gut and in the longer term, damage to liver and kidneys.
In common with other seabirds, its upper surface is black and underside white.
The chick is covered in fluffy black down and its eyes are open and it can stand as soon as it is hatched.
The parent on incubation duty in the dark nest chamber spends much of its time asleep with its head tucked under its wing, occasionally emerging from the tunnel to flap dust out of its feathers or take a short flight down to the sea.
In the 2013 breeding season, nearly 40,000 pairs were recorded on the Farne Islands, a slight increase on the 2008 census and on the previous year's poor season when some of the burrows flooded.
The chick finally leaves its nest at night, when the risk of predation is at its lowest.
They will also steal fish from puffins returning to feed their young.
This was mainly due to the rats that had proliferated on the island and were eating eggs and young chicks.
* ''Fratercula arctica naumanni''
The rhinoceros auklet (''Cerorhinca monocerata'') and the puffins are closely related, together composing the tribe Fraterculini.
When stocks recovered, a different method of harvesting was used and now hunting is maintained at a sustainable level.
This winter plumage is seldom seen by humans because when they have left their chicks, the birds head out to sea and do not return to land until the next breeding season.
Individuals from southern Iceland (subspecies ''arctica'') are intermediate between the other two in size.
The bird has a powerful bite.
It fishes by sight and can swallow small fish while submerged, but larger specimens are brought to the surface.
By 2011 there were over 120 pairs nesting on the small islet.
The Norwegian municipality of Værøy has an Atlantic puffin as its civic emblem.
The island issued its own coins and, in 1929, its own stamps with denominations in "puffins".
Then the slopes empty for the night as the birds fly out to sea to roost, often choosing to do so at fishing grounds ready for early morning provisioning.
In fact these surveys can be used to provide evidence of the adverse effects of a particular pollutant, using fingerprinting techniques to provide evidence suitable for the prosecution of offenders.
There is a tradition on the Icelandic island of Heimaey for the children to rescue young puffins, a fact recorded in Bruce McMillan's photo-illustrated children's book ''Nights of the Pufflings'' (1995).
Many birds die, and others, while attempting to remove the oil by preening, ingest and inhale toxins.
The juvenile does not have brightly coloured head ornamentation, its bill is less broad and is dark-grey with a yellowish-brown tip, and its legs and feet are also dark.
It can catch several small fish in one dive, holding the first ones in place in its beak with its muscular, grooved tongue while it catches others.
The rest were lost some time between departing from land in the summer and reappearing the following spring.
The egg is large compared to the size of the bird, averaging  long by  wide and weighing about .
Landing is awkward; it either crashes into a wave crest or, in calmer water, does a belly flop.
Later arrivals at the colony may find that all the best nesting sites have already been taken and be pushed towards the periphery where they are in greater danger of predation.
The female lays a single white egg each year but if this is lost early in the breeding season, another might be produced.
Maine is on the southerly edge of the bird's breeding range and with changing weather patterns, this may be set to contract northwards.
Nevertheless, a further hunting ban covering the whole of Iceland was called for in 2011, although the puffin's lack of recent breeding success was being blamed on a diminution in food supply rather than overharvesting.
Land birds mostly lose their primaries one pair at a time to enable them still to be able to fly, but the puffin sheds all its primaries at one time and dispenses with flight entirely for a month or two.
The white shell is usually devoid of markings but soon becomes soiled with mud.
Some of the causes of population decline may be increased predation by gulls and skuas, the introduction of rats, cats, dogs and foxes onto some islands used for nesting, contamination by toxic residues, drowning in fishing nets, declining food supplies and climate change.
It has been estimated that an adult bird needs to eat about forty of these per day—sand eels, herring, sprats and capelin being the most often consumed.
The beak is very distinctive.
In a long-lived bird with a small clutch size such as the Atlantic puffin, the survival rate of adults is an important factor influencing the success of the species.
The vernacular name ''puffin'' – puffed in the sense of swollen – was originally applied to the fatty, salted meat of young birds of the unrelated species Manx shearwater (''Puffinus puffinus''), which in 1652 was known as the "Manks puffin".
A combination of the availability of food in winter and summer probably influences the survival of the birds, since individuals starting the winter in poor condition are less likely to survive than those in good condition.
The largest colony is on Iceland where 60% of the world's Atlantic puffins nest.
It can excavate its own hole or move into a pre-existing system dug by a rabbit and has been known to peck and drive off the original occupant.
Heavy metals and other pollutants are concentrated through the food chain and, as fish are the primary food source for Atlantic puffins, there is great potential for them to bioaccumulate heavy metals such as mercury and arsenic.
In Maine, light level geolocators have been attached to the legs of puffins which store information on their whereabouts.
Here, the dangers are often from below the water rather than above, and puffins can sometimes be seen putting their heads underwater to peer around for predators.
The island of Lundy in the United Kingdom is reputed to derive its name from the Norse ''lund-ey'' or "puffin island".
The puffins are energetic burrow-engineers and repairers and the grassy slopes may be undermined by a network of tunnels.
This puffin has a black crown and back, pale grey cheek patches and white underparts.
Total incubation time is around 39–45 days.
Oiled plumage has a reduced ability to insulate and makes the bird more vulnerable to temperature fluctuations and less buoyant in the water.
In the summer, its southern limit stretches from northern France to Maine and in the winter the bird may range as far south as the Mediterranean Sea and North Carolina.
Sometimes a beakful of materials is taken underground, only to be brought out again and discarded.
This causes the turf to dry out in summer, vegetation to die and dry soil be whirled away by the wind.
Another conservation measure undertaken by the Centre is to encourage motorists to check under their cars in late summer before driving off as young puffins, disorientated by the street lights, may land in the town and take shelter underneath the vehicles.
In 2014, 148 nesting pairs were counted on the island.
In the spring, mature birds return to land, usually to the colony at which they were hatched.
This did not catch on at first, but in 1981 four pairs nested on the island.
Puffins from northern populations are typically larger than their counterparts in southern parts of the range.
Both legs and large webbed feet are bright orange, contrasting with the sharp black claws.
This is thought to benefit the bird by reducing kleptoparasitism by the Arctic skua which harasses puffins until they drop their fish loads.
The juvenile bird is similar to the adult in plumage but altogether duller with a much darker grey face and yellowish-brown beak tip and legs.
The most important demographic may be an increase in the sea surface temperature which may have benefits for some northerly Atlantic puffin colonies.
The irises are brown or very dark blue and each has red orbital ring.
Others have been provisioning the nest with butterfish (''Peprilus triacanthus'') but these are often too large and deep-bodied for the chick to swallow, causing it to die from starvation.
While the species is also known as the common puffin, "Atlantic Puffin" is the English name recommended by the International Ornithological Congress.
In years of fish shortage, the whole colony may experience a longer fledgling period but the normal range is 38 to 44 days, by which time chicks will have reached about 75% of their mature body weight.
When the moment arrives, it emerges from the burrow, usually for the first time, and walks, runs and flaps its way to the sea.
Climate change may well affect populations of seabirds in the northern Atlantic.
This trauma can contribute to a loss of reproductive success and harm to developing embryos.
When at sea, the Atlantic puffin bobs about like a cork, propelling itself through the water with powerful thrusts of its feet and keeping itself turned into the wind, even when resting and apparently asleep.
On land, they soon set about improving and clearing out the burrow.
The only morphological difference between the three is their size.
After the oil tanker  shipwreck and oil spill in 1967, few dead puffins were recovered, but the number of puffins breeding in France the following year was reduced to 16% of its previous level.
It rearranges its nesting material, picks up and drops small stones, flaps its immature wings, pulls at protruding root ends and pushes and strains against the unyielding wall of the burrow.
At the breeding colony it is quiet above ground but in its burrow makes a growling sound somewhat resembling a chainsaw being revved up.
On the island of Lundy the number of puffins decreased from 3,500 pairs in 1939 to 10 pairs in 2000.
They are still caught and eaten in Iceland and the Faroe Islands, but there have been calls for an outright ban on hunting them in Iceland because of concern over the dwindling number of birds successfully raising chicks.
In addition to demonstrating the feasibility of re-establishing a seabird colony, the project showed the usefulness of using decoys, and eventually call recordings and mirrors, to facilitate such reestablishment.
The chick may come to the burrow entrance to defecate but does not usually emerge into the open and seems to have an aversion to light until it is nearly fully fledged.
Where it nests on the tundra in the far north, the Arctic skua (''Stercorarius parasiticus'') is a terrestrial predator, but at lower latitudes it is a specialised kleptoparasite, concentrating on auks and other seabirds.
There is a Project Puffin Visitor Centre in Rockland providing information on the birds and their lives, and on the other conservation projects being undertaken by the National Audubon Society who run the centre.
This provides camouflage, with aerial predators unable to observe the bird against the dark watery background and underwater attackers failing to notice it as it blends in with the bright sky above the waves.
On the other hand, puffin numbers increased considerably in the late twentieth century in the North Sea, including on the Isle of May and the Farne Islands where numbers have been increasing by about 10% per year.
It copes with the excess salt that it swallows partly through its kidneys and partly by excretion through specialised salt glands in its nostrils.
Only 5% of the ringed puffins that failed to reappear at the colony did so during the breeding season.
Puffins were caught and eaten fresh, salted in brine or smoked and dried.
The external appearance of the adult male and female are identical except that the male is usually slightly larger.
It is in the auk family, Alcidae, which includes the guillemots, typical auks, murrelets, auklets, puffins and the razorbill.
It spends much time each day preening to keep its plumage in order and spread oil from the preen gland.
The Atlantic puffin diet consists almost entirely of fish, though examination of its stomach contents shows that it occasionally eats shrimps, other crustaceans, molluscs and polychaete worms, especially in more coastal waters.
Project Puffin is an effort initiated in 1973 by Dr. Stephen W. Kress of the National Audubon Society to restore Atlantic puffins to nesting islands in the Gulf of Maine.
In northern Norway the main food item fed to the chick is the young herring.
It is in competition with other birds and animals for burrows.
Puffins have been hunted by man since time immemorial.
By the end of the breeding season, the black plumage may have lost its shine or even taken on a slightly brownish tinge.
They will not breed till the following year although it has been found that if the ground cover surrounding the colony is cut back before these sub-adults arrive, the number of successfully nesting pairs may be increased.
Each year before fledging, the young were individually tagged.
Measurements can be made on eggs, feathers or internal organs and beached bird surveys, accompanied by chemical analysis of feathers, can be effective indicators of marine pollution by lipophilic substances as well as metals.
For example, four thousand puffins nest each year on islands off the coast of Maine and visitors can view them from tour boats which operate during the summer months.
There are considered to be three subspecies:
A few dead puffins were strewn around to entice incoming birds to land, and the net was flicked upwards to scoop a bird from the air as it slowed before alighting.
The Vikings might have found the island a useful refuge and restocking point after their depredations on the mainland .
Its downy under-plumage remains dry and provides thermal insulation.
It is the official bird symbol for the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador.
The Atlantic puffin has a direct flight, typically  above the sea surface and higher over the water than most other auks.
Like many seabirds, the Atlantic puffin spends most of the year far from land in the open ocean and only visits coastal areas to breed.
In the interim, each year it will have a broader bill, paler face patches and brighter legs and beak.
Puffin numbers on the island of Craigleith, once one of the largest colonies in Scotland with 28,000 pairs, have declined dramatically to just a few thousand due to the invasion of a large introduced plant, the tree mallow (''Lavatera arborea'').
* ''Fratercula arctica arctica''
Spending the autumn and winter in the open ocean of the cold northern seas, the Atlantic puffin returns to coastal areas at the start of the breeding season in late spring.
The Atlantic puffin and other pelagic birds are excellent bioindicators of the environment as they occupy a high trophic level.
In the Shetland Islands, sand eels (''Ammodytes marinus'') normally form at least 90% of the food fed to chicks.
At the joint of the two mandibles there is a yellow, wrinkled rosette.
One bird was found to have covered  of ocean in eight months, traveling northwards to the northern Labrador Sea then southeastward to the mid-Atlantic before returning to land.
It retreats to the nest chamber as the adult bird brings in its load of fish.
The legs are short and set well back on the body giving the bird its upright stance on land.
Manx shearwaters also nest underground and often live in their own burrows alongside puffins, and their burrowing activities may break through into the puffin's living quarters resulting in the loss of the egg.
When it takes off, the Atlantic puffin patters across the surface of the water while vigorously flapping its wings, before launching itself into the air.
Atlantic puffins are probably safest when out at sea.
Eastern Egg Rock Island in Muscongus Bay, about  away from Pemaquid Point, had been occupied by nesting puffins until 1885, when the birds disappeared because of overhunting.
Sometimes a bird such as an Arctic skua will harass a puffin arriving with a beakful of fish, causing it to drop its catch.
It cannot fly properly yet so descending a cliff is perilous; when it reaches the water it paddles out to sea, and may be three kilometres (two miles) away from the shore by daybreak.
They make several circuits of the colony before alighting.
The underparts of the bird, the breast, belly and undertail coverts, are white.
New colonies are very unlikely to start up spontaneously because this gregarious bird will only nest where others are already present.
The demand was so great that Puffin Book Clubs were introduced in schools to encourage reading, and a children's magazine ''Puffin Post'' was established.
It harasses puffins while they are airborne forcing them to drop their catch which it then snatches up.
Smaller gull species like the herring gull (''L.
Atlantic puffins lead solitary existences when out at sea and this part of their life has been little studied as the task of finding even one bird on the vast ocean is formidable.
Although the number of birds seems to be decreasing, the decline does not reach the threshold for "vulnerable" status.
Having spent the winter alone on the ocean, it is unclear whether the Atlantic puffin meets its previous partner offshore or whether they encounter each other when they return to their nest of the previous year.
For example, a puffin from northern Iceland (subspecies ''naumanii'') weighs about  and has a wing length of  while one from the Faroes (subspecies ''grabae'') weighs  and has a wing length of .
They have been given a number of endearing names including "clowns of the sea" and "sea parrots", and juvenile puffins may be called "pufflings".
Predation by the great skua (''Catharacta skua'') is also reduced by several birds arriving simultaneously.
Breeding success depends on there being ample supplies of food at the time of maximum demand, as the chick grows.
These face patches taper to a point and nearly meet at the back of the neck.
On detecting danger, puffins take off and fly down to the safety of the sea or retreat into their burrows, but if caught they defend themselves vigorously with beak and sharp claws.
The growing chick seems to anticipate the arrival of an adult, advancing along the burrow just before it arrives but not emerging into the open air.
If a bird is startled and takes off unexpectedly, a panic can spread through the colony with all the birds launching themselves into the air and wheeling around in a great circle.
On the Isle of May on the other side of the Atlantic, only five pairs of puffins were breeding in 1958 while twenty years later there were 10,000 pairs.
These oceanic waters have such a vast extent of 15 to 30 million square kilometres (6 to 12 million square miles) that each bird has more than a square kilometre at its disposal and it is unsurprising that they are seldom seen out at sea.
Younger birds may come ashore a month or more after the mature birds and find no remaining nesting sites.
The half nearest the tip is orange-red and the half nearest to the head is slate grey.
It mostly moves by paddling along efficiently with its webbed feet and seldom takes to the air.
They each have two feather-free brood patches on their undersides where an enhanced blood supply provides heat for the egg.
For the first few days the chick may be fed with these beak-to-beak but later the fish are simply dropped on the floor of the nest beside the chick which swallows them whole.
There is a yellow chevron-shaped ridge separating the two parts and a yellow, fleshy strip at the base of the bill.
It breeds on the coasts of north west Europe, the Arctic fringes and eastern North America.
Following the elimination of the rats, it is hoped that populations will recover, and in 2005, a juvenile was seen, believed to be the first chick raised on the island for thirty years.
It is an Anglo-Norman word (Middle English ''pophyn'' or ''poffin'') used for the cured carcasses.
Coastal communities and island dwellers with few natural resources at their disposal, made good use of the seafoods that they found on their cliffs and shores.
Birds that were removed as chicks and released elsewhere were found to show fidelity to their point of liberation.
Puffin decoys had been installed on the island to fool the puffins into thinking they were part of an established colony.
It nests in clifftop colonies, digging a burrow in which a single white egg is laid.
The birds are colonial nesters, excavating burrows on grassy clifftops or reusing existing holes, and may also nest in crevices and amongst rocks and scree on occasion.
Often, one stands outside the entrance while the other excavates, kicking out quantities of soil and grit that showers the partner standing outside.
Colonies are mostly on islands where there are no terrestrial predators but adult birds and newly fledged chicks are at risk of attacks from the air by gulls and skuas.
Its wingspan is  and on land it stands about  high.
The Atlantic puffin is a bird of the colder waters of the North Atlantic Ocean.
It does not congregate with others of its kind and will not return to land for two or three years.
In its Red List of Threatened Species, the International Union for Conservation of Nature lists the Atlantic puffin as vulnerable.
It is typically silent at sea, except for the soft purring sounds it sometimes makes in flight.
The specific name ''arctica'' refers to the northerly distribution of the bird, being derived from the Greek ''άρκτος'' ("arktos"), the bear, referring to the northerly constellation, the Great Bear.
Body length, wing length and size of beak all increase at higher latitudes.
From the side the beak is broad and triangular but viewed from above it is narrow.
Traditional means of capture varied across the birds' range and nets and rods were used in various ingenious ways.
Dominance is shown by an upright stance, with fluffed chest feathers and cocked tail, an exaggerated slow walk, head jerking and gaping.
Little is known of their behaviour and diet at sea but no correlation was found between environmental factors, such as temperature variations, and their mortality rate.
Another method of capture, used in St Kilda, involved the use of a flexible pole with a noose on the end.
The forehead, crown and nape are glossy black, as are the back, wings and tail.
On land, it has the typical upright stance of an auk.
The largest colony in the western Atlantic (estimated at more than 260,000 pairs) can be found at the Witless Bay Ecological Reserve, south of St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador.
Islands seem particularly attractive to the birds for breeding as compared to mainland sites.
In Labrador the puffins seemed more flexible and when the staple forage fish capelin (''Mallotus villosus'') declined in availability, they were able to adapt and feed the chicks on other prey species.
The breeding success of Atlantic puffin colonies has been found to correlate in this way with the water surface temperatures of the previous year.
Both the guillemot tick ''Ixodes uriae'' and the flea ''Ornithopsylla laetitiae'' (probably originally a rabbit flea) have been recorded from the nests of puffins.
It is generally considered that these populations are different subspecies.
This is a practice in which the pair approach each other, each wagging its head from side to side, and then rattle their beaks together.
As the bird ages, one or more grooves may form on the red portion.
On the ground they spend much time preening, spreading oil from their preen gland and setting each feather in its correct position with beak or claw.
