Contemporary art museums include the Atlanta Contemporary Art Center and the Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia.
Many restaurants opened in the city's gentrifying neighborhoods have received praise at the national level, including Bocado, Bacchanalia, and Miller Union in West Midtown, Empire State South in Midtown, and Two Urban Licks and Rathbun's on the east side.
In the 2010 Census, Atlanta was recorded as the nation's fourth-largest majority-black city.
Reed was elected to a second term on November 5, 2013.
Atlanta sits atop a ridge south of the Chattahoochee River, which is part of the ACF River Basin.
The film's legendary producer, David O. Selznick, as well as the film's stars Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, and Olivia de Havilland attended the gala event at Loew's Grand Theatre, but Oscar winner Hattie McDaniel, an African American, was barred from the event due to racial segregation laws and policies.
The eastside is marked by historic streetcar suburbs built from the 1890s-1930s as havens for the upper middle class.
The city is split among 14 state house districts and four state senate districts, all held by Democrats.
The city has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men's Basketball Championship four times, most recently in 2013.
In professional golf, The Tour Championship, the final PGA Tour event of the season, is played annually at East Lake Golf Club.
The opening of the Georgia World Congress Center in 1976 heralded Atlanta's rise as a convention city.
Lows at or below freezing can be expected 40 nights annually, but extended stretches with daily high temperatures below  are very rare, with a recent exception in January 2014.
Prior to the arrival of European settlers in north Georgia, Creek and Cherokee Indians inhabited the area.
Many of Atlanta's tallest skyscrapers were built in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with most displaying tapering spires or otherwise ornamented crowns, such as One Atlantic Center (1987), 191 Peachtree Tower (1991), and the Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta (1992).
For traditional Southern fare, one of the city's most famous establishments is The Varsity, a long-lived fast food chain and the world's largest drive-in restaurant.
Beginning as early as the 1920s, Atlanta emerged as a center for country music, which was brought to the city by migrants from Appalachia.
The city's main street is named after a tree, and beyond the Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead business districts, the skyline gives way to a dense canopy of woods that spreads into the suburbs.
Atlanta is the primary transportation hub of the Southeastern United States, via highway, railroad, and air, with Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport being the world's busiest airport since 1998.
The racial makeup and population of Atlanta was 54.0% Black or African American, 38.4% White, 3.1% Asian and 0.2% Native American.
The region surrounding Atlanta was the location of several major army battles, culminating with the Battle of Atlanta and a four-month-long siege of the city by the Union Army under the command of General William Tecumseh Sherman.
The heavy reliance on automobiles for transportation in Atlanta has resulted in traffic, commute, and air pollution rates that rank among the worst in the country.
After engineers surveyed various possible locations for the terminus, the "zero milepost" was driven into the ground in what is now Five Points.
Midtown Atlanta is the city's second-largest business district, containing the offices of many of the region's law firms.
The gentrification of Atlanta has its origins in the 1970s, after many of Atlanta's neighborhoods had undergone the urban decay that affected other major American cities in the mid-20th century.
Atlanta also attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions catering to a variety of interests.
The collapse in home prices has led some economists to deem Atlanta the worst housing market in the country.
Under the Köppen classification, Atlanta has a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa'') with four distinct seasons and generous precipitation year-round, typical for the inland South.
Under Mayor Jackson's tenure, Atlanta's airport was modernized, solidifying the city's role as a transportation center.
Atlanta is the county seat of Fulton County, and a small portion of the city extends eastward into DeKalb County.
Atlanta is an "alpha-" or "world city", exerting a significant impact upon commerce, finance, research, technology, education, media, art, and entertainment.
This unique cultural combination reveals itself in the arts district of Midtown, the quirky neighborhoods on the city's eastside, and the multi-ethnic enclaves found along Buford Highway.
During the 2000s, Atlanta underwent a profound transformation demographically, physically, and culturally.
The city is served by the Atlanta Police Department, which numbers 2,000 officers and oversaw a 40% decrease in the city's crime rate between 2001 and 2009.
Georgia State University, a public research university located in Downtown Atlanta, is the largest of the 29 public colleges and universities in the University System of Georgia and a major contributor to the revitalization of the city's central business district.
Warm air from the Gulf of Mexico can bring spring-like highs while strong Arctic air masses can push lows into the teens (≤ −7&nbsp;°C).
The latter two combine in the middle of the city to form the Downtown Connector (I-75/85), which carries more than 340,000 vehicles per day and is one of the most congested segments of interstate highway in the United States.
The Canopy Walk is considered the only canopy-level pathway of its kind in the United States.
MARTA rail lines connect many key destinations, such as the airport, Downtown, Midtown, Buckhead, and Perimeter Center.
Information technology companies are drawn to Atlanta's lower costs and educated workforce.
Institutions of higher education also contribute to Atlanta's art scene, with the Savannah College of Art and Design's Atlanta campus providing the city's arts community with a steady stream of curators, and Emory University's Michael C. Carlos Museum containing the largest collection of ancient art in the Southeast.
J. Edgar Thomson, Chief Engineer of the Georgia Railroad, suggested the town be renamed "Atlantica-Pacifica," which was shortened to "Atlanta".
In 2011, the ''New York Times'' characterized Empire State South and Miller Union as reflecting "a new kind of sophisticated Southern sensibility centered on the farm but experienced in the city."
By 1885, the founding of the Georgia School of Technology (now Georgia Tech) and the city's black colleges had established the city as a center for higher education.
Lastly, Atlanta's cultural offerings expanded during the 2000s: the High Museum of Art doubled in size; the Alliance Theatre won a Tony Award; and numerous art galleries were established on the once-industrial Westside.
Atlanta is also served by many private schools, including parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Atlanta.
The median income for a household in the city was $45,171.
Atlanta is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Atlanta Opera), ballet (Atlanta Ballet), orchestral music (Atlanta Symphony Orchestra), and theater (the Alliance Theatre).
From 2010–2011, Atlanta saw a 0.9% contraction in employment and only a 0.4% rise in income.
Construction of the city's subway system began in 1975, with rail service commencing in 1979.
The Weather Channel, owned by NBCUniversal, Bain Capital, and The Blackstone Group, is headquartered just outside Atlanta in Cobb County.
In 2011, Atlanta hosted professional wrestling's annual WrestleMania.
Facilities located along the Chattahoochee River cater to watersports enthusiasts, providing the opportunity for kayaking, canoeing, fishing, boating, or tubing.
While the games themselves were marred by numerous organizational inefficiencies, as well as the Centennial Olympic Park bombing, they were a watershed event in Atlanta's history, initiating a fundamental transformation of the city in the decade that followed.
Golf and tennis are also popular in Atlanta, and the city contains six public golf courses and 182 tennis courts.
22.6% percent of the population was living below the poverty line.
The Atlanta Streetcar line is also being expanded on in the coming years to include a wider range of Atlanta's neighborhoods and important places of interest, with a total of 66 miles of track being laid in the near future.
Located at the far northwestern edge of the city, much of the river's natural habitat is preserved, in part by the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area.
Festivals showcasing arts and crafts, film, and music, including the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, the Atlanta Film Festival, and Music Midtown, respectively, are also popular with tourists.
The city council consists of 15 representatives—one from each of the city's 12 districts and three at-large positions.
The southern fourth is in the 13th district, represented by Democrat David Scott.
As the state capital, Atlanta is the site of most of Georgia's state government.
Film and television production injected $6 billion into Georgia's economy in 2015, with Atlanta garnering most of the projects.
Atlanta is home to professional franchises for three major team sports: the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball, the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association, and the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League.
Suburbanization, a booming economy, and new migrants decreased the city's black percentage from a high of 67% in 1990 to 54% in 2010.
Those from some other race made up 2.2% of the city's population, while those from two or more races made up 2.0%.
Atlanta is also home to nationally renowned private colleges and universities, most notably Emory University, a leading liberal arts and research institution that ranks among the top 20 schools in the United States and operates Emory Healthcare, the largest health care system in Georgia.
The city's embrace of modern architecture, however, translated into an ambivalent approach toward historic preservation, leading to the destruction of notable architectural landmarks, including the Equitable Building (1892–1971), Terminal Station (1905–1972), and the Carnegie Library (1902–1977).
During the Civil War, the nexus of multiple railroads in Atlanta made the city a hub for the distribution of military supplies.
In the decades following the Civil Rights Movement, during which the city earned a reputation as "too busy to hate" for the progressive views of its citizens and leaders, Atlanta attained international prominence.
From 2000 to 2010, the city's black population decreased by 31,678 people, shrinking from 61.4% of the city's population in 2000 to 54.0% in 2010.
Dewpoints in the summer range from  in June to  in July.
Indeed, Atlanta has been nicknamed the Silicon peach due to its burgeoning technology sector.
Surrounding these high-density districts are leafy, low-density neighborhoods, most of which are dominated by single-family homes.
There, the million-plus immigrants that make Atlanta home have established various authentic ethnic restaurants representing virtually every nationality on the globe.
, Atlanta contains the fourth-largest concentration of information technology jobs in the United States, numbering 85,000.
Piedmont Park, located in Midtown is Atlanta's most iconic green space.
Increased racial tensions led to the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906, which left at least 27 people dead and over 70 injured.
At the federal level, Atlanta is split between two congressional districts.
From 2000 to 2010, Atlanta gained 22,763 white residents, 5,142 Asian residents, and 3,095 Hispanic residents, while the city's black population decreased by 31,678.
In general, Southern accents are less prevalent among residents of the city and inner suburbs and among younger people; they are more common in the outer suburbs and among older people.
Because of the development of corporate headquarters in the region, attracting migrants from other areas of the country, by 2003, ''Atlanta'' magazine concluded that Atlanta had become significantly "de-Southernized."
Mary Mac's Tea Room and Paschal's are more formal destinations for Southern food.
Beginning in the 1880s, Henry W. Grady, the editor of the ''Atlanta Constitution'' newspaper, promoted Atlanta to potential investors as a city of the "New South" that would be based upon a modern economy and less reliant on agriculture.
Notwithstanding heavy automotive usage in Atlanta, the city's subway system is the eighth busiest in the country.
The 2010 United States Census reported that Atlanta had a population of 420,003.
Atlanta encompasses , of which  is land and  is water.
Tourists are also drawn to the city's culinary scene, which comprises a mix of urban establishments garnering national attention, ethnic restaurants serving cuisine from every corner of the world, and traditional eateries specializing in Southern dining.
A 2001 study found that Atlanta's heavy tree cover declined from 48% in 1974 to 38% in 1996.
Crime is down across the country, but Atlanta's improvement has occurred at more than twice the national rate.
Atlanta is an important rail junction and contains major classification yards for Norfolk Southern and CSX.
The city was also a center for Southern rock during its 1970s heyday: the Allman Brothers Band's hit instrumental "Hot 'Lanta" is an ode to the city, while Lynyrd Skynyrd's famous live rendition of "Free Bird" was recorded at the Fox Theatre in 1976, with lead singer Ronnie Van Zant directing the band to "play it pretty for Atlanta".
In 2001 and 2011, Atlanta hosted the PGA Championship, one of the four major championships in men's professional golf, at the Atlanta Athletic Club.
The city's only skate park, a  facility that offers bowls, curbs, and smooth-rolling concrete mounds, is located at Historic Fourth Ward Park.
Atlanta's economy is considered diverse, with dominant sectors including logistics, professional and business services, media operations, and information technology.
In college football, Atlanta hosts the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Game, the SEC Championship Game, and the Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl.
With a network of freeways that radiate out from the city, automobiles are the dominant mode of transportation in the region.
The Chattahoochee River long formed a border between the Coastal Southern and Southern Appalachian dialects.
The heaviest single snowfall occurred on January 23, 1940, with around  of snow.
Every mayor elected since 1973 has been black.
Atlanta's dialect has traditionally been a variation of Southern American English.
Home to the nation's largest collections of gorillas and orangutans, the Zoo is also one of only four zoos in the U.S. to house giant pandas.
Northwest Atlanta contains the areas of the city to west of Marietta Boulevard and to the north of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, including those neighborhoods remote to downtown, such as Riverside, Bolton and Whittier Mill, which is one of Atlanta's designated Landmark Historical Neighborhoods.
Atlanta also contains a campus of the Savannah College of Art and Design, a private art and design university that has proven to be a major factor in the recent growth of Atlanta's visual art community.
The Atlanta Falcons have played in Atlanta since their inception in 1966.
The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains, and at  above mean sea level, Atlanta has the highest elevation of major cities east of the Mississippi River.
Atlanta serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy, including the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Tornadoes are rare in the city itself, but the March 15, 2008 EF2 tornado damaged prominent structures in downtown Atlanta.
Visitors seeking to sample international Atlanta are directed to Buford Highway, the city's international corridor.
However, the problem is being addressed by community organizations and city government: Trees Atlanta, a non-profit organization founded in 1985, has planted and distributed over 75,000 shade trees in the city, while Atlanta's government has awarded $130,000 in grants to neighborhood groups to plant trees.
During the first decades of the 20th century, Atlanta experienced a period of unprecedented growth.
Extremes range from  on February 13, 1899 to  on June 30, 2012.
Midtown is also known for its art institutions, cultural attractions, institutions of higher education, and dense form.
Delta Air Lines, the city's largest employer and the metro area's third largest, operates the world's largest airline hub at Hartsfield-Jackson and has helped make it the world's busiest airport, both in terms of passenger traffic and aircraft operations.
However, the nickname is also factually accurate, as the city's tree coverage percentage is at 36%, the highest out of all major American cities, and above the national average of 27%.
When neighborhood opposition successfully prevented two freeways from being built through city's the east side in 1975, the area became the starting point for Atlanta's gentrification.
Atlanta has also had its own professional ice hockey and soccer franchises.
At the same time, the white population of Atlanta has increased.
Although municipal elections are officially nonpartisan, nearly all of the city's elected officials are registered Democrats.
Over 75 percent of Fortune 1000 companies conduct business operations in the Atlanta metropolitan area, and the region hosts offices of about 1,250 multinational corporations.
Winters are cool but variable, with an average of 48 freezing days per year and temperatures dropping to  on rare occasions.
Corporate operations comprise a large portion of the Atlanta's economy, with the city serving as the regional, national, or global headquarters for many corporations.
In 1895, Atlanta hosted the Cotton States and International Exposition, which attracted nearly 800,000 attendees and successfully promoted the New South's development to the world.
The Braves won the World Series in 1995, and had an unprecedented run of 14 straight divisional championships from 1991 to 2005.
In 1836, the Georgia General Assembly voted to build the Western and Atlantic Railroad in order to provide a link between the port of Savannah and the Midwest.
During the countercultural 1960s, Atlanta hosted the Atlanta International Pop Festival, with the 1969 festival taking place more than a month before Woodstock and featuring many of the same bands.
Atlanta offers resources and opportunities for amateur and participatory sports and recreation.
Though unemployment had dropped to 7% by late 2014, this was still higher than the national unemployment rate of 5.8% Atlanta's housing market has also struggled, with home prices falling by 2.1% in January 2012, reaching levels not seen since 1996.
Atlanta contains the country's third largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies, and the city is the global headquarters of corporations such as The Coca-Cola Company, The Home Depot, Delta Air Lines, AT&T Mobility, Chick-fil-A, UPS, and Newell-Rubbermaid.
Between the mid-1990s and 2010, stimulated by funding from the HOPE VI program, Atlanta demolished nearly all of its public housing, a total of 17,000 units and about 10% of all housing units in the city.
Protestant Christianity still maintains a strong presence in the city (63%), but in recent decades the Catholic Church has increased in numbers and influence because of new migrants in the region.
The Peachtree Road Race, the world's largest  race, is held annually on Independence Day.
Largely due to a statewide tax incentive enacted in 2005, the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act, which awards qualified productions a transferable income tax credit of 20% of all in-state costs for film and television investments of $500,000 or more, Atlanta has become a center for film and television production.
It ranks 36th among world cities and 8th in the nation with a gross domestic product of $270&nbsp;billion.
Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of whites in the city's population grew faster than that of any other U.S. city.
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, the world's busiest airport as measured by passenger traffic and aircraft traffic, offers air service to over 150 U.S. destinations and more than 80 international destinations in 52 countries, with over 2,700 arrivals and departures daily.
Due to the city's superior rail transportation network, the state capital was moved to Atlanta from Milledgeville in 1868.
Although Atlanta's lack of bike lanes and hilly topography may deter many residents from cycling, the city's transportation plan calls for the construction of  of bike lanes by 2020, with the BeltLine helping to achieve this goal.
Since the turn of the 21st century, Atlanta has emerged as a sophisticated restaurant town.
On November 11, 1864, in preparation of the Union Army's march to Savannah, Sherman ordered Atlanta to be burned to the ground, sparing only the city's churches and hospitals.
The mayor may veto a bill passed by the council, but the council can override the veto with a two-thirds majority.
The Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area, located in the northwestern corner of the city, preserves a  stretch of the river for public recreation opportunities.
Typical of the southeastern U.S., Atlanta receives abundant rainfall that is relatively evenly distributed throughout the year, though spring and early fall are markedly drier.
Specifically, homicide decreased by 57%, rape by 72%, and violent crime overall by 55%.
African-American residents of Atlanta have followed whites to newer housing in the suburbs in the early 21st century.
Historically, Atlanta has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party.
Thus, although traditional Southern culture is part of Atlanta's cultural fabric, it is mostly the backdrop to one of the nation's most cosmopolitan cities.
Desegregation of the public sphere came in stages, with public transportation desegregated by 1959, the restaurant at Rich's department store by 1961, movie theaters by 1963, and public schools by 1973.
Revitalization of Atlanta's neighborhoods, initially spurred by the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, has intensified in the 21st century, altering the city's demographics, politics, and culture.
Delta Air Lines maintains its largest hub at the airport.
Gentrification of the city's neighborhoods is one of the more controversial and transformative forces shaping contemporary Atlanta.
The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, is home to the  Kendeda Canopy Walk, a skywalk that allows visitors to tour one of the city's last remaining urban forests from .
The Georgia State Capitol building, located downtown, houses the offices of the governor, lieutenant governor and secretary of state, as well as the General Assembly.
In 1960, whites comprised 61.7% of the city's population.
Atlanta has one of the highest LGBT populations per capita, ranking third among major American cities, behind San Francisco and slightly behind Seattle, with 12.8% of the city's total population identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
In southwest Atlanta, neighborhoods closer to downtown originated as streetcar suburbs, including the historic West End, while those farther from downtown retain a postwar suburban layout, including Collier Heights and Cascade Heights, home to much of the city's affluent African American population.
Atlanta has played a major or contributing role in the development of various genres of American music at different points in the city's history.
Downtown is also home to the city's sporting venues and many of its tourist attractions.
After Atlanta was awarded the Olympic games in 1990, gentrification expanded into other parts of the city, stimulated by infrastructure improvements undertaken in preparation for the games.
Also located in the city is the Atlanta University Center, the largest contiguous consortium of historically black colleges, comprising Spelman College, Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College, Morehouse School of Medicine, and Interdenominational Theological Center.
Out of the total population five years and older, 83.3% spoke only English at home, while 8.8% spoke Spanish, 3.9% another Indo-European language, and 2.8% an Asian language.
Atlanta was established in 1837 at the intersection of two railroad lines, and the city rose from the ashes of the American Civil War to become a national center of commerce.
Georgia Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, WABE, a classical music station operated by Atlanta Public Schools.
On May 21, 1917, the Great Atlanta Fire destroyed 1,938 buildings in what is now the Old Fourth Ward, resulting in one fatality and the displacement of 10,000 people.
In 2012, Atlanta's first "bike track" was constructed on 10th Street in Midtown.
Amtrak, the national rail passenger system, provides service to Atlanta via the ''Crescent train'' (New&nbsp;York–New&nbsp;Orleans), which stops at Peachtree Station.
In 1915, Leo Frank, a Jewish-American factory superintendent, convicted of murder, was hanged by a lynch mob, drawing attention to antisemitism in the United States.
In professional ice hockey, the city hosted the 56th NHL All-Star Game in 2008, three years before the Thrashers moved.
Atlanta has also hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000.
By 1970, African Americans were a majority of the city's population and exercised new-found political influence by electing Atlanta's first black mayor, Maynard Jackson, in 1973.
Emory University operates its Cliff shuttle buses with 200,000 boardings per month, while private minibuses supply Buford Highway.
The Bank of America Plaza is the tallest building outside of New York City and Chicago, and was the last building built in the United States to be in the top 10 tallest buildings in the world until One World Trade Center was completed externally in May 2013.
Furthermore, in its 2013 ParkScore ranking, the The Trust for Public Land, a national land conservation organization, reported that among the park systems of the 50 most populous U.S. cities, Atlanta's park system received a ranking of 31.
Hispanics of any race made up 5.2% of the city's population.
Atlanta is governed by a mayor and the Atlanta City Council.
On December 15, 1939, Atlanta hosted the film premiere of ''Gone with the Wind'', the epic film based on the best-selling novel by Atlanta's Margaret Mitchell.
Atlanta has gained recognition as a center of production of horror and zombie-related productions, with ''Atlanta'' magazine dubbing the city the "Zombie Capital of the World".
The renowned High Museum of Art is arguably the South's leading art museum and among the most-visited art museums in the world.
The district is marked by an urbanized core along Peachtree Road, surrounded by suburban single-family neighborhoods situated among dense forests and rolling hills.
Most famously, Atlanta hosted the Centennial 1996 Summer Olympics.
The city contains three major high-rise districts, which form a north-south axis along Peachtree: Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead.
On September 1, 1864, Confederate General John Bell Hood made the decision to retreat from Atlanta, ordering all public buildings and possible assets to the Union Army destroyed.
Partly due to the airport, Atlanta has become a hub for diplomatic missions; , the city contains 25 general consulates, the seventh-highest concentration of diplomatic missions in the United States.
The district has been plagued by a widely publicized cheating scandal exposed in 2009.
January averages , with temperatures in the suburbs slightly cooler due largely to the urban heat island effect.
The per capita income for the city was $35,453.
Other notable city parks include Centennial Olympic Park, a legacy of the 1996 Summer Olympics that forms the centerpiece of the city's tourist district; Woodruff Park, which anchors the campus of Georgia State University; Grant Park, home to  Zoo Atlanta; and Chastain Park, which houses an amphitheater used for live music concerts.
The Atlanta Dream is the city's Women's National Basketball Association franchise.
The average annual rainfall is , while snowfall is typically light at around  per year.
In April 2014, a Major League Soccer team, Atlanta United FC, was formed as an expansion team to begin play in 2017.
In the 1880 Census, Atlanta surpassed Savannah as Georgia's largest city.
Nevertheless, Forbes ranked Atlanta as the sixth most dangerous city in the United States in 2012.
Standing Peachtree, a Creek village located where Peachtree Creek flows into the Chattahoochee River, was the closest Indian settlement to what is now Atlanta.
Atlanta is mostly encircled by Interstate 285, a beltway locally known as "the Perimeter" that has come to mark the boundary between "Inside the Perimeter" (ITP), the city and close-in suburbs, and "Outside the Perimeter" (OTP), the outer suburbs and exurbs.
In 1990, Atlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games.
July averages , with high temperatures reaching  on an average 44 days per year, though  readings are not seen most years.
The Atlanta metropolitan area is served by two public television stations and one public radio station.
However, ice storms usually cause more problems than snowfall does, the most severe occurring on January 7, 1973.
The Falcons have won the division title five times (1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012) and the conference championship once, when they finished as the runner-up to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999.
Cox Enterprises, the country's third-largest cable television service and the publisher of over a dozen major American newspapers, is headquartered in the city.
As a national center for the arts, Atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions.
