Although atoms are made of the same basic substance, they can combine based on their eternal properties to produce any of six "aggregates", which seem to correspond with the Greek concept of "elements": earth, water, shadow, sense objects, karmic matter, and unfit matter.
Other traditions in Islam rejected the atomism of the Asharites and expounded on many Greek texts, especially those of Aristotle.
One part of that creation were the four simple bodies of fire, air, water, and earth.
The most elaborate and well-preserved Indian theory of atomism comes from the philosophy of the Jaina school, dating back to at least the 6th century BC.
Atomistic philosophies are found very early in Islamic philosophy and was influenced by earlier Greek and to some extent Indian philosophy.
In the 5th century B.C.E., Leucippus and his pupil Democritus proposed that all matter was composed of small indivisible particles called atoms, in order to reconcile two conflicting schools of thought on the nature of reality.
For example, his experiments with falling bodies and inclined planes led him to the concepts of circular inertial motion and accelerating free-fall.
The Nyaya&ndash;Vaisesika school developed one of the earliest forms of atomism; scholars date the Nyaya and Vaisesika texts from the 6th to 1st centuries BC.
Unlike the atomism of Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus, and also unlike the later atomic theory of John Dalton, the Aristotelian natural minimum was not conceptualized as physically indivisible--"atomic" in the contemporary sense.
For example, in the 14th century Nicholas of Autrecourt considered that matter, space, and time were all made up of indivisible atoms, points, and instants and that all generation and corruption took place by the rearrangement of material atoms.
Speculation on ''minima naturalia'' provided philosophical background for the mechanistic philosophy of early modern thinkers like Descartes, and for the alchemical works of Geber and Daniel Sennert, who in turn influenced the corpuscularian alchemist Robert Boyle, one of the founders of modern chemistry.
The atomists theorized that nature consists of two fundamental principles: ''atom'' and ''void''.
The atoms and the void are eternal and in constant motion.
The square faces of the cube were each made up of four isosceles right-angled triangles and the triangular faces of the tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron were each made up of six right-angled triangles.
Three hundred years after Epicurus, Lucretius in his epic poem ''On the Nature of Things'' would depict him as the hero who crushed the monster Religion through educating the people in what was possible in the atoms and what was ''not'' possible in the atoms.
To the Jains, karma was real, but was a naturalistic, mechanistic phenomenon caused by buildups of subtle karmic matter within the soul.
The ancient ''shāshvata-vāda'' doctrine of eternalism, which held that elements are eternal, is also suggestive of a possible starting point for atomism (Gangopadhyaya 1981).
That ammonia is a binary compound of hydrogen and azote nitrogen, and the relative weights of the two atoms are as 1:5, nearly...
The work of Democritus only survives in secondhand reports, some of which are unreliable or conflicting.
The particles of chemical matter for which chemists and other natural philosophers of the early 19th century found experimental evidence were thought to be indivisible, and therefore were given the name "atom", long used by the atomist philosophy.
which are no longer "gold."
Each of these elements has a specific property, such as solidity or motion, and performs a specific function in mixtures, such as providing support or causing growth.
The matter was finally resolved in Dalton's favour in the early 20th century with the rise of atomic physics.
William R. Newman has dubbed this approach to matter theory "chymical atomism," and has argued for its significance to both the mechanical philosophy and to the chemical atomism that emerged in the early 19th century.
Indian Buddhists, such as Dharmakirti and others, also developed distinctive theories of atomism, for example, involving momentary (instantaneous) atoms, that flash in and out of existence (Kalapas).
In 1808, John Dalton assimilated the known experimental work of many people to summarize the empirical evidence on the composition of matter.
words have a preferred ontological status in defining meaning.
"The material manifestation's ultimate particle, which is indivisible and not formed into a body, is called the atom (''parama-aṇuh'').
He believed change was real, and if it was not then at least the illusion had to be explained.
Human sensations and meteorological phenomena are also explained by Lucretius in terms of atomic motion.
The Nyaya and Vaisheshika schools later developed theories on how atoms combined into more complex objects.
"uncuttable", "indivisible") is a natural philosophy that developed in several ancient traditions.
For example, Paramāņu is characterized by continuous motion either in a straight line or in case of attractions from other Paramāņus, it follows a curved path.
One of the first groups of atomists in England was a cadre of amateur scientists known as the Northumberland circle, led by Henry Percy (1585&ndash;1632), the 9th Earl of Northumberland.
This corresponds with the description of orbit of electrons across the Nucleus.
Few of Epicurus's writings survive and those that do reflect his interest in applying Democritus's theories to assist people in taking responsibility for themselves and for their own happiness—since he held there are no gods around that can help them.
In this manner, for example, it was theorized that mercury could penetrate into metals and modify their inner structure, a step on the way towards transmutative production of gold.
Unlike their modern scientific namesake in atomic theory, philosophical atoms come in an infinite variety of shapes and sizes, each indestructible, immutable and surrounded by a void where they collide with the others or hook together forming a cluster.
''Minima naturalia'' were theorized by Aristotle as the smallest parts into which a homogeneous natural substance (e.g., flesh, bone, or wood) could be divided and still retain its essential character.
Ultimate particles are also described as particles with positive (Snigdha i.e.
He described atomic theory as a 'Thoroughly materialistic bit of joiners work'.
It was such a fertile and flexible idea that, as in Greece and India, it flourished in some leading schools of Islamic thought.
Instead, the concept was rooted in Aristotle's hylomorphic worldview, which held that every physical thing is a compound of matter (Greek ''hyle'') and an immaterial substantial form (Greek ''morphe'') that imparts its essential nature and structure.
The Jains envisioned the world as consisting wholly of atoms, except for souls.
:Chemical analysis and synthesis go no farther than to the separation of particles one from another, and to their reunion.
Dalton concluded that the fixed proportions of elements by weight suggested that the atoms of one element combined with only a limited number of atoms of the other elements to form the substances that he listed.
Sometime before 330 B.C.E.
The points and edges of the octahedron and icosahedron were blunter and so these less mobile bodies were assigned to air and water.
Since the simple bodies could be decomposed into triangles, and the triangles reassembled into atoms of different elements, Plato's model offered a plausible account of changes among the primary substances.
The cube, with its flat base and stability, was assigned to earth; the tetrahedron was assigned to fire because its penetrating points and sharp edges made it mobile.
A piece of wet clay, when acted upon by a potter, takes on its potential to be an actual drinking mug.
The Indian atomistic position, like many movements in Indian Philosophy and Mathematics, starts with an argument from Linguistics.
In Asharite atomism, atoms are the only perpetual, material things in existence, and all else in the world is "accidental" meaning something that lasts for only an instant.
Not all corpuscularianism made use of the primary-secondary quality distinction, however.
Between the 5th and 3rd centuries BC, the atom (anu or aṇor) is mentioned in the Bhagavad Gita (Chapter 8, Verse 9):
However, although the ancient atomists' works were unavailable, Scholastic thinkers still had Aristotle's critiques of atomism.
This is suggestive of modern chemistry, in which, e.g., a bar of gold can be continually divided until one has a single atom of gold, but further division yields only subatomic particles (electrons, quarks, etc.)
And then he proceeded to give a list of relative weights in the compositions of several common compounds, summarizing:
Although they published little of account, they helped to disseminate atomistic ideas among the burgeoning scientific culture of England, and may have been particularly influential to Francis Bacon, who became an atomist around 1605, though he later rejected some of the claims of atomism.
Aristotle's intuition was that there is some smallest size beyond which matter could no longer be structured as flesh, or bone, or wood, or some other such organic substance that for Aristotle, living before the microscope, could be considered homogeneous.
Change took place not by the rearrangement of atoms to make new structures, but by transformation of matter from what it was in potential to a new actuality.
These simple bodies were geometric solids, the faces of which were, in turn, made up of triangles.
Alexander Williamson used his Presidential Address to the London Chemical Society in 1869  to defend the Atomic Theory against its critics and doubters.
But whatever water or other elements were left, they would no longer have the "nature" of flesh: in hylomorphic terms, they would no longer be matter structured by the form of flesh; instead the remaining water, e.g., would be matter structured by the form of water, not the form of flesh.
Galileo Galilei (1564&ndash;1642) was an advocate of atomism in his 1612, ''Discourse on Floating Bodies'' (Redondi 1969).
Averroes commented in detail on most of the works of Aristotle and his commentaries did much to guide the interpretation of Aristotle in later Jewish and Christian scholastic thought.
Atoms are the ultimate state of the manifest universe.
On the other side was Parmenides, who believed instead that all change is illusion.
Descartes thought everything physical in the universe to be made of tiny ''vortices'' of matter.
Their concept of atoms was very similar to classical atomism, differing primarily in the specific properties of atoms.
In The Sceptical Chymist (1661), Boyle demonstrates problems that arise from chemistry, and offers up atomism as a possible explanation.
Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie in 1866 published the first part of his Calculus of Chemical Operations  as a non-atomic alternative to the Atomic Theory.
Paramāņus or atoms were considered as the basic building blocks of all matter.
For example, in 1826 when Sir Humphry Davy presented Dalton the Royal Medal from the Royal Society, Davy said that the theory only became useful when the atomic conjecture was ignored.
In Plato's ''Timaeus'', (28B &ndash; 29A) the character of Timeaus insisted that the cosmos was not eternal but was created, although its creator framed it after an eternal, unchanging model.
The similarities of his ideas with those of al-Ghazali suggest that Nicholas may have been familiar with Ghazali's work, perhaps through Averroes' refutation of it (Marmara, 1973&ndash;74).
The Vedic etymologist and grammarian Yaska (c. 7th century BC) in his Nirukta,  in dealing with models for how linguistic structures get to have their meanings, takes the atomistic position that words are the "primary" carrier of meaning &ndash; i.e.
He also wrote all that ''is'' must be an indivisible unity, for if it were manifold, then there would have to be a void that could divide it (and he did not believe the void exists).
One can clearly see that the hexatom goes up towards the sky.
Aristotle asserted that the elements of fire, air, earth, and water were not made of atoms, but were continuous.
The atomist position had transcended language into epistemology by the time that Nyaya&ndash;Vaisesika, Buddhist and Jaina theology were developing mature philosophical positions.
It exists always as an invisible identity, even after the dissolution of all forms.
This scientific work in poetic form illustrates several segments of Epicurean theory on how the universe came into its current stage and it shows that the phenomena we perceive are actually composite forms.
The main difference between atomism and Descartes' concept was the existence of the void.
Parmenides denied the existence of motion, change and void.
In India the Jain, Ajivika and Carvaka schools of atomism may date back to the 4th century BCE.
According to ancient Buddhist atomism, which probably began developing before the 4th century BC, there are four kinds of atoms, corresponding to the standard elements.
Firstly, he believed there is no such thing as void, equating it with non-being (i.e.
Time is the potency of the almighty Personality of Godhead, Hari, who controls all physical movement although He is not visible in the physical world.
The form that came to be accepted by most English scientists after Robert Boyle (1627–1692) was an amalgam of the systems of Descartes and Gassendi.
We might as well attempt to introduce a new planet into the solar system, or to annihilate one already in existence, as to create or destroy a particle of hydrogen.
They also had detailed theories of how atoms could combine, react, vibrate, move, and perform other actions, all of which were thoroughly deterministic.
Atoms can exist in one of two states: subtle, in which case they can fit in infinitesimally small spaces, and gross, in which case they have extension and occupy a finite space.
The void is infinite and provides the space in which the atoms can pack or scatter differently.
Though they revived the classical form of atomism, this group was among the scientific avant-garde: the Northumberland circle contained nearly half of the confirmed Copernicans prior to 1610 (the year of Galileo's The Starry Messenger).
His ideas are also represented in the works of his follower  Lucretius, who wrote ''On the Nature of Things''.
Aristotle has often been criticized for rejecting atomism, but in ancient Greece the atomic theories of Democritus remained "pure speculations, incapable of being put to any experimental test.
Will Durant wrote in ''Our Oriental Heritage'':
When they stay in their own forms without forming different bodies, they are called the unlimited oneness.
One can estimate time by measuring the movement of the atomic combination of bodies.
However, the parallel is not exact: ''minima naturalia'' are not a direct anticipation of modern chemical and physical concepts.
Although the atomism of Epicurus had fallen out of favor in the centuries of Scholasticism, a related Aristotelian concept, that of ''minima naturalia'' (natural minima) received extensive consideration.
Some of the Jain texts that refer to matter and atoms are Pancastikayasara, Kalpasutra, Tattvarthasutra and Pannavana Suttam.
The Buddhist and Jaina schools, however, were more willing to accept the ideas of atomism.
Al-Ghazali also used the theory to support his theory of occasionalism.
Certain characteristics of Paramāņu correspond with that sub-atomic particles.
While Aristotelian philosophy eclipsed the importance of the atomists in late Roman and medieval Europe, their work was still preserved and exposited through commentaries on the works of Aristotle.
That water is a binary compound of hydrogen and oxygen, and the relative weights of the two elementary atoms are as 1:7, nearly;
All the changes we can produce, consist in separating particles that are in a state of cohesion or combination, and joining those that were previously at a distance.
— Excerpted from ''Srimad-Bhagavatam'' (''SB'' 3.11.1–5) by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International ( prabhupadabooks.com)
Furthermore, he concluded that there was a unique atom for each element, using Lavoisier's definition of an element as a substance that could not be analyzed into something simpler.
Dalton's atomic theory remained controversial throughout the 19th century.
The atom is described as an invisible particle, but when six such atoms combine together, they are called a ''trasareṇu'', and this is visible in the sunshine pouring through the holes of a window screen."
In both Jaina and Vaisesika atomism, atoms first combine in pairs (dyads), and then group into trios of pairs (triads), which are the smallest visible units of matter.
In the 2nd century, Galen (AD 129&ndash;216) presented extensive discussions of the Greek atomists, especially Epicurus, in his Aristotle commentaries.
Like the ancient atomists, Descartes claimed that sensations, such as taste or temperature, are caused by the shape and size of tiny pieces of matter.
With few exceptions, much of the curriculum in the universities of Europe was based on such Aristotelianism for most of the Middle Ages (Kargon 1966).
A number of different atomistic theories were blossoming in France at this time, as well (Clericuzio 2000).
He believed all existence to be a single, all-encompassing and unchanging mass (a concept known as monism), and that change and motion were mere illusions.
The most successful form of Islamic atomism was in the Asharite school of Islamic theology, most notably in the work of the theologian al-Ghazali (1058&ndash;1111).
He postulated the geometric structure of the simple bodies of the four elements as summarized in the table to the right.
Commentators like John Philoponus and Thomas Aquinas reconciled these aspects of Aristotle's thought by distinguishing between mathematical and "natural" divisibility.
Indian atomism in the Middle Ages was still mostly philosophical and/or religious in intent, though it was also scientific.
These two positions came to be called ''a-kShaNDa-pakSha'' (indivisibility or sentence-holism), a position developed later by Bhartrihari (c. 500 AD), vs. ''kShaNDa-pakSha'' (atomism), a position adopted by the Mimamsa and Nyaya schools (Note: ''kShanDa'' = fragmented; "a-kShanDa" = whole).
Aristotle considered the existence of a void, which was required by atomic theories, to violate physical principles.
According to the atomist view, the words (''pada'') would be the primary elements (''prakrti'') out of which the sentence is constructed, while the holistic view considers the sentence as the primary entity, originally "given" in its context of utterance, and the words are arrived at only through analysis and abstraction.
Although Epicurus was certain of the existence of atoms and the void, he was less sure we could adequately explain specific natural phenomena such as earthquakes, lightning, comets, or the phases of the Moon (Lloyd 1973, 25&ndash;6).
Democritus accepted most of Parmenides' arguments, except for the idea that change is an illusion.
''kaviḿ purāṇam anuśāsitāram '''aṇor''' aṇīyāḿsam anusmared yaḥ sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam āditya-varṇaḿ tamasaḥ parastāt''
The different possible packings and scatterings within the void make up the shifting outlines and bulk of the objects that organisms feel, see, eat, hear, smell, and taste.
Gassendi formulated his atomistic conception of mechanical philosophy partly in response to Descartes; he particularly opposed Descartes' reductionist view that only purely mechanical explanations of physics are valid, as well as the application of geometry to the whole of physics (Clericuzio 2000).
Plato (c. 427 — c. 347 B.C.E.
'''Atomism''' (from Greek , ''atomon'', i.e.
Like the Hindu Jains, the Buddhists were able to integrate a theory of atomism with their theological presuppositions.
However, in the 20th century, the "atoms" of the chemists were found to be composed of even smaller entities: electrons, neutrons and protons, and further experiments showed that protons and neutrons are made of quarks.
On one side was Heraclitus, who believed that the nature of all existence is change.
Galileo identified some basic problems with Aristotelian physics through his experiments.
Gassendi's concept was closer to classical atomism, but with no atheistic overtone.
This conclusion, as well as the reasoning that led to it, may indeed seem baffling to the modern empirical mind, but Parmenides explicitly rejected sensory experience as the path to an understanding of the universe, and instead used purely abstract reasoning.
This in turn meant that motion is impossible, because there is no void to move into.
Whilst the Law of definite proportion was accepted, the hypothesis that this was due to atoms was not so widely accepted.
For instance, if flesh were divided beyond its natural minimum, what would be left might be a large amount of the element water, and smaller amounts of the other elements.
But Plato did not consider these corpuscles to be the most basic level of reality, for in his view they were made up of an unchanging level of reality, which was mathematical.
Thus, Dalton concluded the following.
In The Assayer, Galileo offered a more complete physical system based on a corpuscular theory of matter, in which all phenomena—with the exception of sound—are produced by "matter in motion".
However, Epicurus expressed a non-aggressive attitude characterized by his statement:  "The man who best knows how to meet external threats makes into one family all the creatures he can; and those he can not, he at any rate does not treat as aliens; and where he finds even this impossible, he avoids all dealings, and, so far as is advantageous, excludes them from his life."
Scholasticism was standard science in the time of Isaac Newton, but in the 17th century, a renewed interest in Epicurean atomism and corpuscularianism as a hybrid or an alternative to Aristotelian physics had begun to mount outside the classroom.
Pierre Gassendi (1592&ndash;1655) was a Catholic priest from France who was also an avid natural philosopher.
In the medieval universities there were expressions of atomism.
"if the void '''''is''''', then it is not nothing; therefore it is not the void").
Contingent events are not subject to natural physical causes, but are the direct result of God's constant intervention, without which nothing could happen.
This hexatom is visible in the sunshine which enters through the holes of a window screen.
The division of gross time is calculated as follows: two atoms make one double atom, and three double atoms make one hexatom.
An influential tradition in medieval and early modern alchemy argued that chemical analysis revealed the existence of robust corpuscles that retained their identity in chemical compounds (to use the modern term).
Clusters of different shapes, arrangements, and positions give rise to the various macroscopic substances in the world.
Granted that atomism was, in the long run, to prove far more fruitful than any qualitative theory of matter, in the short run the theory that Aristotle proposed must have seemed in some respects more promising".
The unifying principle that would eventually lead to the acceptance of a hybrid corpuscular–atomism was mechanical philosophy, which became widely accepted by physical sciences.
In the pratishakhya text (c. 2nd century BCE), the gist of the controversy was stated cryptically in the sutra form as "saMhitA pada-prakr^tiH".
In a sense, the Asharite theory of atomism has far more in common with Indian atomism than it does with Greek atomism.
One meditates on the omniscient, primordial, the controller, smaller than the atom, yet the maintainer of everything; whose form is inconceivable, resplendent like the sun and totally transcendental to material nature
Much of the best evidence of Democritus' theory of atomism is reported by Aristotle in his discussions of Democritus' and Plato's contrasting views on the types of indivisibles composing the natural world.
Corpuscularianism is similar to atomism, except that where atoms were supposed to be indivisible, corpuscles could in principle be divided.
In the West, atomism emerged in the 5th century BCE with Leucippus and Democritus.
René Descartes' (1596&ndash;1650) "mechanical" philosophy  of corpuscularism had much in common with atomism, and is considered, in some senses, to be a different version of it.
In other words, every particle of water is like every other particle of water; every particle of hydrogen is like every other particle of hydrogen, etc.
Finally, he stated that the all encompassing Unity is unchanging, for the Unity already encompasses all that is and can be.
Atomic collisions create objects, which are still composed of the same eternal atoms whose motion for a while is incorporated into the created entity.
References to the concept of atomism and its atoms are found in ancient India and ancient Greece.
Nothing accidental can be the cause of anything else, except perception, as it exists for a moment.
Each atom, according to Jain philosophy, has one kind of taste, one smell, one color, and two kinds of touch, though it is unclear what was meant by "kind of touch".
Epicurus (341&ndash;270) studied atomism with Nausiphanes who had been a student of Democritus.
While organisms may feel hot or cold, hot and cold actually have no real existence.
Another key distinction between Descartes' view and classical atomism is the mind/body duality of Descartes, which allowed for an independent realm of existence for thought, soul, and most importantly, God.
The current Aristotelian theories of impetus and terrestrial motion were inadequate to explain these.
There are certainly different bodies in physical forms, but the atoms themselves form the complete manifestation.
smooth charge) and negative  (Rūksa – rough) charges that provide them the binding force.
An active school of philosophers in Spain, including the noted commentator Averroes (AD 1126&ndash;1198) explicitly rejected the thought of al-Ghazali and turned to an extensive evaluation of the thought of Aristotle.
This position was to be the subject of a fierce debate in the Indian tradition from the early Christian era till the 18th century, involving different philosophers from the Nyaya, Mimamsa and Buddhist schools.
He argued that atoms just crashing into other atoms could never produce the beauty and form of the world.
Thus nature is completely dependent on God, which meshes with other Asharite Islamic ideas on causation, or the lack thereof (Gardet 2001).
Because the "infallible Vedas", the oldest Hindu texts, do not mention atoms (though they do mention elements), atomism was not orthodox in many schools of Hindu philosophy, although accommodationist interpretations or assumptions of lost text justified the use of atomism for non-orthodox schools of Hindu thought.
According to historian of atomism Joshua Gregory, there was no serious work done with atomism from the time of Galen until Gassendi and Descartes resurrected it in the 17th century; "the gap between these two 'modern naturalists' and the ancient Atomists marked "the exile of the atom" and "it is universally admitted that the Middle Ages had abandoned Atomism, and virtually lost it."
:Therefore we may conclude that the ultimate particles of all homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike in weight, figure, etc.
Although the connection to historical atomism is at best tenuous, elementary particles have thus become a modern analog of philosophical atoms, despite the misnomer in chemistry.
No new creation or destruction of matter is within the reach of chemical agency.
This in turn led to further meetings at which the positivists again attacked the supposition that there were atoms.
They are simply sensations produced in organisms by the different packings and scatterings of the atoms in the void that compose the object that organisms sense as being "hot" or "cold".
Similarly, other purified substances decomposed to the same elements in the same proportions by weight.
While atomism did not explain the law of fall either, it was a more promising framework in which to develop an explanation because motion was conserved in ancient atomism (unlike Aristotelian physics).
The material body is but a combination of such atoms, but it is misunderstood by the common man.
Later Indian Buddhist philosophers, such as Dharmakirti and Dignāga, considered atoms to be point-sized, durationless, and made of energy.
Like the Jaina school, the Nyaya&ndash;Vaisesika atomists had elaborate theories of how atoms combine.
For instance, a rubber ball for a hylomorphist like Aristotle would be rubber (matter) structured by spherical shape (form).
He understood gods' role as moral ideals.
Like the Buddhist atomists, the Vaisesika had a pseudo-Aristotelian theory of atomism.
He was particularly intrigued by the Greek atomists, so he set out to "purify" atomism from its heretical and atheistic philosophical conclusions (Dijksterhius 1969).
He utilized a theory of atomism as a partial replacement, but he was never unequivocally committed to it.
Like both the Greek and Indian versions, Islamic atomism was a charged topic that had the potential for conflict with the prevalent religious orthodoxy, but it was instead more often favoured by orthodox Islamic theologians.
Other influential atomists of late 16th and early 17th centuries include Giordano Bruno, Thomas Hobbes (who also changed his stance on atomism late in his career), and Thomas Hariot.
Corpuscularianism stayed a dominant theory over the next several hundred years and retained its links with alchemy in the work of scientists such as Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton in the 17th century.
