Hemispatial neglect, also called ''unilateral neglect'', often occurs when people have damage to their right hemisphere.
This relies on the reflexive response due to "overlearning" the skill of morse code reception/detection/transcription so that it is an autonomous function requiring no specific attention to perform.
However, with research contributions by Sir William Hamilton, 9th Baronet this view was changed.
Incorporating the children in the community gives them the opportunity to keenly observe and contribute to activities that were not directed towards them.
Because of the highly expensive equipment that was generally only available in hospitals, psychologists sought for cooperation with neurologists.
This debate became known as the early-selection vs. late-selection models.
Posner and Cohen (1984) noted a reversal of this benefit takes place when the interval between the onset of the cue and the onset of the target is longer than about 300 ms.
Simultaneous attention is demonstrated by children in Indigenous communities, who learn through this type of attention to their surroundings.
This hierarchic model is based in the recovering of attention processes of brain damage patients after coma.
This model has been shown to be very useful in evaluating attention in very different pathologies, correlates strongly with daily difficulties and is especially helpful in designing stimulation programs such as attention process training, a rehabilitation program for neurological patients of the same authors.
For example, the word Blue would be typed in Orange, Pink in Black, and so on.
The results of these experiments have shown a broad agreement with the psychological, psychophysiological and the experiments performed on monkeys.
And, because, as everyone knows, there is nothing that makes them clearer and more distinct than attentiveness, we must try to find the means to become more attentive than we are".
In 1890, William James, in his textbook ''The Principles of Psychology'', remarked:
This is because they are typically presented at the center of a display, where an observer's eyes are likely to be fixated.
This was the time difference between stimulus discrimination and response initiation.
Wundt measured mental processing speed by likening it to differences in stargazing measurements.
One major debate in this period was whether it was possible to attend to two things at once (split attention).
This damage often leads to a tendency to ignore the left side of one's body or even the left side of an object that can be seen.
San Pedro toddlers and caregivers frequently coordinated their activities with other members of a group in multiway engagements rather than in a dyadic fashion.
One theory regarding selective attention is the cognitive load theory, which states that there are two mechanisms that affect attention: cognitive and perceptual.
Another cultural practice that may relate to simultaneous attention strategies is coordination within a group.
Older research involved looking at the limits of people performing simultaneous tasks like reading stories, while listening and writing something else, or listening to two separate messages through different ears (i.e., dichotic listening).
The cognitive refers to the actual processing of the stimuli, studies regarding this showed that the ability to process stimuli decreased with age, meaning that younger people were able to perceive more stimuli and fully process them, but were likely to process both relevant and irrelevant information, while older people could process fewer stimuli, but usually processed only relevant information.
This research found that the time to complete a list was longer for mixed lists than for pure lists.
It was previously thought in the beginning of the 19th century that people were not able to attend to more than one stimulus at a time.
This implies that the meaning of unattended messages is not identified.
In order to have an effect, endogenous cues must be processed by the observer and acted upon purposefully.
It is therefore necessary to look for means to keep our perceptions from being confused and imperfect.
Indigenous heritage toddlers and caregivers in San Pedro were observed to frequently coordinate their activities with other members of a group in ways parallel to a model of simultaneous attention, whereas middle-class European-descent families in the U.S. would move back and forth between events.
The perceptual considers the subject’s ability to perceive or ignore stimuli, both task-related and non task-related.
This points to a strong cultural difference in attention management.
While speaking with a passenger is as cognitively demanding as speaking with a friend over the phone, passengers are able to change the conversation based upon the needs of the driver.
Sensorial attention is when attention is directed to objects of sense, stimuli that are physically present.
Their results soon sparked interest from the entire neuroscience community in these psychological studies, which had until then focused on monkey brains.
In the first stage, attention is distributed uniformly over the external visual scene and processing of information is performed in parallel.
Being present allows the child to focus their attention on the actions being performed by their parents, elders, and/or older siblings.
The term "spotlight" was inspired by the work of William James, who described attention as having a focus, a margin, and a fringe.
These tasks often require participants to observe a number of stimuli, but attend to only one.
Eventually the child is expected to be able to perform these skills themselves.
Apperception refers to "the process by which new experience is assimilated to and transformed by the residuum of past experience of an individual to form a new whole."
It is the taking possession by the mind in clear and vivid form of one out of what seem several simultaneous objects or trains of thought.
For example, a center–surround mechanism has been used to define saliency across scales, inspired by the putative neural mechanism.
* exogenous orienting is less affected by cognitive load than endogenous orienting;
Keen attention is both a requirement and result of learning by observing and pitching-in.
New technology has yielded more information, such that there is a large, distributed network of frontal, parietal, temporal, and subcortical brain areas that have been tied to neglect.
This often results in a reflexive saccade.
These cues are frequently referred to as ''central cues''.
Although overt eye movements are quite common, there is a distinction that can be made between two types of eye movements; reflexive and controlled.
Generally speaking, visual attention is thought to operate as a two-stage process.
The vast majority of current research on human multitasking is based on performance of doing two tasks simultaneously, usually that involves driving while performing another task, such as texting, eating, or even speaking to passengers in the vehicle, or with a friend over a cellphone.
In a typical experiment, subjects would use a set of headphones to listen to two streams of words in different ears and selectively attend to one stream.
For example, if traffic intensifies, a passenger may stop talking to allow the driver to navigate the increasingly difficult roadway; a conversation partner over a phone would not be aware of the change in environment.
He also differentiated between three types of reactions: simple reaction, choice reaction, and go/no-go reaction.
FIT posits that "objects are retrieved from scenes by means of selective spatial attention that picks out objects' features, forms feature maps, and integrates those features that are found at the same location into forming objects."
Research concludes that children with close ties to Indigenous American roots have a high tendency to be especially wide, keen observers.
''Exogenous'' (from Greek ''exo'', meaning "outside", and ''genein'', meaning "to produce") orienting is frequently described as being under control of a stimulus.
The product of the combined research of Vygotsky and Luria have determined a large part of the contemporary understanding and definition of attention as it is understood at the start of the 21st-century.
This is task switching.
In order to learn in this way, keen attention and focus is required.
Apperception is required for a perceived event to become a conscious event.
In his work on memory, Vives found that the more closely one attends to stimuli, the better they will be retained.
Hamilton proposed a view of attention that likened its capacity to holding marbles.
Von Helmholtz stated that it is possible to focus on one stimulus and still perceive or ignore others.
Donders also formalized the subtractive method which states that the time for a particular process can be estimated by adding that process to a task and taking the difference in reaction time between the two tasks.
Philosopher Johann Friedrich Herbart agreed with Leibniz's view of apperception however he expounded on it in by saying that new experiences had to be tied to ones already existing in the mind.
This differs from multitasking which is characterized by alternating attention and focus between multiple activities; that is, halting one activity before switching to the next.
One, conceived by Kahneman, explains that there is a single pool of attentional resources that can be freely divided among multiple tasks.
Thus in order to keep these ideas organized, attention is necessary.
The point at which attention becomes "selective" is when one of the memory representations is selected for further processing.
This network can be related to other research as well; the dorsal attention network is tied to spatial orienting.
It can be seen from different Indigenous communities and cultures, such as the Mayans of San Pedro, that children can simultaneously attend to multiple events.
* expectancies about cue validity and predictive value affects endogenous orienting more than exogenous orienting.
This learning by observing and pitching-in model requires active levels of attention management.
Therefore, it incorporates the notion of "freedom from distractibility."
The effect of damage to this network may result in patients neglecting their left side when distracted about their right side or an object on their right side.
The child is present while caretakers engage in daily activities and responsibilities such as: weaving, farming, and other skills necessary for survival.
Damage to different neural substrates can result in different types of neglect.
He stated, "The fact of mental set is primary in all conscious activity.
One example is simultaneous attention which involves uninterrupted attention to several activities occurring at the same time.
One of the most used models for the evaluation of attention in patients with very different neurologic pathologies is the model of Sohlberg and Mateer.
Subjects were then instructed to say the name of the ink color and ignore the text.
This problem is at times called "focused attention", as opposed to "divided attention".
These aspects of attention are thought to involve parietal and temporal cortices, as well as the brainstem.
The current view is that visual covert attention is a mechanism for quickly scanning the field of view for interesting locations.
This is a direct result of the learning by observing and pitching in model.
This debate has still not been resolved.
You can only hold a certain amount of marbles at a time before it starts to spill over.
This means that the mere presence of an exogenous cue will affect the response to other stimuli that are subsequently presented in the cue's previous location.
* '''Sustained attention (vigilance and concentration):''' The ability to maintain a consistent behavioral response during continuous and repetitive activity.
"Malebranche held that we have access to ideas, or mental representations  of the external world, but not direct access to the world itself."
In 2012, the HFT method was introduced, and both the amplitude and the phase information are made use of.
Researchers often use "filtering" tasks to study the role of covert attention of selecting information.
Selective attention intervenes after this stage to select information that will be entered into visual short-term memory."
Experiments by Gray and Wedderburn and later Anne Treisman pointed out various problems in Broadbent's early model and eventually led to the Deutsch–Norman model in 1968.
These models may be considered loosely as metaphors which are used to describe internal processes and to generate hypotheses that are falsifiable.
Although this model is more adequate at explaining divided attention among simple tasks, resource theory is another, more accurate metaphor for explaining divided attention on complex tasks.
An example of this is being able to focus on the letter u in the word house and still perceiving the letters h, o, s, and e.
'''Attention''' is the behavioral and cognitive process of selectively concentrating on a discrete aspect of information, whether deemed subjective or objective, while ignoring other perceivable information.
This period covers the development of attentional research from the founding of psychology to 1909.
Covert orienting has the potential to affect the output of perceptual processes by governing attention to particular items or locations (for example, the activity of a V4 neuron whose receptive field lies on an attended stimuli will be enhanced by covert attention) but does not influence the information that is processed by the senses.
General theories of attention actively assume bottom-up (covert) processes and top-down (overt) processes converge on a common neural architecture.
During this period, research in attention waned and interest in behaviorism flourished, leading some to believe, like Ulric Neisser, that in this period, "There was no research on attention".
These movements are slow and voluntary.
The phenomenon  of valid cues producing longer reaction times than invalid cues is called inhibition of return.
His view states that we can attend to more than one stimulus at once.
One way is based on the spatial contrast analysis.
Several studies have investigated the influence of valid and invalid cues.
This list of colors had each color typed in a color different from the actual text.
James also distinguished between immediate or derived attention: attention to the present versus to something not physically present.
Luria published his well-known book ''The Working Brain'' in 1973 as a concise adjunct volume to his previous 1962 book ''Higher Cortical Functions in Man''.
The contrast of the two theories placed a new emphasis on the separation of visual attention tasks alone and those mediated by supplementary cognitive processes.
Attention is best described as the sustained focus of cognitive resources on information while filtering or ignoring extraneous information.
Areas of active investigation involve determining the source of the sensory cues and signals that generate attention, the effects of these sensory cues and signals on the tuning properties of sensory neurons, and the relationship between attention and other behavioral and cognitive processes like working memory and vigilance.
These experiments showed for the first time that there was a direct neural correlate of a mental process (namely, enhanced firing in the superior colliculus).
In the twentieth century, the pioneering research of Lev Vygotsky and Alexander Luria led to the three-part model of neuropsychology defining the working brain as being represented by three co-active processes listed as Attention, Memory, and Activation.
Attention works to make us perceive, conceive, distinguish, remember, and shorten reactions time.
In the late selection models (first proposed by J. Anthony Deutsch and Diana Deutsch), the content in both ears is analyzed semantically, but the words in the unattended ear cannot access consciousness.
This research reveals that the human attentional system has limits for what it can process: driving performance is worse while engaged in other tasks; drivers make more mistakes, brake harder and later, get into more accidents, veer into other lanes, and/or are less aware of their surroundings when engaged in the previously discussed tasks.
* '''Alternating attention:''' The ability of mental flexibility that allows individuals to shift their focus of attention and move between tasks having different cognitive requirements.
This model has established itself as the exemplar for saliency detection and consistently used for comparison in the literature; the other way is based on the frequency domain analysis.
Simultaneous attention involves uninterrupted attention to several activities occurring at the same time.
Focalization, concentration of consciousness are of its essence.
This fringe extends out to a specified area, and the cut-off is called the margin.
There are several studies to support that the use of keen attention towards learning is much more common in Indigenous communities of North and Central America than in a middle-class setting.
Modern research on attention began with the analysis of the "cocktail party problem" by Colin Cherry in 1953.
Surrounding the focus is the fringe of attention, which extracts information in a much more crude fashion (i.e., low-resolution).
They began the research on the extent of attention and how attention is directed.
In the second stage, attention is concentrated to a specific area of the visual scene (i.e., it is focused), and processing is performed in a serial fashion.
Franciscus Donders used mental chronometry to study attention and it was considered a major field of intellectual inquiry by authors such as Sigmund Freud.
At any time, only one can be selected, resulting in the ''attentional bottleneck''.
The first aspect is called bottom-up processing, also known as stimulus-driven attention or exogenous attention.
These include, but are not limited to, anxiety, arousal, task difficulty, and skills.
In the early selection models (first proposed by Donald Broadbent), attention shuts down (in Broadbent's model) or attenuates (in Triesman's refinement) processing in the unattended ear before the mind can analyze its semantic content.
The zoom-lens of attention can be described in terms of an inverse trade-off between the size of focus and the efficiency of processing: because attentional resources are assumed to be fixed, then it follows that the larger the focus is, the slower processing will be of that region of the visual scene, since this fixed resource will be distributed over a larger area.
It is thought that the focus of attention can subtend a minimum of 1° of visual angle, however the maximum size has not yet been determined.
During this period of attention, various philosophers made significant contributions to the field.
This shift in covert attention is linked to eye movement circuitry that sets up a slower saccade to that location.
As is frequently the case, clinical models of attention differ from investigation models.
Broadbent's Filter Model of Attention states that information is held in a pre-attentive temporary store, and only sensory events that have some physical feature in common are selected to pass into the limited capacity processing system.
''Endogenous'' (from Greek ''endo'', meaning "within" or "internally") orienting is the intentional allocation of attentional resources to a predetermined location or space.
Cherry performed a number of experiments which became known as dichotic listening and were extended by Donald Broadbent and others.
Exogenous orienting is considered to be reflexive and automatic and is caused by a sudden change in the periphery.
Duncan and Humphrey's AET understanding of attention maintained that "there is an initial pre-attentive parallel phase of perceptual segmentation and analysis that encompasses all of the visual items present in a scene.
By the 1990s, psychologists began using PET and later fMRI to image the brain while monitoring attention tasks.
In 1931, Telford discovered the psychological refractory period.
In cognitive psychology there are at least two models which describe how visual attention operates.
Exogenous orienting can even be observed when individuals are aware that the cue will not relay reliable, accurate information about where a target is going to occur.
In this volume, Luria summarized his three-part global theory of the working brain as being composed of three constantly co-active processes which he described as the; (1) Attention system, (2) Mnestic (memory) system, and (3) Cortical activation system.
Since exogenous cues are typically presented in the periphery, they are referred to as ''peripheral cues''.
Attention is identified as one of the three major co-active processes of the working brain.
In the 1960s, Robert Wurtz at the National Institutes of Health began recording electrical signals from the brains of macaques who were trained to perform attentional tasks.
They concluded that valid peripheral cues benefit performance, for instance when the peripheral cues are brief flashes at the relevant location before to the onset of a visual stimulus.
Otherwise we will confuse these ideas.
Simultaneous attention is a type of attention, classified by attending to multiple events at the same time.
In 1935 John Ridley Stroop developed the Stroop Task which elicited the Stroop Effect.
Intellectual attention is attention directed to ideal or represented objects; stimuli that are not physically present.
Generally speaking, there are two kinds of models to mimic the bottom-up saliency mechanism.
With the development of these technological innovations neuroscientists became interested in this type of research that combines sophisticated experimental paradigms from cognitive psychology with these new brain imaging techniques.
Philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz introduced the concept of apperception to this philosophical approach to attention.
* '''Selective attention:''' The ability to maintain a behavioral or cognitive set in the face of distracting or competing stimuli.
In this task, subjects were to look at a list of colors.
At a cocktail party how do people select the conversation that they are listening to and ignore the rest?
These describe attentional processing which is driven by the properties of the objects themselves.
The first of these models to appear in the literature is the spotlight model.
Central cues, such as an arrow or digit presented at fixation, tell observers to attend to a specific location.
''Overt orienting'' is the act of selectively attending to an item or location over others by moving the eyes to point in that direction.
The naming time nearly doubled in the presence  of conflicting color words, an effect known as the Stroop Effect.
In contrast, controlled eye movements are commanded by areas in the frontal lobe.
Stroop's task showed that irrelevant stimulus information can have a major impact on performance.
Both SR and PQFT only use the phase information.
Some processes, such as motion or a sudden loud noise, can attract our attention in a pre-conscious, or non-volitional way.
Also, a significant amount of time is required to shift the filter from one channel to another.
This model inherits all properties of the spotlight model (i.e., the focus, the fringe, and the margin), but it has the added property of changing in size.
We attend to them whether we want to or not.
Malebranche writes in "The Search After Truth", "because it often happens that the understanding has only confused and imperfect perceptions of things, it is truly a cause of our errors....
Much research has asserted that damage to gray matter within the brain results in spatial neglect.
According to James, attention has five major effects.
Astronomers in this time would measure the time it took for stars to travel.
There has been little difference found between speaking on a hands-free cell phone or a hand-held cell phone, which suggests that it is the strain of attentional system that causes problems, rather than what the driver is doing with his or her hands.
Leibniz emphasized a reflexive involuntary view of attention known as exogenous orienting.
These different readings resulted in different reports from each astronomer.
This is due to the fact that central mechanisms that may control covert orienting, such as the parietal lobe also receive input from subcortical centres involved in overt orienting.
Most Maya children have learned to pay attention to several events at once in order to make useful observations.
Attention is a very basic function that often is a precursor to all other neurological/cognitive functions.
This disagreement could only be resolved through experimentation.
''Covert orienting'' is the act to mentally shifting one's focus without moving one's eyes.
Attention remains a major area of investigation within education, psychology, neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, and neuropsychology.
It also involved psychophysical methods that allowed measurement of the relation between physical stimulus properties and the psychological perceptions of them.
Wundt called his school of psychology voluntarism.
Attention has also been referred to as the allocation of limited processing resources.
These movements are fast and are activated by the sudden appearance of stimuli.
Simultaneous attention is present in the ways in which children of indigenous background interact both with their surroundings, and with other individuals.
As Rastophopoulos summarizes the debate: "Against Treisman's FIT, which posits spatial attention as a necessary condition for detection of objects, Humphreys argues that visual elements are encoded and bound together in an initial parallel phase without focal attention, and that attention serves to select among the objects that result from this initial grouping."
Research concludes that children with close ties to Indigenous American roots have a high tendency to be especially keen observers.
Although the older technique of EEG had long been used to study the brain activity underlying selective attention by cognitive psychophysiologists, the ability of the newer techniques to actually measure precisely localized activity inside the brain generated renewed interest by a wider community of researchers.
* observers are able to ignore endogenous cues but not exogenous cues;
Psychologist John Watson cites Juan Luis Vives as the Father of Modern Psychology due to his book ''De Anima et Vita'' ("''The Soul and Life''") in which Vives was the first to recognize the importance of empirical investigation.
For example, if individuals attend to the right hand corner field of view, movement of the eyes in that direction may have to be actively suppressed.
This model seems to be too oversimplified, however, due to the different modalities (e.g., visual, auditory, verbal) that are perceived.
