In addition, there are a varying number of Auckland-based List MPs, who are elected via party lists.
Auckland Airport, New Zealand's largest, is in the southern suburb of Mangere on the shores of the Manukau Harbour.
A new suburb, Stonefields, has been built in an excavated lava flow, north west of Maungarei / Mount Wellington, that was previously used as a quarry by Winstones.
The 2014 Mercer Quality of Living Survey ranked Auckland 3rd place in the world on its list, while the ''Economist Intelligence Unit's'' World's most liveable cities index of 2016 ranked Auckland in 8th place.
Numerous arterial roads also provide regional and sub-regional connectivity, with many of these roads (especially on the isthmus) previously used to operate Auckland's former tram network.
The State Highway network connects the different parts of Auckland, with State Highway 1 being the major north-south thoroughfare through the city (including both the Northern and Southern Motorways) and the main connection to the adjoining regions of Northland and Waikato.
Auckland has also been called a very pedestrian- and cyclist-unfriendly city, though some efforts are being made to change this.
There are also direct connections to many locations in the South Pacific, as well as the United States, Asia and Santiago and Buenos Aires in South America.
Auckland straddles the Auckland volcanic field, which has produced about 90 volcanic eruptions from 50 volcanoes in the last 90,000 years.
A large proportion of the technical and trades workforce is based in the industrial zones of South Auckland.
It is the warmest main centre of New Zealand and is also one of the sunniest, with an average of 2,003.1 sunshine hours per annum.
It is one of the few cities in the world to have two harbours on two separate major bodies of water.
The face of urban Auckland changed when the government's immigration policy began allowing immigrants from Asia in 1986.
Ferries provide transport to parks and nature reserves at Devonport, Waiheke Island, Rangitoto Island and Tiritiri Matangi.
Each of the four settlements had about 800 settlers, the men being fully armed in case of emergency but spent nearly all their time breaking in the land and establishing roads.
The bridge provides eight lanes of vehicle traffic and has a moveable median barrier for lane flexibility, but does not provide access for rail, pedestrians or cyclists.
Auckland had a far greater population of ex soldiers, many of whom were Irish, than other settlements.
Auckland has a population of , which constitutes  percent of New Zealand's population.
Auckland's housing is amongst the least affordable in the world, based on comparing average house prices with average household income levels and house prices have grown well above the rate of inflation in recent decades.
Most major international corporations have an Auckland office; the most expensive office space is around lower Queen Street and the Viaduct Basin in the Auckland CBD, where many financial and business services are located, which make up a large percentage of the CBD economy.
The Whangaparaoa Peninsula, Orewa, Omaha and Pakiri, to the north of the main urban area, are also popular.
Auckland has four railway lines (Western, Onehunga, Eastern and Southern).
Parts of Waiheke Island effectively function as Auckland suburbs, while various smaller islands near Auckland are mostly zoned 'recreational open space' or are nature sanctuaries.
Snowfall is extremely rare: the most significant fall since the start of the 20th century was on 27 July 1939, when snow stuck to the clothes of people outdoors just before dawn and five centimetres of snow reportedly lay on the summit of Mt Eden.
Auckland also has a total length of approximately  of rivers and streams, about 8&nbsp;percent of these in urban areas.
making it among the most affordable cities worldwide to live in, with living expense of $20,000 per year, based on the comparative cost of 200 aspects of life including housing, transport, food, clothing, household goods.
In 2010, Auckland was classified as a Beta World City in the World Cities Study Group's inventory by Loughborough University.
US$33,000) for the region in 2005, with jobs in the Auckland CBD often earning more.
The growth occurred similarly to other mercantile-dominated cities, mainly around the port and with problems of overcrowding and pollution.
While office workers still account for a large part of Auckland's commuters, large office developments in other parts of the city, for example in Takapuna or Albany, both on the North Shore, are slowly becoming more common, reducing concentration on the Auckland CBD somewhat.
Work began in late 2015 to provide more route flexibility and connect Britomart more directly to western suburbs on the Western Line via an underground rail tunnel known as the City Rail Link project.
This strong roading focus results in substantial traffic congestion during peak times.
Events celebrating the city's cultural diversity include the Pasifika Festival, Polyfest, and the Auckland Lantern Festival, all of which are the largest of their kind in New Zealand.
Auckland's volcanoes are fuelled entirely by basaltic magma, unlike the explosive subduction-driven volcanism in the central North Island, such as at Mount Ruapehu and Lake Taupo which are of tectonic origin.
In October 2010, Manukau City mayor Len Brown was elected the mayor of the amalgamated Auckland Council.
The Auckland urban area (as defined by Statistics New Zealand) ranges to Waiwera in the north, Kumeu in the northwest, and Runciman in the south.
In the early 1860s Auckland became a base against the Māori King Movement.
All surf lifesaving clubs are part of the Surf Life Saving Northern Region.
There are two harbours in the Auckland urban area surrounding this isthmus: Waitemata Harbour to the north, which opens east to the Hauraki Gulf, and Manukau Harbour to the south, which opens west to the Tasman Sea.
According to the 1961 census data, Māori and Pacific Islanders comprised 5% of Auckland's population; Asians less than 1%.
Auckland is home to over half (51.6 percent) of New Zealand's overseas born population, including 72 percent of the country's Pacific Island-born population, 64 percent of its Asian-born population, and 56 percent of its Middle Eastern and African born population.
Māori population in the area is estimated to have peaked at 20,000 before the arrival of Europeans.
There are no electricity generation stations located within the city.
However, even in 1840 Port Nicholson (later Wellington) was seen as a better choice for an administrative capital because of its proximity to the South Island, and Wellington became the capital in 1865.
In 2010, Auckland was ranked by the Mercer consulting firm as 149th of 214 centres on a scale of cost of living, i.e.
The Waitemata Harbour is home to several notable yacht clubs and marinas, including the Royal New Zealand Yacht Squadron and Westhaven Marina, the largest of the Southern Hemisphere.
It is not contiguous; the section from Waiwera to Whangaparāoa Peninsula is separate from its nearest neighbouring suburb of Long Bay.
Several islands of the Hauraki Gulf are administered as part of Auckland, though they are not part of the Auckland metropolitan area.
A major overhaul of Auckland's bus services is planned to be implemented by 2016, significantly expanding the reach of "frequent" bus services: those that operate at least every 15 minutes during the day and early evening, every day of the week.
The isthmus was settled by Māori around 1350, and was valued for its rich and fertile land.
In 2006, Auckland placed 23rd on the UBS list of the world's richest cities.
Auckland lies between the Hauraki Gulf of the Pacific Ocean to the east, the low Hunua Ranges to the south-east, the Manukau Harbour to the south-west, and the Waitakere Ranges and smaller ranges to the west and north-west.
Private vehicles are the main form of transportation within Auckland, with around 7% of journeys in the Auckland region being undertaken by bus (2006 data), and 2% undertaken by train and ferry.
The 2006 Auckland Blackout interrupted supply to the CBD and many inner suburbs after an earth wire shackle at Transpower's Otahuhu substation broke and short-circuited the lines supplying the inner city.
The trend is for the latest eruptions to occur in the north west of the field.
The famed "Ellerslie Hill" is part of what is generally recognised as one of the great steeplechase courses in world racing.
One of Auckland's nicknames, the "City of Sails", is derived from the popularity of sailing in the region.
The early morning calm on the isthmus during settled weather, before the sea breeze rises, was described as early as 1853: "In all seasons, the beauty of the day is in the early morning.
With public transport declining heavily during the second half of the 20th century (a trend mirrored in most Western countries such as the US), and increased spending on roads and cars, New Zealand (and specifically Auckland) now has the second-highest vehicle ownership rate in the world, with around 578 vehicles per 1000 people.
Auckland is the major economic and financial centre of New Zealand.
The rail upgrade has included electrification of Auckland's rail network, with electric trains constructed by Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles commencing service in April 2014.
On 27 January 1832, Joseph Brooks Weller, eldest of the Weller brothers of Otago and Sydney bought land including the sites of the modern cities of Auckland and North Shore and part of Rodney District for "one large cask of powder" from "Cohi Rangatira".
Two of the longest arterial roads within the Auckland Region are Great North Road and Great South Road – the main connections in those directions before the construction of the State Highway network.
Many Auckland beaches are patrolled by surf lifesaving clubs, such as Piha Surf Life Saving Club the home of Piha Rescue.
This strong focus on Auckland has led the immigration services to award extra points towards immigration visa requirements for people intending to move to other parts of New Zealand.
After a British colony was established in 1840, the new Governor of New Zealand, William Hobson chose the area as his new capital.
In July 2016, Auckland Council released, as the outcome of a three-year study and public hearings, its Unitary Plan for Auckland.
Most shopping malls are located in the middle- and outer-suburbs, with Sylvia Park and Westfield Albany being the largest.
The city is home to some of the largest schools in New Zealand, including Rangitoto College in the East Coast Bays area, the largest school in New Zealand with  students as of
He was re-elected for a second term in October 2013.
The Viaduct Basin, on the western edge of the CBD, hosted two America's Cup challenges (2000 Cup and 2003 Cup).
Auckland has at least 14 large lava tube caves which run from the volcanoes down towards the sea.
Auckland has various small regional airports and Auckland Airport, the busiest of the country.
There is significant public debate around why Auckland's housing is so expensive, often referring to a lack of land supply, the easy availability of credit for residential investment and Auckland's high level of liveability.
The premier jumping events (the Great Northern Hurdles and Great Northern Steeplechase) are held at the beginning of September.
Freight usually arrives at or is distributed from the port via road, though the port facilities also have rail access.
Auckland, because of its large population, is covered by 22 general electorates and three Maori electorates, each returning one member to the New Zealand House of Representatives.
However, subdividing such properties with 'infill housing' has long been the norm.
Amongst the more important tertiary educational institutes are the University of Auckland, Auckland University of Technology, Massey University, Manukau Institute of Technology and Unitec New Zealand.
State Highway 22 is a non-motorway rural arterial connecting Pukekohe to the Southern Motorway at Drury.
Recent immigration from Asia has added to the religious diversity of the city, increasing then number of people affiliating with Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Sikhism, although there are no figures on religious attendance.
Transpower owns the national grid and is responsible for the high voltage transmission lines into and across Auckland.
The introduction of firearms at the end of the eighteenth century, which began in Northland, upset the balance of power and led to devastating intertribal warfare beginning in 1807, causing iwi who lacked the new weapons to seek refuge in areas less exposed to coastal raids.
It was replaced as the capital in 1865, but immigration to the new city stayed strong and it has remained the country's most populous urban area.
The administrative offices of the Government of the Pitcairn Islands is situated in Auckland.
There is, however, nothing to suggest that this was the result of a deliberate European policy.
'''Auckland''' ( ), in the North Island of New Zealand, is the largest and most populous urban area in the country.
There is also a small, long-established Jewish community.
Rail services operate along four lines travel between the CBD and the west, south and south-east of Auckland, with longer-distance trains operating to Wellington only a few times each week.
The Mangere Bridge and the Upper Harbour Bridge span the upper reaches of the Manukau and Waitemata Harbours, respectively.
Other state highways within Auckland include State Highway 16 (the Northwest Motorway), State Highway 18 (the Upper Harbour Motorway) and State Highway 20 (the Southwest Motorway).
Most of the Irish, though not all, were from Protestant Ulster.
There are two thoroughbred racecourses in the city, at Ellerslie and Avondale.
It is part of the wider Auckland Region—the area governed by the Auckland Council—which also includes outlying rural areas and the islands of the Hauraki Gulf, resulting in a total population of .
A number of proposed projects to further extend Auckland's rail network were included in the 2012 Auckland Plan, including the City Rail Link, rail to Auckland Airport, the Avondale-Southdown Line and rail to the North Shore.
The west coast has popular surf spots such as Piha, Muriwai and Bethells Beach.
However, this is partially offset by net emigration out of Auckland to other regions of New Zealand, mainly Waikato and Bay of Plenty.
Following the opening of Britomart Transport Centre in 2003, major investment in Auckland's rail network occurred, involving station upgrades, rolling stock refurbishment and infrastructure improvements.
From 1989 to 2010 Auckland was governed by several separate city and district councils.
The land that Auckland was established on was given to the Governor by local Maori iwi Ngāti Whātua as a sign of goodwill and in the hope that the building of a city would attract commercial and political opportunities for the iwi.
Housing varies considerably between some suburbs having state owned housing in the lower income neighbourhoods, to palatial waterfront estates, especially in areas close to the Waitemata Harbour.
Many aspects of the reorganisation were or are still controversial, from matters such as the form of representation for Maori, the inclusion or exclusion of rural council areas in the city, to the role of council-controlled organisations that are intended to place much of the day-to-day business of council services at arms length from the elected Council.
Auckland's population is predominantly of European origin, though the proportion of those of Asian or other non-European origins has increased in recent decades due to immigration and the removal of restrictions directly or indirectly based on race.
The demolition of the older houses is being combated through increased heritage protection for older parts of the city.
The Waitakere Ranges Regional Park to the west of Auckland offers beautiful and relatively unspoiled bush territory, as do the Hunua Ranges to the south.
In 2009 the Gallery was promised a gift of fifteen works of art by New York art collectors and philanthropists Julian and Josie Robertson – including well-known paintings by Paul Cézanne, Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, Paul Gauguin and Piet Mondrian.
Bridges span parts of both harbours, notably the Auckland Harbour Bridge crossing the Waitemata Harbour west of the Auckland Central Business District (CBD).
Since there is very little generation north of Auckland, almost all of the electricity for Auckland and Northland must be transmitted from power stations in the south, mainly from Huntly Power Station and the Waikato River hydroelectric stations.
Auckland lies on and around an isthmus, less than two kilometres wide at its narrowest point, between Mangere Inlet and the Tamaki River.
Research at Griffith University has indicated that in the last 50 years, Auckland has engaged in some of the most pro-automobile transport policies anywhere in the world.
Traditionally, the most common residence of Aucklanders was a standalone dwelling on a 'quarter acre' (1,000 m²).
Nonetheless, Auckland ranked 3rd in a survey of the quality of life of 215 major cities of the world (2015 data).
Nevertheless, the majority of Aucklanders live in single dwelling housing and are expected to continue to do so – even with most of future urban growth being through intensification.
These reduced the Auckland Region's reliance on Otahuhu substation and northern and western Auckland's reliance on the Otahuhu to Henderson line.
Twenty councillors make up the remainder of the Auckland Council governing body, elected from thirteen electoral wards.
The Central Motorway Junction, also called 'Spaghetti Junction' for its complexity, is the intersection between the two major motorways of Auckland (State Highway 1 and State Highway 16).
Many Aucklanders use this time of day to walk and run in parks.
The majority of settlers in the early period were assisted by receiving a cheap passage to New Zealand.
The plan aims to free up to 30 per cent more land for housing and allows for greater intensification of the existing urban area, creating 422,000 new dwellings in the next 30 years.
Rangitoto's size, its symmetry, its position guarding the entrance to Waitemata Harbour and its visibility from many parts of the Auckland region make it Auckland's most iconic natural feature.
Auckland's housing stock has become more diverse in recent decades, with many more apartments being built since the 1970s – particularly since the 1990s in the CBD.
High levels of rainfall occur almost year-round with an average of  per year.
While maritime winds normally disperse the pollution relatively quickly it can sometimes become visible as smog, especially on calm winter days.
The Auckland Harbour Bridge, opened in 1959, is the main connection between the North Shore and the rest of the Auckland metropolitan area.
Between 1842 and 1865, Auckland was the capital city of New Zealand.
About 50% of the population was Irish which contrasted heavily with the majority English settlers in Wellington, Christchurch or New Plymouth.
This, and continued road building towards the south into the Waikato, enabled Pākehā (European New Zealanders) influence to spread from Auckland.
The isthmus on which Auckland resides was first settled around 1350 and was valued for its rich and fertile land.
Auckland occasionally suffers from air pollution due to fine particle emissions.
Some of the cones and flows have been partly or completely quarried away.
The assertiveness of Pacific Island street culture and the increasing political influence of ethnic groups contributes to the city's multicultural vitality.
In Māori, Auckland's name is '''''''''' (or '''''Ākarana'''''), meaning "the maiden sought by a hundred lovers", in reference to its natural beauty.
Today, Auckland's Central Business District is the major financial centre of New Zealand.
Parliament met in what is now Old Government House on the University of Auckland's City campus.
Auckland hosted the 1950 British Empire Games and the 14th Commonwealth Games in 1990, and hosted a number of matches (including the semi-finals and the final) of the 2011 Rugby World Cup.
The median personal income (for all persons older than 15 years of age, per year) was NZ$22,300 (2001), behind only North Shore City (also part of the Auckland metropolitan area) and Wellington.
In 2009, much of the northern and western suburbs, as well as all of Northland, experienced a blackout when a forklift accidentally came into contact with the Otahuhu to Henderson 220&nbsp;kV line, the only major line supplying the region.
Some are several kilometres long.
As a result, the region had relatively low numbers of Māori when European settlement of New Zealand began.
Auckland CBD is connected to coastal suburbs, to the North Shore and to outlying islands by ferry.
At the same, high-profile gaps in the network, such as the inability for pedestrians and cyclists to cross the Waitemata Harbour, will probably remain for the foreseeable future, with councils generally not considering the costs involved as sensible expense.
There is also a racecourse at Pukekohe Park Raceway, inside the motor racing track.
Additionally, Auckland regularly hosts the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra and Royal New Zealand Ballet.
On the eastern coastline of the North Shore, where the Rangitoto Channel divides the inner Hauraki Gulf islands from the mainland, there are excellent swimming beaches at Cheltenham and Narrow Neck in Devonport, Takapuna, Milford, and the various beaches further north in the area known as East Coast Bays.
The city's economy is based largely on services and commerce.
By 2006 the Asian population had reached 18.0% in Auckland, and 36.2% in the central city.
The 2013 Series kicks off in April in Auckland and will continue there yearly for at least 3 more years.
Many ''pā'' (fortified villages) were created, mainly on the volcanic peaks.
In earlier times, portage paths crossed the narrowest sections of the isthmus.
It is estimated that the field will stay active for about 1 million years.
The sub-national GDP of the Auckland region was estimated at US$47.6&nbsp;billion in 2003, 36% of New Zealand's national GDP, 15% greater than the entire South Island.
135,000 yachts and launches are registered in Auckland, and around 60,500 of the country's 149,900 registered yachtsmen are from Auckland, with about one in three Auckland households owning a boat.
The Auckland Trotting Cup is held on 31 December, with many other feature events spread throughout the year.
By the time the first Fencibles arrived in 1848 the rebels in the north had been defeated so the outlying defensive towns were constructed to the south stretching in a line from the port village of Onehunga in the West to Howick in the east.
The network south of central Papakura is owned by Counties Power.
Auckland is expecting substantial population growth via natural population increases (two-thirds of growth) and immigration (one third), and is set to grow to an estimated 1.9&nbsp;million inhabitants by 2031 in a medium-variant scenario.
Auckland also has the largest Polynesian population of any city in the world.
The 2012 ITU World Triathlon Series Grand Final events were held in the Auckland CBD in October 2012.
Auckland was officially declared New Zealand's capital in 1841 and the transfer of the administration from Russell (now Old Russell) in the Bay of Islands was completed in 1842.
Māori population in the area is estimated to have been about 20,000 people before the arrival of Europeans.
This substantial increase in population will have a major impact on transport, housing and other infrastructure that are, particularly in the case of housing, already considered under pressure.
past midnight) are limited, even on weekends.
The average daily maximum temperature is  in February and  in July.
The Waitemata Harbour has several popular swimming beaches, including Mission Bay and Kohimarama on the south side of the harbour, and Stanley Bay on the north side.
The sub-transmission and distribution network in the Auckland region is mostly owned by Vector.
In response to the ongoing rebellion by Hone Heke in the mid-1840s the government encouraged retired but fit British soldiers and their families to migrate to Auckland to form a defence line around the port settlement as garrison soldiers.
At that time, generally, a solemn stillness holds, and a perfect calm prevails...".
The Northern Busway runs alongside part of the Northern Motorway on the North Shore.
Meanwhile, traffic problems, the lack of good public transport, and increasing housing costs have been cited by many Aucklanders as among the strongest negative factors of living there, together with crime.
With the exceptions of Hamburg and Galway, all of these cities are located within the Pacific Rim.
The total coastline of Auckland is  long.
A Royal Commission on Auckland Governance was set up in 2007, and in 2009 recommended a unified local governance structure for Auckland, amalgamating the councils.
For trips to the city centre at peak times the use of public transport is much higher, with more than half of trips are undertaken by bus, train or ferry.
A number of arts events are held in Auckland, including the Auckland Festival, the Auckland Triennial, the New Zealand International Comedy Festival, and the New Zealand International Film Festival.
This is the largest gift ever made to an art museum in Australasia.
It is the only city in the world built on a basaltic volcanic field that is still active.
The former hosts the Auckland Cup and New Zealand Derby in March, and the Railway Stakes on New Year's Day, as well as many other feature events throughout the year.
In 2004, Auckland's port handled 43% of the country's container trade.
According to NIWA, Auckland has a subtropical climate, with warm, humid summers and mild, damp winters.
As of December 2015, there are twelve list MPs in the House who contested Auckland-based electorates at the : six from National, four from Green, and one each from Labour and New Zealand First.
Auckland's status as the largest commercial centre of the country reflects in the high median personal income (per working person, per year) which was NZ$44,304 (approx.
The five-week-long 1998 Auckland power crisis blacked out much of the CBD after a cascade failure occurred on four underground cables in Mercury Energy's sub-transmission network.
After losing its status as capital Auckland remained the principal city of the Auckland Province until the provincial system was abolished in 1876.
After the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in February 1840 the new Governor of New Zealand, William Hobson, chose the area as his new capital and named it after George Eden, Earl of Auckland, then Viceroy of India.
Economic deregulation in the mid-1980s led to dramatic changes to Auckland's economy and many companies relocated their head offices from Wellington to Auckland.
The capital was moved to the more centrally located Wellington in 1865.
The individual volcanoes are all considered extinct, although the volcanic field itself is merely dormant.
At the 2013 Census, 39.1 percent of Auckland's population were born overseas; in the local board areas of Puketapapa and Howick, overseas-born residents outnumbered those born in New Zealand.
There are also occasional breaches of guideline levels of carbon monoxide.
Important institutions include the Auckland Art Gallery, Auckland War Memorial Museum, New Zealand Maritime Museum, National Museum of the Royal New Zealand Navy, and the Museum of Transport and Technology/.
The Auckland Philharmonia Orchestra is the city and region's resident full-time symphony orchestra, performing its own series of concerts and accompanying opera and ballet.
The governing National Party holds thirteen general electorates, the opposing Labour Party holds eight general electorates and all three Maori electorates, and ACT holds the remaining electorate ().
Surface features include cones, lakes, lagoons, islands and depressions, and several have produced extensive lava flows.
Positive aspects of Auckland life are its mild climate, plentiful employment and educational opportunities, as well as numerous leisure facilities.
Auckland still ranks quite low in its use of public transport, having only 46 public transport trips per capita per year, while Wellington has almost twice this number at 91, and Sydney has 114 trips.
In April 2015, Quotable Value reported the average house price for Auckland metro was NZ$809,200, compared with $458,300 in Wellington, $473,100 in Christchurch and $375,900 in Hamilton.
Auckland has been described as having 'the most extensive range of timbered housing with its classical details and mouldings in the world', many of them Victorian-Edwardian style houses.
Snowflakes were also seen on 28 July 1930 and 15 August 2011.
Bus services in Auckland are mostly radial, with few cross-town routes.
Under Köppen's climate classification, the city has an oceanic climate (''Cfb'').
