Despite hostile reviews, the play earned him an audience with King Charles XV, who supported his studies with a payment of 200 riksdaler.
File:Seascape, 1894.jpg|''Marin'', 1894
Strindberg was pivotal in the creation of chamber plays.
The drama revolves around the conflict between the Captain, a father, husband, and scientist, and his wife, Laura, over the education of their only child, a fourteen-year-old daughter named Berta.
Otto Brahm's Freie Bühne theatre premiered some of his famous works in Germany, including ''The Father'', ''Miss Julie'', and ''Creditors''.
Ludvig Josephson (the new artistic director of Stockholm's New Theatre) agreed to stage ''Master Olof'', eventually opting for the prose version – the five-hour-long production opened on 30 December 1881 under the direction of August Lindberg to favourable reviews.
In satirizing Swedish society – in particular the upper classes, the cultural and political establishment, and his many personal and professional foes – he could be very confrontational, with scarcely concealed caricatures of political opponents.
Strindberg felt that true naturalism was a psychological "battle of brains": two people who hate each other in the immediate moment and strive to drive the other to doom is the type of mental hostility that Strindberg strove to describe.
When he was 37, he began ''The Son of a Servant'', a four-part autobiography.
Strindberg returned to Uppsala University in January 1870 to study aesthetics and modern languages and to work on a number of plays.
His novel ''The Red Room'' (1879) made him famous.
The three missing years, 1875–1877, were the time when Strindberg was wooing von Essen and their marriage; entitled ''He and She'', this portion of his autobiography was not printed until 1919, after his death.
After the trial he evaluated his religious beliefs, and concluded that he needed to leave Lutheranism, though he had been Lutheran since childhood; and after briefly being a deist, he became an atheist.
Strindberg described himself as a "failed author" at this time: "I feel like a deaf-mute," he wrote, "as I cannot speak and am not permitted to write; sometimes I stand in the middle of my room that seems like a prison cell, and then I want to scream so that walls and ceilings would fly apart, and I have so much to scream about, and therefore I remain silent."
Some critics think that Strindberg suffered from severe paranoia in the mid-1890s, and perhaps that he temporarily experienced insanity.
His play ''The Keys of Heaven'' (1892) was inspired by the loss of his children in his divorce.
In September 1887 he began to write a novel in French about his relationship with Siri von Essen called ''The Defence of a Fool''.
In ''Town and Gown'' (1877), a collection of short stories describing student life, he ridiculed Uppsala and its professors.
Georg helped him put on ''The Father'', which had its première on 14 November 1887 at the Casino Theatre in Copenhagen.
From December 1874, Strindberg worked for eight years as an assistant librarian at the Royal Library.
By setting up his rules and creating an intimate atmosphere, Strindberg was able to demand the audience's focus.
It can only be blown up."
Buoyant from the reception of ''The Red Room'', Strindberg swiftly completed ''The Secret of the Guild'', an historical drama set in Uppsala at the beginning of the 15th century about the conflict between two masons over the completion of the city cathedral, which opened at the Royal Theatre on 3 May 1880 (his first première in nine years); Siri played Margaretha.
Strindberg had the intention of the theatre being used for his plays and his plays only, he also had the intention of the theatre being used mainly to perform chamber plays.
Many of his works, however, had at least some politics and sometimes an abundance of it.
The theatre ran into a financial difficulty in February 1908 and Falck had to borrow money from Prince Eugén, Duke of Närke, who attended the première of ''The Pelican''.
The skein is too tangled to be unravelled.
These works include: ''Debit and Credit'' (1892), ''Facing Death'' (1892), ''Motherly Love'' (1892), and ''The First Warning'' (1893).
Strindberg had very specific ideas about how the theatre would be opened and operated.
He wrote on subjects such as botany, chemistry, and optics before returning to literature with the publication of his edited journals ''Legends'' and ''Jacob Wrestling'' (both 1898), where he noted the impact Emanuel Swedenborg had on his current work.
Strindberg's best-known play from this period is ''Miss Julie''.
Returning to the university for what would be his final term in the spring, he left on 2&nbsp;March 1872, without graduating.
His most famous and produced plays are ''Master Olof'', ''Miss Julie'', and ''The Father''.
As a child he had a keen interest in natural science, photography, and religion (following his mother's Pietism).
While there, he rode out the final phase of the divorce and later used this agonizing ordeal for the basis of ''The Bond and the Link'' (1893).
He moved to Grez-sur-Loing, just south of Paris, France, where Larsson was staying.
Taking his cue from William Shakespeare, he began to use colloquial and realistic speech in his historical dramas, which challenged the convention that they should be written in stately verse.
In 1909, Strindberg thought he might get the Nobel Prize in Literature, but instead lost to Selma Lagerlöf, the first woman and first Swede to win the award.
He entered the period of his "Inferno crisis," in which he had psychological and religious upheavals that influenced his later works.
Only 160 seats in the auditorium.
The leader of the Social Democrat Youth Alliance started a fund-raiser for a special award.
From 1881, at the invitation of Edvard Brandes, Strindberg began to contribute articles to the ''Morgenbladet'', a Copenhagen daily newspaper.
In May 1885 he wrote: "I am on my way to becoming an atheist."
Strindberg and Siri's daughter Karin was born on 26 February 1880.
In 1903, Strindberg planned to write a grand cycle of plays based on world history, but the idea soon faded.
From November 1887 to April 1889, Strindberg stayed in Copenhagen.
This money allowed him to leave Sweden and he joined artistic circles in Berlin.
Depression followed as he was unable to meet his financial obligations and to support his children and former wife.
The newspapers wrote about the theatre until its death; however, Strindberg felt it was entirely unsuccessful.
Another collection of stories, ''Utopias in Reality'', was published in September 1885, though it was not well received.
As William Blake, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Honoré de Balzac, and William Butler Yeats had been, he was drawn to Swedenborg's mystical visions, with their depictions of spiritual landscape and Christian morality.
He wrote ''The Last of the Knights'' (1908), ''Earl Birger of Bjalbo'' (1909), and ''The Regents'' (1909).
His view on psychological power struggles may be seen in works such as ''Creditors'' (1889), ''The Stronger'' (1889), and ''Pariah'' (1889).
Max Reinhardt was a big supporter of his, staging some of his plays at the Kleines Theater in 1902 (including ''The Bond'', ''The Stronger'', and ''The Outlaw'').
File:The White Mare II, 1892.jpg|''The white horse'', 1892
On 3 April 1884, Siri gave birth to their son, Hans.
The history of the Paris Commune, during 1871, caused young Strindberg to develop the opinion that politics is a conflict between the upper and lower classes.
Before writing ''Creditors'', Strindberg completed one of his most famous pieces, ''Miss Julie''.
Albert Bonniers förlag paid him 200,000 Swedish crowns for his complete works.
Their second daughter, Greta, was born on 9 June 1881, while they were staying on the island of Kymmendö.
After his disenchantment with naturalism, Strindberg had a growing interest in transcendental matters.
Strindberg wanted to attain what he called "greater Naturalism."
He co-founded the Rune Society, a small literary club whose members adopted pseudonyms taken from runes of the ancient Teutonic alphabet – Strindberg called himself Frö (Seed), after the god of fertility.
August Falck, an actor, wanted to put on a production of ''Miss Julie'' and wrote to Strindberg for permission.
Among his most widely read works is the novel ''The People of Hemsö''.
Income earned from ''Lucky Peter's Journey'' enabled him to move to Switzerland in 1883.
He wrote the play with a Parisian stage in mind, in particular the Théâtre Libre, founded in 1887 by Andre Antoine.
Strindberg embarked on his career as a journalist and critic for newspapers in Stockholm.
Strindberg's relationships with women were troubled and have often been interpreted as misogynistic by contemporaries and modern readers.
Strindberg's last home was Blå tornet in central Stockholm, where he lived from 1908 until 1912.
In 1884 Strindberg wrote a collection of short stories, ''Getting Married'', that presented women in an egalitarian light and for which he was tried for and acquitted of blasphemy in Sweden.
August Strindberg's Inferno is his personal account of sinking deeper into some kind of madness, typified by visions and paranoia.
In 1889, he published an essay entitled "On Modern Drama and the Modern Theatre", in which he disassociated himself from naturalism, arguing that it was petty and unimaginative realism.
In ''Strindberg och alkoholen'' (1985), James Spens discusses Strindberg's drinking habits, including his liking for absinthe and its possible implications for Strindberg's mental health during the inferno period.
He drafted a series of rules for his theatre in a letter to August Falck: 1.
He was admired by many as a far-left writer.
Strindberg subsequently ended his association with Naturalism and began to produce works informed by Symbolism.
He is considered the "father" of modern Swedish literature and his ''The Red Room'' (1879) has frequently been described as the first modern Swedish novel.
At Strindberg's insistence, Siri resigned from the Royal Theatre in the spring, having become pregnant again.
Less than a year later, with the theatre and reconciliation short lived, he moved back to Sweden while Siri moved back to her native Finland with the children.
They married a year later, on 30 December 1877; Siri was seven months pregnant at the time.
Others, including Evert Sprinchorn and Olof Lagercrantz, believed that he intentionally turned himself into his own guinea pig by doing psychological and drug-induced self-experimentation.
The changing nature of his political positions shows in his changing stance on the women's rights issue.
He wrote another historical drama in 1908 after the Royal Theatre convinced him to put on a new play for its sixtieth birthday.
The Swedish Composer Ture Rangström dedicated his first Symphony, which was finished in 1914, to ''August Strindberg in memoriam''.
In Sweden Strindberg is known as an essayist, painter, poet, and especially as a novelist and playwright, but in other countries he is known mostly as a playwright.
In his autobiographical novel ''The Son of a Servant'', Strindberg describes a childhood affected by "emotional insecurity, poverty, religious fanaticism and neglect.".
He intended his plays to be impartial and objective, citing a desire to make literature akin to a science.
In 1887, they moved to Issigatsbühl, near Lindau by Lake Constance.
He attended a harsh school in Klara for four years, an experience that haunted him in his adult life.
In September 1872, the Royal Theatre rejected it, leading to decades of rewrites, bitterness, and a contempt for official institutions.
Because of his political views, Strindberg was promoted strongly in socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as in the Soviet Union and Cuba.
While there, to provide a lead role for his wife and as a reply to Henrik Ibsen's ''A Doll's House'' (1879), he also wrote ''Sir Bengt's Wife'', which opened on 25 November 1882 at the New Theatre.
Strindberg believed for the rest of his life that the relationship between the transcendental and the real world was described by a series of "correspondences" and that everyday events were really messages from above of which only the enlightened could make sense.
Here he met a diverse group of artists from Scandinavia, Poland, and Germany.
This is believed to have stalled Strindberg's creativity, and Strindberg insisted that he was in a rivalry and forced to defend naturalism, even though he had exhausted its literary potential.
The stage was unusually small, only 6 by 9 metres.
In the curious autobiographical work ''Inferno''—a paranoid and confusing tale of his years in Paris, written in French—he claims to have successfully performed alchemical experiments and cast black magic spells on his daughter.
He first left Uppsala in 1868 to work as a schoolteacher, but then studied chemistry for some time at the Institute of Technology in Stockholm in preparation for medical studies, later working as a private tutor before becoming an extra at the Royal Theatre in Stockholm.
Strindberg spent the next few years in Uppsala and Stockholm, alternately studying for exams and trying his hand at non-academic pursuits.
From the beginning of 1876, Strindberg and Siri began to meet in secret.
Less than a year later, their daughter Kerstin was born and the couple separated, though their marriage was not officially dissolved until 1897.
Many of these attitudes, passions and behaviours may have been developed for literary reasons and ended as soon as he had exploited them in books.
The ceiling lighting was a yellow silk cover which created an effect of mild daylight.
The floor was covered with a deep-green carpet, and the auditorium was decorated by six ultra modern columns with elaborate up-to-date capitals.
He passed his graduation exam in May 1867 and enrolled at the Uppsala University, where he began on 13 September.
Alchemy, occultism, Swedenborgianism, and various other eccentric interests were pursued by Strindberg with some intensity for periods of his life.
Edvard Brandes wrote that the novel "makes the reader want to join the fight against hypocrisy and reaction."
Today, his best-known pieces are stormy, expressionist seascapes, selling at high prices in auction houses.
In the wake of the publication of ''Getting Married'', he began to correspond with Émile Zola.
A multi-faceted author, Strindberg was often extreme.
His ''A Dream Play'' (1902) – with its radical attempt to dramatise the workings of the unconscious by means of an abolition of conventional dramatic time and space and the splitting, doubling, merging, and multiplication of its characters – was an important precursor to both expressionism and surrealism.
Instead of the usual restaurant Strindberg offered a lounge for the ladies and a smoking-room for the gentlemen.
Part three, or ''The Red Room'', describes his years as a poet and journalist; it ends with his meeting Siri von Essen.
"The Powers" were central to Strindberg's later work.
He had the desire to become the national poet and felt that historical dramas were the way to attain that status.
The play was accepted by the Royal Theatre, where it premièred on 13 September 1870.
It is believed that this play was inspired by the marriage of Strindberg, the son of a servant, to an aristocratic woman.
In the play he used Charles Darwin's theory of survival of the fittest and dramatized a doomed sexual encounter that crosses the division of social classes.
In 1898 he returned to playwriting with ''To Damascus'', which, like ''The Great Highway'' (1909), is a dream-play of spiritual pilgrimage.
Having returned to Kymmendö during the summer of 1882, Strindberg wrote a collection of anti-establishment short stories, ''The New Kingdom''.
He had a brief affair in Berlin with Dagny Juel before his marriage to Frida; it has been suggested that the news of her murder in 1901 was the reason he cancelled his honeymoon with his third wife, Harriet.
He died on 14 May 1912 at the age of 63.
This is controversial in contemporary assessments of Strindberg, as have his antisemitic descriptions of Jews (and, in particular, Jewish enemies of his in Swedish cultural life) in some works (e.g., ''Det nya riket''), particularly during the early 1880s.
After completing ''The Father'' in a matter of weeks, he sent a copy to Émile Zola for his approval, though Zola's reaction was lukewarm.
August Palme, Strindberg's friend, played Jean and Manda Bjorling played Julie.
Strindberg was age 28 and Siri was 27 at the time of their marriage.
Though Strindberg was friends with Edvard Munch and Paul Gauguin, and was thus familiar with modern trends, the spontaneous and subjective expressiveness of his landscapes and seascapes can be ascribed also to the fact that he painted only in periods of personal crisis.
That same month, Strindberg offered ''Master Olof'' to Edvard Stjernström (the director of the newly built New Theatre in Stockholm), but it was rejected.
Early on, Strindberg was sympathetic to women of 19th-century Sweden, calling for women's suffrage as early as 1884.
In 1892, he experienced writer's block, which led to a drastic reduction in his income.
He also suspected that Ibsen had based Hjalmar Ekdal in ''The Wild Duck'' (1884) on Strindberg because he felt that Ibsen viewed him as a weak and pathetic husband; he reworked the situation of Ibsen's play into a warfare between the two sexes.
He asked writers to send him scripts, which he received from Herman Bang, Gustav Wied and Nathalia Larsen.
They were married in 1893.
In his response to Brandes, Strindberg explained that:
Problems of prostitution and poverty were debated among writers, critics and politicians.
During the Christmas holiday of 1870–71, he re-wrote an historical tragedy, ''Sven the Sacrificer'', as a one-act play in prose called ''The Outlaw''.
She wrote a book which illuminates his last years, but the exact nature of their relationship is debated.
His daughter Karin Strindberg married a Russian Bolshevik of partially Swedish ancestry, Vladimir Martynovich Smirnov ("Paulsson").
In November 1879, his novel ''The Red Room'' was published.
He is considered one of the pioneers of the modern European stage and Expressionism.
He helped to run the Intimate Theatre from 1907, a small-scale theatre, modelled on Max Reinhardt's , that staged his chamber plays (such as ''The Ghost Sonata'').
Through unscrupulous means, Laura gets the Captain to doubt his fatherhood until he suffers a mental and physical collapse.
He supported himself in between studies as a substitute primary-school teacher and as a tutor for the children of two well-known physicians in Stockholm.
In April he began work on ''The Swedish People'', a four-part cultural history of Sweden written as a series of depictions of ordinary people's lives from the 9th century onwards, which he undertook mainly for financial reasons and which absorbed him for the next year; Larsson provided illustrations.
It was at this time that he first learnt about the ideas of Charles Darwin.
Towards the end of the year Strindberg completed a first draft of his first major work, a play about Olaus Petri called ''Master Olof''.
He also completed one of his few comedies, ''Playing with Fire'' (1893), and the first two parts of his post-inferno trilogy ''To Damascus'' (1898–1904).
While receiving mixed reviews in Sweden, it was acclaimed in Denmark, where Strindberg was hailed as a genius.
A fund was set up through an appeal in a German magazine.
He was inspired by writers such as Gustave Guiche and Henri de Lavedan.
He then moved to Paris, which they found noisy and polluted.
The small stage and minimal amount of seats was meant to give the audience a greater feeling of involvement in the work.
In March 1882 he wrote in a letter to Josephson: "My interest in the theatre, I must frankly state, has but one focus and one goal – my wife's career as an actress"; Josephson duly cast her in two roles the following season.
Early in the summer of 1875, he met Siri von Essen, a 24-year-old aspiring actress who, by virtue of her husband, was a baroness – he became infatuated with her.
Similar to twenty years earlier when he frequented The Red Room, he now went to the German tavern The Black Porker.
It can only be sheared.
Their first child was born prematurely on 21 January 1878 and died two days later.
Less than a year after her death, his father married the children's governess, Emilia Charlotta Pettersson.
His interest in photography resulted, among other things, in a large number of arranged self-portraits in various environments, which now number among the best-known pictures of Strindberg.
She died when he was thirteen, and although his grief lasted for only three months, in later life he came to feel a sense of loss and longing for an idealised maternal figure.
It is now a museum.
He had completed short plays about Martin Luther, Plato, Moses, Jesus Christ, and Socrates.
During Christmas 1911, Strindberg became sick with pneumonia and he never recovered completely.
Part four, which dealt with the years from 1877 to 1886, was banned by his publishers and was not published until after his death.
File:Underlandet, (Kraina czarow), 1892.jpg|''The wonderland'', 1894
Of several statues and busts of him erected in Stockholm, the most prominent is Carl Eldh's, erected in 1942 in Tegnérlunden, a park adjoining this house.
Strindberg developed a theory that sexual warfare was not motivated by carnal desire but by relentless human will.
A prolific writer who often drew directly on his personal experience, Strindberg's career spanned four decades, during which time he wrote over 60 plays and more than 30 works of fiction, autobiography, history, cultural analysis, and politics.
Following a successful audition that December, Siri became an actress at the Royal Theatre.
Symbolism was just beginning at this time.
In 1885, they moved back to Paris.
He was particularly excited at this time by Henry Thomas Buckle's ''History of Civilization'' and the first volume of Georg Brandes' ''Main Currents of Nineteenth-Century Literature''.
Summer performances.
Works included the so-called Vasa Trilogy: ''The Saga of the Folkungs'' (1899), ''Gustavus Vasa'' (1899), and ''Erik XIV'' (1899).
While there he had several opportunities to meet with both Georg Brandes and his brother Edvard Brandes.
Once Otto Brahm relinquished his role as head as of the Deutsches Theater, Reinhardt took over and produced Strindberg's plays.
File:August Strindberg - Björken I (Höst).jpg|''Birch autumn I''
Following further revision in the summer, ''The Outlaw'' opened at the Royal Theatre on 16 October 1871.
He was a socialist (or perhaps more of an anarchist, which he himself claimed on at least one occasion).
He said that "the Powers" were an outside force that had caused him his physical and mental suffering because they were acting in retribution to humankind for their wrongdoings.
When the theatre opened in 1907 with a performance of ''The Pelican'' it was a rather large hit.
As a result of an argument in January 1876 concerning the inheritance of the family firm, Strindberg's relationship with his father was terminated (he did not attend his funeral in February 1883).
While writing ''The Father'', Strindberg himself was experiencing marital problems and doubted the paternity of his children.
Though Strindberg claimed that he was writing "realistically," he freely altered past events and biographical information, and telescoped chronology.
A bold experimenter and iconoclast throughout, he explored a wide range of dramatic methods and purposes, from naturalistic tragedy, monodrama, and history plays, to his anticipations of expressionist and surrealist dramatic techniques.
He also returned to writing historical drama, the genre with which he had begun his playwriting career.
Depressed by Uppsala, he stayed in Stockholm, returning to the university in April to pass an exam in Latin and in June to defend his thesis on Adam Gottlob Oehlenschläger's Romantic tragedy ''Earl Haakon'' (1802).
In his plays ''The Father'' (1887), ''Miss Julie'' (1888), and ''Creditors'' (1889), he created naturalistic dramas that – building on the established accomplishments of Henrik Ibsen's prose problem plays while rejecting their use of the structure of the well-made play – responded to the call-to-arms of 's manifesto "Naturalism in the Theatre" (1881) and the example set by 's newly established  (opened 1887).
A year later the family moved near to Sabbatsberg, where they stayed for three years before returning to Norrtullsgatan.
As a young student, Strindberg also worked as an assistant in a pharmacy in the university town of Lund in southern Sweden.
Falck helped to design the auditorium, which was decorated in a deep-green tone.
It enjoyed a successful run for eleven days after which it toured the Danish provinces.
He was moved to the school in Jakob in 1860, which he found far more pleasant, though he remained there for only a year.
In the essay ''On Psychic Murder'' (1887), he referred to the psychological theories of the Nancy School, which advocated the use of hypnosis.
While this production of ''Master Olaf'' was his breakthrough in the theatre, Strindberg's five-act fairy-tale play ''Lucky Peter's Journey'', which opened on 22 December 1883, brought him his first significant success, although he dismissed it as a potboiler.
He needed a credo and he used Jean-Jacques Rousseau nature worshiping, which he had studied while a student, as one.
During the summer he completed a sequel volume of stories, though some were quite different in tone from those of the first.
He also felt that he was chosen by Providence to atone for the moral decay of others and that his tribulations were payback for misdeeds earlier in his life.
Strindberg used a minimal technique, as was his way, by only having a back drop and some sea shells on the stage for scene design and props.
