The realized sculpture displays Balzac cloaked in the drapery, looking forcefully into the distance with deeply gouged features.
(Rodin later returned the favor by sculpting a bust of Henley that was used as the frontispiece to Henley's collected works and, after his death, on his monument in London.)
Rodin's focus was on the handling of clay.
Misfortune surrounded Rodin: his mother, who had wanted to see her son marry, was dead, and his father was blind and senile, cared for by Rodin's sister-in-law, Aunt Thérèse.
His sculpture emphasized the individual and the concreteness of flesh, and suggested emotion through detailed, textured surfaces, and the interplay of light and shadow.
In 1889, ''The Burghers of Calais'' was first displayed to general acclaim.
The patient's condition is grave."
Rodin's most original work departed from traditional themes of mythology and allegory, modeled the human body with realism, and celebrated individual character and physicality.
Rodin thought of John the Baptist, and carried that association into the title of the work.
It is a bronze sculpture weighing two tons (1,814&nbsp;kg), and its figures are 6.6&nbsp;ft (2&nbsp;m) tall.
For a monument to French author Honoré de Balzac, Rodin was chosen in 1891.
Commenting on Rodin's monument to Victor Hugo, ''The Times'' in 1909 expressed that "there is some show of reason in the complaint that Rodin's conceptions are sometimes unsuited to his medium, and that in such cases they overstrain his vast technical powers".
Students sought him at his studio, praising his work and scorning the charges of ''surmoulage''.
Rodin willed to the French state his studio and the right to make casts from his plasters.
George Bernard Shaw sat for a portrait and gave an idea of Rodin's technique: "While he worked, he achieved a number of miracles.
Regardless of the immediate receptions of ''St.
Rodin also promoted the work of other sculptors, including Aristide Maillol and Ivan Meštrović whom Rodin once called "the greatest phenomenon amongst sculptors."
Rodin remains one of the few sculptors widely known outside the visual arts community.
In 1857, Rodin submitted a clay model of a companion to the École des Beaux-Arts in an attempt to win entrance; he did not succeed, and two further applications were also denied.
John the Baptist Preaching'' did not have an obviously religious theme.
Rodin's inability to gain entrance may have been due to the judges' Neoclassical tastes, while Rodin had been schooled in light, 18th-century sculpture.
The statue's apparent lack of a theme was troubling to critics&nbsp;– commemorating neither mythology nor a noble historical event&nbsp;– and it is not clear whether Rodin intended a theme.
Leaving the ''Petite École'' in 1857, Rodin earned a living as a craftsman and ornamenter for most of the next two decades, producing decorative objects and architectural embellishments.
The monument had its supporters in Rodin's day; a manifesto defending him was signed by Monet, Debussy, and future Premier Georges Clemenceau, among many others.
John'' stands almost 6' 7" (2&nbsp;m).
Rodin's relationship with Turquet was rewarding: through him, he won the 1880 commission to create a portal for a planned museum of decorative arts.
Rodin's talent for surface modeling allowed him to let every part of the body speak for the whole.
During the Hundred Years' War, the army of King Edward III besieged Calais, and Edward ordered that the town's population be killed ''en masse''.
Other sculptors whose work has been described as owing to Rodin include Joseph Csaky, Alexander Archipenko, Joseph Bernard, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, Georg Kolbe, Wilhelm Lehmbruck, Jacques Lipchitz, Pablo Picasso, Adolfo Wildt, and Ossip Zadkine.
Rodin's intent had been to show Balzac at the moment of conceiving a work&nbsp;– to express courage, labor, and struggle.
The result was a life-size, well-proportioned nude figure, posed unconventionally with his right hand atop his head, and his left arm held out at his side, forearm parallel to the body.
Since the 1950s, Rodin's reputation has re-ascended; he is recognized as the most important sculptor of the modern era, and has been the subject of much scholarly work.
Only after damage during the First World War, subsequent storage, and Rodin's death was the sculpture displayed as he had intended.
In appreciation for her efforts at unlocking the American market, Rodin eventually presented Hallowell with a bronze, a marble and a terra cotta.
In 1880, Rodin submitted the sculpture to the Paris Salon.
To a greater degree than his contemporaries, Rodin believed that an individual's character was revealed by his physical features.
Rodin was sensitive to the controversy surrounding his work, but refused to change his style.
By 1900, Rodin's artistic reputation was entrenched.
His fragments&nbsp;– perhaps lacking arms, legs, or a head&nbsp;– took sculpture further from its traditional role of portraying likenesses, and into a realm where forms existed for their own sake.
A prolific artist, he created thousands of busts, figures, and sculptural fragments over more than five decades.
Rodin said, "It is Michelangelo who has freed me from academic sculpture."
Portraiture was an important component of Rodin's oeuvre, helping him to win acceptance and financial independence.
Rodin worked as Carrier-Belleuse' chief assistant until 1870, designing roof decorations and staircase and doorway embellishments.
The ''Hand of God'' is his own hand."
The model, an Italian peasant who presented himself at Rodin's studio, possessed an idiosyncratic sense of movement that Rodin felt compelled to capture.
After the revitalization of the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1890, Rodin served as the body's vice-president.
The original was a  high bronze piece created between 1879 and 1889, designed for the ''Gates'' lintel, from which the figure would gaze down upon Hell.
These include Gutzon Borglum, Antoine Bourdelle, Constantin Brancusi, Camille Claudel, Charles Despiau, Malvina Hoffman, Carl Milles, François Pompon, and Clara Westhoff, even though Brancusi later rejected his legacy.
It was the freedom and creativity with which Rodin used these practices&nbsp;– along with his activation surfaces of sculptures through traces of his own touch and with his more open attitude toward bodily pose, sensual subject matter, and non-realistic surface&nbsp;– that marked Rodin's re-making of traditional 19th century sculptural techniques into the prototype for modern sculpture.
Rodin had enormous artistic influence.
Despite the title, ''St.
The charges of fakery surrounding ''The Age of Bronze'' continued.
Rodin restored an ancient role of sculpture&nbsp;– to capture the physical and intellectual force of the human subject&nbsp;– and he freed sculpture from the repetition of traditional patterns, providing the foundation for greater experimentation in the 20th century.
In 1877, the work debuted in Brussels and then was shown at the Paris Salon.
Sculpturally, Rodin possessed a unique ability to model a complex, turbulent, deeply pocketed surface in clay.
After two more intermediary titles, Rodin settled on ''The Age of Bronze'', suggesting the Bronze Age, and in Rodin's words, "man arising from nature".
He demanded an inquiry and was eventually exonerated by a committee of sculptors.
From the unexpected realism of his first major figure – inspired by his 1875 trip to Italy – to the unconventional memorials whose commissions he later sought, Rodin's reputation grew, such that he became the preeminent French sculptor of his time.
While ''The Age of Bronze'' is statically posed, ''St.
"The hand of Rodin worked not as the hand of a sculptor works, but as the work of ''Elan Vital''.
He described the evolution of his bust over a month, passing through "all the stages of art's evolution": first, a "Byzantine masterpiece", then "Bernini intermingled", then an elegant Houdon.
A prime example of this is the bold ''The Walking Man'' (1899–1900), which was exhibited as his major one-person show in 1900.
With the arrival of the Franco-Prussian War, Rodin was called to serve in the National Guard, but his service was brief due to his near-sightedness.
John'' and ''The Age of Bronze'', Rodin had achieved a new degree of fame.
Early subjects included fellow sculptor Jules Dalou (1883) and companion Camille Claudel (1884).
Though the town envisioned an allegorical, heroic piece centered on Eustache de Saint-Pierre, the eldest of the six men, Rodin conceived the sculpture as a study in the varied and complex emotions under which all six men were laboring.
Instead of copying traditional academic postures, Rodin preferred his models to move naturally around his studio (despite their nakedness).
Rodin had wanted it located near the town hall, where it would engage the public.
Rodin began the project in 1884, inspired by the chronicles of the siege by Jean Froissart.
A Rodin work with a verified history sold for US$4.8 million in 1999, and Rodin's bronze ''Eve, grand modele&nbsp;– version sans rocher'' sold for $18.9 million at a 2008 Christie's auction in New York.
Rodin sought to avoid another charge of ''surmoulage'' by making the statue larger than life: ''St.
Rilke stayed with Rodin in 1905 and 1906, and did administrative work for him; he would later write a laudatory monograph on the sculptor.
Many of his most notable sculptures were roundly criticized during his lifetime.
He was largely self-educated, and began to draw at age ten.
The offer was in part a gesture of reconciliation, and Rodin accepted.
In 1903, Rodin was elected president of the International Society of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers.
He owned a work by the as-yet-unrecognized Van Gogh, and admired the forgotten El Greco.
Rodin requested permission to stay in the Hotel Biron, a museum of his works, but the director of the museum refused to let him stay there.
That part of Rodin which appreciated 18th-century tastes was aroused, and he immersed himself in designs for vases and table ornaments that brought the factory renown across Europe.
Rodin was ill that year; in January, he suffered weakness from influenza, and on 16 November his physician announced that "congestion of the lungs has caused great weakness.
The ''Société des Gens des Lettres'', a Parisian organization of writers, planned a monument to French novelist Honoré de Balzac immediately after his death in 1850.
After this experience, Rodin did not complete another public commission.
The mayor of Calais was tempted to hire Rodin on the spot upon visiting his studio, and soon the memorial was approved, with Rodin as its architect.
''The Thinker'' (originally titled ''The Poet'', after Dante) was to become one of the most well-known sculptures in the world.
In competitions for commissions he submitted models of Denis Diderot, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Lazare Carnot, all to no avail.
The sculptor often made quick sketches in clay that were later fine-tuned, cast in plaster, and forged into bronze or carved in marble.
It is one of Rodin's best-known and most acclaimed works.
The French order ''Légion d'honneur'' made him a Commander, and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford.
During his later creative years, Rodin's work turned increasingly toward the female form, and themes of more overt masculinity and femininity.
It would commemorate the six townspeople of Calais who offered their lives to save their fellow citizens.
During his lifetime, Rodin was compared to Michelangelo, and was widely recognized as the greatest artist of the era.
'''François Auguste René Rodin''' (12 November 1840 – 17 November 1917), known as '''Auguste Rodin''' (; ), was a French sculptor.
Rodin was a naturalist, less concerned with monumental expression than with character and emotion.
To prove completely that I could model from life as well as other sculptors, I determined...to make the sculpture on the door of figures smaller than life."
As Rodin's practice developed into the 1890s, he became more and more radical in his pursuit of fragmentation, the combination of figures at different scales, and the making of new compositions from his earlier work.
The six men portrayed do not display a united, heroic front; rather, each is isolated from his brothers, individually deliberating and struggling with his expected fate.
To deal with the complexity of bronze reproduction, France has promulgated several laws since 1956 which limit reproduction to twelve casts&nbsp;– the maximum number that can be made from an artist's plasters and still be considered his work.
Father and son now joined the couple in their flat, with Rose as caretaker.
The unconventional bronze piece was not a traditional bust, but instead the head was "broken off" at the neck, the nose was flattened and crooked, and the back of the head was absent, having fallen off the clay model in an accident.
In 1895, Calais succeeded in having ''Burghers'' displayed in their preferred form: the work was placed in front of a public garden on a high platform, surrounded by a cast-iron railing.
As a result of this limit, ''The Burghers of Calais'', for example, is found in fourteen cities.
In 1864, Rodin began to live with a young seamstress named Rose Beuret, with whom he would stay&nbsp;– with ranging commitment&nbsp;– for the rest of his life.
Many of the portal's figures became sculptures in themselves, including Rodin's most famous, ''The Thinker'' and ''The Kiss''.
During his early appearances at these social events, Rodin seemed shy; in his later years, as his fame grew, he displayed the loquaciousness and temperament for which he is better known.
Carrier-Belleuse soon asked Rodin to join him in Belgium, where they would work on ornamentation for Brussels' bourse.
Challenged in finding an appropriate representation of Balzac given the author's rotund physique, Rodin produced many studies: portraits, full-length figures in the nude, wearing a frock coat, or in a robe&nbsp;– a replica of which Rodin had requested.
It had barely won acceptance for display at the Paris Salon, and criticism likened it to "a statue of a sleepwalker" and called it "an astonishingly accurate copy of a low type".
His execution of both sculptures clashed with traditional tastes, and met with varying degrees of disapproval from the organizations that sponsored the commissions.
Fortunately, he came to know Sarah Tyson Hallowell (1846–1924), a curator from Chicago who visited Paris to arrange exhibitions at the large Interstate Expositions of the 1870s and 1880s.
Their work had a profound effect on his artistic direction.
His drawing teacher, Horace Lecoq de Boisbaudran, believed in first developing the personality of his students so that they observed with their own eyes and drew from their recollections.
John the Baptist Preaching'', was completed in 1878.
Wealthy private clients sought Rodin's work after his World's Fair exhibit, and he kept company with a variety of high-profile intellectuals and artists.
"Nothing, really, is more moving than the maddened beast, dying from unfulfilled desire and asking in vain for grace to quell its passion."
Charles Baudelaire echoed those themes, and was among Rodin's favorite poets.
Critics were still mostly dismissive of his work, but the piece finished third in the Salon's sculpture category.
The male's passion in ''The Thinker'' is suggested by the grip of his toes on the rock, the rigidness of his back, and the differentiation of his hands.
A modern critic, indeed, indicates that ''Balzac'' is one of Rodin's masterpieces.
The ''Société'' rejected the work, and the press ran parodies.
Rodin planned to stay in Belgium a few months, but he spent the next six years out of France.
The two formed a passionate but stormy relationship and influenced each other artistically.
A number of drawings, previously attributed to Rodin, are now known to have been forged by Ernest Durig.
French statesman Leon Gambetta expressed a desire to meet Rodin, and the sculptor impressed him when they met at a salon.
Although the museum was never built, Rodin worked throughout his life on ''The Gates of Hell'', a monumental sculptural group depicting scenes from Dante's ''Inferno'' in high relief.
Notable examples are ''The Walking Man'', ''Meditation without Arms'', and ''Iris, Messenger of the Gods''.
Claudel inspired Rodin as a model for many of his figures, and she was a talented sculptor, assisting him on commissions.
The sense of incompletion offered by some of his sculpture, such as ''The Walking Man'', influenced the increasingly abstract sculptural forms of the 20th century.
His most popular works, such as ''The Kiss'' and ''The Thinker'', are widely used outside the fine arts as symbols of human emotion and character.
At the end of the first fifteen minutes, after having given a simple idea of the human form to the block of clay, he produced by the action of his thumb a bust so living that I would have taken it away with me to relieve the sculptor of any further work."
Rodin fought against forgeries of his works as early as 1901, and since his death, many cases of organized, large-scale forgeries have been revealed.
After he completed his work in clay, he employed highly skilled assistants to re-sculpt his compositions at larger sizes (including any of his large-scale monuments such as ''The Thinker''), to cast the clay compositions into plaster or bronze, and to carve his marbles.
Rodin saw suffering and conflict as hallmarks of modern art.
In July 1906, Rodin was also enchanted by dancers from the Royal Ballet of Cambodia, and produced some of his most famous drawings from the experience.
Rodin's major innovation was to capitalize on such multi-staged processes of 19th century sculpture and their reliance on plaster casting.
Fortunately, ''Bust of Dalou'' and ''Burgher of Calais'' were on display in the official French pavilion at the fair and so between the works that were on display and those that were not, he was noticed.
Rodin and Beuret's modest country estate in Meudon, purchased in 1897, was a host to such visitors as King Edward, dancer Isadora Duncan, and harpsichordist Wanda Landowska.
They clashed with predominant figurative sculpture traditions, in which works were decorative, formulaic, or highly thematic.
Rodin earned his living collaborating with more established sculptors on public commissions, primarily memorials and neo-baroque architectural pieces in the style of Carpeaux.
Returning to Belgium, he began work on ''The Age of Bronze'', a life-size male figure whose realism brought Rodin attention but led to accusations of sculptural cheating.
Since clay deteriorates rapidly if not kept wet or fired into a terra-cotta, sculptors used plaster casts as a means of securing the composition they would make out of the fugitive material that is clay.
His undated drawing ''Study of a Woman Nude, Standing, Arms Raised, Hands Crossed Above Head'' is one of the works seized in 2012 from Cornelius Gurlitt.
By 1900, he was a world-renowned artist.
A massive forgery was discovered by French authorities in the early 1990s and led to the conviction of art dealer Guy Hain.
John the Baptist Preaching'' he was having re-sculpted at a reduced scale.
The committee was incensed by the untraditional proposal, but Rodin would not yield.
That year, Rodin offered his first sculpture for exhibition, and entered the studio of Albert-Ernest Carrier-Belleuse, a successful mass producer of ''objets d'art''.
Rodin, however, would have multiple plasters made and treat them as the raw material of sculpture, recombining their parts and figures into new compositions, and new names.
Art critics concerned about authenticity have argued that taking a cast does not equal reproducing a Rodin sculpture&nbsp;– especially given the importance of surface treatment in Rodin's work.
Hallowell was not only a curator but an adviser and a facilitator who was trusted by a number of prominent American collectors to suggest works for their collections, the most prominent of these being the Chicago hotelier Potter Palmer and his wife, Bertha Palmer (1849–1918).
It was at Petite École that he first met Jules Dalou and Alphonse Legros.
In 1923, Marcell Tirel, Rodin's secretary, published a book alleging that Rodin's death was largely due to cold, and the fact that he had no heat at Meudon.
After Hallowell's death, her niece, the painter Harriet Hallowell, inherited the Rodins  and after her death, the American heirs could not manage to match their value in order to export them, so they became the property of the French state.
The Musée Rodin was founded in 1916 and opened in 1919 at the Hôtel Biron, where Rodin had lived, and it holds the largest Rodin collection, with more than 6,000 sculptures and 7,000 works on paper.
Many of Rodin's best-known sculptures started as designs of figures for this composition, such as ''The Thinker'', ''The Three Shades'', and ''The Kiss'', and were only later presented as separate and independent works.
One year into the commission, the Calais committee was not impressed with Rodin's progress.
Only in 1939 was ''Monument to Balzac'' cast in bronze and placed on the Boulevard du Montparnasse at the intersection with Boulevard Raspail.
After the start of the 20th century, Rodin was a regular visitor to Great Britain, where he developed a loyal following by the beginning of the First World War.
Leaving aside the false charges, the piece polarized critics.
''The Gates of Hell'' comprised 186 figures in its final form.
The popularity of Rodin's most famous sculptures tends to obscure his total creative output.
Gambetta spoke of Rodin in turn to several government ministers, likely including Edmund Turquet, the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Fine Arts, whom Rodin eventually met.
He pursued the commission, interested in the medieval motif and patriotic theme.
Saint Peter Julian Eymard, founder and head of the congregation, recognized Rodin's talent and, sensing his lack of suitability for the order, encouraged Rodin to continue with his sculpture.
With the museum commission came a free studio, granting Rodin a new level of artistic freedom.
Rodin had essentially abandoned his son for six years, and would have a very limited relationship with him throughout his life.
His election to the prestigious position was largely due to the efforts of Albert Ludovici, father of English philosopher Anthony Ludovici, who was private secretary to Rodin for several months in 1906, but the two men parted company after Christmas, "to their mutual relief."
He married his lifelong companion, Rose Beuret, in the last year of both their lives.
The Salon rejected the piece.
A commission to create a portal for Paris' planned Museum of Decorative Arts was awarded to Rodin in 1880.
While ''The Thinker'' most obviously characterizes Dante, aspects of the Biblical Adam, the mythological Prometheus, and Rodin himself have been ascribed to him.
Fifty-three years into their relationship, Rodin married Rose Beuret.
In 2011 the world premiere of Boris Eifman's new ballet ''Rodin'' took place in Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
The teacher's attention to detail&nbsp;– his finely rendered musculature of animals in motion&nbsp;– significantly influenced Rodin.
Without finessing the join between upper and lower, between torso and legs, Rodin created a work that many sculptors at the time and subsequently have seen as one of his strongest and most singular works.
The subject was an elderly neighbourhood street porter.
Rodin vigorously denied the charges, writing to newspapers and having photographs taken of the model to prove how the sculpture differed.
While Rodin was beginning to be accepted in France by the time of ''The Burghers of Calais'', he had not yet conquered the American market and because of his technique and the frankness of some of his work, he did not have an easy time selling his work to American industrialists.
In the BBC series Civilisation, art historian Kenneth Clark praised the monument as "the greatest piece of sculpture of the 19th Century, perhaps, indeed, the greatest since Michelangelo."
Rodin was anguished and felt guilty because he had introduced Maria to an unfaithful suitor.
The ballet is dedicated to the life and work of Auguste Rodin and Camille Claudel.
Henry Moore acknowledged Rodin's seminal influence on his work.
Speaking of ''The Thinker'', Rodin illuminated his aesthetic: "What makes my Thinker think is that he thinks not only with his brain, with his knitted brow, his distended nostrils and compressed lips, but with every muscle of his arms, back, and legs, with his clenched fist and gripping toes."
His income from portrait commissions alone totalled probably 200,000 francs a year.
Because he encouraged the edition of his sculpted work, Rodin's sculptures are represented in many public and private collections.
With his personal connections and enthusiasm for Rodin's art, Henley was most responsible for Rodin's reception in Britain.
Rodin's sister Maria, two years his senior, died of peritonitis in a convent in 1862.
The artistic community knew his name.
He first visited England in 1881, where his friend, the artist Alphonse Legros, had introduced him to the poet William Ernest Henley.
His sculptures suffered a decline in popularity after his death in 1917, but within a few decades, his legacy solidified.
Rodin's eleven-year-old son Auguste, possibly developmentally delayed, was also in the ever-helpful Thérèse's care.
When ''Balzac'' was exhibited in 1898, the negative reaction was not surprising.
Although busy with ''The Gates of Hell'', Rodin won other commissions.
Rodin died the next day, age 77, at his villa in Meudon, Île-de-France, on the outskirts of Paris.
A cast of ''The Thinker'' was placed next to his tomb in Meudon; it was Rodin's wish that the figure serve as his headstone and epitaph.
In 1889, the Paris Salon invited Rodin to be a judge on its artistic jury.
Rodin dedicated much of the next four decades to his elaborate ''Gates of Hell'', an unfinished portal for a museum that was never built.
Decorators' work had dwindled because of the war, yet Rodin needed to support his family; poverty was a continual difficulty for Rodin until about the age of 30.
This was common practice amongst Rodin's contemporaries, and sculptors would exhibit plaster casts with the hopes that they would be commissioned to have the works made in a more permanent material.
Its mastery of form, light, and shadow made the work look so realistic that Rodin was accused of ''surmoulage''&nbsp;– having taken a cast from a living model.
This is composed of two sculptures from the 1870s that Rodin found in his studio&nbsp;– a broken and damaged torso that had fallen into neglect and the lower extremities of a statuette version of his 1878 ''St.
