Among the best known of many surviving portraits are the Augustus of Prima Porta, the image on the Ara Pacis, and the Via Labicana Augustus, which shows him as a priest.
Alternatively, it is possible that Livia did supply a poisoned fig (she did cultivate a variety of fig named for her that Augustus is said to have enjoyed), but did so as a means of assisted suicide rather than murder.
Livia had long been the target of similar rumors of poisoning on the behalf of her son, most or all of which are unlikely to have been true.
Traditionally, proconsuls (Roman province governors) lost their proconsular "imperium" when they crossed the Pomerium – the sacred boundary of Rome – and entered the city.
Tacitus was of the belief that Nerva (r. 96–98) successfully "mingled two formerly alien ideas, principate and liberty".
He certainly fell out of Augustus' favor as an heir; the historian Erich S. Gruen notes various contemporary sources that state Postumus Agrippa was a "vulgar young man, brutal and brutish, and of depraved character".
Now he decided to assume the full powers of the magistracy, renewed annually, in perpetuity.
If he were to die from natural causes or fall victim to assassination, Rome could be subjected to another round of civil war.
Octavian meanwhile built up a private army in Italy by recruiting Caesarian veterans and, on 28 November, he won over two of Antony's legions with the enticing offer of monetary gain.
In September, the leading Optimate orator Marcus Tullius Cicero began to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the Republican order.
In 22, 21, and 19&nbsp;BC, the people rioted in response, and only allowed a single consul to be elected for each of those years, ostensibly to leave the other position open for Augustus.
Lepidus was left with the province of Africa, stymied by Antony, who conceded Hispania to Octavian instead.
Further, he was causing political problems by desiring to have his nephew Marcus Claudius Marcellus follow in his footsteps and eventually assume the Principate in his turn, alienating his three biggest supporters&nbsp;– Agrippa, Maecenas, and Livia.
Augustus prepared to hand down his signet ring to his favored general Agrippa.
Lack of effective supervision, combined with tax farmers' desire to maximize their profits, had produced a system of arbitrary exactions that was often barbarously cruel to taxpayers, widely (and accurately) perceived as unfair, and very harmful to investment and the economy.
He was born at Ox Head, a small property on the Palatine Hill, very close to the Roman Forum.
His paternal great-grandfather Gaius Octavius was a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War.
The poet Marcus Annaeus Lucanus (AD 39–65) was of the opinion that Caesar's victory over Pompey and the fall of Cato the Younger (95 BC–46&nbsp;BC) marked the end of traditional liberty in Rome; historian Chester G. Starr, Jr. writes of his avoidance of criticizing Augustus, "perhaps Augustus was too sacred a figure to accuse directly."
Marble could be found in buildings of Rome before Augustus, but it was not extensively used as a building material until the reign of Augustus.
Caesar had no living legitimate children under Roman law, and so had adopted Octavius, his grand-nephew, making him his primary heir.
In July, an embassy of centurions sent by Octavian entered Rome and demanded that he receive the consulship left vacant by Hirtius and Pansa.
This element features in many modern works of historical fiction pertaining to Augustus' life, but some historians view it as likely to have been a salacious fabrication made by those who had favoured Postumus as heir, or other of Tiberius' political enemies.
He appointed noted Republican Calpurnius Piso for co-consul in 23&nbsp;BC, after his choice Aulus Terentius Varro Murena was executed as part of the Marcus Primus Affair, in an attempt to bolster his support there, especially with the Republicans.
During the second settlement, Augustus was also granted the power of a tribune (''tribunicia potestas'') for life, though not the official title of tribune.
Augustus' public revenue reforms had a great impact on the subsequent success of the Empire.
Through the Senate, Octavian was able to continue the appearance of a still-functional constitution.
It was proclaimed that Augustus joined the company of the gods as a member of the Roman pantheon.
Velleius Paterculus reports that after that time, Caesar allowed the young man to share his carriage.
The only other possible claimant as heir was Postumus Agrippa, who had been exiled by Augustus in AD 7, his banishment made permanent by senatorial decree, and Augustus officially disowned him.
Historians usually refer to the new Caesar as ''Octavian'' during the time between his adoption and his assumption of the name Augustus in 27&nbsp;BC in order to avoid confusing the dead dictator with his heir.
He donned the ''toga virilis'' four years later, and was elected to the College of Pontiffs in 47&nbsp;BC.
This was due to his "inflammatory" eulogy given at Caesar's funeral, mounting public opinion against the assassins.
This caused them to insist upon Augustus' participation in imperial affairs from time to time.
He had composed an account of his achievements, the ''Res Gestae Divi Augusti'', to be inscribed in bronze in front of his mausoleum.
His ears were of moderate size, and his nose projected a little at the top and then bent ever so slightly inward.
Tiberius, Augustus' eldest son by marriage to Livia, was the only other general to receive a triumph — for victories in Germania in 7&nbsp;BC.
With his finances securing the maintenance of roads throughout Italy, Augustus also installed an official courier system of relay stations overseen by a military officer known as the ''praefectus vehiculorum''.
Copies of the text were inscribed throughout the Empire upon his death.
Mark Antony later charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar through sexual favours, though Suetonius describes Antony's accusation as political slander.
Octavian succeeded in a temporary alliance in 40&nbsp;BC when he married Scribonia, a daughter of Lucius Scribonius Libo who was a follower of Sextus Pompeius as well as his father-in-law.
However, Augustus handed over to his co-consul Piso all of his official documents, an account of public finances, and authority over listed troops in the provinces while Augustus' supposedly favored nephew Marcellus came away empty-handed.
There were as many as eighteen Roman towns affected by the new settlements, with entire populations driven out or at least given partial evictions.
Octavian and Lepidus launched a joint operation against Sextus in Sicily in 36&nbsp;BC.
This bloody event sullied Octavian's reputation and was criticized by many, such as Augustan poet Sextus Propertius.
Almost the entire fourth chapter in his publicly released memoirs of achievements known as the ''Res Gestae'' was devoted to his military victories and honors.
His new title of Augustus was also more favorable than ''Romulus'', the previous one which he styled for himself in reference to the story of Romulus and Remus (founders of Rome), which symbolized a second founding of Rome.
In the late spring Augustus suffered a severe illness, and on his supposed deathbed made arrangements that would ensure the continuation of the Principate in some form, while at the same time put into doubt the senators' suspicions of his anti-republicanism.
Julius Caesar had been granted similar powers, wherein he was charged with supervising the morals of the state.
When he annually held the office of consul, he had the power to intervene with the affairs of the other provincial proconsuls appointed by the Senate throughout the empire, when he deemed necessary.
Later Roman Emperors were generally limited to the powers and titles originally granted to Augustus, though often newly appointed Emperors would decline one or more of the honorifics given to Augustus in order to display humility.
The Senate's proposal was a ratification of Octavian's extra-constitutional power.
Moreover, command of these provinces provided Octavian with control over the majority of Rome's legions.
Augustus retaliated by dispatching Tiberius and Drusus to the Rhineland to pacify it, which had some success although the battle of AD 9 brought the end to Roman expansion into Germany.
Nevertheless, his legacy proved more enduring.
Beyond the frontiers, he secured the Empire with a buffer region of client states and made peace with the Parthian Empire through diplomacy.
Shotter states that Tiberius focused his anger and criticism on Gaius Asinius Gallus (for marrying Vipsania after Augustus forced Tiberius to divorce her), as well as toward the two young Caesars, Gaius and Lucius—instead of Augustus, the real architect of his divorce and imperial demotion.
Augustus also styled himself as ''Imperator Caesar divi filius'', "Commander Caesar son of the deified one".
Victory in battle was not always a permanent success, as newly conquered territories were constantly retaken by Rome's enemies in Germania.
He failed to encourage enough senators to finance the building and maintenance of networks of roads in Italy in 20 BC, but he undertook direct responsibility for them.
On 5 February 2&nbsp;BC, Augustus was also given the title ''pater patriae'', or "father of the country".
In early 31&nbsp;BC, Antony and Cleopatra were temporarily stationed in Greece when Octavian gained a preliminary victory: the navy successfully ferried troops across the Adriatic Sea under the command of Agrippa.
Then applaud as I exit"—referring to the play-acting and regal authority that he had put on as emperor.
Augustus' own experience, his patience, his tact, and his political acumen also played their parts.
Augustus created the senatorial group of the ''curatores viarum'' (translated as "Supervisors for Roads") for the upkeep of roads; this senatorial commission worked with local officials and contractors to organize regular repairs.
A ''praefectus vigilum'', or "Prefect of the Watch" was put in charge of the vigiles, Rome's fire brigade and police.
He was short of stature (although Julius Marathus, his freedman and keeper of his records, says that he was five feet and nine inches, more or less 1.75 meter, in height), but this was concealed by the fine proportion and symmetry of his figure, and was noticeable only by comparison with some taller person standing beside him.&nbsp;... "
He continued to say that, with Augustus' death and swearing of loyalty to Tiberius, the people of Rome simply traded one slaveholder for another.
They had the power to intimidate the Senate, install new emperors, and depose ones they disliked; the last emperor they served was Maxentius, as it was Constantine I who disbanded them in the early 4th century and destroyed their barracks, the Castra Praetoria.
The rebellious tribes of Asturias and  Cantabria in modern-day Spain were finally quelled in 19&nbsp;BC, and the territory fell under the provinces of Hispania and Lusitania.
Moreover, if a battle was fought in a Senatorial province, Augustus' proconsular imperium maius allowed him to take command of (or credit for) any major military victory.
The longevity of Augustus' reign and its legacy to the Roman world should not be overlooked as a key factor in its success.
Shotter suggests that Augustus' deification obliged Tiberius to suppress any open resentment that he might have harbored, coupled with Tiberius' "extremely conservative" attitude towards religion.
The Senate still controlled North Africa, an important regional producer of grain, as well as Illyria and Macedonia, two martially strategic regions with several legions.
Octavian could not rely on his limited funds to make a successful entry into the upper echelons of the Roman political hierarchy.
(Murena had fought against Julius Caesar and supported Cassius and Brutus.)
An equally important reform was the abolition of private tax farming, which was replaced by salaried civil service tax collectors.
Contemporary Roman historians provide conflicting reports as to which triumvir was more responsible for the proscriptions and killing.
The territorial agreement between the triumvirate and Sextus Pompeius began to crumble once Octavian divorced Scribonia and married Livia on 17 January 38&nbsp;BC.
It is likely that Augustus was not expected to return alive from Nola, but it seems that his health improved once there; it has therefore been speculated that Augustus and Livia conspired to end his life at the anticipated time, having committed all political process to accepting Tiberius, in order to not endanger that transition.
The Senate proposed to Octavian, the victor of Rome's civil wars, that he once again assume command of the provinces.
''Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus'' chose ''Imperator'' ("victorious commander") to be his first name, since he wanted to make an emphatically clear connection between himself and the notion of victory.
In that year, Tiberius was also granted the powers of a tribune and proconsul, emissaries from foreign kings had to pay their respects to him, and by AD 13 was awarded with his second triumph and equal level of ''imperium'' with that of Augustus.
Augustus' reign laid the foundations of a regime that lasted, in one form or another, for nearly fifteen hundred years through the ultimate decline of the Western Roman Empire and until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.
Thus, both the laurel and the oak were integral symbols of Roman religion and statecraft; placing them on Augustus' doorposts was tantamount to declaring his home the capital.
Such an action would have ripped away the veneer of Republican restoration as promoted by Augustus, and exposed his fraud of merely being the first citizen, a first among equals.
For some years, Augustus had been awarded ''tribunicia sacrosanctitas'', the immunity given to a Tribune of the Plebeians.
However, for his rule of Rome and establishing the principate, Augustus has also been subjected to criticism throughout the ages.
After the early deaths of both Lucius and Gaius in AD 2 and 4 respectively, and the earlier death of his brother Drusus (9&nbsp;BC), Tiberius was recalled to Rome in June AD 4, where he was adopted by Augustus on the condition that he, in turn, adopt his nephew Germanicus.
Plutarch described the proscriptions as a ruthless and cutthroat swapping of friends and family among Antony, Lepidus, and Octavian.
Although this did not apply to the Subura slums, which were still as rickety and fire-prone as ever, he did leave a mark on the monumental topography of the centre and of the Campus Martius, with the Ara Pacis (Altar of Peace) and monumental sundial, whose central gnomon was an obelisk taken from Egypt.
In the year 6 Augustus established the ''aerarium militare'', donating 170 million sesterces to the new military treasury that provided for both active and retired soldiers.
To ensure stability, he needed to designate an heir to his unique position in Roman society and government.
Pompeius' control over the sea prompted him to take on the name ''Neptuni filius'', "son of Neptune".
The relief sculptures decorating the Ara Pacis visually augmented the written record of Augustus' triumphs in the ''Res Gestae''.
The Triumvirate was eventually torn apart under the competing ambitions of its members.
Thomas Gordon and the French political philosopher Montesquieu (1689–1755) both remarked that Augustus was a coward in battle.
Some Augustan historians argue that indications pointed toward his sister's son Marcellus, who had been quickly married to Augustus' daughter Julia the Elder.
A temporary peace agreement was reached in 39&nbsp;BC with the treaty of Misenum; the blockade on Italy was lifted once Octavian granted Pompeius Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and the Peloponnese, and ensured him a future position as consul for 35&nbsp;BC.
Octavian had exploited his position as Caesar's heir to further his own political career, and he was well aware of the dangers in allowing another person to do so the same.
The Senate's control over some of the Roman provinces helped maintain a republican façade for the autocratic Principate.
He may have died from natural causes, although there were unconfirmed rumors that his wife Livia poisoned him.
In these situations, Augustus would have power as part of his tribunician authority but his constitutional imperium within the Pomerium would be less than that of a serving consul.
According to Nicolaus of Damascus, Octavius wished to join Caesar's staff for his campaign in Africa, but gave way when his mother protested.
This came about because it was overseen by Agrippa when he served as aedile, and was even funded by him afterwards when he was a private citizen paying at his own expense.
His biographer Suetonius, writing about a century after Augustus' death, described his appearance as: "...&nbsp;unusually handsome and exceedingly graceful at all periods of his life, though he cared nothing for personal adornment.
In 28&nbsp;BC, he melted down 80 silver statues erected in his likeness and in honor of him, an attempt of his to appear frugal and modest.
After a warm welcome by Caesar's soldiers at Brundisium, Octavian demanded a portion of the funds that were allotted by Caesar for the intended war against Parthia in the Middle East.
His memory was enshrined in the political ethos of the Imperial age as a paradigm of the good emperor.
The Roman dominions were now divided between Octavian in the West and Antony in the East.
However, Octavian received two key deserters from Antony in the autumn of 32&nbsp;BC: Munatius Plancus and Marcus Titius.
Augustus also showed favor to his stepsons, Livia's children from her first marriage Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (henceforth referred to as Drusus) and Tiberius Claudius (henceforth Tiberius), granting them military commands and public office, though seeming to favor Drusus.
The city of Rome was utterly transformed under Augustus, with Rome's first institutionalized police force, fire fighting force, and the establishment of the municipal prefect as a permanent office.
Also, Octavian's control of entire provinces followed Republican-era precedents for the objective of securing peace and creating stability, in which such prominent Romans as Pompey had been granted similar military powers in times of crisis and instability.
Lucius Cornelius Balbus was the last man outside Augustus' family to receive this award in 19&nbsp;BC.
For example, Octavian allowed the proscription of his ally Cicero, Antony the proscription of his maternal uncle Lucius Julius Caesar (the consul of 64 BC), and Lepidus his brother Paullus.
He was born '''Gaius Octavius''' into an old and wealthy equestrian branch of the plebeian Octavii family.
Octavian pursued them and defeated their forces in Alexandria on 1 August 30&nbsp;BC—after which Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide.
With the powers of a censor, Augustus appealed to virtues of Roman patriotism by banning all attire but the classic toga while entering the Forum.
Both his adoptive surname, Caesar, and his title ''Augustus'' became the permanent titles of the rulers of the Roman Empire for fourteen centuries after his death, in use both at Old Rome and at New Rome.
His maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC, and Octavius was named in Caesar's will as his adopted son and heir, then known as '''Octavianus''' (Anglicized as '''Octavian''').
Octavian forcibly entered the temple of the Vestal Virgins and seized Antony's secret will, which he promptly publicized.
Additionally, laurel wreaths were important in several state ceremonies, and crowns of laurel were rewarded to champions of athletic, racing, and dramatic contests.
On 6 March 12&nbsp;BC, after the death of Lepidus, he additionally took up the position of pontifex maximus, the high priest of the college of the Pontiffs, the most important position in Roman religion.
He had clear, bright eyes&nbsp;... His teeth were wide apart, small, and ill-kept; his hair was slightly curly and inclining to golden; his eyebrows met.
It was recorded that the pious Tiberius walked in front of his brother's body all the way back to Rome.
Rome's revenue was the amount of the successful bids, and the tax farmers' profits consisted of any additional amounts they could forcibly wring from the populace with Rome's blessing.
The attrition of the civil wars on the old Republican oligarchy and the longevity of Augustus, therefore, must be seen as major contributing factors in the transformation of the Roman state into a de facto monarchy in these years.
It was not until AD 8 that a food crisis of this sort prompted Augustus to establish a ''praefectus annonae'', a permanent prefect who was in charge of procuring food supplies for Rome.
It was there that Antony's fleet faced the much larger fleet of smaller, more maneuverable ships under commanders Agrippa and Gaius Sosius in the battle of Actium on 2 September 31&nbsp;BC.
A later senatorial investigation into the disappearance of the public funds took no action against Octavian, since he subsequently used that money to raise troops against the Senate's arch enemy Mark Antony.
This was to be achieved in small, undramatic, and incremental ways that did not stir senatorial fears of monarchy.
Lepidus surrendered to Octavian and was permitted to retain the office of ''pontifex maximus'' (head of the college of priests), but was ejected from the Triumvirate, his public career at an end, and effectively was exiled to a villa at Cape Circei in Italy.
All armed forces in the city had formerly been under the control of the urban praetors and consuls, but this situation now placed them under the sole authority of Augustus.
In addition to claiming responsibility for both victories, Antony also branded Octavian as a coward for handing over his direct military control to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa instead.
Lepidus' troops deserted him, however, and defected to Octavian since they were weary of fighting and were enticed by Octavian's promises of money.
Feeling pressure from his own core group of adherents, Augustus turned to the Senate for help.
Mark Antony was amassing political support, but Octavian still had opportunity to rival him as the leading member of the faction supporting Caesar.
In late 32&nbsp;BC, the Senate officially revoked Antony's powers as consul and declared war on Cleopatra's regime in Egypt.
The exact nature of the grant is uncertain but it probably covered Augustus' imperial provinces, east and west, perhaps lacking authority over the provinces of the Senate.
He was defended by Lucius Lucinius Varro Murena, who told the trial that his client had received specific instructions from Augustus, ordering him to attack the client state.
During his reign the circus games resulted in the killing of 3,500 elephants.
Besides the advent of swifter communication among Italian polities, his extensive building of roads throughout Italy also allowed Rome's armies to march swiftly and at an unprecedented pace across the country.
The senate heaped many more rewards on Decimus Brutus than on Octavian for defeating Antony, then attempted to give command of the consular legions to Decimus Brutus—yet Octavian decided not to cooperate.
Under his consulship, however, the Senate had little power in initiating legislation by introducing bills for senatorial debate.
That came later, as did the jealously guarded tribunicia potestas.
Octavian began to bolster his personal forces with Caesar's veteran legionaries and with troops designated for the Parthian war, gathering support by emphasizing his status as heir to Caesar.
Antony fell on his own sword and was taken by his soldiers back to Alexandria where he died in Cleopatra's arms.
The reign of Augustus initiated an era of relative peace known as the ''Pax Romana'' (''The Roman Peace'').
After the demise of the Second Triumvirate, Augustus restored the outward facade of the free Republic, with governmental power vested in the Roman Senate, the executive magistrates, and the legislative assemblies.
His official images were very tightly controlled and idealized, drawing from a tradition of Hellenistic royal portraiture rather than the tradition of realism in Roman portraiture.
In the case of Augustus, however, it became an almost regnal title for a leader who was first in charge.
The word ''Caesar'' was merely a cognomen for one branch of the Julian family, yet Augustus transformed ''Caesar'' into a new family line that began with him.
This in effect gave Augustus constitutional power superior to all other proconsuls in the empire.
Other historians dispute this due to Augustus' will read aloud to the Senate while he was seriously ill in 23&nbsp;BC, instead indicating a preference for Marcus Agrippa, who was Augustus' second in charge and arguably the only one of his associates who could have controlled the legions and held the Empire together.
Octavian failed to persuade Antony to relinquish Caesar's money to him.
When back in Rome, Caesar deposited a new will with the Vestal Virgins, naming Octavius as the prime beneficiary.
Fulvia decided to take action.
This was supported by numerous auxiliary units of 500 soldiers each, often recruited from recently conquered areas.
After the death of Agrippa in 12&nbsp;BC, a solution had to be found in maintaining Rome's water supply system.
First, after Augustus relinquished the annual consulship, he was no longer in an official position to rule the state, yet his dominant position remained unchanged over his Roman, 'imperial' provinces where he was still a proconsul.
With opinion in Rome turning against him and his year of consular power nearing its end, Antony attempted to pass laws that would lend him control over Cisalpine Gaul, which had been assigned as part of his province, from Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, one of Caesar's assassins.
This was a clever ploy by Augustus; his ceasing to perennially be one of two annual consuls allowed aspiring senators a better chance to fill that position, while at the same time Augustus could exercise wider patronage within the senatorial class.
Soon after his bout of illness subsided, Augustus gave up his annual consulship.
As it was effectively considered Augustus' private property rather than a province of the Empire, it became part of each succeeding emperor's patrimonium.
Lucius and his allies ended up in a defensive siege at Perusia (modern Perugia), where Octavian forced them into surrender in early 40&nbsp;BC.
In 46&nbsp;BC, she consented for him to join Caesar in Hispania, where he planned to fight the forces of Pompey, Caesar's late enemy, but Octavius fell ill and was unable to travel.
Every Emperor of Rome adopted his name, Caesar Augustus, which gradually lost its character as a name and eventually became a title.
The measures of taxation in the reign of Augustus were determined by population census, with fixed quotas for each province.
This union produced five children, three sons and two daughters: Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, Vipsania Julia, Agrippina the Elder, and Postumus Agrippa, so named because he was born after Marcus Agrippa died.
Octavian had the Senate grant him, his wife, and his sister tribunal immunity, or ''sacrosanctitas'', in order to ensure his own safety and that of Livia and Octavia once he returned to Rome.
Tiberius and his son Drusus delivered the eulogy while standing atop two ''rostra''.
Antony and Octavian then sent 28 legions by sea to face the armies of Brutus and Cassius, who had built their base of power in Greece.
Both Tacitus and Cassius Dio wrote that Livia was rumored to have brought about Augustus' death by poisoning fresh figs.
On 16 January 27&nbsp;BC the Senate gave Octavian the new titles of ''Augustus'' and ''Princeps''.
His grandfather had served in several local political offices.
In the late Augustan era, the commission of five senators called the ''curatores locorum publicorum iudicandorum'' (translated as "Supervisors of Public Property") was put in charge of maintaining public buildings and temples of the state cult.
On 19 August AD 14, Augustus died while visiting Nola where his father had died.
According to a ''senatus consultum'' quoted by Macrobius, Sextilis was renamed to honor Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power, culminating in the fall of Alexandria, fell in that month.
Werner Eck claims that this was a great disappointment for Romans seeking to avenge Crassus' defeat by military means.
No specific reason is known for his departure, though it could have been a combination of reasons, including a failing marriage with Julia, as well as a sense of envy and exclusion over Augustus' apparent favouring of his young grandchildren-turned-sons Gaius and Lucius.
Octavian's aims from this point forward were to return Rome to a state of stability, traditional legality, and civility by lifting the overt political pressure imposed on the courts of law and ensuring free elections—in name at least.
After Agrippa died in 12&nbsp;BC, Tiberius was ordered to divorce his own wife Vipsania and marry Agrippa's widow, Augustus' daughter Julia&nbsp;— as soon as a period of mourning for Agrippa had ended.
He also built the Temple of Caesar, the Baths of Agrippa, and the Forum of Augustus with its Temple of Mars Ultor.
He reformed the Roman system of taxation, developed networks of roads with an official courier system, established a standing army, established the Praetorian Guard, created official police and fire-fighting services for Rome, and rebuilt much of the city during his reign.
While his paternal family was from the town of Velletri, approximately  from Rome, Augustus was born in the city of Rome on 23 September 63&nbsp;BC.
Horace dedicated an ode to the victory, while the monument Trophy of Augustus near Monaco was built to honor the occasion.
Nevertheless, there were some who were concerned by the expansion of powers granted to Augustus by the Second Settlement, and this came to a head with the apparent conspiracy of Fannius Caepio.
Other projects were either encouraged by him, such as the Theatre of Balbus, and Agrippa's construction of the Pantheon, or funded by him in the name of others, often relations (e.g.
This region proved to be a major asset in funding Augustus' future military campaigns, as it was rich in mineral deposits that could be fostered in Roman mining projects, especially the very rich gold deposits at Las Medulas.
By 23&nbsp;BC, some of the un-Republican implications were becoming apparent concerning the settlement of 27&nbsp;BC.
Augustus bestowed only properties and possessions to his designated heirs, as an obvious system of institutionalized imperial inheritance would have provoked resistance and hostility among the republican-minded Romans fearful of monarchy.
Although the most powerful individual in the Roman Empire, Augustus wished to embody the spirit of Republican virtue and norms.
Murena was named among the conspirators, the outspoken Consul who defended Primus in the Marcus Primus Affair.
Syria (like Egypt after Antony) was governed by a high prefect of the equestrian class rather than by a proconsul or legate of Augustus.
On the other hand, Cleopatra could restore his army to full strength; he already was engaged in a romantic affair with her, so he decided to send Octavia back to Rome.
The provinces ceded to him for that ten-year period comprised much of the conquered Roman world, including all of Hispania and Gaul, Syria, Cilicia, Cyprus, and Egypt.
He first appeared on coins at the age of 19, and from about 29 BC "the explosion in the number of Augustan portraits attests a concerted propaganda campaign aimed at dominating all aspects of civil, religious, economic and military life with Augustus' person."
Sextilis in fact had 31 days before it was renamed, and it was not chosen for its length (see Julian calendar).
Under oath, Augustus declared that he gave no such order.
In fact, he dated his 'reign' from the completion of the Second Settlement, July 1, 23 BC.
