A focus of Austrian science has always been medicine and psychology, starting in medieval times with Paracelsus.
Austria lies between latitudes 46° and 49° N, and longitudes 9° and 18° E.
In addition to them, biologists Gregor Mendel and Konrad Lorenz as well as mathematician Kurt Gödel and engineers such as Ferdinand Porsche and Siegfried Marcus were Austrians.
The Thirty Years War, the influence of the Kingdom of Sweden and Kingdom of France, the rise of the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Napoleonic invasions all weakened the power of the Emperor in the North of Germany, but in the South, and in non-German areas of the Empire, the Emperor and Catholicism maintained control.
The produce of small private schnapps distilleries, of which there are around 20,000 in Austria, is known as ''Selbstgebrannter'' or ''Hausbrand''.
Two new parties, Stronach and the NEOS, received less than 10% of the vote, and 11 and nine seats respectively.
Since the fall of communism, Austrian companies have been quite active players and consolidators in Eastern Europe.
In 1912, after the annexation of Bosnia Hercegovina in 1908, Islam was officially recognised in Austria.
A poll by the Kärntner Humaninstitut conducted in January 2006 states that 65% of Carinthians are not in favour of an increase of bilingual topographic signs, since the original requirements set by the State Treaty of 1955 have already been fulfilled according to their point of view.
All males who have reached the age of eighteen and are found fit have to serve a six months compulsory military service, followed by an eight-year reserve obligation.
The political system of the Second Republic with its nine states is based on the constitution of 1920, amended in 1929, which was reenacted on 1 May 1945.
Austria also signed the Schengen Agreement in 1995, and adopted the euro currency in 1999.
At holidays like Christmas and Easter bock beer is also available.
Billy Wilder, Fritz Lang, Josef von Sternberg, and Fred Zinnemann originally came from Austria before establishing themselves as internationally relevant movie makers.
Present day Petronell-Carnuntum in Eastern Austria was an important army camp turned capital city in what became known as the Upper Pannonia province.
Austrian athletes such as Annemarie Moser-Pröll, Franz Klammer, Hermann Maier, Toni Sailer, Benjamin Raich, Marlies Schild & Marcel Hirscher are widely regarded as some of the greatest alpine skiers of all time, Armin Kogler, Andreas Felder, Ernst Vettori, Andreas Goldberger, Andreas Widhölzl, Thomas Morgenstern & Gregor Schlierenzauer as some of the greatest ski jumpers of all time.
Guest workers ''(Gastarbeiter)'' and their descendants, as well as refugees from the Yugoslav wars and other conflicts, also form an important minority group in Austria.
The loan meant that Austria passed from an independent state to the control exercised by the League of Nations.
During all other legislative periods, either a grand coalition of SPÖ and ÖVP or a "small coalition" (one of these two and a smaller party) ruled the country.
The political system of the Second Republic is based on the constitution of 1920 and 1929, which was reintroduced in 1945.
The second largest population of linguistic and ethnic groups are the Turks (including minority of Kurds) with a number of 200,000 to 300,000 who currently live in Austria.
The terrain is highly mountainous, lying   within the Alps; only 32% of the country is below , and its highest point is .
Austria's past as a European power and its cultural environment generated a broad contribution to various forms of art, most notably among them music.
The Austrian-Hungarian rule of this diverse empire included various Slavic groups, including Croats, Czechs, Poles, Rusyns, Serbs, Slovaks, Slovenes and Ukrainians, as well as large Italian and Romanian communities.
It emerged from the Congress of Vienna in 1815 as one of the continent's four dominant powers and a recognised great power.
Total military deaths from 1939 to 1945 are estimated at 260,000.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born in Salzburg, then an independent Church Principality of the Holy Roman Empire, though one that was culturally closely connected to Austria, and much of Mozart's career was spent in Vienna.
Vienna's status began its rise as a cultural centre in the early 16th century, and was focused around instruments, including the lute.
The status of South Tyrol was a lingering problem between Austria and Italy until it was officially settled by the 1980s with a great degree of autonomy being granted to it by the Italian national government.
In 1775, Maria Theresa gave official permission to the Mechistarist Congregation of the Armenian Catholic Church to settle in the Habsburg Empire.
The 3Rs (Reading, wRiting and aRithmetic) dominate lesson time, with less time allotted to project work than in the UK.
Standard attendance times are 8&nbsp;am to 12&nbsp;pm or 1&nbsp;pm, with hourly five- or ten-minute breaks.
Austria also hosts F1 races (Austrian Grand Prix); now held at Red Bull Ring, in the past also at Österreichring and Zeltweg Airfield.
The Green Party came in third with 11% of the vote.
After general elections held in October 2006, the SPÖ emerged as the strongest party, whereas the ÖVP came in second, having lost about 8% of its previous polling.
The Treaty of Saint-Germain of 1919 (for Hungary the Treaty of Trianon of 1920) confirmed and consolidated the new order of Central Europe which to a great extent had been established in November 1918, creating new states and altering others.
In all cases, an obligatory fee of €17 is charged for the student union and insurance.
About 12% of the population declared that they have no religion.
(The date is officially named the birthday of the second republic.)
In 1814 Austria was part of the Allied forces that invaded France and brought to an end the Napoleonic Wars.
Today, Serbs in Austria are mainly found in Vienna, Salzburg, and Graz.
The Austrian Forces Disaster Relief Unit (AFDRU), in particular, an all-volunteer unit with close ties to civilian specialists (e.g.
The Austrian portion of the Vienna basin comprises the remaining 4%.
In 2007, Austria ranked 9th worldwide in international tourism receipts, with 18.9 billion US$.
From 1925 to 1929 the economy enjoyed a short high before nearly crashing after Black Tuesday.
There is also the "Mehlspeisen" Bakery, which created particular delicacies such as Sachertorte, "Krapfen" which are doughnuts usually filled with apricot jam or custard, and "Strudel" such as "Apfelstrudel" filled with apple, "Topfenstrudel" filled with a type of cheese curd called "topfen", and "Millirahmstrudel" (milk-cream strudel).
The German language is standardised between countries of German mother tongue, i.e., Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein, as well as those with significant German speaking minorities: Italy, Belgium and Denmark.
Some politicians have called for a prolongation of this mission, but the legality of this is heavily disputed.
According to the WWF, the territory of Austria can be subdivided into four ecoregions: the Central European mixed forests, Pannonian mixed forests, Alps conifer and mixed forests and Western European broadleaf forests.
Of these, 764,000 (9.1%) were born outside the EU and 512,000 (6.1%) were born in another EU Member State.
They were the final elections to the Reichstag during Nazi rule and took the form of a single-question referendum asking whether voters approved of a single Nazi-party list for the 813-member Reichstag as well as the recent annexation of Austria (the Anschluss).
Ludwig van Beethoven spent the better part of his life in Vienna.
Other noteworthy Austrian-born émigrés include the management thinker Peter Drucker, sociologist Paul Felix Lazarsfeld and scientist Sir Gustav Nossal.
The main sectors of the Bundesheer are Joint Forces (Streitkräfteführungskommando, SKFüKdo) which consist of Land Forces (Landstreitkräfte), Air Forces (Luftstreitkräfte), International Missions (Internationale Einsätze) and Special Forces (Spezialeinsatzkräfte), next to Joint Mission Support Command (Kommando Einsatzunterstützung; KdoEU) and Joint Command Support Centre (Führungsunterstützungszentrum; FüUZ).
In 2012, Austria's defence expenditures corresponded to approximately 0.8% of its GDP.
The Alps of western Austria give way somewhat into low lands and plains in the eastern part of the country.
After World War I and the breakup of the Austrian monarchy, politicians of the new republic declared its name to be "Deutschösterreich" (Republic of German-Austria) and that it was part of the German Republic.
Because of unsolved social, political and national conflicts the German lands were shaken by the 1848 revolution aiming to create a unified Germany.
The system came to be characterised by ''Proporz'', meaning that most posts of political importance were split evenly between members of the Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPÖ) and the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP).
Satisfactory marks in the end-of-the-year report ("Zeugnis") are a prerequisite for moving up ("aufsteigen") to the next class.
A unification of the two countries was forbidden by the treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye as one of the conditions imposed by the victorious Allies of World War I upon the vanquished nation, to prevent the creation of a territorially extensive German state.
In the 1938 Anschluss, Austria was occupied and annexed by Nazi Germany.
Between 1918 and 1919 Austria was known as the State of German Austria ().
According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll 2010,
Attendance at one of these further education institutes also leads to the Matura.
Austria also implements the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights, since the European Convention on Human Rights is part of the Austrian constitution.
As Austria was not willing to relinquish its German-speaking territories to what would become the German Empire of 1848, the crown of the newly formed empire was offered to the Prussian King Friedrich Wilhelm IV.
A present-day quantum physicist is Anton Zeilinger, noted as the first scientist to demonstrate quantum teleportation.
After the war, inflation began to devalue the ''Krone'', which was still Austria's currency.
Some further exceptions to the fee apply, e.g.
Red Bull, the highest-selling energy drink in the world, was invented in Austria.
In 1867, the empire was reformed into Austria-Hungary.
As head of state, Austrian President (currently held jointly by three individuals due to the annulled
For the national rules, see Austrian nationality law – Naturalisation.
In 1781, in the era of Austrian enlightenment, Emperor Joseph II issued a Patent of Tolerance for Austria that allowed other confessions a limited freedom of worship.
Labour movements are particularly strong in Austria and have large influence on labour politics.
His son Philip the Fair married Joanna the Mad, the heiress of Castile and Aragon, and thus acquired Spain and its Italian, African and New World appendages for the Habsburgs.
After the end of World War II in 1945, a stricter secularism was imposed in Austria, and religious influence on politics declined.
Austria indicated on 16 November 2010 that it would withhold the December instalment of its contribution to the EU bailout of Greece, citing the material worsening of the Greek debt situation and the apparent inability of Greece to collect the level of tax receipts it had previously promised.
In 1192, the Babenbergs also acquired the Duchy of Styria.
Another popular drink is the so-called "Spetzi", a mix between Coca-Cola and the original formula of Orange Fanta or the more locally renowned Frucade.
Vienna was for a long time an important centre of musical innovation.
Austria was incorporated into the Third Reich and ceased to exist as an independent country.
Voting for the Federal President and for the Parliament used to be compulsory in Austria, but this was abolished in steps from 1982 to 2004.
On 26 October 1955, after all occupation troops had left, Austria declared its "permanent neutrality" by an act of parliament.
Among them were Peter Lorre, Helmut Berger, Curd Jürgens, Senta Berger, Oskar Werner, and Klaus Maria Brandauer.
Also in 1995, it joined NATO's Partnership for Peace and subsequently participated in peacekeeping missions in Bosnia.
The numbers for other languages fall off sharply below 3,000.
The two big parties at this time, the Social Democrats and the Conservatives, had paramilitary armies; the Social Democrats' ''Schutzbund'' was now declared illegal but still operative as civil war broke out.
Of the remaining number of Austria's people that are of non-Austrian descent, many come from surrounding countries, especially from the former East Bloc nations.
Austrian cuisine is mainly the tradition of Royal-Cuisine ("Hofküche") delivered over centuries.
Until the 1980s, many of Austria's largest industry firms were nationalised; in recent years, however, privatisation has reduced state holdings to a level comparable to other European economies.
Due to the mountainous terrain, alpine skiing is a prominent sport in Austria.
School attendance is compulsory for nine years, i.e.
Since 1998, women volunteers have been allowed to become professional soldiers.
Austria became a federal, representative democratic republic through the Federal Constitution of 1920.
With the death of Frederick II in 1246, the line of the Babenbergs was extinguished.
It is generally expected that a class will be taught by one teacher for the entire four years and the stable bond between teacher and pupil is considered important for a child's well-being.
Graz is second in size, with 265,778 inhabitants, followed by Linz (191,501), Salzburg (145,871), and Innsbruck (122,458).
Following a referendum in 1994, at which consent reached a majority of two-thirds, the country became a member of the European Union on 1 January 1995.
As in Germany, secondary education consists of two main types of schools, attendance at which is based on a pupil's ability as determined by grades from the primary school.
Children work individually and all members of a class follow the same plan of work.
The First Austrian Republic was established in 1919.
Max Reinhardt was a master of spectacular and astute theatre productions.
Austria's current national anthem, attributed to Mozart, was chosen after World War II to replace the traditional Austrian anthem by Joseph Haydn.
In the same year, the Austrian Parliament created the Declaration of Neutrality which declared that the Second Austrian Republic would become permanently neutral.
Charlemagne conquered the area in AD 788, encouraged colonisation and introduced Christianity.
Two years earlier, in 1804, the Empire of Austria was founded.
As at primary school, lessons at Gymnasium begin at 8&nbsp;am and continue with short intervals until lunchtime or early afternoon, with children returning home to a late lunch.
In autumn 1922 Austria was granted an international loan supervised by the League of Nations.
File:2015-4-Danube(96).JPG|Cargo ship on Danube near Melk
Austria is the 12th richest country in the world in terms of GDP (Gross domestic product) per capita, has a well-developed social market economy, and a high standard of living.
The Austrian cuisine is therefore one of the most multicultural and transcultural in Europe.
Some of the most prominent Nazis were native Austrians, including Adolf Hitler, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Arthur Seyss-Inquart, Franz Stangl, and Odilo Globocnik, as were 40% of the staff at Nazi extermination camps.
In the east—in the Pannonian Plain and along the Danube valley—the climate shows continental features with less rain than the alpine areas.
The Habsburgs began also to accumulate lands far from the hereditary lands.
On 15 May 1955, after talks which lasted for years and were influenced by the Cold War, Austria regained full independence by concluding the Austrian State Treaty with the Four Occupying Powers.
Between 1995 and 2010, 4,868 mergers and acquisitions with a total known value of 163 bil.
This left the responsibility for the end of the war, on 3 November 1918, solely to the Emperor and his government.
The first Winter Youth Olympics in 2012 were held in Innsbruck as well.
The Grüner Veltliner grape provides some of Austria's most notable white wines  and Zweigelt is the most widely planted red wine grape.
The Austrian federal states of Carinthia and Styria are home to a significant indigenous Slovene-speaking minority while in the easternmost state, Burgenland (formerly part of the Hungarian portion of Austria–Hungary), there are significant Hungarian- and Croatian-speaking minorities.
Notably the Constitutional Court (''Verfassungsgerichtshof'') may exert considerable influence on the political system by ruling out laws and ordinances not in compliance with the constitution.
Austria remained largely influenced by Catholicism.
After the fall of the Roman Empire the area was invaded by Bavarians, Slavs, and Avars.
The second greater mountain area (much lower than the Alps) is situated in the north.
On 1 May 1934, the Austrofascists imposed a new constitution ("Maiverfassung") which cemented Dollfuss's power but on 25 July he was assassinated in a Nazi coup attempt.
Meanwhile, the only part of the Constitutional Law on Neutrality of 1955 still fully valid is not to allow foreign military bases in Austria.
''Noricum'' later became a Roman province in the mid 1st century AD.
As at primary level, all pupils follow the same plan of work.
File:Oberleis 01 2008.JPG|The plains of the Weinviertel
File:Krems and mautern from ferdinandswarte.jpg|View of Krems at the end of Wachau valley
Austria was among the most successful football playing nations on the European continent placing 4th at the 1934 FIFA World Cup, 3rd at the 1954 FIFA World Cup and 7th at the 1978 FIFA World Cup.
Both males and females at the age of sixteen are eligible for voluntary service.
In 1955, the Austrian State Treaty re-established Austria as a sovereign state, ending the occupation.
rescue dog handlers) enjoys a reputation as a quick (standard deployment time is 10 hours) and efficient SAR unit.
There are more than 415,000 descendants of foreign-born immigrants residing in Austria, the great majority of whom have been naturalised.
Sascha Kolowrat was an Austrian pioneer of filmmaking.
Since 1945, governing via a single-party government has occurred between 1966–1970 (ÖVP) and 1970–1983 (SPÖ).
Following Napoleon's defeat, Prussia emerged as Austria's chief competitor for rule of a larger Germany.
Other known Austrian tennis players are for example Horst Skoff, Jürgen Melzer and Dominic Thiem.
Michael Haneke became internationally known for his disturbing cinematic studies, before receiving a Golden Globe for his critically acclaimed film ''The White Ribbon'' in 2010.
Vienna is by far the country's largest city.
According to census information published by Statistik Austria for 2001 there were a total of 710,926 foreign nationals living in Austria.
The Austrian Serbian Society was founded in 1936.
Austria was the birthplace of many famous composers such as Joseph Haydn, Michael Haydn, Franz Liszt, Franz Schubert, Anton Bruckner, Johann Strauss, Sr. and Johann Strauss, Jr. as well as members of the Second Viennese School such as Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern and Alban Berg.
Schnapps of typically up to 60% alcohol or fruit brandy is drunk, which in Austria is made from a variety of fruits, for example apricots and rowanberries.
The greater part of Austria lies in the cool/temperate climate zone, where humid westerly winds predominate.
Vorderhopfreben Üntschenspitze 1.jpg|Austrian rural area of Schoppernau in summer
It is famous for its well-balanced variations of beef and pork and countless variations of vegetables.
The Celtic kingdom of Noricum was later claimed by the Roman Empire and made a province.
Austria was home to Sigmund Freud, founder of psychoanalysis, Alfred Adler, founder of Individual psychology, psychologists Paul Watzlawick and Hans Asperger, and psychiatrist Viktor Frankl.
It is bordered by the Czech Republic and Germany to the north, Hungary and Slovakia to the east, Slovenia and Italy to the south, and Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the west.
The word "Austria" is a Latinisation of the German name and was first recorded in the 12th century.
However, the upper house of parliament, the Bundesrat, has a limited right of veto (the Nationalrat can—in almost all cases—ultimately pass the respective bill by voting a second time.
The Gymnasium caters for the more able children, in the final year of which the Matura examination is taken, which is a requirement for access to university.
Austrian Herbert von Karajan was principal conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic for 35 years.
Phytogeographically, Austria belongs to the Central European province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom.
Austria's defeat by Prussia at the Battle of Königgrätz, during the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, cleared the way for Prussia to assert control over the rest of Germany.
Of these, the largest by far are 283,334 foreign nationals from the former Yugoslavia (of whom 135,336 speak Serbian; 105,487 Croatian; 31,591 Bosnian – i.e.
This set the border on the Karawanken mountain range, with many Slovenes remaining in Austria.
Historically there has been no lunch hour, with children returning home to eat.
Together, Serbs, Croats, Bosniaks and Slovenes make up about 5.1% of Austria's total population.
assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo in 1914 by Bosnian Serb Gavrilo Princip was used by leading Austrian politicians and generals to persuade the emperor to declare war on Serbia, thereby risking and prompting the outbreak of World War I, which eventually led to the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Of the remaining people, around 340,000 are registered as members of various Muslim communities, mainly due to the influx from Turkey, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo.
The government can be removed from office by either a presidential decree or by vote of no confidence in the lower chamber of parliament, the Nationalrat.
Christoph Waltz rose to international fame with his performance in ''Inglourious Basterds'', earning the Best Actor Award at Cannes in 2009, and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2010 and finally two Oscars.
The origins of modern-day Austria date back to the time of the Habsburg dynasty when the vast majority of the country was a part of the Holy Roman Empire.
Children are given homework daily from the first year.
The FPÖ and the deceased Jörg Haider's new party Alliance for the Future of Austria, both on the political right, were strengthened during the election but taken together received less than 20% of the vote.
Other local official languages are Hungarian, Burgenland Croatian, and Slovene.
Since then, Austria has shaped its foreign policy on the basis of neutrality, but rather different from the neutrality of Switzerland.
In reality, Austria is taking part in the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy, participates in peacekeeping and peace creating tasks, and has become a member of NATO's "Partnership for Peace"; the constitution has been amended accordingly.
While there is a general threshold of 4% for all parties at federal elections (Nationalratswahlen), there remains the possibility to gain a direct seat, or , in one of the 43 regional election districts.
The invading Allied powers, in particular the Americans, planned for the supposed "Alpine Fortress Operation" of a national redoubt, that was largely to have taken place on Austrian soil in the mountains of the eastern Alps.
The German name for Austria, , meant "eastern realm" in Old High German, and is cognate with the word ''Ostarrîchi'', which first appears in the "Ostarrîchi document" of 996.
18th- and 19th-century composers were drawn to the city due to the patronage of the Habsburgs, and made Vienna the European capital of classical music.
A 2006 bill allowed the introduction of entrance exams for studies such as Medicine.
In accordance with the Austrian constitution, armed forces may only be deployed in a limited number of cases, mainly to defend the country and aid in cases of national emergency, such as in the wake of natural disasters.
Austria currently produces more than half of its electricity by hydropower.
In 1477 Archduke Maximilian, only son of Emperor Frederick III, married the heiress Maria of Burgundy, thus acquiring most of the Netherlands for the family.
Austria's cuisine is derived from that of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Some schools aim to combine the education available at the Gymnasium and the Hauptschule, and are known as Gesamtschulen.
The status of German Bohemia (Sudetenland) later played a role in sparking the Second World War.
Austria's population was estimated to be 8.72 million in April 2016 by the Statistik Austria.
Horseback riding is also popular; the famed Spanish Riding School of Vienna is located in Vienna.
Foreign-born population – top 15 countries:
Austria attaches great importance to participation in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and other international economic organisations, and it has played an active role in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The Slovenes in the Austrian state of Styria (estimated at a number between 1,600 and 5,000) are not recognised as a minority and do not have special rights, although some believe  the State Treaty of 27 July 1955 states otherwise.
Austria is a largely mountainous country due to its location in the Alps.
Growth in GDP reached 3.3% in 2006.
The Austrian university system had been open to any student who passed the Matura examination until recently.
After 1918, First Republic Catholic leaders such as Theodor Innitzer and Ignaz Seipel took leading positions within or close to Austria's government and increased their influence during the time of the Austrofascism; Catholicism was treated much like a state religion by Engelbert Dollfuss and Kurt Schuschnigg.
In 2014, 41.7% of births were to unmarried women.
The latter also became the 38th Governor of California.
On 13 March 1938, the ''Anschluss'' of Austria was officially declared.
Known as the Austrian granite plateau, it is located in the central area of the Bohemian Mass and accounts for 10% of Austria.
From the time of the Reformation, many Northern German princes, resenting the authority of the Emperor, used Protestantism as a flag of rebellion.
Buddhism was legally recognised as a religion in Austria in 1983.
File:Heiligenblut kirche2.jpg|View of the Großglockner from Heiligenblut
