Due to the lack of common law between Austria and Hungary, to conclude identical texts, each parliament elected 60 of its members to form a delegation that discussed motions of the Imperial & Royal ministries separately and worked towards a compromise.
From the 1860s, businessmen succeeded in industrializing parts of the Empire.
By 1910, the total length of the rail networks of Hungarian Kingdom reached 22,869&nbsp;km (14,210&nbsp;mi), the Hungarian network linked more than 1,490 settlements.
Overlapping responsibilities between the joint ministries and the ministries of the two halves caused friction and inefficiencies.
62 and 63), in all joint Croatian and Hungarian affairs symbols of both Croatia and Hungary respectively had to be used.
In Croatia-Slavonia there were three urban counties or towns with municipal rights namely: Osijek, Varaždin and Zagreb.
In the later years of the 19th century, rapid economic growth spread to the central Hungarian plain and to the Carpathian lands.
At that point, the government realized the military possibilities of rail and began to invest heavily in construction.
* '''' ('''') or Imperial-Royal was the term for institutions of Cisleithania (Austria); "royal" in this label referred to the Crown of Bohemia.
In 1889, the Austrian merchant marine consisted of 10,022 ships, with 7,992 fishing vessels.
Andrássy next served as the Foreign Minister of Austria-Hungary (1871–1879).
In 1914, Slavic militants in Bosnia rejected Austria's plan to fully absorb the area; they assassinated the Austrian heir and precipitated World War I.
Until 1918, the k.u.k.
In 1900 the engineer C. Wagenführer drew up plans to link the Danube and the Adriatic Sea by a canal from Vienna to Trieste.
By the "Ordinance of 5 April 1897", the Austrian Prime Minister Count Kasimir Felix Badeni gave Czech equal standing with German in the internal government of Bohemia; this led to a crisis because of nationalist German agitation throughout the empire.
It was also the first steamship in Habsburg ruled states.
* Bohemia: Prague (1891); Teplice (1895); Liberec (1897); Ústí nad Labem, Plzeň, Olomouc (1899); Moravia, Brno, Jablonec nad Nisou (1900); Ostrava (1901); Mariánské Lázně (1902); Opava (1905); Budějovice, České Budějovice, Jihlava (1909); Český Těšín/Cieszyn (1911)
The riverbed rocks and the associated rapids made the gorge valley an infamous passage for shipping.
In those territories in which several races dwell, the public and educational institutions are to be so arranged that, without applying compulsion to learn a second country language (""), each of the races receives the necessary means of education in its own language.
Although the unified government determined the overall military direction, the Austrian and Hungarian governments each remained in charge of recruiting, supplies and training.
It was built from 1894 to 1896 and opened on 2 May 1896.
They argued that while Hungary had the right to full internal independence, under the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, foreign affairs and defense were "common" to both Austria and Hungary.
Army carried the double-eagle flags they had used before 1867, as they had a long history in many cases.
Meanwhile, western areas, concentrated mainly around Prague and Vienna, excelled in various manufacturing industries.
The Austrian Empire and Kingdom of Hungary contracted their foreign commercial treaties independently of each other.
The implementation of this principle led to several disputes, as it was not clear which languages could be regarded as "customary".
It was often contracted to the '''Dual Monarchy''' in English, or simply referred to as '''Austria'''.
In Bohemia, for example, he authorized Czech as an official language of the bureaucracy and school system, thus breaking the German speakers' monopoly on holding office.
The Kingdom of Hungary and the First Austrian Republic were treated as its successors ''de jure'', whereas the independence of the West Slavs and South Slavs of the Empire as the First Czechoslovak Republic, the Second Polish Republic and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, respectively, and most of the territorial demands of the Kingdom of Romania were also recognized by the victorious powers in 1920.
The new foreign minister, Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust, wanted to conclude the stalemated negotiations with the Hungarians.
Its predecessor state, the Habsburg Empire, had built a substantial core of railways in the west, originating from Vienna, by 1841.
The monarch's common government, in which its ministers were appointed by the Monarch and responsible to him, had the responsibility for the army, for the navy, for foreign policy, and for the customs union.
The first telegraph station on Hungarian territory was opened in December 1847 in Pressburg/ Pozsony /Bratislava/.
All governments faced difficult and divisive hurdles in deciding on the languages of government and of instruction.
Another significant seaport was Pola (Pula, today part of Croatia)&nbsp;– especially for the navy.
Pozsony (Bratislava), Budapest, Prague, Kraków, Graz, Laibach (Ljubljana) and Venedig (Venice) became linked to the main network.
At the same time, Hungarian dominance faced challenges from the local majorities of Romanians in Transylvania and in the eastern Banat, Slovaks in today's Slovakia, and Croats and Serbs in the crown lands of Croatia and of Dalmatia (today's Croatia), in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in the provinces known as the Vojvodina (today's northern Serbia).
The most significant seaport was Trieste (today part of Italy), where the Austrian merchant marine was based.
In 1890 most large Hungarian private railway companies were nationalized as a consequence of the poor management of private companies, except the strong Austrian-owned Kaschau-Oderberg Railway (KsOd) and the Austrian-Hungarian Southern Railway (SB/DV).
What would become Cisleithania gained  of track, and Hungary built  of track.
Near the actual "Iron Gates" strait the Prigrada rock was the most important obstacle until 1896: the river widened considerably here and the water level was consequently low.
Each government could have a strong influence over common governmental responsibilities.
The A-H Empire was followed by France with 396 million telephone calls and Italy with 230 million phone calls.
In the Austrian half, however, the Emperor had the power to both appoint and dismiss its Prime minister and cabinet members.
The first electrified tramway in Austria-Hungary was built in Budapest in 1887.
That level of growth compared very favorably to that of other European nations such as Britain (1%), France (1.06%), and Germany (1.51%).
He hated Prussia's diplomat, Otto von Bismarck, who had repeatedly outmaneuvered him.
After several small-scale attempts, István Széchenyi organised the "regulation of the Tisza" (Hungarian: a Tisza szabályozása) which started on August 27, 1846, and substantially ended in 1880.
Economic growth centered on Vienna and Budapest, the Austrian lands (areas of modern Austria), the Alpine region and the Bohemian lands.
Hungary and Austria maintained separate parliaments each with its own prime minister.
Austria was represented by the black-yellow flag.
The Hungarian Minority Act of 1868 gave the minorities (Slovaks, Romanians, Serbs, et al.)
In Vienna, in front of Schönbrunn Palace, the black and yellow flag was flown for Cisleithania, while both Croatian and Hungarian flags were flown for Transleithania.
Between 1913 and 1918, the Hungarian aircraft industry began developing.
In recognition that he reigned in a multi-ethnic country, Emperor Franz Joseph spoke (and used) German, Hungarian and Czech fluently, and Polish and Italian to some degree.
Thanks to the constitution's modern laws and to the benevolence of emperor Franz Joseph, the Austrian Jews came to regard the era of Austria-Hungary as a golden era of their history.
It was ruled by the House of Habsburg, and constituted the last phase in the constitutional evolution of the Habsburg Monarchy.
Hungary's central government structures remained well separated from the Austrian imperial government.
individual (but not also communal) rights to use their language in offices, schools (although in practice often only in those founded by them and not by the state), courts and municipalities (if 20% of the deputies demanded it).
The Germans, the traditional bureaucratic, capitalist and cultural elite, demanded the recognition of their language as a customary language in every part of the empire.
Under the terms of the "Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867", an agreement renegotiated every ten years, determined these matters.
As a result, wide disparities of development existed within the empire.
The last was responsible only for financing the Imperial and Royal household, the diplomatic service, the common army and the common war fleet.
It did not recognize non-Hungarians to have rights to form states with any territorial autonomy.
The large Hungarian food exports were not limited to neighbouring Germany and Italy: Hungary became the most important foreign food supplier of the large cities and industrial centres of the United Kingdom.
The armed forces suffered particularly from overlap.
navy used the port's shipyards to construct new naval ships.
From 1867 onwards, common expenditures were allocated 70% to Austria and 30% to Hungary.
In this sense Austria-Hungary remained under an authoritarian government, as the Emperor-King appointed both Austrian and Hungarian Prime ministers along with their respective cabinets.
and the RÁBA Company in Győr.
When Russia defeated Turkey in a war the resulting Treaty of San Stefano was seen in Austria as much too favourable for Russia and its Orthodox-Slavic goals.
He wanted Germany to ally with Austria, not Russia.
Many of the state institutions and the modern administrative system of Hungary were established during this period.
In July 1849, the Hungarian Revolutionary Parliament proclaimed and enacted ethnic and minority rights.
Following a decision of Franz Joseph I in 1868, the realm bore the official name '''Austro-Hungarian Monarchy/Realm'''  (; ) in its international relations.
Vienna (1865), Budapest (1866), Brno (1869).
'''Kingdom of Hungary'''
From 1815 to 1866, Venice was included within the monarchy and was prevented from competing with Austrian-ruled ports.
Besides these sixty-three rural counties for Hungary, and eight for Croatia-Slavonia, Hungary had twenty-six urban counties or towns with municipal rights.
Kingdom of Hungary:
Linking/co-ordinating the two parliaments fell to a government under the monarch.
Upstream, the Greben rock near the "Kazan" gorge was notorious.
Each half of the Dual Monarchy proved quite prepared to disrupt common operations to advance its own interests.
Taaffe used a coalition of clergy, conservatives and Slavic parties to weaken the liberals.
Railways allowed the empire to integrate its economy far more than previously possible, when transportation depended on rivers.
# The Royal Supreme Court at Budapest, and the Supreme Court of Justice, or Table of Septemvirs, at Zagreb, which were the highest judicial authorities.
Hungary proper used a red-white-green tricolor defaced with the Hungarian coat of arms, sometimes used to represent the entirety of the Lands of the Hungarian Crown.
The new length of the river in Hungary was  ( total), with  of "dead channels" and  of new riverbed.
In 1916, there were 366 million telephone calls in the Austrian half of the monarchy, among them 8.4 million long distant calls.
By 1910 about 900,000 Jews made up approximately 5 percent of the population of Hungary and about 23 percent of Budapest's citizenry.
The count finally signed the trialist proclamation after heavy pressure from the king on 23 October 1918. one day after the king.
Following the 1867 reforms, the Austrian and the Hungarian states were co-equal.
In German, the passage is still known as the Kataraktenstrecke, even though the cataracts are gone.
This division of labour between the east and west, besides the existing economic and monetary union, led to an even more rapid economic growth throughout Austria-Hungary by the early 20th century.
The following years saw official recognition of several languages, at least in Austria.
Austria - Hungary had 568 million telephone calls in 1913, only two Western European countries had more phone calls, the German Empire and the United Kingdom.
File:Flag of Croatia-Slavonia with CoA.svg|Flag of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia
Antisemitic parties and movements existed, but the governments of Vienna and Budapest did not initiate pogroms or implement official antisemitic policies.
It was a liberal piece of legislation, and offered extensive language and cultural rights.
From 1527 (the creation of the monarchic personal union) to 1851, the Kingdom of Hungary maintained its own customs controls, which separated her from the other parts of the Habsburg-ruled territories.
The Austrian Lloyd was one of the biggest ocean shipping companies of the time.
Austria-Hungary was geographically the second-largest country in Europe after the Russian Empire, at , and the third-most populous (after Russia and the German Empire).
By 1854, the empire had almost  of track, about 60–70% of it in state hands.
File:Royal hungarian maritime flag.gif|Royal Hungarian maritime ensign
There was political turmoil during the build-up to each renewal of the agreement.
It operated over a special type of telephone exchange system.
Under these ministries came the Statthalter, whose administrative area had ordinarily the proportions of a Crown territory (''Kronland''); but the immense variations in area of the Crown territories made a uniform and consistent intermediate administrative organization practically impossible.
The constitution of 1627 made the German language a second official language and equal to Czech.
From 1854 to 1879, private interests conducted almost all rail construction.
The common army changed its label from '''' to '''' only in 1889 at the request of the Hungarian government.
Electric tramway lines in the Kingdom of Hungary:
Electric tramway lines in the Austrian Empire:
The Congress of Berlin in 1878 let Austria occupy (but not annex) the province of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a predominantly Slavic area.
These leftist liberal parliamentary parties were backed by the big industrialists, bankers, businessmen and the predominant majority of newspaper publishers.
File:Coa Hungary Country History med (1915).svg|Medium coat of arms of the Hungarian part (1915–1918)
Prior to World War I, the Austrian Empire had four car manufacturer companies.
In general, the western areas became more developed than the eastern.
The first telephone exchange was opened in Zagreb (8 January 1881), the second was Budapest (1 May 1881) the  third was opened in Vienna (3 June 1881).
In 1831 a plan had already been drafted to make the passage navigable, at the initiative of the Hungarian politician István Széchenyi.
Foreign affairs and the military came under joint oversight, but all other governmental faculties were divided between respective states.
The equality of all customary languages ("") in school, office and public life, is recognized by the state.
For instance, whenever the joint Hungarian-Croatian Parliament held its session in Budapest, both the Croatian and Hungarian flags were hoisted on the parliament building in Budapest.
The old Hungarian Constitution was restored, and Franz Joseph was crowned as King of Hungary.
In 1847, the first telegraph connection (Vienna – Brno – Prague) started operation.
The public telephone stations appeared in the 1890s, and they quickly became widespread in post offices and railway stations.
(The next such laws were in Switzerland), but these were overturned after the Russian and Austrian armies crushed the Hungarian Revolution.
File:Austria-Hungary-flag-1869-1914-naval-1786-1869-merchant.svg|Naval ensign until 1918
Of the pre-World War military forces of the major European powers, the Austro-Hungarian army was almost alone in its regular promotion of Jews to positions of command.
Two delegations of representatives (60–60 members), one each from the Austrian and Hungarian parliaments, met separately and voted on the expenditures of the Common Ministerial Council giving the two governments influence in the common administration.
The first Hungarian designed and produced airplane (powered by inline engine) was flown in 1909 at Rákosmező.
This led to the closing of several minority schools, devoted mostly to the Slovak and Rusyn languages.
Prior to World War I, the Kingdom of Hungary had four car manufacturer companies.
The antisemitic parties remained on the periphery of the political sphere due to their low popularity among voters in the parliamentary elections.
The resultant length of the flood-protected river comprises  (out of  of all Hungarian protected rivers).
The influence of liberals in Austria, most of them ethnic Germans, weakened under the leadership of Count Edouard von Taaffe, the Austrian prime minister from 1879 to 1893.
Galicia designated Polish instead of German in 1869 as the customary language of government.
was Fiume (Rijeka, today part of Croatia), where the Hungarian shipping companies, such as the Adria, operated.
Since 1876 each municipality had a council of twenty members to exercise control over its administration.
All telephone exchanges of the cities and towns in Kingdom of Hungary were linked in 1893.
Although Austria-Hungary did not have a common flag (a "national flag" could not exist since both halves of the Dual Monarchy consisted of inhabitants of various nationalities), a common civil ensign (introduced in 1869) did exist.
The Hungarian majority asserted more of their identity within the Kingdom of Hungary.
Article 19 of the 1867 "Basic State Act" (''Staatsgrundgesetz''), valid only for the Cisleithanian (Austrian) part of Austria-Hungary, said:
Technological change accelerated industrialization and urbanization.
From 1867 onwards, the abbreviations heading the names of official institutions in Austria-Hungary reflected their responsibility:  ('''' or Imperial and Royal) was the label for institutions common to both parts of the Monarchy, e.g.
The largest Hungarian shipbuilding company was the Ganz-Danubius.
The negotiations in 1917 ended with the dissolution of the Dual Monarchy.
* The Imperial and Royal Ministry of the Exterior and the Imperial House
By 1914 the number of telegraph offices reached 3,000 in post offices and further 2,400 were installed in the railway stations of the Kingdom of Hungary.
* Galicia: Bielsko-Biała (1895); Kraków (1901); Tarnów, Cieszyn (1911)
From June 1907, all public and private schools in Hungary were obliged to ensure that after the fourth grade, the pupils could express themselves fluently in Hungarian.
The government then began to sell off large portions of track to private investors to recoup some of its investments and because of the financial strains of the 1848 Revolution and of the Crimean War.
The two most important trading partners were traditionally Germany (1910: 48% of all exports, 39% of all imports), and Great Britain (1910: almost 10% of all exports, 8% of all imports), the third most important partner was the United States, it followed by Russia, France, Switzerland, Romania, the Balkan states and South America.
Finally, the communes had self-government within their own sphere.
In comparison to the Austrian Lloyd, the Austro-American concentrated on destinations in North and South America.
The Poles systematically disregarded the large Ukrainian minority in their territory, and did not grant Ukrainian the status of an official language.
The Cisleithanian (Austrian) part contained about 57 percent of the total population and the larger share of its economic resources, compared to the Hungarian part.
The Romanians and the Serbs began to agitate for union with their fellow nationalists and language speakers in the newly founded states of Romania (1859–78) and Serbia.
Relations during the half-century after 1867 between the two parts of the dual monarchy featured repeated disputes over shared external tariff arrangements and over the financial contribution of each government to the common treasury.
However, in a comparison with Germany and Britain, the Austro-Hungarian economy as a whole still lagged considerably, as sustained modernization had begun much later.
To some extent, they modelled their relation to that kingdom on their own compromise with Austria of the previous year.
All races of the empire have equal rights, and every race has an inviolable right to the preservation and use of its own nationality and language.
After the war, republican, national parties contributed to the disintegration and collapse of the monarchy in Austria and Hungary.
To rebuild Habsburg prestige and gain revenge against Prussia, Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust became foreign secretary.
Other factors in the constitutional changes were continued Hungarian dissatisfaction with rule from Vienna and increasing national consciousness on the part of other nationalities (or ethnicities) of the Austrian Empire.
The country was governed by the Council of Lieutenancy of Hungary (the Gubernium) – located in Pressburg and later in Pest – and by the Hungarian Royal Court Chancellery in Vienna.
Provisional renewals of the common arrangements occurred in October 1907 and in November 1917 on the basis of the ''status quo''.
Austria-Hungary was a great power but it contained a large number of ethnic groups that sought their own nation.
The electrification of tramways started from the late 1880s.
The language disputes were most fiercely fought in Bohemia, where the Czech speakers formed a majority and sought equal status for their language to German.
By playing nationalities off one another, the government ensured the monarchy's central role in holding together competing interest groups in an era of rapid change.
The lowest administrative unit was the political sub-district (''Bezirk'') under an official (''Bezirkshauptmann''), who united nearly all the administrative functions which were divided among the various ministries according to their attributions.
who during his short reign supported the trialist idea only to be vetoed by the Hungarian government and Count Istvan Tisza.
Since plains can cause a river to flow very slowly, the Tisza used to follow a path with many curves and turns, which led to many large floods in the area.
The navy became significant during the time of the k.u.k.
monarchy, as industrialization and development provided sufficient revenues to develop it.
In 1914, Jews in the empire numbered about two million; their position was ambiguous.
The empire's heavy industry had mostly focused on machine building, especially for the electric power industry, locomotive industry and automotive industry, while in light industry the precision mechanics industry was the most dominant.
Republics were established in Vienna and Budapest.
This has ranked Hungarian railways the 6th most dense in the world (ahead of countries as Germany or France).
Austria envisioned a multi-ethnic, religiously diverse empire under Vienna's control.
File:Flag of Hungary (1867-1918).svg|Flag of Royal Hungary
Austria-Hungary also became the world's third largest manufacturer and exporter of electric home appliances, electric industrial appliances and power generation apparatuses for power plants, after the United States and the German Empire.
The length of the Tisza in Hungary used to be .
By 1914, more than 2000 settlements had telephone exchange in Kingdom of Hungary.
A common Ministerial Council ruled the common government: it comprised the three ministers for the joint responsibilities (joint finance, military, and foreign policy), the two prime ministers, some Archdukes and the monarch.
It flowed through the Great Hungarian Plain, which is one of the largest flat areas in central Europe.
There were three '''' or joint ministries:
The first Danubian steamer company, Donau-Dampfschiffahrt-Gesellschaft (DDSG), was the largest inland shipping company in the world until the collapse of the k.u.k.
Hungary's leaders were generally less willing than their Austrian counterparts to share power with their subject minorities, but they granted a large measure of autonomy to Croatia in 1868.
The union was a result of the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 and came into existence on 30 March 1867, when the compromise was ratified by the Hungarian parliament.
In 1914, of a total of  of railway tracks in Austria,  (82%) were state owned.
However, by the end of the 19th century, economic differences gradually began to even out as economic growth in the eastern parts of the monarchy consistently surpassed that in the western.
During the WW I, fighter planes, bombers and reconnaissance planes were produced in these factories.
However, dissatisfaction with Austrian rule had grown for many years within Hungary and had many other causes.
The dynamic Pest grew into Hungary's administrative, political, economic, trade and cultural hub.
'''Kingdom of Hungary'''
Horse-drawn tramways appeared in the first half of the 19th century.
After 1867, the Austrian and Hungarian customs union agreement had to be renegotiated and stipulated every ten years.
In that period, the majority of Jews in Austria-Hungary lived in small towns (''shtetls'') in Galicia and rural areas in Hungary and Bohemia, although there were large communities in Vienna, Budapest, Prague and other large cities.
The capitalist way of production spread throughout the Empire during its 50-year existence, replacing medieval institutions.
