Although this has not been studied systematically, there are reports of its success.
The trees used are most commonly eucalypts, although a variety of other native trees as well as introduced pine, ''Crataegus'', and elm have been recorded.
Named in 1903 by Alex Milligan, it is a medium-sized subspecies with a long thin bill.
They are thought to affect native New Zealand bird populations such as the tui and kererū, sometimes raiding nests for eggs and nestlings, although studies by Waikato University have cast doubt on this, and much blame on the magpie as a predator in the past has been anecdotal only.
They were also familiar with its highly territorial nature, and it features in a song in their ''Burndud'', or songs of customs.
The Australian magpie produces a clutch of two to five light blue or greenish eggs, which are oval in shape and about .
Magpies have a long breeding season which varies in different parts of the country; in northern parts of Australia they will breed between June and September, but not commence until August or September in cooler regions, and may continue until January in some alpine areas.
The reported age of first breeding has varied according to area, but the average is between the ages of three and five years.
White-backed subspecies have a wholly white nape and saddle.
Pitch may vary over up to four octaves, and the bird can mimic over 35 species of native and introduced bird species, as well as dogs and horses.
The magpie is generally sedentary and territorial throughout its range, living in groups occupying a territory, or in flocks or fringe groups.
It was first described by Schodde and Mason in 1999.
The male and female are similar in appearance, and can be distinguished by differences in back markings.
A wide variety of displays are seen, with aggressive behaviours outnumbering pro-social ones.
Its robust wedge-shaped bill is bluish-white bordered with black, with a small hook at the tip.
The tail has a black terminal band.
One of the best-known New Zealand poems is "The Magpies" by Denis Glover, with its refrain "Quardle oodle ardle wardle doodle", imitating the sound of the bird – and the popular New Zealand comic ''Footrot Flats'' features a magpie character by the name of Pew.
It has a broad black tail band.
The Australian magpie was subdivided into three species in the literature for much of the twentieth century—the black-backed magpie (''C.
There are currently thought to be nine subspecies of the Australian magpie, although there are large zones of overlap with intermediate forms between the taxa.
The Australian magpie is known to engage in cooperative breeding, and helper birds will assist in feeding and raising young.
The nest is a bowl-shaped structure made of sticks and lined with softer material such as grass and bark.
Such teams tend to wear uniforms with black and white stripes.
This form was initially described by H. L. White in 1922.
Chicks develop fine downy feathers on their head, back and wings in the first week, and pinfeathers in the second week.
There is a tendency for birds to become larger with increasing latitude, the southern subspecies being larger than those further north, except the Tasmanian form which is small.
It is not, however, related to the European magpie, which is a corvid.
One of Australia's most highly regarded songbirds, the Australian magpie has a wide variety of calls, many of which are complex.
Magpies were introduced into New Zealand in the 1860s but have subsequently been accused of displacing native birds and are now treated as a pest species.
Other names used include ''piping crow-shrike'', ''piper'', ''maggie'', ''flute-bird'' and ''organ-bird''.
Black-backed subspecies have a black saddle and white nape.
The Australian magpie's affinities with butcherbirds and currawongs were recognised early on and the three genera were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature.
Least threatening are alarm calls and distant swoops, where birds fly within several metres from behind and perch nearby.
Magpies were introduced into New Zealand to control agricultural pests, and were therefore a protected species until 1951.
Next in intensity are close swoops, where a magpie will swoop in from behind or the side and audibly "snap" their beaks or even peck or bite at the face, neck, ears or eyes.
The Collingwood Football Club adopted the magpie from a visiting South Australian representative team in 1892.
The magpie is a commonly used emblem of sporting teams in Australia, and its brash, cocky attitude has been likened to the Australian psyche.
The percentage has been difficult to estimate but is significantly less than 9%.
The Australian magpie had been placed in its own genus ''Gymnorhina'', but several authorities, Storr in 1952 and later authors including Christidis and Boles in their 2008 official checklist, place it in the butcherbird genus ''Cracticus'', giving rise to its current binomial name, arguing that its adaptation to ground-living is not enough to consider it a separate genus.
The black and white colouration is noticeable from an early stage.
Pairs of magpies often take up a loud musical calling known as ''carolling'' to advertise or defend their territory; one bird initiates the call with the second (and sometimes more) joining in.
The black legs are long and strong.
In the ''negotiating display'', the one or two dominant magpies parade along the border of the defended territory while the rest of the group stand back a little and look on.
A group of magpies will sing a short repetitive version of carolling just before dawn (''dawn song''), and at twilight after sundown (''dusk song''), in winter and spring.
Intermediate forms are found in the Mount Lofty Ranges and on Kangaroo Island.
tibicen hypoleuca'' now refers to a small white-backed subspecies with a short compact bill and short wings, found on King and Flinders Islands, as well as Tasmania.
Nestlings are fed exclusively by the female, though the male magpie will feed his partner.
However, this protection is removed in some Australian states if a magpie attacks a human, allowing for the bird to be destroyed if it is considered particularly aggressive (such a provision is made, for example, in section 54 of the South Australian National Parks and Wildlife Act).
The Australian magpie is the mascot of several Australian sporting teams, most notably the Collingwood Magpies and Western Suburbs Magpies.
The chicks hatch synchronously around 20&nbsp;days after incubation begins; like all passerines, the chicks are altricial—they are born pink, naked, and blind with large feet, a short broad beak and a bright red throat.
It has a narrow black terminal tailband, and a narrow black band; the male has a large white nape, the female pale grey.
A magpie, particularly a juvenile, may also fall, roll over on its back and expose its underparts.
This does vary from region to region, and with the size of the group—the behaviour is rare or nonexistent in pairs or small groups.
Milligan speculated the bill may have been adapted for the local conditions, slim fare meaning the birds had to pick at dangerous scorpions and spiders.
Attacks begin as the eggs hatch, increase in frequency and severity as the chicks grow, and tail off as the chicks leave the nest.
The term ''bell-magpie'' was proposed to help distinguish it from the European magpie but failed to gain wide acceptance.
tibicen tibicen'', the nominate form, is a large subspecies found in southeastern Queensland, from the vicinity of Moreton Bay through eastern New South Wales to Moruya, New South Wales almost to the Victorian border.
tibicen terraereginae'', found from Cape York and the Gulf Country southwards across Queensland to the coast between Halifax Bay in the north and south to the Mary River, and central and western New South Wales and into northern South Australia, is a small to medium-sized subspecies.
Both sexes have black thighs.
When alone, a magpie may make a quiet musical warbling; these complex melodious warbles or subsongs are pitched at 2–4&nbsp;KHz and do not carry for long distances.
Introductions also occurred in the Solomon Islands and Sri Lanka, although the species has failed to become established.
Its specific epithet derived from the Latin ''tibicen'' "flute-player" or "piper" in reference to the bird's melodious call.
Disputes over who has been the first club to adopt the magpie emblem have been heated at times.
Although once considered to be three separate species, it is now considered to be one, with nine recognised subspecies.
The magpie-lark is a much smaller and more delicate bird with complex and very different banded black and white plumage.
On the ground, the Australian magpie moves around by walking, and is the only member of the Artamidae to do so; woodswallows, butcherbirds and currawongs all tend to hop with legs parallel.
The magpie has a short femur (thigh bone), and long lower leg below the knee, suited to walking rather than running, although birds can run in short bursts when hunting prey.
It has also been recorded in mature pine plantations; birds only occupy rainforest and wet sclerophyll forest in the vicinity of cleared areas.
* The '''New Guinean magpie''', ''C.
tibicen dorsalis'' was originally described as a separate species by A. J. Campbell in 1895 and is found in the fertile south-west corner of Western Australia.
A magpie may rarely attack by landing on the ground in front of a person and lurching up and landing on the victim's chest and pecking at the face and eyes.
Introductions also occurred in the Solomon Islands and Fiji, where the birds are not considered an invasive species.
In Denis Glover's poem "The Magpies", the mature magpie's call is described as ''quardle oodle ardle wardle doodle'', one of the most famous lines in New Zealand poetry, and as ''waddle giggle gargle paddle poodle'', in the children's book ''Waddle Giggle Gargle'' by Pamela Allen.
Natural predators of magpies include various species of monitor lizard and the barking owl.
Smaller prey are swallowed whole, although magpies rub off the stingers of bees and wasps before swallowing.
Well-known and easily recognisable, the Australian magpie is unlikely to be confused with any other species.
Its complex, musical, warbling call is one of the most familiar Australian bird sounds.
The bird was named for its similarity in colouration to the European magpie; it was a common practice for early settlers to name plants and animals after European counterparts.
More rarely, a bird may dive-bomb and strike the intruder's (usually a cyclist's) head with its chest.
It is very similar to ''tyrannica'', differing in having a shorter wing and being lighter and smaller overall.
Much energy is spent defending a territory from intruders, particularly other magpies, and different behaviours are seen with different opponents.
The adult magpie is a fairly solid, sturdy bird ranging from  in length with a  wingspan, and weighing .
tibicen tyrannica'', a very large white-backed form found from Twofold Bay on the New South Wales far south coast, across southern Victoria south of the Great Dividing Range through to the Coorong in southeastern South Australia.
Some birds continue begging for food until eight or nine months of age, but are usually ignored.
They employ several high pitched (8–10&nbsp;kHz) alarm or rallying calls when intruders or threats are spotted.
''Booroogong'' and ''garoogong'' were Wiradjuri words, and ''carrak'' was a Jardwadjali term from Victoria.
These incursions are all tolerated by the magpies.
The main difference between the subspecies lies in the "saddle" markings on the back below the nape.
The '''Australian magpie''' (''Cracticus tibicen'') is a medium-sized black and white passerine bird native to Australia and southern New Guinea.
In a ''group strength display'', employed if both the opposing and defending groups are of roughly equal numbers, all magpies will fly and form a row at the border of the territory.
The first two species may even locate their nest directly beneath a magpie nest, while the diminutive striated pardalote (''Pardalotus striatus'') has been known to make a burrow for breeding into the base of the magpie nest itself.
The wings and tarsus are shorter and the bill proportionally longer.
Birds are often killed on roads or electrocuted by powerlines, or poisoned after killing and eating house sparrows or mice, rats or rabbits targeted with baiting.
The plumage is the same as that of subspecies ''tibicen'', although the female has a shorter black tip to the tail.
tibicen eylandtensis'', the Top End magpie, is found from the Kimberley in northern Western Australia, across the Northern Territory through Arnhem Land and Groote Eylandt and into the Gulf Country.
The channel-billed cuckoo (''Scythrops novaehollandiae'') is a notable brood parasite in eastern Australia; magpies will raise cuckoo young, which eventually outcompete the magpie nestlings.
Birds reach adult size by their first year.
''Tarra-won-nang'', or ''djarrawunang'', ''wibung'', and ''marriyang'' were names used by the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney Basin.
Another club, Glenorchy Football Club of Tasmania, was forced to change uniform design when placed in the same league as another club (Claremont Magpies) with the same emblem.
The adult Australian magpie is a fairly robust bird ranging from  in length, with distinctive black and white plumage, gold brown eyes and a solid wedge-shaped bluish-white and black bill.
tibicen''), the white-backed magpie (''C.
The Australian raven may take nestlings left unattended.
Crouching low and uttering quiet begging calls are common signs of submission.
It intergrades with subspecies ''terraereginae'' southeast of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
However, the European magpie is a member of the Corvidae, while its Australian counterpart is placed in the Artamidae family (although both are members of a broad corvid lineage).
Almost all attacking birds (around 99%) are male, and they are generally known to attack pedestrians at around  from their nest, and cyclists at around .
Play may even take place with other species such as blue-faced honeyeaters and Australasian pipits.
In New Zealand, the Hawke's Bay Rugby Union team, from Napier, New Zealand, is also known as the magpies.
Cyclists can deter attack by attaching a long pole with a flag to a bike, and the use of cable ties on helmets has become common and appears to be effective.
It has even learnt to safely eat the poisonous cane toad by flipping it over and consuming the underparts.
tibicen telonocua'', found from Cowell south into the Eyre and Yorke Peninsulas in southern South Australia, as well as the southwestern Gawler Ranges.
Described as one of Australia's most accomplished songbirds, the Australian magpie has an array of complex vocalisations.
Distinct calls have been recorded for the approach of eagles and monitor lizards.
An early recorded vernacular name is ''piping poller'', written on a painting by Thomas Watling, one of a group known collectively as the Port Jackson Painter, sometime between 1788 and 1792.
These magpies may engage in an escalating series of behaviours to drive off intruders.
American ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between woodswallows and the butcherbirds in 1985, and combined them into a Cracticini clade, which became the family Artamidae.
Birds nest and shelter in trees but forage mainly on the ground in these open areas.
Birds may jump on each other and even engage in mock fighting.
Three-way hybridisation occurs between Bega and Batemans Bay on the New South Wales south coast.
Magpie attacks can cause injuries, typically wounds to the head, and being unexpectedly swooped while cycling can result in loss of control of the bicycle, which may cause injury.
Currawong species have predominantly dark plumage and heavier bills.
Predominantly a ground feeder, the Australian magpie paces open areas methodically searching for insects and their larvae.
Magpies are ubiquitous in urban areas all over Australia, and have become accustomed to people.
Evidence confirming this was published in a 2013 molecular study, which showed that it was the sister taxon to the black butcherbird (''C.
Magpies place themselves either side of the bird of prey so that it will be attacked from behind should it strike a defender, and harass and drive the raptor to some distance beyond the territory.
A basic disguise such as sunglasses worn on the back of the head may fool the magpie as to where a person is looking.
Often preceded by warbling, carolling is pitched between 6 and 8&nbsp;kHz and has 4–5 elements with slurring indistinct noise in between.
The male Western Australian subspecies ''dorsalis'' is also white-backed, but the equivalent area in the female is scalloped black.
Immature birds have dark brownish eyes until around two years of age.
A small percentage of birds become highly aggressive during breeding season from late August to early October, and will swoop and sometimes attack passersby.
Juvenile magpies begin foraging on their own three weeks after leaving the nest, and mostly feeding themselves by six months old.
The idea is that humans thereby appear less of a threat to the nesting birds.
Nests are built exclusively by females and generally placed high up in a tree fork, often in an exposed position.
A group will use carolling as a signal to advertise ownership and warn off other magpies.
This resulted in them being reclassified as one species by Julian Ford in 1969, with most recent authors following suit.
The age at which young birds disperse varies across the country, and depends on the aggressiveness of the dominant adult of the corresponding sex; males are usually evicted at a younger age.
A group may occupy and defend the same territory for many years.
The Australian magpie prefers open areas such as grassland, fields and residential areas such as parks, gardens, golf courses, and streets, with scattered trees or forest nearby.
tibicen papuana'', is a little-known subspecies found in southern New Guinea.
The leaders may fluff their feathers or caroll repeatedly.
Near human habitation, synthetic material may be incorporated.
Magpies prefer to swoop at the back of the head; therefore, keeping the magpie in sight at all times can discourage the bird.
Fledgling and juvenile magpies emit a repeated short and loud (80&nbsp;dB), high-pitched (8&nbsp;kHz) begging call.
Birds taken mainly from Tasmania and Victoria were introduced into New Zealand by local Acclimatisation Societies of Otago and Canterbury in the 1860s, with the Wellington Acclimatisation Society releasing 260 birds in 1874.
Among the Kamilaroi, it is ''burrugaabu'', ''galalu'', or ''guluu''.
It has a long deep bill resembling that of subspecies ''longirostris''.
Magpies have even been noted to mimic human speech when living in close proximity to humans.
A member of the Artamidae, the Australian magpie is classified in the butcherbird genus ''Cracticus'' and is most closely related to the black butcherbird (''C.
These may involve picking up, manipulating or tugging at various objects such as sticks, rocks or bits of wire, and handing them to other birds.
It is coastal or near-coastal and is restricted to east of the Great Dividing Range.
One study showed birds were able to find scarab beetle larvae by sound or vibration.
Many leave at around a year old, but the age of departure may range from eight months to four years.
Magpies may indulge in beak-clapping to warn other species of birds.
Skinks, frogs, mice and other small animals as well as grain, tubers, figs and walnuts have also been noted as components of their diet.
It was originally described by Gregory Mathews in 1912, its subspecies name a Latin translation, ''terra'' "land" ''reginae'' "queen's" of "Queensland".
It was known as ''Warndurla'' among the Yindjibarndi people of the central and western Pilbara.
There appears to be some specificity in choice of attack targets, with the majority of individuals specializing on either pedestrians or cyclists.
The Yindjibarndi people of the Pilbara in the northwest of the country used the bird as a signal for sunrise, frightening them awake with its call.
Mature magpies have dull red eyes, in contrast to the yellow eyes of currawongs and white eyes of Australian ravens and crows.
The ''manus flutter'' is a submissive display where a magpie will flutter its primary feathers in its wings.
The sight of a raptor results in a rallying call by sentinel birds and subsequent coordinated mobbing of the intruder.
Magpies have to be moved some distance as almost all are able to find their way home from distances of less than .
Other bird species, such as the yellow-rumped thornbill (''Acanthiza chrysorrhoa''), willie wagtail (''Rhipidura leucophrys''), southern whiteface (''Aphelocephala leucopsis''), and (less commonly) noisy miner (''Manorina melanocephala''), often nest in the same tree as the magpie.
Birds will adopt a specific posture by tilting their heads back, expanding their chests, and moving their wings backwards.
The bill is relatively short compared with other magpie subspecies.
More commonly, an aggressive bird will be caught and relocated to an unpopulated area.
The original form known, as the '''black-backed magpie''' and classified as ''Gymnorhina tibicen'', has been split into four black-backed races:
Birds use their bills to probe into the earth or otherwise overturn debris in search of food.
Juveniles have lighter greys and browns amidst the starker blacks and whites of their plumage; two- or three-year-old birds of both sexes closely resemble and are difficult to distinguish from adult females.
This species is commonly fed by households around the country, but in spring a small minority of breeding magpies (almost always males) become aggressive and swoop and attack those who approach their nests.
A bird may pick up a feather or leaf and flying off with it, with other birds pursuing and attempting to bring down the leader by latching onto its tail feathers.
The Australian magpie is omnivorous, eating various items located at or near ground level including invertebrates such as earthworms, millipedes, snails, spiders and scorpions as well as a wide variety of insects—cockroaches, ants, beetles, moths and caterpillars and other larvae.
Under the name piping shrike, the white-backed magpie was declared the official emblem of the Government of South Australia in 1901 by Governor Tennyson, and has featured on the South Australian flag since 1904.
Insects, including large adult grasshoppers, may be seized mid-flight.
Magpies will become accustomed to being fed by humans, and although they are wild, will return to the same place looking for handouts.
The Australian magpie was first described by English ornithologist John Latham in 1801 as ''Coracias tibicen'', the type collected in the Port Jackson region.
hypoleuca''), and the western magpie (''C.
These songs have been recorded up to 70 minutes in duration and are more frequent after the end of the breeding season.
Some claim that swooping can be prevented by hand-feeding magpies.
The '''white-backed magpie''', originally described as ''Gymnorhina hypoleuca'' by John Gould in 1837, has also been split into races:
The plumage is pure glossy black and white; both sexes of all subspecies have black heads, wings and underparts with white shoulders.
* The '''western magpie''', ''C.
The Port Adelaide Magpies would similarly adopt the black and white colours and Magpie name in 1902.
If it is necessary to walk near the nest, wearing a broad-brimmed or legionnaire's hat or using an umbrella will deter attacking birds, but beanies and bicycle helmets are of little value as birds attack the sides of the head and neck.
They were later noted to hybridise readily where their territories crossed, with hybrid grey or striped-backed magpies being quite common.
The female is unusual in that it has a scalloped black or brownish-black mantle and back; the dark feathers there are edged with white.
The pied butcherbird has a similar build and plumage, but has white underparts unlike the former species' black underparts.
Eyes painted on hats or helmets will deter attacks on pedestrians but not cyclists.
It is a small subspecies with a long and thinner bill, with birds of Groote Eylandt possibly even smaller than mainland birds.
Other examples include Brisbane's Souths Logan Magpies, and Sydney's Western Suburbs Magpies.
The Australian magpie featured in aboriginal folklore around Australia.
It was a totem bird of the people of the Illawarra region south of Sydney.
Magpies are a protected native species in Australia, so it is illegal to kill or harm them.
Australian magpies generally live to around 25&nbsp;years of age, though ages of up to 30&nbsp;years have been recorded.
With its long legs, the Australian magpie walks rather than waddles or hops and spends much time on the ground.
tibicen longirostris'', the long-billed magpie, is found across northern Western Australia, from Shark Bay into the Pilbara.
Described by Schodde and Mason in 1999, its subspecific name is an anagram of ''leuconota'' "white-backed".
In general, evidence suggests the range and population of the Australian magpie has increased with land-clearing, although local declines in Queensland due to a 1902 drought, and in Tasmania in the 1930s have been noted; the cause for the latter is unclear but rabbit baiting, pine tree removal, and spread of the masked lapwing (''Vanellus miles'') have been implicated.
Common and widespread, it has adapted well to human habitation and is a familiar bird of parks, gardens and farmland in Australia and New Guinea.
Birds may fluff up their flank feathers as an aggressive display or preceding an attack.
