* Heard Island and McDonald Islands
However, multicultural immigration has contributed to a decline in its relative position, and the Roman Catholic Church has benefitted from recent immigration to become the largest group.
Over recent decades, Australia's foreign relations have been driven by a close association with the United States through the ANZUS pact, and by a desire to develop relationships with Asia and the Pacific, particularly through ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum.
The majority of Australians live within the coastal zone, making the beach a popular recreation spot and an integral part of the nation's identity.
The National Gallery of Australia and state galleries maintain collections of Australian and international art.
On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, consultation and voting.
19th-century writers such as Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson captured the experience of the bush using a distinctive Australian vocabulary.
It was identified by the Credit Suisse Research Institute as the nation with the highest median wealth in the world and the second-highest average wealth per adult in 2013.
The states manage hospitals and attached outpatient services, while the Commonwealth funds the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (subsidising the costs of medicines) and general practice.
The Colonial Office in London retained control of some matters, notably foreign affairs, defence, and international shipping.
Australia's population has quadrupled since the end of World War I, much of this increase from immigration.
Much of the northern part of the country has a tropical, predominantly summer-rainfall (monsoon) climate.
A government policy of "assimilation" beginning with the ''Aboriginal Protection Act 1869'' resulted in the removal of many Aboriginal children from their families and communities—often referred to as the Stolen Generations—a practice which may also have contributed to the decline in the indigenous population.
The south-west corner of the country has a Mediterranean climate.
In 2015, the Commonwealth Parliament abolished self-government, integrating Norfolk Island into the Australian tax and welfare systems and replacing its legislative assembly with a council.
The first recorded European sighting of the Australian mainland, and the first recorded European landfall on the Australian continent, are attributed to the Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon.
About 24% of Australians over the age of 15 regularly participate in organised sporting activities.
* Ashmore and Cartier Islands
The spirituality and customs of Torres Strait Islanders, who inhabit the islands between Australia and New Guinea, reflected their Melanesian origins and dependence on the sea.
About 110 others are spoken exclusively by older people.
With the loss of its American colonies in 1783, the British Government sent a fleet of ships, the "First Fleet", under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip, to establish a new penal colony in New South Wales.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Nellie Melba was one of the world's leading opera singers.
Separate colonies were carved from parts of New South Wales: South Australia in 1836, Victoria in 1851, and Queensland in 1859.
Australia has among the highest house prices and some of the highest household debt levels in the world.
Australia is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the World Trade Organization, and has pursued several major bilateral free trade agreements, most recently the Australia–United States Free Trade Agreement and Closer Economic Relations with New Zealand, with another free trade agreement being negotiated with China—the Australia–China Free Trade Agreement—and Japan, South Korea in 2011, Australia–Chile Free Trade Agreement, and as of November 2015 has put the Trans-Pacific Partnership before parliament for ratification.
Nationally, other popular sports include Australian rules football, horse racing, basketball, surfing, soccer, and motor racing.
Australia's military expenditure is the world's 13th-largest.
Much of the south-east (including Tasmania) is temperate.
A camp was set up and the flag raised at Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, on 26 January 1788, a date which became Australia's national day, Australia Day, although the British Crown Colony of New South Wales was not formally promulgated until 7 February 1788.
The states are sovereign entities, although subject to certain powers of the Commonwealth as defined by the Constitution.
Although Australia has no official language, English has always been entrenched as the ''de facto'' national language.
While the school remained influential into the new century, modernists such as Margaret Preston, and, later, Sidney Nolan and Arthur Boyd, explored new artistic trends.
In cases where no party has majority support, the Governor-General has the constitutional power to appoint the Prime Minister and, if necessary, dismiss one that has lost the confidence of Parliament.
Australia is a powerhouse in water-based sports, such as swimming and surfing.
In terms of average wealth, Australia ranked second in the world after Switzerland in 2013, although the nation's poverty rate increased from 10.2% to 11.8%, from 2000/01 to 2013.
This established the Commonwealth of Australia as a dominion of the British Empire.
The name is not strictly accurate, because parts of the range consist of low hills, and the highlands are typically no more than  in height.
Most Indigenous Australian tribal groups subsisted on a simple hunter-gatherer diet of native fauna and flora, otherwise called bush tucker.
There are two major political groups that usually form government, federally and in the states: the Australian Labor Party and the Coalition which is a formal grouping of the Liberal Party and its minor partner, the National Party.
Australia is one of five nations to have participated in every Summer Olympics of the modern era, and has hosted the Games twice: 1956 in Melbourne and 2000 in Sydney.
The House of Representatives (the lower house) has 150 members elected from single-member electoral divisions, commonly known as "electorates" or "seats", allocated to states on the basis of population, with each original state guaranteed a minimum of five seats.
Australia has the third and seventh highest life expectancy of males and females respectively in the world.
The 1996 Australian census counted more than 7000 respondents as followers of a traditional Aboriginal religion.
It is the flattest continent, with the oldest and least fertile soils; desert or semi-arid land commonly known as the outback makes up by far the largest portion of land.
Each state and major mainland territory has its own parliament—unicameral in the Northern Territory, the ACT and Queensland, and bicameral in the other states.
* The judiciary: the High Court of Australia and other federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the Governor-General on advice of the Federal Executive Council.
To the south of these and inland, lie more areas of grassland: the Ord Victoria Plain and the Western Australian Mulga shrublands.
The population of 24 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated in the eastern states and on the coast.
About 58% of Australians aged from 25 to 64 have vocational or tertiary qualifications, and the tertiary graduation rate of 49% is the highest among OECD countries.
At the time of the 2006 census, 52,000 Indigenous Australians, representing 12% of the Indigenous population, reported that they spoke an Indigenous language at home.
These include the western plains of New South Wales, and the Einasleigh Uplands, Barkly Tableland, and Mulga Lands of inland Queensland.
In May 2012, there were 11,537,900&nbsp;people employed (either full- or part-time), with an unemployment rate of 5.1%.
The indirect tax system was substantially changed in July 2000 with the introduction of a 10% Goods and Services Tax (GST).
The federal parliament directly administers the following territories:
Total government debt in Australia is about $190 billion – 20% of GDP in 2010.
Even taller are Mawson Peak (at ), on the remote Australian territory of Heard Island, and, in the Australian Antarctic Territory, Mount McClintock and Mount Menzies, at  and  respectively.
In addition, 38 percent of Australia's population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world.
Since the 1970s and following the abolition of the White Australia policy, immigration from Asia and elsewhere was also promoted.
In the 2015–16 budget, defence spending was A$31.9 billion or 1.92% of GDP, representing the 13th largest defence budget.
Thousands more died as a result of frontier conflict with settlers.
Since 2008, inflation has typically been 2–3% and the base interest rate 5–6%.
In the 2011 census, 61.1% of Australians were counted as Christian, including 25.3% as Roman Catholic and 17.1% as Anglican; 22.3% of the population reported having "no religion"; 7.2% identify with non-Christian religions, the largest of these being Buddhism (2.5%), followed by Islam (2.2%), Hinduism (1.3%) and Judaism (0.5%).
Australia was the only advanced economy not to experience a recession due to the global financial downturn in 2008–2009.
Traditional designs, patterns and stories infuse contemporary Indigenous Australian art, "the last great art movement of the 20th century"; its exponents include Emily Kame Kngwarreye.
At the north-west corner of the continent are the sandstone cliffs and gorges of The Kimberley, and below that the Pilbara.
Australia was ranked 3rd out of 178 countries in the world on the 2014 Environmental Performance Index.
The most notable exercise to date of the Governor-General's reserve powers outside the Prime Minister's request was the dismissal of the Whitlam Government in the constitutional crisis of 1975.
The Indigenous population—Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders—was counted at 548,370 (2.5% of the total population) in 2011, a significant increase from 115,953 in the 1976 census.
In 2004, the average age of the civilian population was 38.8 years.
A gold rush began in Australia in the early 1850s and the Eureka Rebellion against mining licence fees in 1854 was an early expression of civil disobedience.
Many of Australia's performing arts companies receive funding through the federal government's Australia Council.
Christian churches have played an integral role in the development of education, health and welfare services in Australia.
Australia is a member of the United Nations, G20, Commonwealth of Nations, ANZUS, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, and the Pacific Islands Forum.
Traditional ownership of land—aboriginal title—was not recognised until 1992, when the High Court case ''Mabo v Queensland (No 2)'' overturned the legal doctrine that Australia had been ''terra nullius'' ("land belonging to no one") before the European occupation.
Australian winners of the Booker Prize include Peter Carey, Thomas Keneally and Richard Flanagan.
Although agriculture and natural resources account for only 3% and 5% of GDP respectively, they contribute substantially to export performance.
The 2005–06 budget provides A$2.5&nbsp;billion for development assistance.
Australian English is a major variety of the language with a distinctive accent and lexicon, and differs slightly from other varieties of English in grammar and spelling.
''The Story of the Kelly Gang'' (1906), the world's first feature length film, spurred a boom in Australian cinema during the silent film era.
Although most of Australia is semi-arid or desert, it includes a diverse range of habitats from alpine heaths to tropical rainforests, and is recognised as a megadiverse country.
Australia has grown at an average annual rate of 3.6% for over 15 years, in comparison to the OECD annual average of 2.5%.
The Dutch adjectival form ''Australische'' was used in a Dutch book in Batavia (Jakarta) in 1638, to refer to the newly discovered lands to the south.
A 2010–2011 study by the Australia Early Development Index found the most common language spoken by children after English was Arabic, followed by Vietnamese, Greek, Chinese, and Hindi.
The landscape remained a central subject matter for Fred Williams, Brett Whiteley and other post-World War II artists whose works, eclectic in style yet uniquely Australian, moved between the figurative and the abstract.
Since the carbon tax was repealed, emissions have again continued to rise.
It led the formation of the Cairns Group and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
A carbon tax was introduced in 2012 and helped to reduce Australia's emissions but was scrapped in 2014 under the Liberal Government.
The external territory of Norfolk Island previously exercised considerable autonomy under the Norfolk Island Act 1979 through its own legislative assembly and an Administrator to represent the Queen.
A founding member country of the United Nations, Australia is strongly committed to multilateralism and maintains an international aid program under which some 60 countries receive assistance.
Total expenditure on health (including private sector spending) is around 9.8% of GDP.
Each major city has at least one daily newspaper, and there are two national daily newspapers, ''The Australian'' and ''The Australian Financial Review''.
He sighted the coast of Cape York Peninsula in early 1606, and made landfall on 26 February at the Pennefather River near the modern town of Weipa on Cape York.
The collection of stories that it contains shaped Aboriginal law and customs.
Most immigrants are skilled, but the immigration quota includes categories for family members and refugees.
The surf lifesaving movement originated in Australia, and the volunteer lifesaver is one of the country's icons.
About 85% of flowering plants, 84% of mammals, more than 45% of birds, and 89% of in-shore, temperate-zone fish are endemic.
Surrounded by the Indian and Pacific oceans, it is separated from Asia by the Arafura and Timor seas, with the Coral Sea lying off the Queensland coast, and the Tasman Sea lying between Australia and New Zealand.
Australia has the greatest number of reptiles of any country, with 755 species.
The climate of Australia is significantly influenced by ocean currents, including the Indian Ocean Dipole and the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, which is correlated with periodic drought, and the seasonal tropical low-pressure system that produces cyclones in northern Australia.
Similarly, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism and Judaism have all grown in Australia over the past half-century.
Vegemite, pavlova, lamingtons and meat pies are regarded as iconic Australian foods.
On 12 December 1817, Macquarie recommended to the Colonial Office that it be formally adopted.
Each state has a publicly funded theatre company.
Australia is a developed country and one of the wealthiest in the world, with the world's 12th-largest economy.
The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act of 1999 was designed to minimise further impacts on ecological communities in Australia and its territories.
Australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99% in 2003.
The Federal government gained the power to make laws with respect to Aborigines following the 1967 referendum.
Many animal and plant species became extinct soon after first human settlement, including the Australian megafauna; others have disappeared since European settlement, among them the thylacine.
Australia's electoral system uses preferential voting for all lower house elections with the exception of Tasmania and the ACT which, along with the Senate and most state upper houses, combine it with proportional representation in a system known as the single transferable vote.
Numerous protected areas have been created under the National Strategy for the Conservation of Australia's Biological Diversity to protect and preserve unique ecosystems; 65 wetlands are listed under the Ramsar Convention, and 16 natural World Heritage Sites have been established.
The country was ranked second in the United Nations 2011 Human Development Index and first in Legatum's 2008 Prosperity Index.
The shock of the United Kingdom's defeat in Asia in 1942 and the threat of Japanese invasion caused Australia to turn to the United States as a new ally and protector.
The Queen is represented in Australia by the Governor-General at the federal level and by the Governors at the state level, who by convention act on the advice of her ministers.
Indigenous Australians experience higher than average rates of imprisonment and unemployment, lower levels of education, and life expectancies for males and females that are, respectively, 11 and 17 years lower than those of non-indigenous Australians.
In 1770, James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast, which he named New South Wales and claimed for Great Britain.
Protection of the environment is a major political issue in Australia.
Youth unemployment (15–24) stood at 11.2%.
Ranked second in preventable causes is hypertension at 7.6%, with obesity third at 7.5%.
Nevertheless, Australia's carbon dioxide emissions per capita are among the highest in the world, lower than those of only a few other industrialised nations.
Australia has a balance of payments that is more than 7% of GDP negative, and has had persistently large current account deficits for more than 50 years.
* Jervis Bay Territory, a naval base and sea port for the national capital in land that was formerly part of New South Wales
The northernmost point of the east coast is the tropical-rainforested Cape York Peninsula.
On 1 January 1901, the six colonies federated, forming the Commonwealth of Australia.
Other major international events held in Australia include the Australian Open tennis grand slam tournament, international cricket matches, and the Australian Formula One Grand Prix.
Life expectancy in Australia in 2010 was 79.5 years for males and 84.0 years for females.
In 2007, the First Rudd Government signed the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
Ranked third in the Index of Economic Freedom (2010), Australia is the world's twelfth largest economy and has the fifth highest per capita GDP (nominal) at $66,984.
Australia has the highest rates of skin cancer in the world, while cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of death and disease, responsible for 7.8% of the total mortality and disease.
In the Commonwealth, the Queen's representative is the Governor-General.
Because of the continent's great age, extremely variable weather patterns, and long-term geographic isolation, much of Australia's biota is unique.
* Coral Sea Islands
The population density, 2.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, is among the lowest in the world, although a large proportion of the population lives along the temperate south-eastern coastline.
As a result, Australia's demography, culture, and self-image were transformed.
Within Australian political culture, the Coalition is considered centre-right and the Labor Party is considered centre-left.
Multicultural immigration transformed Australian cuisine; post-World War II European migrants, particularly from the Mediterranean, helped to build a thriving Australian coffee culture, and the influence of Asian cultures has led to Australian variants of their staple foods, such as the Chinese-inspired dim sim and Chiko Roll.
Independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in Australian parliaments, mostly in upper houses.
Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun between 42,000 and 48,000 years ago, possibly with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea-crossings from what is now Southeast Asia.
The Queen is represented in each state by a Governor; and in the Northern Territory, the Administrator.
In the Programme for International Student Assessment, Australia regularly scores among the top five of thirty major developed countries (member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
The AACTAs are Australia's premier film and television awards, and notable Academy Award winners from Australia include Geoffrey Rush, Nicole Kidman, Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger.
Aboriginal art, story and dance continue to draw on these spiritual traditions.
Since 1951, Australia has been a formal military ally of the US, under the ANZUS treaty.
Australia has  of coastline (excluding all offshore islands), and claims an extensive Exclusive Economic Zone of .
Australian literature grew slowly in the decades following European settlement though Indigenous oral traditions, many of which have since been recorded in writing, are much older.
In 2007 228,621 Newstart unemployment allowance recipients were registered, a total that increased to 646,414 in March 2013.
Following World War II and through to 2000, almost 5.9&nbsp;million of the total population settled in the country as new immigrants, meaning that nearly two out of every seven Australians were born in another country.
Australia has also participated in every Commonwealth Games, hosting the event in 1938, 1962, 1982, 2006 and will host the 2018 Commonwealth Games.
By 2050, Australia's population is currently projected to reach around 42 million.
Australia's largest export markets are Japan, China, the US, South Korea, and New Zealand.
The increase is partly due to many people with Indigenous heritage previously having been overlooked by the census due to undercount and cases where their Indigenous status had not been recorded on the form.
* Australian Antarctic Territory
At the heart of the country are the uplands of central Australia.
Apart from Macquarie Island, Australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44°S, and longitudes 112° and 154°E.
According to the 2011 census, English is the only language spoken in the home for close to 81% of the population.
The population grew steadily in subsequent decades; the continent was explored and an additional five self-governing crown colonies were established.
As well as being a regular FIFA World Cup participant, Australia has won the OFC Nations Cup four times and the AFC Asian Cup once – the only country to have won championships in two different FIFA confederations.
Between 1855 and 1890, the six colonies individually gained responsible government, managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the British Empire.
With the 2006 merger of the Australian Stock Exchange and the Sydney Futures Exchange, the Australian Securities Exchange became the ninth largest in the world.
Australia is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government meetings provide the main forum for co-operation.
Australian biota has been severely impacted by changes occurring since European settlement began in 1788, with more than 10% of mammal species lost in the past 225 years.
Eastern Australia is marked by the Great Dividing Range, which runs parallel to the coast of Queensland, New South Wales and much of Victoria.
'''Australia''' (, , ), officially the '''Commonwealth of Australia''', is a country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania  and numerous smaller islands.
In Australia's tax system, personal and company income tax are the main sources of government revenue.
Australia has six states—New South Wales (NSW), Queensland (QLD), South Australia (SA), Tasmania (TAS), Victoria (VIC) and Western Australia (WA)—and two major mainland territories—the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) and the Northern Territory (NT).
In 1824, the Admiralty agreed that the continent should be known officially as ''Australia''.
Australians took part in many of the major battles fought on the Western Front.
In some states (e.g., Western Australia, the Northern Territory and New South Wales), children aged 16–17 are required to either attend school or participate in vocational training, such as an apprenticeship.
The federal government is separated into three branches:
Victoria and Western Australia were also founded "free", but later accepted transported convicts.
Australia has been involved in UN and regional peacekeeping, disaster relief and armed conflict, including the 2003 invasion of Iraq; it currently has deployed about 2,241 personnel in varying capacities to 12 international operations in areas including Iraq and Afghanistan.
The first time that the name Australia appears to have been officially used was in a despatch to Lord Bathurst of 4 April 1817 in which Governor Lachlan Macquarie acknowledges the receipt of Matthew Flinders' charts of Australia.
The Northern Territory was founded in 1911 when it was excised from South Australia.
The first settlers introduced British food to the continent, much of which is now considered typical Australian food, such as the Sunday roast.
In a 1999 referendum, 55% of voters and a majority in every state rejected a proposal to become a republic with a president appointed by a two-thirds vote in both Houses of the Australian Parliament.
Before European settlement, the animist beliefs of Australia's indigenous people had been practised for many thousands of years.
Australia made its inaugural appearance at the Pacific Games in 2015.
Australia has 37 government-funded universities and two private universities, as well as a number of other specialist institutions that provide approved courses at the higher education level.
At , Mount Kosciuszko on the Great Dividing Range is the highest mountain on the Australian mainland.
The remaining 9.4% of the population did not provide an adequate answer.
Author David Malouf, playwright David Williamson and poet Les Murray are also renowned literary figures.
Since the arrival of the First Fleet of British ships in 1788, Christianity has grown to be the major religion practised in Australia.
Water restrictions are frequently in place in many regions and cities of Australia in response to chronic shortages due to urban population increases and localised drought.
However, the economies of six of Australia's major trading partners have been in recession, which in turn has affected Australia, significantly hampering its economic growth in recent years.
In 2005 Australia secured an inaugural seat at the East Asia Summit following its accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and in 2011 attended the Sixth East Asia Summit in Indonesia.
Skiing in Australia began in the 1860s and snow sports take place in the Australian Alps and parts of Tasmania.
This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory.
Since 1788, the primary influence behind Australian culture has been Anglo-Celtic Western culture, with some Indigenous influences.
The next most common languages spoken at home are Mandarin (1.7%), Italian (1.5%), Arabic (1.4%), Cantonese (1.3%), Greek (1.3%), and Vietnamese (1.2%); a considerable proportion of first- and second-generation migrants are bilingual.
The head of the government in each state is the Premier and in each territory the Chief Minister.
For about 50,000 years before the first British settlement in the late 18th century, Australia was inhabited by indigenous Australians,
The Federal Capital Territory (later renamed the Australian Capital Territory) was formed in 1911 as the location for the future federal capital of Canberra.
In common with many other developed countries, Australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age.
With the second-highest human development index globally, Australia ranks highly in many international comparisons of national performance, such as quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, and the protection of civil liberties and political rights.
* Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Australia's landmass of  is on the Indo-Australian Plate.
Rainfall in southwestern Australia has decreased by 10–20% since the 1970s, while southeastern Australia has also experienced a moderate decline since the 1990s.
Australia has a sign language known as Auslan, which is the main language of about 5,500 deaf people.
The naturalistic, sun-filled works of Arthur Streeton, Tom Roberts and others associated with the 19th-century Heidelberg School—the first "distinctively Australian" movement in Western art—gave expression to a burgeoning Australian nationalism in the lead-up to Federation.
In the Senate (the upper house), there are 76 senators: twelve each from the states and two each from the mainland territories (the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory).
In most respects these two territories function as states, but the Commonwealth Parliament can override any legislation of their parliaments.
