Hypotheses for the cellular and molecular bases of pathological early overgrowth include the following:
As late as the mid-1970s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism; now it is thought to be one of the most heritable of all psychiatric conditions.
The emergence of the autism rights movement has served as an attempt to encourage people to be more tolerant of those with autism.
Globally, autism affects an estimated 21.7 million people as of 2013, while Asperger syndrome affects a further 31.1 million.
A strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests; two weaknesses are that executive function is hard to measure and that executive function deficits have not been found in young children with autism.
Most people with autism face significant obstacles in transitioning to adulthood.
Children with autism are less likely to make requests or share experiences, and are more likely to simply repeat others' words (echolalia) or reverse pronouns.
Leo Kanner of the Johns Hopkins Hospital first used ''autism'' in its modern sense in English when he introduced the label ''early infantile autism'' in a 1943 report of 11 children with striking behavioral similarities.
Making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism.
Although genetic technology allows clinical geneticists to link an estimated 40% of cases to genetic causes, consensus guidelines in the US and UK are limited to high-resolution chromosome and fragile X testing.
A 2008 study found that compared to their peers, autistic boys have significantly thinner bones if on casein-free diets; in 2005, botched chelation therapy killed a five-year-old child with autism.
It is not known how often recovery happens; reported rates in unselected samples of children with ASD have ranged from 3% to 25%.
Parents usually notice signs in the first two years of their child's life.
If warranted, diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from ASD specialists, observing and assessing cognitive, communication, family, and other factors using standardized tools, and taking into account any associated medical conditions.
* Disturbed neuronal migration during early gestation.
People with autism have social impairments and often lack the intuition about others that many people take for granted.
Neither category is satisfactory on its own; social cognition theories poorly address autism's rigid and repetitive behaviors, while the nonsocial theories have difficulty explaining social impairment and communication difficulties.
In rare cases, autism is strongly associated with agents that cause birth defects.
Although the DSM-IV rules out concurrent diagnosis of many other conditions along with autism, the full criteria for Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Tourette syndrome, and other of these conditions are often present and these comorbid diagnoses are increasingly accepted.
Proponents of this movement wish to seek “acceptance, not cures.” There have also been many worldwide events promoting autism awareness such as World Autism Awareness Day, Light It Up Blue, Autism Sunday, Autistic Pride Day, Autreat, and others.
Biomarkers of abnormal immune function have also been associated with increased impairments in behaviors that are characteristic of the core features of autism such as deficits in social interactions and communication.
Just after birth, the brains of children with autism tend to grow faster than usual, followed by normal or relatively slower growth in childhood.
It has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior.
It seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive specialization.
Typically, autism cannot be traced to a Mendelian (single-gene) mutation or to a single chromosome abnormality, and none of the genetic syndromes associated with ASDs have been shown to selectively cause ASD.
However, they reported lower levels of closeness and intimacy than siblings of children with Down syndrome; siblings of individuals with ASD have greater risk of negative well-being and poorer sibling relationships as adults.
In comparison, for PDD-NOS the association with intellectual disability is much weaker,  and by definition, the diagnosis of Asperger's excludes intellectual disability.
Most recent reviews tend to estimate a prevalence of 1–2 per 1,000 for autism and close to 6 per 1,000 for ASD, and 11 per 1,000 children in the United States for ASD as of 2008; because of inadequate data, these numbers may underestimate ASD's true rate.
Exposure to air pollution during pregnancy, especially heavy metals and particulates, may increase the risk of autism.
Some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways, such as those involved with cell adhesion.
It is distinguished not by a single symptom, but by a characteristic triad of symptoms: impairments in social interaction; impairments in communication; and restricted interests and repetitive behavior.
This increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices, referral patterns, availability of services, age at diagnosis, and public awareness, though unidentified environmental risk factors cannot be ruled out.
Through this movement, people hope to cause others to think of autism as a difference instead of a disease.
In a pair of studies, high-functioning children with autism aged 8–15 performed equally well as, and adults better than, individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling.
Hypo-connectivity seems to dominate, especially for interhemispheric and cortico-cortical functional connectivity.
Weak central coherence theory hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in autism.
Screening tools designed for one culture's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture.
Boys are at higher risk for ASD than girls.
Interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life, and successful neurodevelopment depends on a balanced immune response.
Neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators, resulting in a gap between what a report recommends and what education is provided.
Sociological and cultural aspects of autism have developed: some in the community seek a cure, while others believe that autism is simply another way of being.
Neuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that autism's mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception.
The behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies.
Although popularly used as an alternative treatment for people with autism, there is no good evidence that a gluten-free diet is of benefit.
These theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism.
* '''Genetic disorders'''.
The role of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) in the pathogenesis of fragile X syndrome, the most common identified genetic cause of autism, has led to interest in the possible implications for future autism research into this pathway.
Overt symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months, become established by age two or three years, and tend to continue through adulthood, although often in more muted form.
The increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose ASD, resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms.
The limited data suggest that, in children with intellectual disability, autism is associated with aggression, destruction of property, and tantrums.
In the second and third years, children with autism have less frequent and less diverse babbling, consonants, words, and word combinations; their gestures are less often integrated with words.
The appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers.
ASD, in turn, is a subset of the broader autism phenotype, which describes individuals who may not have ASD but do have autistic-like traits, such as avoiding eye contact.
In people with autism the two networks are not negatively correlated in time, suggesting an imbalance in toggling between the two networks, possibly reflecting a disturbance of self-referential thought.
Various DSP programs have been developed to explicitly deliver intervention systems through at-home parent implementation.
Autistic toddlers differ more strikingly from social norms; for example, they have less eye contact and turn-taking, and do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves, such as pointing at things.
* '''Minor physical anomalies''' are significantly increased in the autistic population.
Screening tools include the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT), the Early Screening of Autistic Traits Questionnaire, and the First Year Inventory; initial data on M-CHAT and its predecessor, the Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (CHAT), on children aged 18–30 months suggests that it is best used in a clinical setting and that it has low sensitivity (many false-negatives) but good specificity (few false-positives).
After childhood, key treatment issues include residential care, job training and placement, sexuality, social skills, and estate planning.
Intensive, sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acquire self-care, social, and job skills, and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladaptive behaviors; claims that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantiated.
Noted autistic Temple Grandin described her inability to understand the social communication of neurotypicals, or people with normal neural development, as leaving her feeling "like an anthropologist on Mars".
Although there is no known cure, there have been reported cases of children who recovered.
US states increasingly require private health insurance to cover autism services, shifting costs from publicly funded education programs to privately funded health insurance.
The number of people diagnosed has been increasing dramatically since the 1980s, partly due to changes in diagnostic practice and government-subsidized financial incentives for named diagnoses; the question of whether actual rates have increased is unresolved.
The word ''autism'' first took its modern sense in 1938 when Hans Asperger of the Vienna University Hospital adopted Bleuler's terminology ''autistic psychopaths'' in a lecture in German about child psychology.
Gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity-dependent changes.
It is not known whether Kanner derived the term independently of Asperger.
Selectivity is the most common problem, although eating rituals and food refusal also occur; this does not appear to result in malnutrition.
ICD-10 uses essentially the same definition.
The validity of this distinction remains controversial; it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype, or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regression.
People with autism may be severely impaired in some respects but normal, or even superior, in others.
Complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes, the environment, and epigenetic factors which do not change DNA sequencing but are heritable and influence gene expression.
There have also been many organizations dedicated to increasing the awareness of autism and the effects that autism has on someone’s life.
This is supported by recent studies that have found that infection during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of autism.
These deficits are present in early childhood, typically before age three, and lead to clinically significant functional impairment.
Available approaches include applied behavior analysis (ABA), developmental models, structured teaching, speech and language therapy, social skills therapy, and occupational therapy.
As people are often sized up initially from their basic language skills, these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends.
However, individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activation in many circuits outside the MNS and the MNS theory does not explain the normal performance of children with autism on imitation tasks that involve a goal or object.
Children with autism have been found by researchers to have inflammation of both the peripheral and central immune systems as indicated by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and significant activation of microglia.
Several diagnostic instruments are available.
Although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence, suggesting that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment, the methodological quality of systematic reviews of these studies has generally been poor, their clinical results are mostly tentative, and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options.
Also, some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with autism, but probably account for less than 5% of cases.
Environmental factors that have been claimed without evidence to contribute to or exacerbate autism include certain foods, infectious diseases, solvents, diesel exhaust, PCBs, phthalates and phenols used in plastic products, pesticides, brominated flame retardants, alcohol, smoking, illicit drugs, vaccines, and prenatal stress.
Social-science scholars have had an increased focused on studying those with autism in hopes to learn more about “autism as a culture, transcultural comparisons… and research on social movements.” Media has had an influence on how the public perceives those with autism.
Asperger was investigating an ASD now known as Asperger syndrome, though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1981.
The percentage of autistic individuals who also meet criteria for intellectual disability has been reported as anywhere from 25% to 70%, a wide variation illustrating the difficulty of assessing autistic intelligence.
Many medications are used to treat ASD symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails.
An autistic culture has developed, with some individuals seeking a cure and others believing autism should be accepted as a difference and not treated as a disorder.
Diagnosis is based on behavior, not cause or mechanism.
The Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children.
Unusual eating behavior occurs in about three-quarters of children with ASD, to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator.
Numerous candidate genes have been located, with only small effects attributable to any particular gene.
Not many children with autism live independently after reaching adulthood, though some become successful.
* '''Anxiety disorders''' are common among children with ASD; there are no firm data, but studies have reported prevalences ranging from 11% to 84%.
Two are commonly used in autism research: the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) is a semistructured parent interview, and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) uses observation and interaction with the child.
The underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning high-level neural connections and synchronization, along with an excess of low-level processes.
For example, magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in children with autism of delayed responses in the brain's processing of auditory signals.
There has been early research looking at hyperbaric treatments in children with autism.
Among these approaches, interventions either treat autistic features comprehensively, or focalize treatment on a specific area of deficit.
It occurs four to five times more often in boys than girls.
In his review, Kenworthy states that "the claim of executive dysfunction as a causal factor in autism is controversial", however, "it is clear that executive dysfunction plays a role in the social and cognitive deficits observed in individuals with autism".
Globally, autism is estimated to affect 21.7 million people as of 2013.
Differences are greater for under-responsivity (for example, walking into things) than for over-responsivity (for example, distress from loud noises) or for sensation seeking (for example, rhythmic movements).
Three- to five-year-old children with autism are less likely to exhibit social understanding, approach others spontaneously, imitate and respond to emotions, communicate nonverbally, and take turns with others.
Although the evidence does not implicate any single pregnancy-related risk factor as a cause of autism, the risk of autism is associated with advanced age in either parent, and with diabetes, bleeding, and use of psychiatric drugs in the mother during pregnancy.
Commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results, given the complexity of autism's genetics.
Starting in the late 1960s autism was established as a separate syndrome by demonstrating that it is lifelong, distinguishing it from intellectual disability and schizophrenia and from other developmental disorders, and demonstrating the benefits of involving parents in active programs of therapy.
The diagnostic criteria require that symptoms become apparent in early childhood, typically before age three.
Of the five PDD forms, Asperger syndrome is closest to autism in signs and likely causes; Rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism, but may have unrelated causes; PDD not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS; also called ''atypical autism'') is diagnosed when the criteria are not met for a more specific disorder.
Experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function, suggesting the possibility of targeting therapies to specific rare mutations known to cause autism.
Many individuals with ASD show superior skills in perception and attention, relative to the general population.
Although the rise of parent organizations and the destigmatization of childhood ASD have deeply affected how we view ASD, parents continue to feel social stigma in situations where their child's autistic behavior is perceived negatively by others, and many primary care physicians and medical specialists still express some beliefs consistent with outdated autism research.
Autism has a strong genetic basis, although the genetics of autism are complex and it is unclear whether ASD is explained more by rare mutations with major effects, or by rare multigene interactions of common genetic variants.
The earliest well-documented case of autism is that of Hugh Blair of Borgue, as detailed in a 1747 court case in which his brother successfully petitioned to annul Blair's marriage to gain Blair's inheritance.
It is not known which approach is more effective.
Autism affects information processing in the brain by altering how nerve cells and their synapses connect and organize; how this occurs is not well understood.
The MNS operates when an animal performs an action or observes another animal perform the same action.
One interventional strategy utilizes a parent training model, which teaches parents how to implement various ABA and DSP techniques, allowing for parents to disseminate interventions themselves.
* No two-word (spontaneous, not just echolalic) phrases by 24 months.
Although core difficulties tend to persist, symptoms often become less severe with age.
Children with autism may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language.
Although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical, it can be considered in some cases, such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features.
Autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems, and to disturb the timing of brain development more than the final product.
Functional connectivity studies have found both hypo- and hyper-connectivity in brains of people with autism.
More than half of US children diagnosed with ASD are prescribed psychoactive drugs or anticonvulsants, with the most common drug classes being antidepressants, stimulants, and antipsychotics.
Acquiring language before age six, having an IQ above 50, and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes; independent living is unlikely with severe autism.
Autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli, smile and look at others less often, and respond less to their own name.
Autism's symptoms result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain.
Unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood.
* '''Sleep problems''' affect about two-thirds of individuals with ASD at some point in childhood.
The mirror neuron system (MNS) theory of autism hypothesizes that distortion in the development of the MNS interferes with imitation and leads to autism's core features of social impairment and communication difficulties.
Most children with autism display moderately less attachment security than neurotypical children, although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe ASD.
* No single words by 16 months.
Rates of PDD-NOS's has been estimated at 3.7 per 1,000, Asperger syndrome at roughly 0.6 per 1,000, and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0.02 per 1,000.
* Several '''metabolic defects''', such as phenylketonuria, are associated with autistic symptoms.
Early speech or behavioral interventions can help children with autism gain self-care, social, and communication skills.
The Internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with, and has given them a way to form online communities and work remotely.
Several studies have tested this hypothesis by demonstrating structural abnormalities in MNS regions of individuals with ASD, delay in the activation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with Asperger syndrome, and a correlation between reduced MNS activity and severity of the syndrome in children with ASD.
Studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definitive conclusions about efficacy, however the development of evidence-based interventions has advanced in recent years.
Scientific evidence appears to matter less to service providers than program marketing, training availability, and parent requests.
A few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named.
All known teratogens (agents that cause birth defects) related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception, and though this does not exclude the possibility that autism can be initiated or affected later, there is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development.
Research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subgroups within the autistic population and by the traditional boundaries between the disciplines of psychiatry, psychology, neurology and pediatrics.
Controversies surround other proposed environmental causes; for example, the vaccine hypotheses, which have since been disproven.
Although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal symptoms, there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that children with autism have more or different gastrointestinal symptoms than usual; studies report conflicting results, and the relationship between gastrointestinal problems and ASD is unclear.
Two theoretical frameworks outlined for early childhood intervention include applied behavioral analysis (ABA) and developmental social pragmatic models (DSP).
* '''Epilepsy''', with variations in risk of epilepsy due to age, cognitive level, and type of language disorder.
Simon Baron-Cohen's empathizing–systemizing theory postulates that autistic individuals can systemize—that is, they can develop internal rules of operation to handle events inside the brain—but are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents.
Infection with rubella during pregnancy causes fewer than 1% of cases of autism;  vaccination against rubella can prevent many of those cases.
Its mechanism can be divided into two areas: the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism, and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors.
Studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0.7 for autism and as high as 0.9 for ASD, and siblings of those with autism are about 25 times more likely to be autistic than the general population.
Sensory abnormalities are found in over 90% of those with autism, and are considered core features by some, although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms differentiate autism from other developmental disorders.
Educational interventions can be effective to varying degrees in most children: intensive ABA treatment has demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing global functioning in preschool children and is well-established for improving intellectual performance of young children.
These organizations include Autism Speaks, Autism National Committee, Autism Society of America, and many others.
Unlike with autism, people with Asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development.
About half of parents of children with ASD notice their child's unusual behaviors by age 18 months, and about four-fifths notice by age 24 months.
Most professionals believe that race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic background do not affect the occurrence of autism.
Although the symptoms of autism and ASD begin early in childhood, they are sometimes missed; years later, adults may seek diagnoses to help them or their friends and family understand themselves, to help their employers make adjustments, or in some locations to claim disability living allowances or other benefits.
Autism can also be divided into syndromal and non-syndromal autism; the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound intellectual disability or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms, such as tuberous sclerosis.
* Any loss of any language or social skills, at any age.
ASD-related patterns of low function and aberrant activation in the brain differ depending on whether the brain is doing social or nonsocial tasks.
The sex ratio averages 4.3:1 and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment: it may be close to 2:1 with intellectual disability and more than 5.5:1 without.
About a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs.
The theory of mind hypothesis is supported by the atypical responses of children with autism to the Sally–Anne test for reasoning about others' motivations, and the mirror neuron system theory of autism described in ''Pathophysiology'' maps well to the hypothesis.
Unlike many other brain disorders, such as Parkinson's, autism does not have a clear unifying mechanism at either the molecular, cellular, or systems level; it is not known whether autism is a few disorders caused by mutations converging on a few common molecular pathways, or is (like intellectual disability) a large set of disorders with diverse mechanisms.
In the DSM V it is one of three recognized disorders in the autism spectrum (ASDs), the other two being Asperger syndrome, which lacks delays in cognitive development and language, and pervasive developmental disorder, not otherwise specified (commonly abbreviated as PDD-NOS), which is diagnosed when the full set of criteria for autism or Asperger syndrome are not met.
ASD can sometimes be diagnosed by age 14 months, although diagnosis becomes increasingly stable over the first three years of life: for example, a one-year-old who meets diagnostic criteria for ASD is less likely than a three-year-old to continue to do so a few years later.
The MNS may contribute to an individual's understanding of other people by enabling the modeling of their behavior via embodied simulation of their actions, intentions, and emotions.
While autism is highly heritable, researchers suspect both environmental and genetic factors as causes.
While many autistics don't have these special abilities, there are some autistic individuals who have been successful in their fields.
Some data suggests neuronal overgrowth potentially related to  an increase in several growth hormones or to impaired regulation of growth factor receptors.
The first category focuses on deficits in social cognition.
Tests of core executive processes such as eye movement tasks indicate improvement from late childhood to adolescence, but performance never reaches typical adult levels.
Kanner's reuse of ''autism'' led to decades of confused terminology like ''infantile schizophrenia'', and child psychiatry's focus on maternal deprivation led to misconceptions of autism as an infant's response to "refrigerator mothers".
Children recover occasionally, so that they lose their diagnosis of ASD; this occurs sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not.
The risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers; two potential explanations are the known increase in mutation burden in older sperm, and the hypothesis that men marry later if they carry genetic liability and show some signs of autism.
Clinical genetics evaluations are often done once ASD is diagnosed, particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause.
Underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases, and much of the recent increase in the number of reported ASD cases is likely due to changes in diagnostic practices.
Some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills, as opposed to a failure to make progress, typically from 15 to 30 months of age.
Disrupted synaptic development may also contribute to epilepsy, which may explain why the two conditions are associated.
'''Autism''' is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social interaction, verbal and non-verbal communication, and restricted and repetitive behavior.
No single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child's needs.
This anomaly appears to start a cascade of pathological events in the brain that are significantly influenced by environmental factors.
Research on autism/schizophrenia relations for chromosome 15 (15q13.3), chromosome 16 (16p13.1) and chromosome 17 (17p12) are inconclusive.
The available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism's true prevalence has increased; a real increase would suggest directing more attention and funding toward changing environmental factors instead of continuing to focus on genetics.
Because the behavior spectrum is continuous, boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary.
As new genetic tests are developed several ethical, legal, and social issues will emerge.
Although individuals with Asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism, the extent of the overlap between Asperger syndrome, HFA, and non-syndromal autism is unclear.
These signs often develop gradually, though some children with autism reach their developmental milestones at a normal pace and then regress.
Most children with autism acquire language by age five or younger, though a few have developed communication skills in later years.
A combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful.
Although many alternative therapies and interventions are available, few are supported by scientific studies.
No single repetitive or self-injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism, but autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors.
A genotype-first model of diagnosis has been proposed, which would routinely assess the genome's copy number variations.
He derived it from the Greek word ''autós'' (αὐτός, meaning "self"), and used it to mean morbid self-admiration, referring to "autistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies, against which any influence from outside becomes an intolerable disturbance".
In general, higher IQs are correlated with greater responsiveness to treatment and improved treatment outcomes.
Children with high-functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers, despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone.
However, most studies have found no evidence of impairment in autistic individuals' ability to understand other people's basic intentions or goals; instead, data suggests that impairments are found in understanding more complex social emotions or in considering others' viewpoints.
These theories are somewhat related to Baron-Cohen's earlier theory of mind approach, which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from an inability to ascribe mental states to oneself and others.
Hence, a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited: that is, the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome.
