Abu Rayhan began by asking Avicenna eighteen questions, ten of which were criticisms of Aristotle's ''On the Heavens''.
He added that "None, however, of the Muslim philosophers engaged so much in transmitting Aristotle's lore
The necessary is the source of its own being without borrowed existence.
Avicenna endorsed the law of noncontradiction proposed by Aristotle, that a fact could not be both true and false at the same time and in the same sense of the terminology used.
These were known in Latin under the title De Anima (treatises "on the soul").
The thought experiment told its readers to imagine themselves created all at once while suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations, which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies.
The Samanid dynasty in the eastern part of Persia, Greater Khorasan and Central Asia as well as the Buyid dynasty in the western part of Persia and Iraq provided a thriving atmosphere for scholarly and cultural development.
He died in June 1037, in his fifty-eighth year, in the month of Ramadan and was buried in Hamadan, Iran.
In optics, Ibn Sina was among those who argued that light had a speed, observing that "if the perception of light is due to the emission of some sort of particles by a luminous source, the speed of light must be finite."
The Avicenna Directories will list universities and schools where doctors, public health practitioners, pharmacists and others, are educated.
Ibn Sina seems to have declined the offers of Mahmud of Ghazni, and proceeded westwards to Urgench in modern Turkmenistan, where the vizier, regarded as a friend of scholars, gave him a small monthly stipend.
Ibn Sina subsequently settled at Rey, in the vicinity of modern Tehran, the home town of Rhazes; where Majd Addaula, a son of the last Buwayhid emir, was nominal ruler under the regency of his mother (Seyyedeh Khatun).
In his book ''The Physician'' (1988) Noah Gordon tells the story of a young English medical apprentice who disguises himself as a Jew to travel from England to Persia and learn from Avicenna, the great master of his time.
He discusses Aristotle's ''Posterior Analytics'' and significantly diverged from it on several points.
During these years he began to study literary matters and philology, instigated, it is asserted, by criticisms on his style.
Existence must, therefore, be due to an agent-cause that necessitates, imparts, gives, or adds existence to an essence.
His portrait hangs in the Hall of the Avicenna Faculty of Medicine in the University of Paris.
Notably, Avicenna develops what is called the "flying man" argument in the Psychology of ''The Cure'' I.1.7 as defense of the argument that the soul is without quantitative extension, which has an affinity with Descartes's ''cogito'' argument (or what phenomenology designates as a form of an "''epoche''").
Avicenna Research Institute in Tehran (Iran), the ''ibn Sīnā'' Tajik State Medical University in Dushanbe, Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences at Aligarh, India, Avicenna School in Karachi and Avicenna Medical College in Lahore, Pakistan Ibne Sina Balkh Medical School in his native province of Balkh in Afghanistan, Ibni Sina Faculty Of Medicine of Ankara University Ankara, Turkey  and Ibn Sina Integrated School in Marawi City (Philippines) are all named in his honour.
When the storm had passed, Ibn Sina returned with the emir to Hamadan, and carried on his literary labors.
There are occasional brief hints and allusions in his longer works however that Avicenna considered philosophy as the only sensible way to distinguish real prophecy from illusion.
A shorter form of the work is known as the An-najat (''Liberatio'').
Avicenna's legacy in classical psychology is primarily embodied in the ''Kitab al-nafs'' parts of his ''Kitab al-shifa'' (''The Book of Healing'') and ''Kitab al-najat'' (''The Book of Deliverance'').
On his deathbed remorse seized him; he bestowed his goods on the poor, restored unjust gains, freed his slaves, and read through the Quran every three days until his death.
He explains that the ideal situation is when one grasps that a "relation holds between the terms, which would allow for absolute, universal certainty."
Along with Rhazes, Abulcasis, Ibn al-Nafis, and al-Ibadi, Ibn Sīnā is considered an important compiler of early Muslim medicine.
The Dāneš-nāma covers such topics as logic, metaphysics, music theory and other sciences of his time.
Besides philosophy and medicine, Avicenna's corpus includes writings on astronomy, alchemy, geography and geology, psychology, Islamic theology, logic, mathematics, physics and poetry.
Various texts (such as the 'Ahd with Bahmanyar) show that he debated philosophical points with the greatest scholars of the time.
It was used as the standard medical textbook in the Islamic world and Europe up to the 18th century.
His medical texts were unusual in that where controversy existed between Galen and Aristotle's views on medical matters (such as anatomy), he preferred to side with Aristotle, where necessary updating Aristotle's position to take into account post-Aristotelian advances in anatomical knowledge.
He criticized Aristotle's view of the stars receiving their light from the Sun, stating that the stars are self-luminous, and believed that the planets are also self-luminous.
Avicenna grounds his psychology on physiology, which means his account of the soul is one that deals almost entirely with the natural science of the body and its abilities of perception.
Ibn Sīnā's commentaries on Aristotle often criticized the philosopher, encouraging a lively debate in the spirit of ijtihad.
The body is unnecessary; in relation to it, the soul is its perfection.
The emir decreed that he should be banished from the country.
Yet, to require differentia entails that they exist 'due-to-themselves' as well as 'due to what is other than themselves'; and this is contradictory.
Constant feuds which raged between the regent and her second son, Shams al-Daula, however, compelled the scholar to quit the place.
Avicennian logic also influenced several early European logicians such as Albertus Magnus and William of Ockham.
Ibn Sina classified minerals into stones, fusible substances, sulfurs, and salts, building on the ideas of Aristotle and Jabir.
George Sarton, the author of ''The History of Science'', described Ibn Sīnā as "one of the greatest thinkers and medical scholars in history"(cf.
The youthful physician's fame spread quickly, and he treated many patients without asking for payment.
He is remembered in the Western history of medicine as a major historical figure who made important contributions to medicine and the European Renaissance.
This process of perception and abstraction is the nexus of the soul and body, for the material body may only perceive material objects, while the immaterial soul may only receive the immaterial, universal forms.
He also wrote the ''Summary of the Almagest'', (based on Ptolemy's ''Almagest''), with an appended treatise "to bring that which is stated in the Almagest and what is understood from Natural Science into conformity".
Avicenna had access to the great libraries of Balkh, Khwarezm, Gorgan, Rey, Isfahan and Hamadan.
He learned Indian arithmetic from an Indian greengrocer,ءMahmoud Massahi and he began to learn more from a wandering scholar who gained a livelihood by curing the sick and teaching the young.
The first knowledge of the flying person would be "I am," affirming his or her essence.
The search for a definitive Islamic philosophy separate from Occasionalism can be seen in what is left of his work.
The Active Intellect reveals the universals concealed in material objects much like the sun makes color available to our eyes.
The Samanid dynasty came to its end in December 1004.
The Latin editions of part of these works have been modified by the corrections which the monastic editors confess that they applied.
Avicenna was born  in Afšana, a village near Bukhara (in present-day Uzbekistan), the capital of the Samanids, a Persian dynasty in Central Asia and Greater Khorasan.
He also studied Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) under the Sunni Hanafi scholar Ismail al-Zahid.
Ibn Sina himself was at this time stricken by a severe illness.
The third work (''The Book of Minerals'') is agreed to be Avicenna's writing, adapted from the ''Kitab al-Shifa'' (''Book of the Remedy'').
In its place, he develops a "method of experimentation as a means for scientific inquiry."
Avicenna was taught some extent of philosophy books such as Introduction (Isagoge)'s Porphyry (philosopher), Euclid's Elements, Ptolemy's Almagest by an unpopular philosopher, Abu Abdullah Nateli, who claimed philosophizing.
Thus, the philosopher's connection between the soul and body is explained almost entirely by his understanding of perception; in this way, bodily perception interrelates with the immaterial human intellect.
However, Avicenna posited the brain as the place where reason interacts with sensation.
Avicenna's is a less sophisticated variant of the theory of impetus developed by Buridan in the 14th century.
He claimed to have observed Venus as a spot on the Sun.
and called him "the most famous scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places, and times."
Meanwhile, he had written to Abu Ya'far, the prefect of the dynamic city of Isfahan, offering his services.
Ibn Sina was even raised to the office of vizier.
Whereas existence is the domain of the contingent and the accidental, essence endures within a being beyond the accidental.
After a perilous journey, they reached Isfahan, receiving an honorable welcome from the prince.
On the grounds is a museum dedicated to his life, times and work.
Every evening, extracts from his great works, the ''Canon'' and the ''Sanatio'', were dictated and explained to his pupils.
Later interpretations of Avicenna's philosophy split into three different schools; those (such as al-Tusi) who continued to apply his philosophy as a system to interpret later political events and scientific advances; those (such as al-Razi) who considered Avicenna's theological works in isolation from his wider philosophical concerns; and those (such as al-Ghazali) who selectively used parts of his philosophy to support their own attempts to gain greater spiritual insights through a variety of mystical means.
Although he did not develop a real theory of temporal propositions, he did study the relationship between ''temporalis'' and the implication.
Avicenna created new scientific vocabulary that had not previously existed in Persian.
He stated, "Anyone who denies the law of noncontradiction should be beaten and burned until he admits that to be beaten is not the same as not to be beaten, and to be burned is not the same as not to be burned."
These included treatises on the prophets (whom he viewed as "inspired philosophers"), and also on various scientific and philosophical interpretations of the Quran, such as how Quranic cosmology corresponds to his own philosophical system.
Ibn Sina's first appointment was that of physician to the emir, Nuh II, who owed him his recovery from a dangerous illness (997).
Avicenna first began to learn the Quran and literature in such a way that when he was ten years old he had essentially learned all of them.
The Avicenna Mausoleum and Museum in Hamadan was built in 1952.
Arabic philosophers have hinted at the idea that Ibn Sīnā was attempting to "re-Aristotelianise" Muslim philosophy in its entirety, unlike his predecessors, who accepted the conflation of Platonic, Aristotelian, Neo- and Middle-Platonic works transmitted into the Muslim world.
Quotations From Famous Historians of Science, Cyberistan.)
For example, Avicenna considers the motion of the solar apogee, which Ptolemy had taken to be fixed.
The material and immaterial interact through the Active Intellect, which is a "divine light" containing the intelligible forms.
He argued that, in this scenario, one would still have self-consciousness.
So great was his joy at the discovery, made with the help of a work from which he had expected only mystery, that he hastened to return thanks to God, and bestowed alms upon the poor.
the sphere of Venus comes before the sphere of the Sun when moving out from the Earth in the prevailing geocentric model.
Sensation prepares the soul to receive rational concepts from the universal Agent Intellect.
The ''epistola de Re recta'' is somewhat less sceptical of alchemy; Anawati argues that it is by Avicenna, but written earlier in his career when he had not yet firmly decided that transmutation was impossible.
Some of his shorter essays on medicine, logic, etc., take a poetical form (the poem on logic was published by Schmoelders in 1836).
There is also a  (''hikmat-al-mashriqqiyya'', in Latin ''Philosophia Orientalis''), mentioned by Roger Bacon, the majority of which is lost in antiquity, which according to Averroes was pantheistic in tone.
It is what always exists.
One important feature of his writing is that he considers mathematical astronomy as a separate discipline to astrology.
Similar disagreements exist on the background of Avicenna's family, whereas some writers considered them Sunni, some more recent writers contested that they were Shia.
His friends advised him to slow down and take life moderately.
Similarly the Declaratio is believed not to be actually by Avicenna.
In Louis L'Amour's 1985 historical novel ''The Walking Drum'', Kerbouchard studies and discusses Avicenna's ''The Canon of Medicine''.
Philosophy, Fiqh and theology (kalaam) were further developed, most noticeably by Avicenna and his opponents.
Ibn Sina's chief reward for this service was access to the royal library of the Samanids, well-known patrons of scholarship and scholars.
Avicenna discussed the issue of a proper methodology for scientific inquiry and the question of "How does one acquire the first principles of a science?"
Avicenna argued that the impossible being is that which cannot exist, while the contingent in itself (''mumkin bi-dhatihi'') has the potentiality to be or not to be without entailing a contradiction.
He refused, however, stating that: ''"I prefer a short life with width to a narrow one with length"''.
The Necessary exists 'due-to-Its-Self', and has no quiddity/essence (''mahiyya'') other than existence (''wujud'').
Avicenna was played by Ben Kingsley.
Near his birthplace in Qishlak Afshona, some  north of Bukhara, a training college for medical staff has been named for him.
The book is also important in respect to Persian scientific works.
Avicenna thus concluded that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing, and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms, but as a primary given, a substance.
Of linguistic significance even to this day are a few books that he wrote in nearly pure Persian language (particularly the Danishnamah-yi 'Ala', Philosophy for Ala' ad-Dawla').
Deep into the night, he would continue his studies, and even in his dreams problems would pursue him and work out their solution.
Ibn Sina created an extensive corpus of works during what is commonly known as the Islamic Golden Age, in which the translations of Greco-Roman, Persian, and Indian texts were studied extensively.
It is unclear if Buridan was influenced by Avicenna, or by Philoponus directly.
Qabus, the generous ruler of Tabaristan, himself a poet and a scholar, with whom Ibn Sina had expected to find asylum, was on about that date (1012) starved to death by his troops who had revolted.
Avicenna criticized Aristotelian induction, arguing that "it does not lead to the absolute, universal, and certain premises that it purports to provide."
Avicenna wrote a number of short treatises dealing with Islamic theology.
The ''Canon'' still plays an important role in Unani medicine.
The 1982 Soviet film ''Youth of Genius'' () by  recounts Avicenna's younger years.
In general these treatises linked his philosophical writings to Islamic religious ideas; for example, the body's afterlife.
His works numbered almost 450 volumes on a wide range of subjects, of which around 240 have survived.
The new emir of Hamadan, hearing of this correspondence and discovering where Ibn Sina was hiding, incarcerated him in a fortress.
Ibn Sīnā wrote at least one treatise on alchemy, but several others have been falsely attributed to him.
Avicenna was a devout Muslim and sought to reconcile rational philosophy with Islamic theology.
Two encyclopaedic treatises, dealing with philosophy, are often mentioned.
The "Persian Scholars Pavilion" at United Nations in Vienna, Austria is featuring the statues of four prominent Iranian figures.
In modern Iran, he is considered a national icon, and is often regarded as one of the greatest Persians to have ever lived.
The use of Avicenna's name symbolises the worldwide partnership that is needed for the promotion of health services of high quality."
The project team stated "Why Avicenna?
Avicenna's psychology and theory of knowledge influenced William of Auvergne, Bishop of Paris and Albertus Magnus, while his metaphysics influenced the thought of Thomas Aquinas.
as did the two men just mentioned.
When actualized, the contingent becomes a 'necessary existent due to what is other than itself' (''wajib al-wujud bi-ghayrihi'').
Necessary being due to itself (''wajib al-wujud bi-dhatihi'') is true in itself, while the contingent being is 'false in itself' and 'true due to something else other than itself'.
Correspondence between Ibn Sina (with his student Ahmad ibn 'Ali al-Ma'sumi) and Al-Biruni has survived in which they debated Aristotelian natural philosophy and the Peripatetic school.
In the ''Al-Burhan'' (''On Demonstration'') section of ''The Book of Healing'', Avicenna discussed the philosophy of science and described an early scientific method of inquiry.
In sense perception, the perceiver senses the form of the object; first, by perceiving features of the object by our external senses.
His aim was to prove the existence of God and His creation of the world scientifically and through reason and logic.
Avicenna's work was further developed by Najm al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī and became the dominant system of Islamic logic until modern times.
Avicenna memorized the Quran by the age of ten, and as an adult, he wrote five treatises commenting on suras from the Quran.
Following is an English translation of the argument:
His ''Book of Healing'' became available in Europe in partial Latin translation some fifty years after its composition, under the title ''Sufficientia'', and some authors have identified a "Latin Avicennism" as flourishing for some time, paralleling the more influential Latin Averroism, but suppressed by the Parisian decrees of 1210 and 1215.
The soul completes the action of intellection by accepting forms that have been abstracted from matter.
For the next year and a half, he studied philosophy, in which he encountered greater obstacles.
After a brief sojourn at Qazvin he passed southwards to Hamadãn where Shams al-Daula, another Buwayhid emir, had established himself.
Conversely, Sharaf Khorasani, citing a rejection of an invitation of the Sunni Governor Sultan Mahmoud Ghazanavi by Avicenna to his court, believes that Avicenna was an Ismaili.
The study of the Quran and the Hadith thrived in such a scholarly atmosphere.
The prize was established in 2003 and named after Avicenna.
Most of his works were written in Arabic –&nbsp;then the language of science in the Middle East&nbsp;– and some in Persian.
It has been translated into English by Parwiz Mowewedge in 1977.
On a similar occasion the disease returned; with difficulty he reached Hamadan, where, finding the disease gaining ground, he refused to keep up the regimen imposed, and resigned himself to his fate.
There is also a crater on the Moon named Avicenna and a plant genus ''Avicennia''.
Early Islamic philosophy and Islamic metaphysics, imbued as it is with Islamic theology, distinguishes more clearly than Aristotelianism between essence and existence.
This process requires a concrete particular (material) to be abstracted into the universal intelligible (immaterial).
The theory of motion presented by Avicenna was probably influenced by the 6th-century Alexandrian scholar John Philoponus.
Under the Samanids, Bukhara rivaled Baghdad as a cultural capital of the Islamic world.
According to his autobiography, Avicenna had memorised the entire Quran by the age of 10.
He also provided a wrong explanation of the rainbow phenomenon.
His mother, named Setareh, was from Bukhara; his father, Abdullah, was a respected Ismaili scholar from Balkh, an important town of the Samanid Empire, in what is today Balkh Province, Afghanistan.
Furthermore, It is 'One' (''wahid ahad'') since there cannot be more than one 'Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself' without differentia (fasl) to distinguish them from each other.
The pay was small, however, so Ibn Sina wandered from place to place through the districts of Nishapur and Merv to the borders of Khorasan, seeking an opening for his talents.
A number of theories have been proposed regarding Avicenna's madhab (school of thought within Islamic jurisprudence).
At first, Ibn Sina entered into the service of a high-born lady; but the emir, hearing of his arrival, called him in as medical attendant, and sent him back with presents to his dwelling.
He did not state this more clearly because of the political implications of such a theory, if prophecy could be questioned, and also because most of the time he was writing shorter works which concentrated on explaining his theories on philosophy and theology clearly, without digressing to consider epistemological matters which could only be properly considered by other philosophers.
Avicenna referred to the living human intelligence, particularly the active intellect, which he believed to be the hypostasis by which God communicates truth to the human mind and imparts order and intelligibility to nature.
He used his transit observation to help establish that Venus was, at least sometimes, below the Sun in Ptolemaic cosmology, i.e.
His ''Logic'', ''Metaphysics'', ''Physics'', and ''De Caelo'', are treatises giving a synoptic view of Aristotelian doctrine, though  ''Metaphysics'' demonstrates a significant departure from the brand of Neoplatonism known as Aristotelianism in Ibn Sīnā's world;
After five years, his younger brother, Mahmoud, was born.
The conceivability of this "Floating Man" indicates that the soul is perceived intellectually, which entails the soul's separateness from the body.
Avicenna then adds two further methods for arriving at the first principles: the ancient Aristotelian method of induction (''istiqra''), and the method of examination and experimentation (''tajriba'').
While he was imprisoned in the castle of Fardajan near Hamadhan, Avicenna wrote his famous "Floating Man" – literally falling man – thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantiality and immateriality of the soul.
A monument was erected outside the Bukhara museum.
In March 2008, it was announced that Avicenna's name would be used for new Directories of education institutions for health care professionals, worldwide.
On the death of the emir, Ibn Sina ceased to be vizier and hid himself in the house of an apothecary, where, with intense assiduity, he continued the composition of his works.
Dr. A. Zahoor and Dr. Z. Haq (1997).
To do so, the cause must be an existing thing and coexist with its effect.
On the other hand, Dimitri Gutas along with Aisha Khan and Jules J. Janssens demonstrated that Avicenna was a Sunni Hanafi.
Avicenna's most important Persian work is the ''Danishnama-i 'Alai'' "the Book of Knowledge for Prince 'Ala ad-Daulah".
While discussing the views of the theists among the Greek philosophers, namely Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle in ''Al-Munqidh min ad-Dalal'' ("Deliverance from Error"), al-Ghazali noted that the Greek philosophers "must be taxed with unbelief, as must their partisans among the Muslim philosophers, such as Ibn Sina and al-Farabi and their likes."
Several of Ibn Sina's treatises were written for this patron; and the commencement of his ''Canon of Medicine'' also dates from his stay in Hyrcania.
Avicenna's views on Islamic theology (and philosophy) were enormously influential, forming part of the core of the curriculum at Islamic religious schools until the 19th century.
Even during this perturbed time, Ibn Sina persevered with his studies and teaching.
Because it is conceivable that a person, suspended in air while cut off from sense experience, would still be capable of determining his own existence, the thought experiment points to the conclusions that the soul is a perfection, independent of the body, and an immaterial substance.
Aruzi Samarqandi describes how before Avicenna left Khwarezm he had met Al-Biruni (a famous scientist and astronomer), Abu Nasr Iraqi (a renowned mathematician), Abu Sahl Masihi (a respected philosopher) and Abu al-Khayr Khammar (a great physician).
In itself, the soul is an immaterial substance.
The novel was adapted into a feature film, ''The Physician'', in 2013.
Avicenna&nbsp;... was&nbsp;... noted for his synthesis of knowledge from both east and west.
He was one of the Islamic world's leading writers in the field of medicine.
Avicenna's Neoplatonic scheme of "emanations" became fundamental in the  ''Kalam'' (school of theological discourse) in the 12th century.
Ibn Sina, however, remained hidden for forty days in sheikh Ahmed Fadhel's house, until a fresh attack of illness induced the emir to restore him to his post.
He turned to medicine at 16, and not only learned medical theory, but also by gratuitous attendance of the sick had, according to his own account, discovered new methods of treatment.
Medieval historian Ẓahīr al-dīn al-Bayhaqī (d. 1169) considered Avicenna to be a follower of the Brethren of Purity.
Greco-Roman (Mid- and Neo-Platonic, and Aristotelian) texts translated by the Kindi school were commented, redacted and developed substantially by Islamic intellectuals, who also built upon Persian and Indian mathematical systems, astronomy, algebra, trigonometry and medicine.
Ibn Sīnā wrote on Earth sciences such as geology in ''The Book of Healing''.
Ibn Sīnā wrote extensively on early Islamic philosophy, especially the subjects logic, ethics, and metaphysics, including treatises named ''Logic'' and ''Metaphysics''.
His poems appear in both Arabic and Persian.
A severe colic, which seized him on the march of the army against Hamadan, was checked by remedies so violent that Ibn Sina could scarcely stand.
Carl Benjamin Boyer described Avicenna's ("Ibn Sīnā") theory on the rainbow as follows:
Avicenna argued that the Islamic prophets should be considered higher than philosophers.
The treatises of Ibn Sīnā influenced later Muslim thinkers in many areas including theology, philology, mathematics, astronomy, physics, and music.
The film is set in Bukhara at the turn of the millennium.
While discussing the formation of mountains, he explained:
Avicenna's consideration of the essence-attributes question may be elucidated in terms of his ontological analysis of the modalities of being; namely impossibility, contingency, and necessity.
In 1253, a Latin text entitled ''Speculum Tripartitum'' stated the following regarding Avicenna's theory on heat:
In such moments of baffled inquiry, he would leave his books, perform the requisite ablutions, then go to the mosque, and continue in prayer till light broke on his difficulties.
Al-Razi and Al-Farabi had provided methodology and knowledge in medicine and philosophy.
He asked how a scientist would arrive at "the initial axioms or hypotheses of a deductive science without inferring them from some more basic premises?"
