The newly elected President of the Republic at the beginning of the year 1913, Raymond Poincaré, visited Provence in mid-October.
Approximately 72,500 passengers passed through the airport in 2011.
From the 21st century, a census of communes with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants is held every five years, unlike larger communes that have a sample survey every year.
The ''Courrier d'Avignon'' appeared from 1733 to 1793 with two interruptions: one between July 1768 and August 1769 due to the annexation of Avignon to France and the other between 30 November 1790 and 24 May 1791.
As they were not particularly strong fortifications, the Popes relied instead on the immensely strong fortifications of their palace, the "Palais des Papes".
The medieval monuments and the annual Festival d'Avignon have helped to make the town a major centre for tourism.
In 1536 king Francis I of France invaded the papal territory, in order to overthrow Emperor Charles V, who was emperor of the territory.
In 1032 when Conrad II inherited the Kingdom of Arles, Avignon was attached to the Holy Roman Empire.
Pope Innocent XII abolished nepotism and the office of Legate in Avignon on 7 February 1693, handing over its temporal government in 1692 to the Congregation of Avignon (i.e.
They asked for one livre for each of them which came to 1,000 livres, a huge sum, which was paid to them quickly.
In 2011 the unemployment rate was 15.6% while it was 13.7% in 2006.
Between 1309 and 1377 during the Avignon Papacy, seven successive popes resided in Avignon and in 1348 Pope Clement VI bought the town from Joanna I of Naples.
After the restoration of the Papacy in Rome the spiritual and temporal government of Avignon was entrusted to a gubernatorial Legate, notably the Cardinal-nephew, who was replaced in his absence by a vice-legate (contrary to the legate he was usually a commoner and not a cardinal).
"The Pope renounces, purely and simply, all the rights to which he might lay claim over the city and territory of Avignon, and the Comtat Venaissin and its dependencies, and transfers and makes over the said rights to the French Republic."
On 19 October 907 King Louis the Blind became emperor and restored an island in the Rhone to Remigius, Bishop of Avignon.
The university occupies the 18th century buildings of the ''Hôpital Sainte-Marthe''.
Before the French Revolution Avignon had as suffragan sees Carpentras, Vaison and Cavaillon, which were united by the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801 to Avignon, together with the Diocese of Apt, a suffragan of Aix-en-Provence.
In 1309 the city, still part of the Kingdom of Arles, was chosen by Pope Clement V as his residence at the time of the Council of Vienne and, from 9 March 1309 until 13 January 1377, Avignon rather than Rome was the seat of the Papacy.
A political event of importance took place in 932 with the reunion of the kingdom of Provence with Upper Burgundy.
The Rhone Valley is an old alluvial zone: loose deposits cover much of the ground.
The town is now the capital of the Vaucluse department and one of the few French cities to have preserved its ramparts.
The historic centre, which includes the Palais des Papes, the cathedral, and the Pont d'Avignon, became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1995.
), the first Transalpine province of the Roman Empire.
On 7 July 1793 federalist insurgents under General Rousselet entered Avignon.
The ''Durançole'' fed the western moats of the city and was also used to irrigate crops at Montfavet.
Already the reception he had received at the ''Mas du Juge'' from the poet and the communal meal they had taken in the presidential train at Graveson had reassured him of the patriotism of Provence.
The 20th century saw significant development of urbanization, mainly outside the city walls, and several major projects have emerged.
AC Arles-Avignon is a professional French football team.
In 1583 King Henry III attempted to offer an exchange of the Marquisate of Saluzzo for Avignon, however his offer was refused by Pope Gregory XIII.
William had his seat at Avignon and Roubaud at Arles.
The wettest month is September, with a rain average of 102 millimetres, and the driest month is July, when the monthly average rainfall is 37 millimetres.
The 7th and 8th centuries were the darkest period in the history of Avignon.
*Clement V: 1305–1314 (curia moved to Avignon March 9, 1309)
The Rhone was now a border that could only be crossed on the old bridge at Avignon.
The University of Avignon was founded by Pope Boniface VIII in 1303 and was famed as a seat of legal studies, flourishing until the French Revolution.
the Cavares, allies with the Massaliotes, became Roman.
On the transport side 1937 saw the creation of the Avignon - Caumont Airport which became an airport in the early 1980s and became prominent with the opening of international routes, a new control tower, extension of the runway, etc.
The opera was an adaptation of the 1790 comedy by Desforges.
As Bishop of Cavaillon, Cardinal Philippe de Cabassoles, Lord of Vaucluse, was the great protector of the Renaissance poet Petrarch.
After the death of Alphonse in 1271, Philip III of France inherited his share of Avignon and passed it to his son Philip the Fair in 1285.
The Palace of the Popes belongs, by virtue of its severe architecture, to the Gothic art of the South of France.
A medieval Latin proverb said of the city: ''Avenie ventosa, sine vento venenosa, cum vento fastidiosa'' (Windy Avignon, pest-ridden when there is no wind, wind-pestered when there is).
In addition a free shuttle boat connects Avignon to the Île de la Barthelasse and, since 1987, a harbor master has managed all river traffic.
The Henri Duffaut hospital, the City of Avignon, and the CHS of Montfavet are the largest employers in the town with about 2,000 employees each.
This was confirmed on 19 February 1797 by the Treaty of Tolentino in which Article 5 definitively sanctioned the annexation stating that:
He had called him to his aid against the "Frankish barbarians" who ruined the countryside.
*Benedict XIII (1394-1403)
When he entered the city the people received him very well, and in return for the reception the people were all granted to them the same privileges that French subjects enjoyed, such as being able to hold state offices.
In 1960 and 1961 excavations in the northern part of the ''Rocher des Doms'' directed by Sylvain Gagnière uncovered a small anthropomorphic stele (height: 20&nbsp;cm), which was found in an area of land being reworked.
When Gregory XI brought the seat of the papacy to Rome in 1377, the city of Avignon was administered by a legate.
On the death of the Archbishop of Arles, Philippe de Lévis in 1475, Pope Sixtus IV in Rome reduced the size of the diocese of Arles: he detached the diocese of Avignon in the province of Arles and raised it to the rank of an archbishopric in favour of his nephew Giuliano della Rovere, who later became Pope Julius II.
Despite all the invasions, intellectual life continued to flourish on the banks of the Rhône.
In that same year Louis, the son of Boson, succeeded his father.
The Hospital Canal (joining the Durançole) and the Crillon Canal (1775) were dug to irrigate the territories of Montfavet, Pontet, and Vedène.
This river was later called the ''Durançole''.
This zoning is for exceptional seismicity resulting in the destruction of buildings.
Since the Pope was the spiritual head and, after 1348, the temporal ruler of Avignon, he was able to have a great deal of influence in all university affairs.
The papal vice-legate, generally a bishop, represented the civil power (in this case the pope) and was chiefly a judicial officer who ranked higher than the Primicerius (Rector).
The Durance flows along the southern boundary of the commune into the Rhone and marks the departmental boundary with Bouches-du-Rhône.
The bridge of the song is the Saint-Bénézet bridge over the Rhône of which only four arches (out of the initial 22) now remain.
The walls that were built by the popes in the years immediately following the acquisition of Avignon as papal territory are well preserved.
The ''Auenion'' of the 1st century BC was Latinized to ''Avennĭo'' (or ''Avēnĭo''), ''-ōnis'' in the 1st century and was written ''Avinhon'' in classic Occitan spelling or ''Avignoun'' aviɲũ in Mistralian spelling The inhabitants of the commune are called ''avinhonencs'' or ''avignounen'' in both Occitan and Provençal dialect.
Clement VII and Benedict XIII reigned again in Avignon Overall therefore it was nine popes who succeeded in the papal palace and enriched themselves during their pontificate.
A bridge across the Rhone was built between 1171 and 1185, with a length of some 900&nbsp;m (2950&nbsp;ft), but was destroyed during the siege of Avignon by Louis VIII of France in 1226.
The relief is quite low despite the creation of mounds allowing local protection from flooding.
Avignon is served by two railway stations: the historic train station built in 1860, the ''Gare d'Avignon-Centre'', located just outside the city walls, which can accommodate any type of train and, since 2001, the ''Gare d'Avignon TGV'' in the "Courtine" district south of the city, on the LGV Méditerranée line.
Avignon's survival as a papal enclave was, however, somewhat precarious, as the French crown maintained a large standing garrison at Villeneuve-lès-Avignon just across the river.
File:Hotel de la monnaie.JPG|The Hôtel des Monnaies.
This congregation, to which appeals were made from the decisions of the vice-legate, was linked to the Congregation of Loreto within the Roman Curia.
Since 1976 a convention centre has occupied two wings of the palace of the popes.
On 25 July General Carteaux appeared before the city and it was abandoned the next day by the troops of General Rousselet as a result of a misinterpretation of orders from Marseille.
Following the passage of Maximian, who was fighting the Bagaudes, the Gallic peasants revolted.
Over the years 121 and 122 the Emperor Hadrian stayed in the Province where he visited Vaison, Orange, Apt, and Avignon.
In 536 Avignon, following the fate of Provence, was ceded to the Merovingians by Vitiges, the new king of the Ostrogoths.
It was Benedict XII who built the ''Old Palace'' and his successor Clement VI the ''New Palace''.
Towards the year 1000 there was already a proconsul Béranger with his wife Gilberte who are known to have founded an abbey at "Castrum Caneto".
His successor, Gregory XI, also decided to return to Rome and this ended the first period of the Avignon Papacy.
It fed the moat around the first ramparts then fed the moat on the newer eastern city walls (14th century).
*Clement VII (1378-1394)
This was confirmed by other findings made in this excavation near the large water reservoir on top of the rock where two polished greenstone axes were discovered, a lithic industry characteristic of "shepherds of the plateaux".
The French King Philip the Fair, who had inherited from his father all the rights of Alphonse de Poitiers (the last Count of Toulouse), made them over to Charles II, King of Naples and Count of Provence (1290).
Inasmuch as the eastern banks of the Rhone marked the edge of his kingdom, when the river flooded up into the city of Avignon, Philip taxed the city since during periods of flood, the city technically lay within his domain.
Boniface VIII and King Charles II of Naples  were the first great protectors and benefactors to the university.
This Charter is the first mention of a cathedral dedicated to Mary.
There are really two festivals that take place: the more formal "Festival In", which presents plays inside the Palace of the Popes and the more bohemian "Festival Off", which is known for its presentation of largely undiscovered plays and street performances.
The right hand side was designed by Jean-Baptiste Franque and built between 1743 and 1745.
In 896 Thibert acted as plenipotentiary of the king at Avignon, Arles, and Marseille with the title of "Governor-General of all the counties of Arles and Provence".
This watercourse is called the Vaucluse Canal but Avignon people still call it the ''Sorgue'' or ''Sorguette''.
In 1562 the city was besieged by the François de Beaumont, baron des Adrets, who wanted to avenge the massacre of Orange.
Thibert, who was his most effective supporter became Count of Apt.
In Avignon there would be no bishop for 205 years with the last known holder being Agricola.
This immense Gothic building, with walls 17–18 feet thick, was built 1335–1364 on a natural spur of rock, rendering it all but impregnable to attack.
It was rebuilt but suffered frequent collapses during floods and had to be continually repaired.
In 2009-2010 there were 7,125 students registered at the university.
Murder took place in the former Hotel du Palais Royal that was located Place Crillon in front of today's Hotel d'Europe.
Between 1920 and 1975 the population has almost doubled despite the cession of Le Pontet in 1925 and the Second World War.
Three consuls, chosen annually by the Council, had charge of the administration of the streets.
At the time the city and its surroundings (the Comtat Venaissin) were ruled by the kings of Sicily of the House of Anjou.
The name of the city dates back to around the 6th century BC.
Gregory of Tours reported that the Frankish king devastated the fields, cut down the vines and olive trees, and destroyed the orchards.
*Gregory XI: 1370–1378 (left Avignon to return to Rome on September 13, 1376)
The hospital moved out in the 1980s and, after major works, the building opened for students in 1997.
In 980 these canons were constituted in a canonical chapter by Bishop Garnier.
Avignon absorbed Montfavet between 1790 and 1794 then ceded Morières-lès-Avignon in 1870 and Le Pontet in 1925.
In November 441 Nectarius of Avignon, accompanied by his deacon Fontidius, participated in the Council of Orange convened and chaired by Hilary of Arles where the Council Fathers defined the right of asylum.
The Rhone passes the western edge of the city but is divided into two branches: the ''Petit Rhône'', or "dead arm", for the part that passes next to Avignon and the ''Grand Rhône'', or "live arm", for the western channel which passes Villeneuve-lès-Avignon in the Gard department.
It left a visible trace in the centre of the city since the bell tower of the Augustinians, which is surmounted by an ancient campanile of wrought iron, located in Rue Carreterie, remained slightly leaning as a result of this earthquake.
There are 26 state nursery schools (''Écoles maternelles'') for children up to 6, and 32 state primary schools (''Écoles élémentaires'') up to 11.
During the coup of 2 December 1851 the people of Avignon, with Alphonse Gent, tried to oppose it.
All of these canals took their water from the Durance.
The city is the headquarters of the ''International Association of the Mediterranean tomato'', the ''World Council of the tomato industry'', and the ''Inter-Rhône'' organisation.
This was nearly 200 years after the demise of the original Avignon university.
From the fifteenth century onward it became the policy of the Kings of France to rule Avignon as part of their kingdom.
As it was published in the papal enclave outside the kingdom of France and Monaco, the newspaper escaped the control system of the press in France (privilege with permission) while undergoing control from papal authorities.
The city rose, expanded its festival, dusted off its monuments, and developed its tourism and trade.
With ten reception and conference rooms, it hosts many events.
The official festival attracted 135,800 people in 2012.
King Louis XI repaired a bridge in October 1479 by letters patent.
The schools within the commune of Avignon are administered by the Académie d'Aix-Marseille.
The Archdiocese of Avignon had canonic jurisdiction over the department of Vaucluse and was an archdiocese under the bishoprics of Comtadins Carpentras, Cavaillon, and Vaison-la-Romaine.
It acquired the status of Roman colony in 43 BC.
In 2010 the commune had 89,683 inhabitants.
With the arrival of the Roman legions in 120 BC.
In all seven popes and two anti-popes resided in Avignon:
The previous zoning is shown below for reference.
Innocent VI endowed the ramparts.
The urban area has one of the largest catchment areas in Europe with more than 300,000 square metres of retail space and 469 m2 per thousand population against 270 on average in France.
Directly contiguous to the east and north are the communes of Caumont-sur-Durance, Morières-lès-Avignon, Le Pontet, and Sorgues.
Ercole Consalvi made an ineffectual protest at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 but Avignon was never restored to the Holy See.
The city was visited by Vincent de Paul in 1607 and also by Francis de Sales in 1622.
On 25 June 1793 Avignon and Comtat-Venaissin were integrated along with the former principality of Orange to form the present departement of Vaucluse with Avignon as its capital.
The large prestigious rooms ''Grand Tinel'' and ''Grande Audience'', located on the visitor circuit for the monument, are used to complement the conference rooms for organizing cocktails, gala dinners, exhibitions etc.
A century later Avignon was part of the "region of Massaliotes" or "country of Massalia".
As a result, a new risk mapping has been developed.
It became a city of Roman law in 49 BC.
Since December 2013 the two stations have been connected by a link line - the ''Virgule''.
On 30 May 1814 the French annexation of Avignon was recognized by the Pope.
Invasions began and during the inroads of the Goths it was badly damaged.
In the 3rd century there was a small Christian community outside the walls around what was to become the Abbey of Saint-Ruf.
It later became part of the ''2nd Viennoise''.
Avignon was captured and forced to pull down its ramparts and fill up its moat.
The Avignon - Caumont Airport on the south-eastern commune border has several international routes to England.
"The cantons of Bonnieux, Apt, Cadenet, Cavaillon, and Pertuis are classified in zone Ib (low risk).
According to Météo-France the number of days per year with rain above 2.5 litres per square metre is 45 and the amount of water, rain and snow combined is 660 litres per square metre.
At the end of September, a few days after the surrender of the city to the troops of King Louis VIII, Avignon experienced flooding.
The main building has an elegant façade with a central portico.
It was in the 4th  century BC that the Massaliotes (people from Marseilles) began to sign treaties of alliance with some cities in the Rhone valley including Avignon and Cavaillon.
Its path passes through the commune and over the Rhone.
In 994 Dom Maïeul arrived in Avignon where his friend William the Liberator was dying.
Fortified on its rock, the city later became and long remained the capital of the Cavares.
However, at that same time Avignon was reduced to the rank of a bishopric and was made a suffragan see of Aix.
During the night of 21 to 22 July 972 the Muslims took dom Mayeul, the Abbot of Cluny who was returning from Rome, prisoner.
Papal control persisted until 1791 when, during the French Revolution, it became part of France.
The Council of Chalon-sur-Saône in 650 was the last to indicate the Episcopal participation of the Provence dioceses.
In the 10th century part of the waters from the ''Sorgue d'Entraigues'' were diverted and today pass under the ramparts to enter the city.
The major airport in the region with domestic and international scheduled passenger service is the Marseille Provence Airport.
These canals were initially used to flood the land, which was very stony, to fertilize them by deposition of silt.
The mission representative Boursault retook the city and had Lestang shot.
100 more than Cristole.
Finally, the areas of Castelette, Croix de Noves, Realpanier, and the airport each have fewer than 25 establishments spread between service activities and shops.
There are many natural and artificial water lakes in the commune such as the Lake of Saint-Chamand east of the city.
His election took place in the Synod of Varennes near Macon.
In 1249 the city again declared itself a republic on the death of Raymond VII, his heirs being on a crusade.
The university founded by Boniface VIII in 1303 had many students under the French popes.
In 2002, as part of the reshuffling of the ecclesiastic provinces of France, the Archdiocese of Avignon ceased to be a metropolitan and became, instead a suffragan diocese of the new province of Marseilles, while keeping its rank of archdiocese.
After a season 2010-2011 competing in Ligue 1, the Arles-Avignon team came back in Ligue 2.
He gave Avignon the status of a Roman colony: "Colonia Julia Hadriana Avenniensis" and its citizens were enrolled in the ''tribu''.
Avignon is commemorated by the French song, "''Sur le Pont d'Avignon''" ("On the bridge of Avignon"), which describes folk dancing.
In the 15th century Avignon suffered a major flood of the Rhone.
The Burgundian was saved by the intervention of the Roman General Aredius.
The annual Festival d'Avignon is the most important cultural event in the city.
Avignon remained a "federated city" with Marseille until the conquest of Marseille by Trebonius and Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, Caesar's lieutenants.
In 1856 a major flood on the Durance river flooded Avignon.
The city is often subject to windy weather; the strongest wind is the mistral.
A centralized government was put in place and, in 879, the bishop of Avignon, Ratfred, with other Provençal colleagues went to the Synod of Mantaille in Viennois where Boso was elected King of Provence after the death of Louis the Stammerer.
Avignon was a simple Greek Emporium founded by Phocaeans from Marseille around 539 BC.
After the Second World War on 11 November 1948 Avignon received a citation of the order of the division.
A famous theatre festival is held annually in Avignon.
William and Roubaud earned their title of Counts of Provence.
All other cantons the Vaucluse department, including Avignon, are classified Ia (very low risk).
At the beginning of the 18th century the streets of Avignon were narrow and winding but buildings changed and houses gradually replaced the old buildings.
In 1476 Louis XI, upset that Charles of Bourbon was made legate, sent troops to occupy the city until his demands that Giuliano della Rovere be made legate.
Chlothar I annexed Avignon, Orange, Carpentras, and Gap; Childebert I took Arles and Marseilles; Theudebert I took Aix, Apt, Digne, and Glandevès.
The two branches are separated by an island, the Île de la Barthelasse.
Other noble examples can be seen in the churches of Saint-Didier, Saint-Pierre, and Saint Agricol as well as in the Clock Tower and in the fortifications built between 1349 and 1368 for a distance of some three miles (5&nbsp;km) flanked by thirty-nine towers, all of which were erected or restored by the Roman Catholic Church.
Franque was assisted by his son François in the design of the portico.
From 1998 to 2001 the Avignon TGV station was built.
He met, at Maillane and at Sérignan-du-Comtat, the two most illustrious people Frédéric Mistral and Jean-Henri Fabre.
July and August are the hottest months with average daily maximum temperatures of around 28&nbsp;°C, and January and February the coldest with average daily maximum temperatures of around 9&nbsp;°C.
In 1503 the Doctors of Law had 4 Theologians and in 1784 two Doctors of Medicine added to their ranks.
To the north and south of the rock of the Doms, partly on the site of the Bishop's Palace that had been enlarged by John XXII, was built the Palace of the Popes in the form of an imposing fortress consisting of towers linked to each other and named as follows: La Campane, Trouillas, La Glacière, Saint-Jean, Saints-Anges (Benedict XII), La Gâche, La Garde-Robe (Clement VI), Saint-Laurent (Innocent VI).
His successor, John XXII, a former bishop of the diocese, made it the capital of Christianity and transformed his former episcopal palace into the primary Palace of the Popes.
After 1475 the bishop became an Archbishop but remained chancellor of the university.
It is located south of Avignon between the city walls and the Durance located in the districts of Croix Rouge, Monclar, Saint-Chamand, and La Rocade.
The authorities kept this a secret from the public for 12 hours then issued a statement prohibiting swimming and fishing in the Gaffiere and Lauzon rivers.
St. Magnus was a Gallo-Roman senator who became a monk and then bishop of the city.
*John XXII: 1316–1334
The tertiary sector is the most dynamic in the department by far on the basis of the significant production of early fruit and vegetables in Vaucluse, The MIN (Market of National Importance) has become the pivotal hub of commercial activity in the department, taking precedence over other local markets (including that of Carpentras).
They were drawn there by the generosity of the sovereign pontiffs who rewarded them with books or benefices.
The islands in the Rhone, such as the ''Île de la Barthelasse'', were created by the accumulation of alluvial deposits and also by the work of man.
