The University of Texas at Austin, the University of Pittsburgh, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are among the schools that have received grants.
Rand provided a positive view of business, and in response business executives and entrepreneurs have admired and promoted her work.
In 1991, a survey conducted for the Library of Congress and the Book-of-the-Month Club asked club members what the most influential book in the respondent's life was.
Rand's work continues to be among the top sellers among books in India.
In 2009, ''GQ''s critic columnist Tom Carson described her books as "capitalism's version of middlebrow religious novels" such as ''Ben-Hur'' and the ''Left Behind'' series.
On the 100th anniversary of Rand's birth in 2005, Edward Rothstein, writing for ''The New York Times'', referred to her fictional writing as quaint utopian "retro fantasy" and programmatic neo-Romanticism of the misunderstood artist, while criticizing her characters' "isolated rejection of democratic society".
However, few universities currently include Rand or Objectivism as a philosophical specialty or research area, with many literature and philosophy departments dismissing her as a pop culture phenomenon rather than a subject for serious study.
A 1987 article in ''The New York Times'' referred to her as the Reagan administration's "novelist laureate".
''The Passion of Ayn Rand'', a 1999 television adaptation of the book of the same name, won several awards.
Rand's political philosophy emphasized individual rights (including property rights), and she considered ''laissez-faire'' capitalism the only moral social system because in her view it was the only system based on the protection of those rights.
She was the eldest of the three daughters of Zinovy Zakharovich Rosenbaum and his wife, Anna Borisovna (née Kaplan), largely non-observant Jews.
The Objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas, both to the public and in academic settings.
Rand's aesthetics defined art as a "selective re-creation of reality according to an artist's metaphysical value-judgments."
She, or a character based on her, figures prominently (in positive and negative lights) in literary and science fiction novels by prominent American authors.
In 1964 Nathaniel Branden began an affair with the young actress Patrecia Scott, whom he later married.
Rand also developed a friendship with libertarian writer Isabel Paterson.
If one recognizes the supremacy of reason and applies it consistently, all the rest follows."
One of these was "On the Randian Argument" by libertarian philosopher Robert Nozick, who argued that her meta-ethical argument is unsound and fails to solve the is–ought problem posed by David Hume.
After the success of her later novels, Rand was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three million copies.
In 2007, book critic Leslie Clark described her fiction as "romance novels with a patina of pseudo-philosophy".
After graduating from high school in the Crimea at 16, Rand returned with her family to Petrograd (as Saint Petersburg was renamed at that time), where they faced desperate conditions, on occasion nearly starving.
Political scientist Charles Murray, while praising Rand's literary accomplishments, criticizes her claim that her only "philosophical debt" was to Aristotle, instead asserting that her ideas were derivative of previous thinkers such as John Locke and Friedrich Nietzsche.
Set in Soviet Russia, it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state.
Rand believed that natural rights should be enforced by a constitutionally limited government.
A chance meeting with famed director Cecil B. DeMille led to a job as an extra in his film ''The King of Kings'' as well as subsequent work as a junior screenwriter.
Rand argued that the requirements of cognition determine the objective criteria of conceptualization, which she summarized in the form of a philosophical razor.
She has been a significant influence among libertarians and American conservatives.
Each night the "jury" was selected from members of the audience, and one of the two different endings, depending on the jury's "verdict", would then be performed.
Rand argued that the film grossly misrepresented conditions in the Soviet Union, portraying life there as being much better and happier than it actually was.
For example, ''Mother Jones'' remarked that "Rand's particular genius has always been her ability to turn upside down traditional hierarchies and recast the wealthy, the talented, and the powerful as the oppressed", while equating Randian individual well-being with that of the ''Volk'' according to Goebbels.
There was also increased criticism of her ideas, especially from the political left, with critics blaming the economic crisis on her support of selfishness and free markets, particularly through her influence on Alan Greenspan.
She denounced libertarianism, which she associated with anarchism.
In a 1959 interview with Mike Wallace, when asked where her philosophy came from, she responded, "Out of my own mind, with the sole acknowledgement of a debt to Aristotle, the only philosopher who ever influenced me.
Despite many negative reviews, ''Atlas Shrugged'' became an international bestseller.
During the 1940s, Rand became politically active.
Afterward, she turned to non-fiction to promote her philosophy, publishing her own magazines and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1982.
A 1997 documentary film, ''Ayn Rand: A Sense of Life'', was nominated for the Academy Award for Documentary Feature.
This was followed by the courtroom drama ''Night of January 16th'', first produced by E.E.
Gladstein, Chris Matthew Sciabarra, Allan Gotthelf, Edwin A. Locke and Tara Smith have taught her work in academic institutions.
Rand acknowledged Aristotle as her greatest influence and remarked that in the history of philosophy she could only recommend "three A's"—Aristotle, Aquinas, and Ayn Rand.
Along with many other "bourgeois" students, Rand was purged from the university shortly before graduating.
'''Ayn Rand''' (; born '''Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum''', ; &nbsp;– March 6, 1982) was a Russian-American novelist, philosopher, playwright, and screenwriter.
Nathaniel and Barbara Branden kept the affair hidden from Rand.
Rand died of heart failure on March 6, 1982, at her home in New York City, and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery, Valhalla, New York.
John Allison of BB&T and Ed Snider of Comcast Spectacor have funded the promotion of Rand's ideas, while Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas Mavericks, and John P. Mackey, CEO of Whole Foods, among others, have said they consider Rand crucial to their success.
Overall these reviews were more positive than the reviews she received for her later work.
In politics, she condemned the initiation of force as immoral, and opposed collectivism and statism as well as anarchism, and instead supported ''laissez-faire'' capitalism, which she defined as the system based on recognizing individual rights.
In 1985, Rand's heir Leonard Peikoff established the Ayn Rand Institute, a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting Rand's ideas and works.
Rand was born Alisa Zinov'yevna Rosenbaum () on February 2, 1905, to a Russian Jewish bourgeois family living in Saint Petersburg.
The drug helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the finished novel, but when the book was done, she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks' rest.
According to Rand, art allows philosophical concepts to be presented in a concrete form that can be easily grasped, thereby fulfilling a need of human consciousness.
Although her political views are often classified as conservative or libertarian, she preferred the term "radical for capitalism".
She was sharply critical of most philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her, except for Aristotle and some Aristotelians, and classical liberals.
Rand's novels were derided by some critics when they were first published as being long and melodramatic.
She supported rational and ethical egoism, and rejected altruism.
Known as "Rand's razor," it states that "concepts are not to be multiplied beyond necessity—the corollary of which is: nor are they to be integrated in disregard of necessity."
Rand's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay ''Red Pawn'' to Universal Studios in 1932, although it was never produced.
Zinovy Rosenbaum was a successful pharmacist and businessman, eventually owning a pharmacy and the building in which it was located.
Rand published an article in ''The Objectivist'' repudiating Nathaniel Branden for dishonesty and other "irrational behavior in his private life".
Her work for Wallis included the screenplays for the Oscar-nominated ''Love Letters'' and ''You Came Along''.
In subsequent years, Rand and several more of her closest associates parted company.
Despite her philosophical differences with them, Rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career, and both of them expressed admiration for her.
During this time, signs mentioning Rand and her fictional hero John Galt appeared at Tea Party protests.
Her use of the drug for approximately three decades may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings.
In 1957, Rand published her best-known work, the novel ''Atlas Shrugged''.
She faced intense opposition from William F. Buckley, Jr. and other contributors for the ''National Review'' magazine.
Taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her writing, she worked for a time as the head of the costume department at RKO Studios.
Rediscovered in the 1960s, these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by Rand and re-released as ''We the Living'' in 1986.
Rand scholars Douglas Den Uyl and Douglas B. Rasmussen, while stressing the importance and originality of her thought, describe her style as "literary, hyperbolic and emotional".
She later recalled that, while in high school, she determined that she was an atheist and that she valued reason above any other human virtue.
Although Rand's influence has been greatest in the United States, there has been international interest in her work.
A  floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign was placed near her casket.
Critics, including some former NBI students and Branden himself, have described the culture of NBI as one of intellectual conformity and excessive reverence for Rand, with some describing NBI or the Objectivist movement itself as a cult or religion.
I hope you picked it up off the floor of the subway and threw it in the nearest garbage pail."
In 1987 Gotthelf helped found the Ayn Rand Society with George Walsh and David Kelley, and has been active in sponsoring seminars about Rand and her ideas.
One of her final projects was work on a never-completed television adaptation of ''Atlas Shrugged''.
Later she began allowing them to read the drafts of her new novel, ''Atlas Shrugged'', as the manuscript pages were written.
She condemned ethical altruism as incompatible with the requirements of human life and happiness, and held that the initiation of force was evil and irrational, writing in ''Atlas Shrugged'' that "Force and mind are opposites."
Other negative reviews called the characters unsympathetic and Rand's style "offensively pedestrian".
Some responses to Nozick by other academic philosophers were also published in ''The Personalist'' arguing that Nozick misstated Rand's case.
Literary critics received Rand's fiction with mixed reviews, and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy, though academic interest has increased in recent decades.
Able to read French, German and Russian, Rand also discovered the writers Fyodor Dostoevsky, Victor Hugo, Edmond Rostand, and Friedrich Schiller, who became her perennial favorites.
In ethics, Rand argued for rational and ethical egoism (rational self-interest), as the guiding moral principle.
The political figures who cite Rand as an influence are usually conservatives (often members of the United States Republican Party), despite Rand taking some positions that are atypical for conservatives, such as being pro-choice and an atheist.
Historian Jennifer Burns has identified "three overlapping waves" of scholarly interest in Rand, the most recent of which is "an explosion of scholarship" since the year 2000.
As with ''We the Living'', Rand's later success allowed her to get a revised version published in 1946, which has sold more than 3.5 million copies.
Philosopher Jack Wheeler says that despite "the incessant bombast and continuous venting of Randian rage", Rand's ethics are "a most immense achievement, the study of which is vastly more fruitful than any other in contemporary thought."
The novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named Howard Roark and his struggle against what Rand described as "second-handers"—those who attempt to live through others, placing others above themselves.
After two early novels that were initially unsuccessful in America, she achieved fame with her 1943 novel, ''The Fountainhead''.
Other artists who have cited Rand as an important influence on their lives and thought include comic book artist Steve Ditko and musician Neil Peart of Rush.
Republican Congressmen and conservative pundits have acknowledged her influence on their lives and recommended her novels.
In 1958 Nathaniel Branden established Nathaniel Branden Lectures, later incorporated as the Nathaniel Branden Institute (NBI), to promote Rand's philosophy.
She worked with conservatives on political projects, but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and ethics.
After several delays, the film version of ''The Fountainhead'' was released in 1949.
Academic Mimi Gladstein was unable to find any scholarly articles about Rand's novels when she began researching her in 1973, and only three such articles appeared during the rest of the 1970s.
Rand said her most important contributions to philosophy were her "theory of concepts, her ethics, and her discovery in politics that evil—the violation of rights—consists of the initiation of force."
In a 1999 interview in the ''Chronicle of Higher Education'', Sciabarra commented, "I know they laugh at Rand", while forecasting a growth of interest in her work in the academic community.
''Atlas Shrugged'' was Rand's last completed work of fiction; a turning point in her life, it marked the end of Rand's career as a novelist and the beginning of her role as a popular philosopher.
Rand's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers, including Alan Greenspan.
The first reviews Rand received were for ''Night of January 16th''.
She also joined the anti-Communist American Writers Association.
The plot is invented, the background is not..." Initial sales were slow and the American publisher let it go out of print, although European editions continued to sell.
In 1954 Rand's close relationship with the younger Nathaniel Branden turned into a romantic affair, with the consent of their spouses.
Nevertheless, her influence among conservatives forced Buckley and other ''National Review'' contributors to reconsider how traditional notions of virtue and Christianity could be integrated with support for capitalism.
She said the individual should "exist for his own sake, neither sacrificing himself to others nor sacrificing others to himself."
In epistemology, she considered all knowledge to be based on sense perception, the validity of which she considered axiomatic, and reason, which she described as "the faculty that identifies and integrates the material provided by man's senses."
Author Flannery O'Connor wrote in a letter to a friend that "The fiction of Ayn Rand is as low as you can get re fiction.
In some cases these grants have been controversial due to their requiring research or teaching related to Rand.
Intent on staying in the United States to become a screenwriter, she lived for a few months with relatives in Chicago, one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens of films for free.
Rand and her works have been referred to in a variety of media: on television shows including animated sitcoms, live-action comedies, dramas, and game shows, as well as in movies and video games.
''Ideal'' is a novel and play written in 1934 which were first published in 2015 by her estate.
In the years following the publication of ''The Fountainhead'', Rand received numerous letters from readers, some of whom the book profoundly influenced.
She became involved with the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a Hollywood anti-Communist group, and wrote articles on the group's behalf.
Her testimony described the disparity between her personal experiences in the Soviet Union and the portrayal of it in the 1944 film ''Song of Russia''.
Libertarian philosopher Michael Huemer has argued that very few people find Rand's ideas convincing, especially her ethics, which he believes is difficult to interpret and may lack logical coherence.
However, she also found early inspiration in Friedrich Nietzsche, and scholars have found indications of his influence in early notes from Rand's journals, in passages from the first edition of ''We the Living'' (which Rand later revised), and in her overall writing style.
This group (jokingly designated "The Collective") included future Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, a young psychology student named Nathan Blumenthal (later Nathaniel Branden) and his wife Barbara, and Barbara's cousin Leonard Peikoff.
Rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result.
Although she rejected the labels "conservative" and "libertarian", Rand has had continuing influence on right-wing politics and libertarianism.
She became friends with journalist Henry Hazlitt and his wife, and Hazlitt introduced her to the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises.
Corey Robin of ''The Nation'' alleged similarities between the "moral syntax of Randianism" and fascism.
She rejected all claims of non-perceptual or ''a priori'' knowledge, including "'instinct,' 'intuition,' 'revelation,' or any form of 'just knowing.
When the first academic book about Rand's philosophy appeared in 1971, its author declared writing about Rand "a treacherous undertaking" that could lead to "guilt by association" for taking her seriously.
Rand extended her involvement with free-market and anti-communist activism while working in Hollywood.
They published numerous criticisms in the 1950s and 1960s by Whittaker Chambers, Garry Wills, and M. Stanton Evans.
During the late 1970s her activities within the Objectivist movement declined, especially after the death of her husband on November 9, 1979.
This activity also brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free-market capitalism.
Rand described the theme of the novel as "the role of the mind in man's existence—and, as a corollary, the demonstration of a new moral philosophy: the morality of rational self-interest."
She was twelve at the time of the February Revolution of 1917, during which she favored Alexander Kerensky over Tsar Nicholas II.
''The Fountainhead'' eventually became a worldwide success, bringing Rand fame and financial security.
Rand's contemporary admirers included fellow novelists, such as Ira Levin, Kay Nolte Smith and L. Neil Smith, and later writers such as Erika Holzer and Terry Goodkind have been influenced by her.
Rand's books continue to be widely sold and read, with over 29&nbsp;million copies sold as of 2013 (with about 10% of that total purchased for free distribution to schools by the Ayn Rand Institute).
Rand later published some of these articles in book form.
At the university she was introduced to the writings of Aristotle and Plato, who would be her greatest influence and counter-influence, respectively.
Rand's first novel, ''We the Living'', was admired by the literary critic H. L. Mencken, her Broadway play ''Night of January 16th'' was both a critical and popular success, and ''The Fountainhead'' was hailed by a reviewer in ''The New York Times'' as "masterful".
It was rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs-Merrill Company on the insistence of editor Archibald Ogden, who threatened to quit if his employer did not publish it.
The tenor of the criticism for her first nonfiction book, ''For the New Intellectual'', was similar to that for ''Atlas Shrugged'', with philosopher Sidney Hook likening her certainty to "the way philosophy is written in the Soviet Union", and author Gore Vidal calling her viewpoint "nearly perfect in its immorality".
She had a play produced on Broadway in 1935–1936.
Although it used Rand's screenplay with minimal alterations, she "disliked the movie from beginning to end", complaining about its editing, acting, and other elements.
This work led to Rand's first public speaking experiences, including fielding the sometimes hostile questions from New York City audiences who had just viewed pro-Willkie newsreels, an experience she greatly enjoyed.
Some negative reviews focused on the length of the novel, such as one that called it "a whale of a book" and another that said "anyone who is taken in by it deserves a stern lecture on paper-rationing".
With this fictional strike, Rand intended to illustrate that without the efforts of the rational and productive, the economy would collapse and society would fall apart.
While working on ''The King of Kings'', she met an aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor; the two were married on April 15, 1929.
During these speeches and Q&A sessions, she often took controversial stances on political and social issues of the day.
However, by the time she wrote ''The Fountainhead'', Rand had turned against Nietzsche's ideas, and the extent of his influence on her even during her early years is disputed.
In a 1959 foreword to the novel, Rand stated that ''We the Living'' "is as near to an autobiography as I will ever write.
This role gave Rand time to work on other projects, including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called ''The Moral Basis of Individualism''.
It is not an autobiography in the literal, but only in the intellectual sense.
It advocates the core tenets of Rand's philosophy of Objectivism and expresses her concept of human achievement.
Rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1974 after decades of heavy smoking.
In art, Rand promoted romantic realism.
Her father’s business was confiscated and the family displaced.
Reviews of the production were largely positive, but Rand considered even positive reviews to be embarrassing because of significant changes made to her script by the producer.
Clive in Hollywood in 1934 and then successfully reopened on Broadway in 1935.
Thus, ''Atlas Shrugged'' outsells not only the works of other philosophers of classical liberalism such as Ludwig von Mises, Friedrich Hayek, or Frederic Bastiat, but also Rand's own non-fiction works.
In 1990, philosopher David Kelley founded the Institute for Objectivist Studies, now known as The Atlas Society.
She referred to egoism as "the virtue of selfishness" in her book of that title, in which she presented her solution to the is-ought problem by describing a meta-ethical theory that based morality in the needs of "man's survival ''qua'' man".
Rand's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had.
She also began delivering annual lectures at the Ford Hall Forum, responding afterward to questions from the audience.
However, after complaints from a group of visiting foreign scientists, many of the purged students were allowed to complete their work and graduate, which Rand did in October 1924.
In an interview with Mike Wallace, Rand declared herself "the most creative thinker alive".
Finishing her work on that screenplay, she was hired by producer Hal Wallis as a screenwriter and script-doctor.
While completing the novel, Rand was prescribed Benzedrine, a brand of amphetamine, to fight fatigue.
The novel's hero and leader of the strike, John Galt, describes the strike as "stopping the motor of the world" by withdrawing the minds of the individuals most contributing to the nation's wealth and achievement.
Rand's ideas have also been made subjects of study at Clemson and Duke universities.
Rand questioned the well-informed Paterson about American history and politics long into the night during their numerous meetings and gave Paterson ideas for her only nonfiction book, ''The God of the Machine''.
However, they became bestsellers largely through word of mouth.
When she arrived in New York City on February 19, 1926, she was so impressed with the skyline of Manhattan that she cried what she later called "tears of splendor".
At first the group was an informal gathering of friends who met with Rand on weekends at her apartment to discuss philosophy.
It was published in England in 1938, but Rand initially could not find an American publisher.
For one of her assignments, she wrote an essay about the Polish actress Pola Negri, which became her first published work.
Rand's image also appears on a 1999 U.S. postage stamp designed by artist Nick Gaetano.
They fled to the Crimean Peninsula, which was initially under control of the White Army during the Russian Civil War.
Nick Gillespie, editor in chief of ''Reason'', has remarked that "Rand's is a tortured immortality, one in which she's as likely to be a punch line as a protagonist..." and that "jibes at Rand as cold and inhuman, run through the popular culture".
When she learned of it in 1968, though her romantic relationship with Branden had already ended, Rand terminated her relationship with both Brandens, which led to the closure of NBI.
''Atlas Shrugged'' received positive reviews from a few publications, including praise from the noted book reviewer John Chamberlain, but Rand scholar Mimi Reisel Gladstein later wrote that "reviewers seemed to vie with each other in a contest to devise the cleverest put-downs", calling it "execrable claptrap" and "a nightmare"; they said it was "written out of hate" and showed "remorseless hectoring and prolixity".
The heroine is an actress who embodies Randian ideals.
The reviewer called Rand "a writer of great power" who wrote "brilliantly, beautifully and bitterly", and stated that "you will not be able to read this masterful book without thinking through some of the basic concepts of our time".
After completing the novel, Rand fell into a severe depression.
In 1943, Rand sold the rights for a film version to Warner Bros., and she returned to Hollywood to write the screenplay.
In the autumn of 1925, Rand was granted a visa to visit American relatives.
Collective members gave lectures for NBI and wrote articles for Objectivist periodicals that she edited.
A visit by Isabel Paterson to meet with Rand's California associates led to a final falling out between the two when Paterson made comments to valued political allies, which Rand considered rude.
She rejected anarchism as a naïve theory based in subjectivism that could only lead to collectivism in practice.
Rand was unimpressed with many of the NBI students and held them to strict standards, sometimes reacting coldly or angrily to those who disagreed with her.
Although the planned book was never completed, a condensed version was published as an essay titled "The Only Path to Tomorrow", in the January 1944 edition of ''Reader's Digest'' magazine.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Rand developed and promoted her Objectivist philosophy through her nonfiction works and by giving talks to students at institutions such as Yale, Princeton, Columbia, Harvard, and MIT.
''Atlas Shrugged'', published in 1957, was considered Rand's ''magnum opus''.
Her novella ''Anthem'' was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel, ''The Fountainhead''.
She opposed statism, which she understood to include theocracy, absolute monarchy, Nazism, fascism, communism, democratic socialism, and dictatorship.
She believed epistemology was a foundational branch of philosophy and considered the advocacy of reason to be the single most significant aspect of her philosophy, stating, "I am not ''primarily'' an advocate of capitalism, but of egoism; and I am not ''primarily'' an advocate of egoism, but of reason.
During Rand's lifetime, her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation.
He described the tone of the book as "shrillness without reprieve" and accused Rand of supporting a godless system (which he related to that of the Soviets), claiming "From almost any page of ''Atlas Shrugged'', a voice can be heard, from painful necessity, commanding: 'To a gas chamber—go!
She subsequently studied for a year at the State Technicum for Screen Arts in Leningrad.
Both she and her husband worked full-time in volunteer positions for the 1940 presidential campaign of Republican Wendell Willkie.
However, some former NBI students believe the extent of these behaviors has been exaggerated, with the problem being concentrated among Rand's closest followers in New York.
Her 1938 novella ''Anthem'' received little attention from reviewers, both for its first publication in England and for subsequent re-issues.
The two girls shared an intense interest in politics and would engage in debates at the Nabokov mansion: while Nabokova defended constitutional monarchy, Rand supported republican ideals.
He attributes the attention she receives to her being a "compelling writer", especially as a novelist.
Rand's first major success as a writer came with ''The Fountainhead'' in 1943, a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years.
