Azerbaijan is the main sponsor of Spanish football club Atlético de Madrid, a partnership that the club describes should 'promote the image of Azerbaijan in the world'.
In 1993, democratically elected president Abulfaz Elchibey was overthrown by a military insurrection led by Colonel Surat Huseynov, which resulted in the rise to power of the former leader of Soviet Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev.
Several documented versions of Koroglu epic remain at the Institute for Manuscripts of the National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan.
The 16th-century poet, Muhammed Fuzuli produced his timeless philosophical and lyrical ''Qazals'' in Arabic, Persian, and Azerbaijani.
Pushed up by spending and demand growth, the 2007 Q1 inflation rate reached 16.6%.
The previously independent Naxicivan SSR would also become an autonomous ASSR within the Azerbaijan SSR by the treaty of Kars.
It belongs to the Turkic language family.
Ilham Aliyev, the son of Heydar Aliyev, assumed as the chairmen of the New Azerbaijan Party as well as the office of presidency when his father died in 2003.
A year later, in 1995, another coup was attempted against Aliyev, this time by the commander of the OMON special unit, Rovshan Javadov.
This also influenced the creation of Azerbaijani animation.
A relatively high percentage of Azerbaijanis have obtained some form of higher education, most notably in scientific and technical subjects.
Spurious legal charges and impunity in violence against journalists have remained the norm.
There are also three mountain ranges, the Greater and Lesser Caucasus, and the Talysh Mountains, together covering approximately 40 percent of the country.
In addition to elementary schools, the education institutions include thousands of preschools, general secondary schools, and vocational schools, including specialized secondary schools and technical schools.
The term of office began on 19 June 2006.
These include Saman Tahmasebi, Sabah Shariati and Jamshid Kheyrabadi in wrestling; and Reza Mehmandoost and Milad Beigi in Taekwando.
In terms of water supply, Azerbaijan is below the average in the world with approximately  per year of water per square kilometer.
The archeological dig on the territory of Azerbaijan testifies to the well developed agriculture, stock raising, metal working, pottery, ceramics, and carpet-weaving that date as far back as to the 2nd millennium BC.
Since independence, one of the first laws that Azerbaijan's Parliament passed to disassociate itself from the Soviet Union was to adopt a modified-Latin alphabet to replace Cyrillic.
Over half of Azerbaijan's land mass consists of mountain ridges, crests, yailas, and plateaus which rise up to hypsometric levels of 400–1000&nbsp;meters (including the Middle and Lower lowlands), in some places (Talis, Jeyranchol-Ajinohur and Langabiz-Alat foreranges) up to 100–120&nbsp;meters, and others from 0–50&nbsp;meters and up (Qobustan, Absheron).
It is one of the oldest breeds, with ancestry dating to the ancient world.
The successful Russian campaigns in the later stages of the Russo-Persian War (1804–13) were concluded with the Treaty of Gulistan, in which the shah's claims to some of the Khanates of the Caucasus were dismissed by Russia on the ground that they had been ''de facto'' independent long before their Russian occupation.
Four United Nations Security Council Resolutions (822, 853, 874, and 884) demand for "the immediate withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan."
Along with Turks, Turkmens and Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis also celebrate the Epic of Koroglu (from  for ''blind man's son''), a legendary folk hero.
The state power in Azerbaijan is limited only by law for internal issues, but for international affairs is additionally limited by the provisions of international agreements.
Azerbaijan also is home to members of the Bahá'í, Hare Krishna and Jehovah's Witnesses communities, as well as adherents of the other religious communities.
It holds observer status in the Non-Aligned Movement and World Trade Organization and is a correspondent at the International Telecommunication Union.
Parliamentary elections are held every five years, on the first Sunday of November.
The Yeni Azerbaijan Party, and independents loyal to the ruling government, currently hold almost all of the Parliament's 125 seats.
Meanwhile, the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan was established as an extra-budgetary fund to ensure macroeconomic stability, transparency in the management of oil revenue, and safeguarding of resources for future generations.
It has a high rate of economic development and literacy, as well as a low rate of unemployment.
Sport in Azerbaijan has ancient roots, and even now, both traditional and modern sports are still practiced.
Furthermore, an estimated 30,000 people had been killed and more than a million people had been displaced.
In the same century, Azerbaijani literature further flourished with the development of Ashik () poetic genre of bards.
Both the absolute minimum temperature (  ) and the absolute maximum temperature (  ) were observed in Julfa and Ordubad.
It is a tourist attraction to visitors to the Baku area.
Azerbaijan also plays a major role in the EU-sponsored Silk Road Project.
It lies between latitudes 38° and 42° N, and longitudes 44° and 51° E. The total length of Azerbaijan's land borders is , of which 1007&nbsp;kilometers are with Armenia, 756&nbsp;kilometers with Iran, 480&nbsp;kilometers with Georgia, 390&nbsp;kilometers with Russia and 15&nbsp;kilometers with Turkey.
Nearly half of all the mud volcanoes on Earth are concentrated in Azerbaijan, these volcanoes were also among nominees for the New7Wonders of Nature.
The official language is Azerbaijani, which is spoken by approximately 92% of the population as a mother tongue.
The country is contributing to peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq.
From the total population of 9,165,000 people as of July 2011, nearly 52% was urban population, the remaining 48% was the rural population.
The judicial power is vested in the Constitutional Court, Supreme Court and the Economic Court.
Human rights organizations remained unable to resume their work.
A report by an Amnesty International researcher in October 2015 points to '...the severe deterioration of human rights in Azerbaijan over the past few years.
Azerbaijani defense industry manufactures small arms, artillery systems, tanks, armors and noctovision devices, aviation bombs, pilotless vehicles, various military vehicles and military planes and helicopters.
Caucasian Albanians, the original inhabitants of northeastern Azerbaijan, ruled that area from around the 4th century BC, and established an independent kingdom.
Azerbaijan is an enthusiastic participant in the Eurovision Song Contest.
Over the centuries, Azerbaijani art has gone through many stylistic changes.
Many Russians and Armenians left Azerbaijan during the 1990s.
The Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline (BTC) became operational in May 2006 and extends more than 1,774&nbsp;kilometers through the territories of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey.
He then launched a crackdown on opposition elements.
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, little monumental architecture was created, but distinctive residences were built in Baku and elsewhere.
After the Safavids, the area was ruled by the Iranian dynasties of Afshar and Zand and briefly by the Qajars, until the latter was eventually forced to cede it to the Russian Empire in the course of the 19th century.
In 1991, after Azerbaijan gained its independence from the Soviet Union, the first Baku International Film Festival East-West was held in Baku.
Sadly Azerbaijan has been allowed to get away with unprecedented levels of repression and in the process almost wipe out its civil society'.
Azerbaijan hosts 9 national TV stations (of which a public service broadcaster and 3 more state-run channels), over 12 regional TV stations, 25 radio channels, over 30 daily newspapers.
Azerbaijan has a Formula One race-track and country hosted  its first Formula One Grand Prix on 19 June 2016.
Three men were sentenced to life in prison on charges of plotting attacks in Baku in a conspiracy with Iran.
Each of these types of decorative art, evidence of the and endowments of the Azerbaijan nation, is very much in favor here.
Many interesting facts pertaining to the development of arts and crafts in Azerbaijan were reported by numerous merchants, travelers and diplomats who had visited these places at different times.
Initial alterations have included the reestablishment of religious education (banned during the Soviet period) and curriculum changes that have reemphasized the use of the Azerbaijani language and have eliminated ideological content.
The ADR was the first modern parliamentary republic in the Muslim world.
There are 106 species of mammals, 97 species of fish, 363 species of birds, 10 species of amphibians and 52 species of reptiles which have been recorded and classified in Azerbaijan.
Tokens allow a call of indefinite duration.
In November, he put two prominent opponents on trial for inciting riots ten months earlier: Ilgar Mammadov, the chairman of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL); and Ilgar Mammadov, the deputy chairman of the New Equality Party (Musavat).
Among the important accomplishments of the Parliament was the extension of suffrage to women, making Azerbaijan the first Muslim nation to grant women equal political rights with men.
According to the 1970 census, there were 510,000 ethnic Russians and 484,000 Armenians in Azerbaijan.
When the republic dissolved in May 1918, the leading Musavat party declared independence as the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR), adopting the name of "Azerbaijan" for the new republic; a name that prior to the proclamation of the ADR was solely used to refer to the adjacent northwestern region of contemporary Iran.
Azerbaijan's ashiq art was included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage by the UNESCO on 30 September 2009.
Azerbaijan's flora consists of more than 4,500 species of higher plants.
The Security Council is the deliberative body under the president, and he organizes it according to the Constitution.
Education through the eighth grade is compulsory.
In October 1998, Aliyev was reelected for a second term.
It operates as a semi-independent entity of the Special State Protection Service, an agency subordinate to the President.
Nominal incomes and monthly wages climbed 29% and 25% respectively against this figure, but price increases in non-oil industry encouraged inflation.
The Book of Dede Korkut consists of two manuscripts copied in the 16th century, was not written earlier than the 15th century.
The Azerbaijan National Guard is a further paramilitary force.
Azerbaijan has the largest agricultural basin in the region.
Nine out of 11 existing climate zones are present in Azerbaijan.
In December 2000, the former President of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, signed a decree proclaiming 2 August to be the professional holiday of filmmakers of Azerbaijan.
Since 1845, it has also been taught in the University of Saint Petersburg in Russia.
UNESCO proclaimed the Azerbaijani mugham tradition a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity on 7 November 2003.
Despite efforts of the Safavids, the Ottomans briefly managed to occupy swaths of present-day Azerbaijan twice over the centuries.
The disturbances in Azerbaijan, in response to Moscow's indifference to already heated conflict, resulted in calls for independence and secession, which culminated in Black January in Baku.
The hydrography of Azerbaijan basically belongs to the Caspian Sea basin.
Public pay phones are available for local calls and require the purchase of a token from the telephone exchange or some shops and kiosks.
They are performed at formal celebrations and the dancers wear national clothes like the Chokha, which is well-preserved within the national dances.
Full diplomatic relations, including mutual exchanges of missions, were first established with Turkey, Pakistan, the United States, Iran and Israel.
Azerbaijan has deployed 151 of its Peacekeeping Forces in Iraq and another 184 in Afghanistan.
Azerbaijan is one of the leading volleyball countries in the world and its Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League is one of strongest women leagues in world.
On the other hand, Armenia was awarded the region of Zangezur and Turkey agreed to return Gyumri (then known as Alexandropol).
Livestock, dairy products, and wine and spirits are also important farm products.
Futsal is another popular sport in Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan also has an ancient Jewish population with a 2,500-year history; Jewish organizations estimate that 10,000–20,000 Jews remain in Azerbaijan.
In a 2006–2008 Gallup poll, only 21% of respondents from Azerbaijan stated that religion is an important part of their daily lives.
Fresh herbs, including mint, cilantro (coriander), dill, basil, parsley, tarragon, leeks, chives, thyme, marjoram, green onion, and watercress, are very popular and often accompany main dishes on the table.
Two-thirds of Azerbaijan is rich in oil and natural gas.
The divan and ghazal styles were further developed by poets Qasim al-Anvar, Fuzuli and Khatai (pen-name of Safavid Shah Ismail I).
The legislative power is held by the unicameral National Assembly and the Supreme National Assembly in the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.
Print and broadcast media in Azerbaijan are almost wholly under control of the ruling Aliyev family, eventually through friendly intermediaries.
The satellite will cover Europe and significant part of Asian countries and Africa and will have transmission for TV, radio broadcasting and the internet.
After gaining independence in 1991, Azerbaijan became a member of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Islamic Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
In contrast to the mugham traditions of Central Asian countries, Azerbaijani mugham is more free-form and less rigid; it is often compared to the improvised field of jazz.
Ownership opacity is backed by law.
At the same time, the country was tainted by rampant corruption in the governing bureaucracy.
Azerbaijani carpets can be categorized under several large groups and a multitude of subgroups.
More than 130 Azerbaijanis were named Heroes of the Soviet Union.
The formation of climate in Azerbaijan is influenced particularly by cold arctic air masses of Scandinavian anticyclone, temperate of Siberian anticyclone, and Central Asian anticyclone.
The region of the Lesser Caucasus accounts for most of the country's gold, silver, iron, copper, titanium, chromium, manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, complex ore and antimony.
Atropates ruled over the region of Atropatene (present Iranian Azerbaijan).
The country has also been making progress in developing its telecoms sector.
Azerbaijanis often use traditional armudu (pear-shaped) glass as they have very strong tea culture.
His major works include ''The Divan of Ghazals'' and ''The Qasidas''.
The khanates exercised control over their affairs via international trade routes between Central Asia and the West.
According to Soviet data, 100 percent of males and females (ages nine to forty-nine) were literate in 1970.
Other than that the Azerbaijani system has undergone little structural change.
Azerbaijan is in the South Caucasus region of Eurasia, straddling Western Asia and Eastern Europe.
Modern literature in Azerbaijan is based on the Shirvani dialect mainly, while in Iran it is based on the Tabrizi one.
Azerbaijanis have a rich and distinctive culture, a major part of which is decorative and applied art.
'''Azerbaijan''' ( ; ), officially the '''Republic of Azerbaijan''' (), is a country in the Transcaucasian region, situated at the crossroads of Southwest Asia and Southeastern Europe.
All the rivers drain into the Caspian Sea in the east of the country.
Reprisals against independent journalists and activists persisted both in the country and abroad, while their family members also faced harassment and arrests.
Its women's national team came fourth at the 2005 European Championship.
In the 4th and 3rd centuries BC, following the overthrow of the Achaemenid Empire, the southwestern part of modern Azerbaijan was part of the Kingdom of Armenia ruled by the Orontid Dynasty; between the years 189 BC and 428 AD the western half of modern Azerbaijan, including the exclave of Nakhchivan, were included into the Kingdom of Greater Armenia ruled by Armenia's Artaxiad and Arsacid dynasties, the latter itself a branch of the eponymous Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.
Azerbaijan closely cooperates with NATO in programs such as Partnership for Peace and Individual Partnership Action Plan.
The Constitution of Azerbaijan claims to guarantee freedom of speech, but this is denied in practice.
Mugham, meykhana and ashiq art are among the many musical traditions of Azerbaijan.
Once again, both choice of content and sponsorship of films are largely left up to the initiative of the filmmaker.
Furthermore, an attack by the Azerbaijani military in 2016 on Armenian villages in Nagorno-Karabakh has caused physical damage and raised controversy over the future of peaceful relations between Azerbaijan and its neighbor, Armenia.
The first of these Turkic dynasties established was the Seljuqs, who entered the area now known as Azerbaijan by 1067.
In 2003, there were 250 Roman Catholics.
It was followed by the March Days massacres that took place between 30 March and 2 April 1918 in the city of Baku and adjacent areas of the Baku Governorate of the Russian Empire.
This, in combination with another series of events, the Safavids laid the foundation for the fact that Iran and the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan are the only Shia-majority countries ever since.
Thus, until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name the newly independent state Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.
Some products previously imported from abroad have begun to be produced locally.
Azerbaijan has been harshly criticized for bribing foreign officials and diplomats for promoting its causes abroad and legitimizing its elections at home, a practice which has been termed as 'caviar diplomacy'.
Just like today, the oil industry attracted foreigners eager to invest and to work.
Azeriqaz, a sub-company of SOCAR, intends to ensure full gasification of the country by 2021.
They have never missed a Grand Final.
In addition to that, $1.36&nbsp;billion was planned to be used for the needs of the defense industry, which bring up the total military spending to billion.
The sex ratio for total population in that year was therefore 0.97 males per female.
This word is translatable as ''Guardian of Fire'', "The Treasury" and "The Treasurer" of fire or "The Land of Fire" in Modern Persian.
Azerbaijan is also ranked 57th in the Global Competitiveness Report for 2010–2011, above other CIS countries.
Also, Baku and its environs were briefly managed by the Russians in the early 18th century as a consequence of the Russo-Persian War.
The Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency launched its first satellite AzerSat 1 into orbit on 7 February 2013 from Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana at orbital positions 46° East.
About 1500 dislodged and carved rock paintings with images of deer, goats, bulls, dogs, snakes, birds, fantastic beings and also people, carriages and various symbols had been found out on basalt rocks.
Among them are Coca Cola by Coca Cola Bottlers LTD, beer by Baki-Kastel, parquet by Nehir and oil pipes by EUPEC Pipe Coating Azerbaijan.
In the same year, the country became a member of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic.
The first newspaper in Azerbaijani, ''Akinchi'' was published in 1875.
Other notable artists who fall within these periods include Sattar Bahlulzade, Togrul Narimanbekov, Tahir Salahov, Alakbar Rezaguliyev, Mirza Gadim Iravani, Mikayil Abdullayev and Boyukagha Mirzazade.
Russian and English play significant roles as second or third languages of education and communication.
The country was a well-known tourist spot in the 1980s.
The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic proclaimed its independence in 1918.
Norwegian ethnographer and adventurer Thor Heyerdahl was convinced that people from the area went to Scandinavia in about 100 AD and took their boat building skills with them, and transmuted them into the Viking boats in Northern Europe.
There are a dozen other minority languages spoken natively in the country.
Entries submitted on the UNESCO World Heritage tentative list include the Ateshgah of Baku, Momine Khatun Mausoleum, Hirkan National Park, Binegadi National Park, Lökbatan Mud Volcano, Baku Stage Mountain, Caspian Shore Defensive Constructions, Shusha National Reserve, Ordubad National Reserve and the Palace of Shaki Khans.
Following a chain of events that started with the re-subjugation of Georgia into Iran in 1795, Russia would now actively contest and battle with the latter over possession of the Caucasus region which was, for most of its part, in the hands of Iran.
Azerbaijan is an active member of NATO's Partnership for Peace program.
, Azerbaijanis did not surrender their brief independence of 1918–20 quickly or easily.
Football is the most popular sport in Azerbaijan, and the Association of Football Federations of Azerbaijan with 9,122 registered players, is the largest sporting association in the country.
Some of these language communities are very small and their numbers are decreasing.
Azerbaijan folk consists of Azerbaijanis, the representative part of society, as well as of nations and ethnic groups, compactly living in various areas of the country.
, there were 1,397,000 main telephone lines and 1,485,000 internet users.
Major projects such as Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center, Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City and SOCAR Tower have transformed the country's skyline and promotes its contemporary identity.
In 2002, the Azerbaijani government established the Ministry of Transport with a broad range of policy and regulatory functions.
Only 24 rivers are over 100&nbsp;kilometers long.
All big water reservoirs are built on Kur.
The original etymology of this name is thought to have its roots in the once-dominant Zoroastrian religion.
Among the poets of this period were Gazi Burhanaddin, Haqiqi (pen-name of Jahan-shah Qara Qoyunlu), and Habibi.
In some areas it is profitable to grow grain, potatoes, sugar beets, cotton and tobacco.
However, the majority of the population consists of Shiite Muslims.
In September 1994, a 30-year contract was signed between the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) and 13&nbsp;oil companies, among them Amoco, BP, ExxonMobil, Lukoil and Statoil.
The Azerbaijani carpet is a traditional handmade textile of various sizes, with dense texture and a pile or pile-less surface, whose patterns are characteristic of Azerbaijan's many carpet-making regions.
To distinguish it from the Turkic Azerbaijani or Azeri language, this Iranian language, is designated as the Azari language (or Old Azari language), because the Turkic language and people are also designated as "Azarbaijani" or "Azari" in the Persian language.
Some 250,000 people from Azerbaijan were killed on the front.
To override the presidential veto, the parliament must have a majority of 95 votes.
A significant factor restricting the population growth is rather a high level of migration.
The power vacuum left by the decline of the Abbasid Caliphate was filled by numerous local dynasties such as the Sallarids, Sajids, Shaddadids, Rawadids and Buyids.
The history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic in 1918, when the National Army of the newly formed Azerbaijan Democratic Republic was created on 26 June 1918.
Hypsometric marks within the Caucasus region vary from about −28&nbsp;meters at the Caspian Sea shoreline up to 4,466&nbsp;meters (Bazardüzü peak).
During this period, Zoroastrianism spread in the Caucasus and Atropatene.
In 2008, Azerbaijan was cited as one of the top 10 reformers by the World Bank's Doing Business Report.
Another important accomplishment of ADR was the establishment of Baku State University, which was the first modern-type university founded in Muslim East.
Ultimately, the name ''Azerbaijan'' comes from ''Azar-Payegan''.
Within four years protected areas doubled and now make up eight percent of the country's territory.
Qajar Iran was forced to cede its Caucasian territories to Russia in the 19th century, which thus included the territory of the modern-day Azerbaijan Republic, while as a result of that cession, the Azerbaijani ethnic group is nowadays parted between two nations: Iran and Azerbaijan.
Iranian Azerbaijanis are by far the largest minority in Iran.
In the same year the total wood resources counted 136 million m³.
By the Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR in February 1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry of Azerbaijan were awarded orders and medals.
There are also different variations of backgammon developed and analyzed by Azerbaijani experts.
The territory of Azerbaijan extends  from north to south, and  from west to east.
The National (now Central) Bank was created in 1992 based on the Azerbaijan State Savings Bank, an affiliate of the former State Savings Bank of the USSR.
In the mid-19th century, it was taught in the schools of Baku, Ganja, Shaki, Tbilisi, and Yerevan.
Other well-known Azerbaijani athletes are Namig Abdullayev, Toghrul Asgarov, Rovshan Bayramov, Sharif Sharifov, Mariya Stadnik and Farid Mansurov in wrestling, Elnur Mammadli, Elkhan Mammadov and Nazim Huseynov in judo, Rafael Aghayev in karate, Magomedrasul Majidov and Aghasi Mammadov in boxing, Nizami Pashayev in Olympic weightlifting, Azad Asgarov in pankration, Eduard Mammadov in kickboxing, and K-1 fighter Zabit Samedov.
The modern Republic of Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence on August 30, 1991, prior to the official dissolution of the USSR in December 1991.
However, only 24 of the 8,350 rivers are greater than  in length.
During winter, the Shahdag Mountain Resort offers skiing with state of the art facilities.
About 54.9 percent of Azerbaijan is agricultural land.
Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries and holds membership in 38 international organizations.
