In 1376, the Mexicas elected their first ''Huey Tlatoani'', Acamapichtli, who was living in Texcoco at the time.
According to their own history, when the Mexicas arrived in the Anahuac valley (Valley of Mexico) around Lake Texcoco, the groups living there considered them uncivilized.
The capital city of the Aztec empire was Tenochtitlan, now the site of modern-day Mexico City.
The political clout of the empire reached far south into Mesoamerica conquering cities as far south as Chiapas and Guatemala and spanning from the Pacific to the Atlantic oceans.
Subsequently, the Spanish founded the new settlement of Mexico City on the site of the ruined Aztec capital, from where they proceeded with the process of colonizing Central America.
Each family had their own garden plot where they grew maize, fruits, herbs, medicines and other important plants.
Bautista de Pomar was the great-grandson of Netzahualcoyotl.
Many of its districts and natural landmarks retain their original Nahuatl names.
For larger purchases, standardized lengths of cotton cloth called quachtli were used.
On the negative side, imperial tribute imposed a burden on commoner households, who had to increase their work to pay their share of tribute.
''Yaocuicatl'' was devoted to war and the god(s) of war, ''Teocuicatl'' to the gods and creation myths and to adoration of said figures, ''xochicuicatl'' to flowers (a symbol of poetry itself and indicative of the highly metaphorical nature of a poetry that often utilized duality to convey multiple layers of meaning).
Indeed, the freedom from Aztec domination may have been considered a positive development by most of the other cultures.
Maxtla, son of Tezozomoc, assassinated Chimalpopoca, the Mexica ruler.
Mexican cuisine continues to be based on and flavored by agricultural products contributed by the Mexicas/Aztecs and Mesoamerica, most of which retain some form of their original Nahuatl names.
Around the island, ''chinampa'' beds were used to grow foods as well as, over time, to increase the size of the island.
It originated in 1427 as a triple-alliance between the city-states Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and Tlacopan, who allied to defeat the Tepanec state of Azcapotzalco, which had previously dominated the Basin of Mexico.
Sometimes the term also includes the inhabitants of Tenochtitlan's two principal allied city-states, the Acolhuas of Texcoco and the Tepanecs of Tlacopan, who together with the Mexica formed the '''Aztec Triple Alliance''' that controlled what is often known as the "Aztec Empire".
However, upon becoming a slave, all of the slave's animals and excess money would go to his purchaser.
It was never a true territorial empire controlling a territory by large military garrisons in conquered provinces, but rather controlled its client states primarily by installing friendly rulers in conquered cities, by constructing marriage alliances between the ruling dynasties, and by extending an imperial ideology to its client states.
The empire extended its power by a combination of trade and military conquest.
In an effort to defeat Maxtla, Chimalpopoca's successor, Itzcoatl, allied with the exiled ruler of Texcoco, Nezahualcoyotl.
Veneration of Huitzilopochtli, the personification of the sun and of war, was central to the religious, social and political practices of the Mexicas.
Although the form of government is often referred to as an empire, in fact most areas within the empire were organized as city-states, known as altepetl in Nahuatl.
In other contexts, Aztec may refer to all the various city states and their peoples, who shared large parts of their ethnic history and cultural traits with the Mexica, Acolhua and Tepanecs, and who often also used the Nahuatl language as a lingua franca.
While most of the farming occurred outside the densely populated areas, within the cities there was another method of (small scale) farming.
Bernal Díaz del Castillo accompanied Cortes, and he later wrote a book named: ''The Discovery and Conquest of Mexico''.
On the basis of current chinampa yields, it has been estimated that 1 hectare of chinampa would feed 20 individuals and 9,000 hectares of ''chinampas'' could feed 180,000.
The second class were the ''mācehualtin'', originally peasants.
The Spaniards, to consolidate the diminishing population, merged the survivors from small towns in the Valley of Mexico into bigger ones.
The Aztecs also admired the Mixtec codices, so some of them were made to order by Mixteca for the Aztecs.
One component of this reform was the institution of ritual war (the flower wars) as a way to have trained warriors, and created the necessity of constant sacrifices to keep the Sun moving.
Traveling merchants called ''pochtecah'' were a small, but important class as they not only facilitated commerce, but also communicated vital information across the empire and beyond its borders.
Maize was grown across the entire empire, in the highland terraces, valley farms and also on the chinampas.
In his book, Capitan Bernal Díaz del Castillo provides his account of the Conquest of Mexico, in which he describes the events leading up to the conquest of Mexico, including accounts of the human sacrifices and cannibalism that he witnessed first hand.
A typical town would have a weekly market (every 5 days), while larger cities held markets every day.
When used to describe ethnic groups, the term "Aztec" refers to several Nahuatl speaking peoples of central Mexico in the postclassic period of Mesoamerican chronology, especially the Mexica, the ethnic group that had a leading role in establishing the hegemonic empire based at Tenochtitlan.
Slaves could buy their liberty, and slaves could be set free if they had children with or were married to their masters.
The chinampas were extremely fertile pieces of land, and yielded, on average, seven crops annually.
Often the term "Aztec" refers exclusively to the Mexica people of Tenochtitlan (now the location of Mexico City), situated on an island in Lake Texcoco, who referred to themselves as ''Mēxihcah Tenochcah''  or ''Cōlhuah Mexihcah'' .
Archaeological excavations in the Aztec-ruled provinces show that incorporation into the empire had both costs and benefits for provincial peoples.
"Prose" was ''tlahtolli'', also with its different categories and divisions (Garganigo et al.
At the time of their arrival, the Valley of Mexico had many city-states, the most powerful of which were Culhuacan to the south and Azcapotzalco to the west.
The true origin of the Mexicas is uncertain.
The cuisine has also become a popular part of the cuisine of the United States and other countries around the world, typically altered to suit various national tastes.
Houses were made of wood and loam, roofs were made of reed, although pyramids, temples and palaces were generally made of stone.
As the former nomadic hunter-gatherer peoples mixed with the complex civilizations of Mesoamerica, adopting religious and cultural practices, the foundation for later Aztec culture was laid.
Two of the primary architects of the Aztec empire were the half-brothers Tlacaelel and Montezuma I, nephews of Itzcoatl.
These payments from commoners to nobles supported both the lavish lifestyles of the high nobility and the finances of city-states.
In this meaning it is possible to talk about an Aztec civilization including all the particular cultural patterns common for most of the peoples inhabiting Central Mexico in the late postclassic period.
This cut the growing time down considerably.
The Aztecs made tortillas from the corn meal.
"Poetry" was ''in xochitl in cuicatl'' a dual term meaning "the flower and the song" and was divided into different genres.
Accounts by the Tlaxcaltecas, the primary enemy of the Aztecs at the time of the Spanish Conquest, show that at least some of them considered it an honor to be sacrificed.
Cortés reported that the central market of Tlatelolco, Tenochtitlan's sister city, was visited by 60,000 people daily.
(It was said that Huitzilopochtli killed his nephew, Cópil, and threw his heart on the lake.
They built what are called ''chinampas''.
The efficient role of the altepetl as a regional political unit was largely responsible for the success of the empire's hegemonic form of control.
Archaeologists usually do not have a problem differentiating between Mixtec and Aztec artifacts.
Some Nahuatl words (most notably ''chocolate'', derived from the Nahuatl word xocolatl, and ''tomato'') have been borrowed through Spanish into other languages around the world.
The Nahuatl words ''aztecatl''  (singular) and ''aztecah''  (plural) mean "people from Aztlan", a mythological place for the Nahuatl-speaking culture of the time, and later adopted as the word to define the Mexica people.
Bartolomé de las Casas wrote apologetically about the Indians, accusing the Spanish conquistadors of committing unspeakable atrocities in their subjugation of the Aztecs and other indigenous groups.
There were two types of schools: the ''telpochcalli'', for practical and military studies, and the ''calmecac'', for advanced learning in writing, astronomy, statesmanship, theology, and other areas.
The players hit the ball with their hips, knees, and elbows and had to pass the ball through a stone ring to automatically win.
The Mexica "gods" themselves had no existence as distinct entities apart from these ''tēixiptla'' representations of ''tēōtl''.
After the death of Moctezuma II, the empire fell into the hands of severely weakened emperors, such as Cuitláhuac, before eventually being ruled by puppet rulers, such as Andrés de Tapia Motelchiuh, installed by the Spanish.
Moctezuma I succeeded Itzcoatl as ''Hueyi Tlatoani'' in 1440.
The '''Aztec''' () people were certain ethnic groups of central Mexico, particularly those groups who spoke the Nahuatl language and who dominated large parts of Mesoamerica from the 14th to 16th centuries.
Small purchases were made with cacao beans, which had to be imported from lowland areas.
This allowed for harvests on a regular basis.
Over the next 100 years, the triple-alliance of Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and Tlacopan would come to dominate the Valley of Mexico and extend its power to the shores of both the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific ocean.
The Nahuatl language is today spoken by 1.5 million people, mostly in mountainous areas in the states of central Mexico.
The modern Mexican flag bears the emblem of the Mexica migration story.
The Triple Alliance formed a tributary empire expanding its political hegemony far beyond the Valley of Mexico, conquering other city states throughout Mesoamerica.
It is generally thought that Aztlán was somewhere to the north of the Valley of Mexico; some experts have placed it as far north as the Southwestern United States.
In recent usage these ethnic groups are rather referred to as the Nahua peoples.
The producers of featherwork, sculptures, jewelry, and other luxury items were full-time commoner specialists who worked for noble patrons.
Ixtlixochitl, for example, wrote a history of Texcoco from a Christian point of view.
Fathers Diego Durán, Motolinia, and Mendieta wrote with their own religion in mind, Father Duran wrote trying to prove that the Aztec were one of the lost tribes of Israel.
Mexica legends identify the Toltecs and the cult of Quetzalcoatl with the mythical city of Tollan, which they also identified with the more ancient Teotihuacan.
Typically, upon the death of the master, slaves who had performed outstanding services were freed.
According to Aztec legend, in 1323 the Mexicas were shown a vision of an eagle perched on a prickly pear cactus, eating a snake.
Money was used primarily in the many periodic markets that were held in each town.
Other crops that the Aztecs relied upon were avocados, beans, squashes, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, chia, amaranth and chilies.
This number, however, is not universally accepted.
The Mexicas borrowed much of their culture from the ancient Toltec whom they seem to have at least partially confused with the more ancient civilization of Teotihuacan.
In some cases poetry is attributed to individual authors, such as Nezahualcoyotl, ''tlatoani'' of Texcoco, and Cuacuauhtzin, Lord of Tepechpan, but whether these attributions reflect actual authorship is a matter of opinion.
The Aztec empire reached its height during the reign of Ahuitzotl in 1486–1502.
Even after the empire was formed in 1428 and began its program of expansion through conquest, the altepetl remained the dominant form of organization at the local level.
Based on codices, as well as other histories, the Mexicas appear to have arrived at Chapultepec in or around the year 1248.
His account of Netzahualcoyotl, an ancestor of Ixtlilxochitl's, has a strong resemblance to the story of King Solomon and portrays Netzahualcoyotl as a monotheist and a critic of human sacrifice.
The Spaniards fled the town on July 1, an episode later characterized as La Noche Triste (the Sad Night).
During the Postclassic period they rose to power at such sites as Tula, Hidalgo.
There are few extant Aztec codices created before the conquest and these are largely ritual texts.
They managed to divert a large portion of the Cuauhtitlan River to provide irrigation to large areas of fields.
They were a very efficient agricultural system and could provide up to seven crops a year.
In the valleys irrigation farming was used.
The Early Aztec period was a time of growth and competition among altepetl.
In 1299, Culhuacan ruler Cocoxtli gave them permission to settle in the empty barrens of Tizapan, where they were eventually assimilated into Culhuacan culture.
A slave could have possessions and even own other slaves.
Nobles, on the other hand, often made out well under imperial rule because of the indirect nature of imperial organization.
To the Aztecs themselves the word "aztec" was not an endonym for any particular ethnic group.
The empire had to rely on local kings and nobles and offered them privileges for their help in maintaining order and keeping the tribute flowing.
The Mexica made reference to at least two manifestations of the supernatural: ''tēōtl'' and ''tēixiptla''.
In addition, the production of craft was an important part of the Mexica economy, and they also made pieces for "export".
The political sector of the economy centered on the control of land and labor by kings and nobles.
Miguel León-Portilla, a well-respected Aztec scholar of Mexico, has stated that it is in this poetry where we can find the real thought of the Aztecs, independent of "official" Aztec ideology.
Although he was also offered the opportunity to be ''tlatoani'', Tlacaelel preferred to operate as the power behind the throne.
The Nahua peoples began to migrate into Mesoamerica from northern Mexico in the 6th century.
Some sellers in the markets were petty vendors; farmers might sell some of their produce, potters sold their vessels, and so on.
One source stated that 20 quachtli could support a commoner for one year in Tenochtitlan.
This rewriting led directly to the curriculum taught to scholars and promoted the belief that the Aztecs were always a powerful and mythic nation; forgetting forever a possible true history of modest origins.
Although Francisco López de Gómara was Cortes' chaplain, friend, and confidant, he never visited the New World so his account is based on hearsay.
"'', a short poem attributed to Netzahualcoyotl, and ''"Lament on the Fall of Tenochtitlan"'', a short poem contained within the "Anales de Tlatelolco" manuscript.'')
The situation was analogous in many ways to the Phoenician culture which imported and duplicated art from other cultures that they encountered.
''Chinampas'', misnamed "floating gardens", were long raised plant beds set upon the shallow lake bottom.
The upper classes of the Aztec empire were considered noblemen by the Spaniards and generally treated as such initially.
Huitzilopochtli honoured Cópil by causing a cactus to grow over Cópil's heart.)
Some authors tried to make a synthesis of the pre-Hispanic cultures, like "Oviedo y Herrera", Jose de Acosta, and Pedro Mártir de Anghiera.
Linguistically the term "Aztecan" is still used about the branch of the Uto-Aztecan languages (also sometimes called the yuto-nahuan languages) that includes the Nahuatl language and its closest relatives Pochutec and Pipil.
Trade partners included the enemy Purépecha, a source of bronze tools and jewelry.
The Tlaxcalans remained loyal to their Spanish allies and were allowed to join them on other conquests with Cortés and his men.
Despite some early battles between the two, Cortés allied himself with the long-time enemy of the Aztecs, the Confederacy of Tlaxcala, and arrived at the gates of Tenochtitlan on November 8, 1519.
In 1521 Hernán Cortés, along with a large number of Nahuatl speaking indigenous allies,  conquered Tenochtitlan and defeated the Aztec Triple Alliance under the leadership of Hueyi Tlatoani Moctezuma II.
The network of canals was a very complex and intricate system.
The culture of central Mexico includes maize cultivation, the social division between noble ''pipiltin'' and ''macehualli'' commoners, a pantheon (featuring Tezcatlipoca, Tlaloc and Quetzalcoatl), and the calendric system of a ''xiuhpohualli'' of 365 days intercalated with a ''tonalpohualli'' of 260 days.
Built on a series of islets in Lake Texcoco, the city plan was based on a symmetrical layout that was divided into four city sections called ''campans''.
Because of fear of the Spanish authorities, he maintained the anonymity of his informants, and wrote a heavily censored version in Spanish.
In the Nahuatl language "''aztecatl''" means "person from Aztlan".
Other important sources are the work of native and mestizo authors, descendants of the upper classes.
Post-conquest codices, like Codex Mendoza or Codex Ríos, were painted by Aztec ''tlacuilos'' (codex creators), but under the control of Spanish authorities.
Legend has it that this is the site on which the Mexicas built their capital city of Tenochtitlan.
For the next 50 years, until 1427, the Mexica were a tributary of Azcapotzalco, which had become a regional power, and perhaps the most powerful since the Toltecs, centuries earlier.
Nobles owned all land, and commoners got access to farmland and other fields through a variety of arrangements, from rental through sharecropping to serf-like labor and slavery.
Tlacaelel reformed the Aztec state and religion.
The Aztec economy can be divided into a political sector, under the control of nobles and kings, and a commercial sector that operated independently of the political sector.
However, Bernal Díaz wrote several decades after the fact, never learned the native languages, and did not take notes.
In the later days, high society Aztec women started to wear Mixtec clothing, specifically the ''quexquemetl''.
In the 12th century the Nahua power center was in Azcapotzalco, from where the Tepanecs dominated the valley of Mexico.
Cortés was the most educated, and his letters to Charles V are a valuable firsthand account.
The rest of the slaves were passed on as part of an inheritance.
The Aztecs built canal systems that were longer and much more elaborate than previous irrigation systems.
Unfortunately the Nahuatl original was not fully translated until the 20th century, thus realising the extent of the censorship of the Spanish version.
Prior to this, Huitzilopochtli was associated primarily with hunting, presumably one of the important subsistence activities of the itinerant bands that would eventually become the Mexica.
A small gold statue approximately  cost 250 beans.
Itzcoatl had the oldest hieroglyphics destroyed for political-religious reasons and Bishop Zumarraga of Mexico (1528–48) had all available texts burned for missionary reasons.
In the commercial sector of the economy several types of money were in regular use.
All this changed rapidly, and the native population was soon forbidden to study by law, and had the status of minors.
If one includes the surrounding islets and shores surrounding Lake Texcoco, estimates range from 300,000 to 700,000 inhabitants.
They and their native allies returned in the spring of 1521 to lay siege to Tenochtitlan, a battle that ended on August 13 with the destruction of the city.
From the 13th century, the Valley of Mexico was the heart of Aztec civilization: here the capital of the Aztec Triple Alliance, the city of Tenochtitlan, was built upon raised islets in Lake Texcoco.
Like most European empires, it was ethnically very diverse, but unlike most European empires, it was more of a system of tribute than a single system of government.
It was worn over their traditional ''huipil'', and much coveted by the women who could not afford such imported goods.
Particular to the Aztecs of Tenochtitlan was the Mexica patron God Huitzilopochtli, twin pyramids, and the ceramic ware known as Aztec I to III.
''Tēōtl'', which the Spaniards and European scholars routinely mistranslated as "god" or "demon", referred rather to an impersonal force that permeated the world.
According to myth, Huitzilopochtli directed the wanderers to found a city on the site where they would see an eagle devouring a snake perched on a fruit-bearing nopal cactus.
The hegemonic nature of the Aztec empire can be seen in the fact that generally local rulers were restored to their positions once their city-state was conquered, and the Aztecs did not interfere in local affairs as long as the tribute payments were made.
The earliest, most basic form of agriculture implemented by the Aztecs is known as “rainfall cultivation.”  The Aztecs also implemented terrace agriculture in hilly areas, or areas that could not be used for level ground farming.
Of the various crops grown by the Aztecs, maize was the most important.
They populated central Mexico, dislocating speakers of Oto-Manguean languages as they spread their political influence south.
Chinampas are areas of raised land, created from alternating layers of mud from the bottom of the lake, and plant matter/other vegetation.
The term extends to further ethnic groups associated with the Aztec empire such as the Acolhua and Tepanec and others that were incorporated into the empire.
However, the Mixtec made some products for "export" and that makes classification more problematic.
The possibility of Spanish influence poses potential problems for those studying the post-conquest codices.
Slaves or ''tlacotin'' also constituted an important class.
Later the class system took on hereditary aspects.
The accounts of the first priests and scholars, while reflecting their faith and their culture, are important sources.
In 1810 Alexander von Humboldt originated the modern usage of "Aztec" as a collective term applied to all the people linked by trade, custom, religion, and language to the Mexica state and the Triple Alliance.
In the swampy regions along Lake Xochimilco, the Aztecs implemented yet another method of crop cultivation.
A number of town names are hybrids of Nahuatl and Spanish.
In any event, the Mexicas founded the town of Tenochtitlan on a small swampy island in Lake Texcoco in 1325.
His account is colorful, but his work is considered by historians to be erratic and exaggerated.
These authors include Don Fernando Alvarado Tezozómoc, Chimalpahin Cuauhtlehuanitzin, Juan Bautista de Pomar, and Fernando de Alva Cortés Ixtlilxochitl.
He thereupon rewrote the history of the Aztec people, thus creating a common awareness of history for the Aztecs.
Before the development of archaeology in Mexico in the 19th century, historians mainly interpreted the ancient written sources to reconstitute Aztec history.
Tenochtitlan was built according to a fixed plan and centered on the ritual precinct, where the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan rose  above the city.
According to some sources, he ordered the burning of most of the extant Aztec books claiming that they contained lies.
In order to plant on them, farmers first created “seedbeds,” or reed rafts, where they planted seeds and allowed them to germinate.
Subsequently, the Valley of Mexico was hit with two more epidemics, smallpox (1545–1548), and typhus (1576–1581).
Local dialects of Spanish, Mexican Spanish generally, and the Spanish language worldwide have all been influenced, in varying degrees, by Nahuatl.
On the positive side, the empire promoted commerce and trade, and exotic goods from obsidian to bronze managed to reach the houses of both commoners and nobles.
The vision indicated the location where they were to build their home.
Around this time the Mexica tribe arrived in central Mexico.
Diego Muñoz Camargo (1521&nbsp;– c. 1612), a Tlaxcalan mestizo, wrote the ''History of Tlaxcala'' six decades after the Spanish conquest.
As all other Mesoamerican cultures, the Aztecs played a variant of the Mesoamerican ballgame, named ''tlachtli'' or ''ollamaliztli'' in Nahuatl.
Crops that were specific to the lowland regions were cotton, fruits, cacao beans and rubber trees.
Unfortunately, one of his letters is lost and replaced by a posterior text and the others were censored prior to their publication.
The accounts of the conquistadors are those of men confronted with a new civilization, which they tried to interpret according to their own culture.
Tlaxcala also practiced the human sacrifice of captured Aztec Citizens.
The original Nahuatl manuscript is known as the Florentine Codex.
These were small polities ruled by a king (tlatoani) from a legitimate dynasty.
While human sacrifice was practiced throughout Mesoamerica, the Aztecs, if their own accounts are to be believed, brought this practice to an unprecedented level.
They were often employed as spies.
During this period the now crumbling Aztec empire went through a rapid line of ruler succession.
In one legend, the warrior Tlahuicole was freed by the Aztecs but eventually returned of his own volition to die in ritual sacrifice.
Client states paid tribute to the Aztec emperor, the Huey Tlatoani, in an economic strategy limiting communication and trade between outlying polities, making them dependent on the imperial center for the acquisition of luxury goods.
According to their legends, the place of origin of the Mexica tribe was Aztlán.
Usually these roads were maintained through tribute, and travelers had places to rest and eat and even latrines to use at regular intervals, roughly every .
The practice of the ballgame carried religious and mythological meanings and also served as sport.
In Aztec marketplaces, a small rabbit was worth 30 beans, a turkey egg cost 3 beans, and a tamal cost a single bean.
He taught Aztec ''tlacuilos'' to write the original Nahuatl accounts using the Latin alphabet.
