Nevertheless, James theorizes that Ruth's 1920 explosion might have happened in 1919, had a full season of 154 games been played rather than 140, had Ruth refrained from pitching 133 innings that season, and if he were playing with any other home field but Fenway Park, where he hit only 9 of 29 home runs.
Although Ruth was married through most of his baseball career, when Colonel Huston asked him to tone down his lifestyle, the player said, "I'll promise to go easier on drinking and to get to bed earlier, but not for you, fifty thousand dollars, or two-hundred and fifty thousand dollars will I give up women.
The first game of the doubleheader in Philadelphia—the Braves lost both—was his final major league appearance.
Ruppert called the deal "the greatest opportunity Ruth ever had".
At the time, Ruth was possibly the best left-handed pitcher in baseball; allowing him to play another position was an experiment that could have backfired.
Ruth's biographers agree that he benefited from the timing of his ascension to "Home Run King", with an America hit hard by both the war and the 1918 flu pandemic longing for something to help put these traumas behind it.
Barrow tried Ruth at first base and in the outfield during the exhibition season, but as the team moved towards Boston and the season opener, restricted him to pitching.
During World War II, he made many personal appearances to advance the war effort, including his last appearance as a player at Yankee Stadium, in a 1943 exhibition for the Army–Navy Relief Fund.
Ruth was buried on a hillside in Section 25 at the Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Hawthorne, New York.
At his final stop before returning home, in the United Kingdom, Ruth was introduced to cricket by Australian player Alan Fairfax, and after having little luck in a cricketer's stance, stood as a baseball batter and launched some massive shots around the field, destroying the bat in the process.
Fans responded with record attendance: on May 16, Ruth and the Yankees drew 38,600 to the Polo Grounds, a record for the ballpark, and 15,000 fans were turned away.
Shawkey, a former Yankees player and teammate of Ruth, was unable to command the slugger's respect.
Ruth was called upon often to pitch, in one stretch starting (and winning) four games in eight days.
Although the Braves had enjoyed modest recent success, finishing fourth in the National League in both 1933 and 1934, the team performed poorly at the box office.
Although Ruth's attempt to steal second is often deemed a baserunning blunder, Creamer pointed out that the Yankees' chances of tying the game would have been greatly improved with a runner in scoring position.
Reaction in Boston was mixed: some fans were embittered at the loss of Ruth; others conceded that the slugger had become difficult to deal with.
The two met five times during the season, with Ruth winning four and Johnson one (Ruth had a no decision in Johnson's victory).
In 1946, Ruth began experiencing severe pain over his left eye, and had difficulty swallowing.
He was also made assistant manager to Braves skipper Bill McKechnie.
He grew increasingly annoyed that McKechnie ignored most of his advice.
Bill James noted, "When the owners discovered that the fans ''liked'' to see home runs, and when the foundations of the games were simultaneously imperiled by disgrace in the Black Sox Scandal, then there was no turning back."
The transaction was contingent on Ruth signing a new contract, which was quickly accomplished—Ruth agreed to fulfill the remaining two years on his contract, but was given a $20,000 bonus, payable over two seasons.
On April 17, 1929, only three months after the death of his first wife, Ruth married actress and model Claire Merritt Hodgson (1897–1976) and adopted her daughter Julia; he was 34 and she was 31.
The championship was won by Cleveland, surging ahead after the Black Sox Scandal broke on September 28 and led to the suspension of many of the team's top players, including Joe Jackson.
Owners build ballparks to encourage home runs, which are featured on ''SportsCenter'' and ''Baseball Tonight'' each evening during the season.
This included Barry, who was a player-manager, and who joined the Naval Reserve in an attempt to avoid the draft, only to be called up after the 1917 season.
Ruth finished the 1915 season 18–8 as a pitcher; as a hitter, he batted .315 and had four home runs.
On September 20, "Babe Ruth Day" at Fenway Park, Ruth won the game with a home run in the bottom of the ninth inning, tying Williamson.
On March 6, 1922, Ruth signed a new contract, for three years at $52,000 a year.
After that season, Red Sox owner Harry Frazee controversially sold Ruth to the Yankees, an act that, coupled with Boston's subsequent championship drought, popularized the "Curse of the Bambino" superstition.
Ruth started and won Game 2, 2–1, in 14 innings.
Both situations began to change on May 1, when Ruth hit a home run with the ball going completely out of the Polo Grounds, a feat believed only to have been previously accomplished by Shoeless Joe Jackson.
With the major leagues shorthanded due to the war, Barrow had many holes in the Red Sox lineup to fill.
Ruth soon realized that Fuchs had deceived him, and had no intention of making him manager or giving him any significant off-field duties.
He will be the patron saint of American possibility."
Yankees business manager Harry Sparrow had died early in the 1920 season; to replace him, Ruppert and Huston hired Barrow.
The competition from the Terrapins caused Dunn to sustain large losses.
Gehrig took the lead, 45–44, in the first game of a doubleheader at Fenway Park early in September; Ruth responded with two of his own to take the lead, as it proved permanently—Gehrig finished with 47.
Ruth also found out that far from giving him a share of the profits, Fuchs wanted him to invest some of ''his'' money in the team in a last-ditch effort to improve its balance sheet.
Ruth collapsed in Asheville, North Carolina, as the team journeyed north.
When he reported to spring training, he was in his best shape as a Yankee, weighing only .
Once the regular season began, Ruth was a star pitcher who was also dangerous at the plate.
Although Fairfax regretted that he could not have the time to make Ruth a cricket player, Ruth had lost any interest in such a career upon learning that the best batsmen made only about $40 per week.
There were other financial pressures on Frazee, despite his team's success.
On July 26, 1948, Ruth left the hospital to attend the premiere of the film ''The Babe Ruth Story''.
He later stated that his only duties as vice president consisted of making public appearances and autographing tickets.
When the matter became public, the press greatly inflated it, and by some accounts, Ruth saved a dying boy's life by visiting him, emotionally promising to hit a home run, and doing so.
He finished 1935 with a .181 average—easily his worst as a full-time position player—and the final six of his 714 home runs.
Ruth was deeply impressed by Providence manager "Wild Bill" Donovan, previously a star pitcher with a 25–4 win–loss record for Detroit in 1907; in later years, he credited Donovan with teaching him much about pitching.
The ballpark was designed with Ruth in mind: although the venue's left-field fence was further from home plate than at the Polo Grounds, Yankee Stadium's right-field fence was closer, making home runs easier to hit for left-handed batters.
Although by late June the Orioles were in first place, having won over two-thirds of their games, the paid attendance dropped as low as 150.
At the end of the season, Shawkey was fired and replaced with Cubs manager Joe McCarthy, though Ruth again unsuccessfully sought the job.
At St. Mary's, which George Jr. entered on June 13, 1902, he was recorded as "incorrigible"; he spent much of the next twelve years there.
Ruth's batting average also fell to .323, well below his career average.
Ruth had two hits in the second game of the season, but it quickly went downhill both for him and the Braves from there.
Creamer pointed out that it is common for inexperienced pitchers to display such habits, and the need to break Ruth of his would not constitute a reason to not use him at all.
He concludes that the hospitalization was behavior-related.
Ruth went 24–13 with a 2.01 ERA and six shutouts in 1917, but the Sox finished in second place in the league, nine games behind the Chicago White Sox in the standings.
Ruth, who played under four managers who are in the National Baseball Hall of Fame, always maintained that Carrigan, who is not enshrined there, was the best skipper he ever played for.
Despite his success as a pitcher, Ruth was acquiring a reputation for long home runs; at Sportsman's Park against the St. Louis Browns, a Ruth hit soared over Grand Avenue, breaking the window of a Chevrolet dealership.
Ruth returned to retirement, never again to work in baseball.
The Yankees had high expectations when they met the New York Giants in the 1921 World Series, and the Yankees won the first two games with Ruth in the lineup.
Many in the crowd threw lemons at Ruth, a sign of derision, and others (as well as the Cubs themselves) shouted abuse at Ruth and other Yankees.
To soothe Providence fans upset at losing a star, Lannin announced that the Red Sox would soon send a replacement to the Grays.
In New York, Ruth collapsed again and was found unconscious in his hotel bathroom.
Despite a relatively successful first season, he was not slated to start regularly for the Red Sox, who had two stellar left-handed pitchers already: the established stars Dutch Leonard, who had broken the record for the lowest earned run average (ERA) in a single season; and Ray Collins, a 20-game winner in both 1913 and 1914.
According to Glenn Stout, "Ruth's home runs were exalted, uplifting experience that meant more to fans than any runs they were responsible for.
Shortly thereafter, Ruth returned to the hospital for the final time.
Ruth had hit a home run against the Yankees on Opening Day, and another during a month-long batting slump that soon followed.
Ruth hit .378, winning his only AL batting title, with a league-leading 46 home runs.
Ruth met Helen Woodford (1897–1929), by some accounts, in a coffee shop in Boston where she was a waitress, and they were married on October 17, 1914; he was 19 and she was 17.
Ruppert and Barrow quickly made a deal with Frazee for New York to acquire some of the players who would be mainstays of the early Yankee pennant-winning teams, including catcher Wally Schang and pitcher Waite Hoyt.
Sometime in 1932, Gehrig's mother, during a conversation which she assumed was private, remarked, "It's a shame Claire doesn't dress Dorothy as nicely as she dresses her own daughter."
Reach Company, maker of baseballs used in the major leagues, was using a more efficient machine to wind the yarn found within the baseball.
He hit a long fly ball off Walter Johnson; the blast left the field, curving foul, but Ruth circled the bases anyway.
''The New York Times'' suggested presciently, "The short right field wall at the Polo Grounds should prove an easy target for Ruth next season and, playing seventy-seven games at home, it would not be surprising if Ruth surpassed his home run record of twenty-nine circuit clouts next Summer."
In early 1914, Ruth was signed to a professional baseball contract by Jack Dunn, owner and manager of the minor-league Baltimore Orioles, an International League team.
In her book, ''My Dad, the Babe'', Dorothy claimed that she was Ruth's biological child by a mistress named Juanita Jennings.
The Philadelphia Athletics, rebuilding after some lean years, erased the Yankees' big lead and even took over first place briefly in early September.
There are various accounts of how Ruth came to be called Babe, but most center on his being referred to as "Dunnie's babe" or a variant.
In Chicago, Ruth was resentful at the hostile crowds that met the Yankees's train and jeered them at the hotel.
In November 1946, he entered French Hospital in New York for tests, which revealed that Ruth had an inoperable malignant tumor at the base of his skull and in his neck.
That play did not open until 1925, however, by which time Frazee had sold the Red Sox.
Ruth's condition gradually became worse; only a few visitors were allowed to see him, one of whom was National League president and future Commissioner of Baseball Ford Frick.
The new commissioner, Happy Chandler (Judge Landis had died in 1944), proclaimed April 27, 1947, Babe Ruth Day around the major leagues, with the most significant observance to be at Yankee Stadium.
Ultimately, Fuchs persuaded Ruth to remain at least until after the Memorial Day doubleheader in Philadelphia.
In the first two games in Pittsburgh, Ruth had only one hit, though a long fly caught by Paul Waner probably would have been a home run in any other ballpark besides Forbes Field.
With little suspense as to the pennant race, the nation's attention turned to Ruth's pursuit of his own single-season home run record of 59.
In a long letter to Ruth a few days before the press conference, Fuchs promised Ruth a share in the Braves' profits, with the possibility of becoming co-owner of the team.
The slugger later sought to market candy bearing his name; he was refused a trademark because of the Baby Ruth bar.
(Ruth replied that he hoped that "every Jap that mentioned my name gets shot").
It is uncertain why Carrigan did not give Ruth additional opportunities to pitch.
Even his failures were seen as majestic—one sportswriter noted, "When Ruth misses a swipe at the ball, the stands quiver".
Two home runs by Ruth on July 5, and one in each of two consecutive games a week later, raised his season total to 11, tying his career best from 1918.
The Yankees swept the favored Cardinals in four games in the World Series, with Ruth batting .625 and hitting three home runs in Game Four, including one off Alexander.
Due to a marketing arrangement, in 2005, the Baby Ruth bar became the official candy bar of Major League Baseball.
Ruth still hoped to be hired as a manager if he could not play anymore, but only one managerial position, Cleveland, became available between Ruth's retirement and the end of the 1937 season.
Ruth remained productive in 1933, as he batted .301, with 34 home runs, 103 RBIs, and a league-leading 114 walks, as the Yankees finished second, seven games behind the Senators.
As an out-of-towner from New York City, Frazee had been regarded with suspicion by Boston's sportswriters and baseball fans when he bought the team.
The school's influence remained with Ruth in other ways: a lifelong Catholic, he would sometimes attend Mass after carousing all night, and he became a well-known member of the Knights of Columbus.
By one account, Julia and Dorothy were, through no fault of their own, the reason for the seven-year rift in Ruth's relationship with teammate Lou Gehrig.
Ruth may have been offered a bonus and a larger salary to jump to the Terrapins; when rumors to that effect swept Baltimore, giving Ruth the most publicity he had experienced to date, a Terrapins official denied it, stating it was their policy not to sign players under contract to Dunn.
As April passed into May, Ruth's deterioration became even more pronounced.
Ruppert had stated that he would not release Ruth to go to another team as a full-time player.
After becoming the best pitcher at St. Mary's, in 1913, when Ruth was 18, he was allowed to leave the premises to play weekend games on teams drawn from the community.
Just before the 1934 season, Ruppert offered to make Ruth the manager of the Yankees' top minor-league team, the Newark Bears, but he was talked out of it by his wife, Claire, and his business manager, Christy Walsh.
Montville notes the continuing relevance of Babe Ruth in American culture, over three-quarters of a century after he last swung a bat in a major league game:
He would adjust his own shirt collars, rather than having a tailor do it, even during his well-paid baseball career.
He became ill while there, and suffered relapses during spring training.
The Yankees, however, regained first place when they beat the Athletics three out of four games in a pivotal series at Yankee Stadium later that month, and clinched the pennant in the final weekend of the season.
According to biographer Kal Wagenheim, there were legal difficulties to be straightened out as Ruth was supposed to remain at the school until he turned 21.
His often reckless lifestyle was tempered by his willingness to do good by visiting children at hospitals and orphanages.
Dunn explored a possible move by the Orioles to Richmond, Virginia, as well as the sale of a minority interest in the club.
George Herman Ruth Jr. was born in 1895 at 216 Emory Street in Pigtown, a working-class section of Baltimore, Maryland, named for its meat-packing plants.
Ruth pitched Game One for the Red Sox, a 1–0 shutout.
Ruth, in his autobiography, stated only that he worked out for Dunn for a half-hour, and was signed.
Once the season concluded, Ruth married Helen in Ellicott City, Maryland.
In his shortened season, Ruth appeared in 110 games, batted .315, with 35 home runs, and drove in 99 runs, but compared to his previous two dominating years, the 1922 season was a disappointment.
The Associated Press reported in 1993 that Muhammad Ali was tied with Babe Ruth as the most recognized athletes in America.
They were briefly silenced when Ruth hit a three-run home run off Charlie Root in the first inning, but soon revived, and the Cubs tied the score at 4–4 in the fourth inning.
There, each speaker, concluding with future New York mayor Jimmy Walker, censured him for his poor behavior.
As part of the Yankees' vaunted "Murderer's Row" lineup of 1927, Ruth hit 60 home runs, extending his MLB single-season record.
Frazee sold the rights to Babe Ruth for $100,000, the largest sum ever paid for a baseball player.
They treated him with teropterin, a folic acid derivative; he may have been the first human subject.
Through July and August, they were never separated by more than two home runs.
Two of Ruth's victories were by the score of 1–0, one in a 13-inning game.
Ernie Shore was called in to relieve Ruth, and was allowed eight warm-up pitches.
Ruth had just two hits in seventeen at bats, and the Yankees lost to the Giants for the second straight year, by 4–0 (with one tie game).
In 1924, the Yankees were favored to become the first team to win four consecutive pennants.
He batted .368, walked eight times, scored eight runs, hit three home runs and slugged 1.000 during the series, as the Yankees won their first World Series championship, four games to two.
He was named baseball's Greatest Player Ever in a ballot commemorating the 100th anniversary of professional baseball, in 1969.
Ruth later told of meeting the woman he would first marry, Helen Woodford, that morning—she was then a 16-year-old waitress at Landers Coffee Shop, and Ruth related that she served him when he had breakfast there.
Helen died in January 1929 at age 31 in a house fire in Watertown, Massachusetts, in a house owned by Edward Kinder, a dentist with whom she had been living as "Mrs. Kinder".
Despite past differences, Ruth praised Huggins and described him as a "great guy".
To spare Ruth's eyes, right field–his defensive position–was not pointed into the afternoon sun, as was traditional; left fielder Meusel was soon suffering headaches from squinting toward home plate.
Whether or not Ruth intended to indicate where he planned to (and did) hit the ball, the incident has gone down in legend as Babe Ruth's called shot.
There were rumors that Ruth was a likely candidate each time when the Cleveland Indians, Cincinnati Reds, and Detroit Tigers were looking for a manager, but nothing came of them.
However, the exact cause of his ailment has never been confirmed and remains a mystery.
Ruth had received a raise on promotion to the major leagues, and quickly acquired tastes for fine food, liquor, and women, among other temptations.
Asked if he had considered Ruth for the job, Indians owner Alva Bradley replied negatively.
Ruth's nine shutouts in 1916 set a league record for left-handers that would remain unmatched until Ron Guidry tied it in 1978.
Nevertheless, on September 4, he both tied and broke the organized baseball record for home runs in a season, snapping Perry Werden's 1895 mark of 44 in the minor Western League.
Ruth's legendary power and charismatic personality made him a larger-than-life figure in the "Roaring Twenties".
There were other changes in the Red Sox organization that offseason, as Lannin sold the team to a three-man group headed by New York theatrical promoter Harry Frazee.
For the first time in his career (disregarding pinch-hitting appearances), Ruth was allowed a place in the batting order higher than ninth.
Ruth's nickname there was "Niggerlips", as he had large facial features and was darker than most boys at the all-white reformatory.
When the home plate umpire 'Brick' Owens called the first four pitches as balls, Ruth threw a punch at him, and was ejected from the game and later suspended for ten days and fined $100.
The 1919 season saw record-breaking attendance, and Ruth's home runs for Boston made him a national sensation.
Large crowds jammed stadiums to see Ruth play when the Yankees were on the road.
Injuries and ineffective pitching by other Boston pitchers gave Ruth another chance, and after some good relief appearances, Carrigan allowed Ruth another start, and he won a rain-shortened seven inning game.
The property was restored and opened to the public in 1973 by the non-profit Babe Ruth Birthplace Foundation, Inc. Ruth's widow, Claire, his two daughters, Dorothy and Julia, and his sister, Mamie, helped select and install exhibits for the museum.
Ruth had hit his fourth home run of the Series earlier in the game, and was the only Yankee to reach base off Alexander, walking in the ninth inning before being caught stealing to end the game.
By this time, years of high living were starting to catch up with him.
In late September, the Yankees visited Cleveland and won three out of four games, giving them the upper hand in the race, and clinched their first pennant a few days later.
Thousands of New Yorkers, including many children, stood vigil outside the hospital in Ruth's final days.
Although Ruppert and his co-owner, Colonel Tillinghast Huston, were both wealthy, and had aggressively purchased and traded for players in 1918 and 1919 to build a winning team, Ruppert faced losses in his brewing interests as Prohibition was implemented, and if their team left the Polo Grounds, where the Yankees were the tenants of the New York Giants, building a stadium in New York would be expensive.
Inexperienced as a manager, Barrow had player Harry Hooper advise him on baseball game strategy.
Ban Johnson ordered him fined, suspended, and stripped of his captaincy.
Ruth was not much noticed by the fans, as Bostonians watched the Red Sox's crosstown rivals, the Braves, begin a legendary comeback that would take them from last place on the Fourth of July to the 1914 World Series championship.
Ruth's salary demands were causing other players to ask for more money.
After the Series, Ruth and teammates Bob Meusel and Bill Piercy participated in a barnstorming tour in the Northeast.
In the interim was a western road trip, at which the rival teams had scheduled days to honor him.
Reisler notes that recent sluggers who surpassed Ruth's 60-home run mark, such as Mark McGwire and Barry Bonds, generated much less excitement than when Ruth repeatedly broke the single-season home run record in the 1920s; Ruth dominated a relatively small sports world, while Americans of the present era have many sports available to watch.
His response was, "I know, but I had a better year than Hoover."
However, Mack later dropped the idea, saying that Ruth's wife would be running the team in a month if Ruth ever took over.
George Ruth Jr. was born in the house of his maternal grandfather, Pius Schamberger, a German immigrant and trade unionist.
He appeared again at another day in his honor at Yankee Stadium in September, but was not well enough to pitch in an old-timers game as he had hoped.
Playing just 98 games, Ruth had his worst season as a Yankee; he finished with a .290 average and 25 home runs.
Before the 1928 season, Ruth signed a new contract for an unprecedented $80,000 per year.
Let's see some son of a bitch try to top that one", Ruth exulted after the game.
Some accounts say that, after a violent incident at his father's saloon, the city authorities decided this environment was unsuitable for a small child.
The food was simple, and the Xaverian Brothers who ran the school insisted on strict discipline; corporal punishment was common.
Until another game of that length was played in 2005, this was the longest World Series game, and Ruth's pitching performance is still the longest postseason complete game victory.
In the 1932 season, the Yankees went 107–47 and won the pennant.
He offered the Senators $60,000 for Walter Johnson, but Washington owner Clark Griffith was unwilling.
Early in the 1934 season, Ruth began openly campaigning to become manager of the Yankees.
At the time, home runs were rare in baseball, and Ruth's majestic shot awed the crowd.
Ruth was prouder of that record than he was of any of his batting feats.
Cynics have suggested that Barrow may have played a larger role in the Ruth sale, as less than a year after, he became the Yankee general manager, and in the following years made a number of purchases of Red Sox players from Frazee.
The Red Sox won the pennant and World Series again, this time defeating the Brooklyn Superbas (as the Dodgers were then known) in five games.
A third major league, the Federal League, had begun play, and the local franchise, the Baltimore Terrapins, restored that city to the major leagues for the first time since 1902.
The Yankees hired Bob Shawkey as manager, their fourth choice.
It was a lesion known as nasopharyngeal carcinoma, or "lymphoepithelioma."
The final home run, both of the game and of Ruth's career, sailed over the upper deck in right field and out of the ballpark, the first time anyone had hit a fair ball completely out of Forbes Field.
Babe Ruth returned to his normal production during 1926, batting .372 with 47 home runs and 146 RBIs.
Recalled to Boston after Providence finished the season in first place, he pitched and won a game for the Red Sox against the New York Yankees on October 2, getting his first major league hit, a double.
During his time as a Red Sox, he kept an eye on the inexperienced Ruth, much as Dunn had in Baltimore.
When these went into play in 1920, the start of the live-ball era, the number of home runs increased by 184 over the previous year across the major leagues.
In 1999, baseball fans named Ruth to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.
Ruth stated, "I think I was born as a hitter the first day I ever saw him hit a baseball."
His second wife, Claire Merritt Ruth, would be interred with him 28 years later in 1976.
Shortly afterward, Tigers owner Frank Navin made a proposal to Ruppert and Barrow—if the Yankees traded Ruth to Detroit, Navin would name Ruth player-manager.
On June 5, 1948, a "gaunt and hollowed out" Ruth visited Yale University to donate a manuscript of ''The Babe Ruth Story'' to its library.
During the 1934–35 offseason, Ruth circled the world with his wife, including a barnstorming tour of the Far East.
The Cincinnati Reds and New York Giants expressed interest in Ruth, but Dunn sold his contract, along with those of pitchers Ernie Shore and Ben Egan, to the Boston Red Sox of the American League (AL) on July 4.
On May 25, he was thrown out of the game for throwing dust in umpire George Hildebrand's face, then climbed into the stands to confront a heckler.
Ruth joined the Grays on August 18, 1914.
Ruth showed dramatic improvement during the summer of 1947, so much so that his case was presented by his doctors at a scientific meeting, without using his name.
The Red Sox won the AL pennant, but with the pitching staff healthy, Ruth was not called upon to pitch in the 1915 World Series against the Philadelphia Phillies.
The Yankees were never challenged, leading the league for most of the 1923 season and winning the AL pennant by 17 games.
