From before 3000 BC until the reign of Hammurabi, the major cultural and religious center of southern Mesopotamia had been the ancient city of Nippur, where the god Enlil was supreme.
The fighting continued, as the Assyrian king held out against the alliance until 608 BC, when he was eventually ejected by the Medes, Babylonians, Scythians and their allies, and prevented in an attempt to regain the city the same year.
When Ḫur-batila, the successor of Tepti Ahar took the throne of Elam, he began raiding the Babylonia, taunting Kurigalzu to do battle with him at Dūr-Šulgi.
The Scythians and Cimmerians, erstwhile allies of Babylonia under Nabopolassar, now became a threat, and Nebuchadnezzar II was forced to march into Anatolia and rout their forces, ending the northern threat to his Empire.
What times what shall I take in order to get 9?
The Egyptians attempted to remain in the Near East, possibly in an effort to aid in restoring Assyria as a secure buffer against Babylonia and the Medes and Persians, or to carve out an empire of their own.
He also maintained friendly relations with Suppiluliuma I, ruler of the Hittite Empire.
Marduk-apla-iddina II was eventually defeated and ejected by Sargon II of Assyria, and fled to his protectors in Elam.
Cyaxares had also taken advantage of the Assyrian destruction of the formerly regionally dominant pre-Iranian Elam and the subsequent anarchy in Assyria to free the Iranic peoples from three centuries of the Assyrian yoke and regional Elamite domination.
Among the Babylonians' mathematical accomplishments were the determination of the square root of two correctly to seven places ( YBC 7289 clay tablet).
In respect of content there is scarcely any difference between the two groups of texts.
The MUL.APIN, contains catalogues of stars and constellations as well as schemes for predicting heliacal risings and the settings of the planets, lengths of daylight measured by a water clock, gnomon, shadows, and intercalations.
Ammi-Ditana's father and son also bore Amorite names: Abi-Eshuh and Ammi-Saduqa.
Both the Babylonians and their Amorite rulers were driven from Assyria to the north by an Assyrian-Akkadian governor named Puzur-Sin c. 1740 BC, who regarded king Mut-Ashkur as a foreign Amorite and a former lackey of Babylon.
In 615 BC, while the Assyrian king was fully occupied fighting rebels in both Babylonia and Assyria itself, Cyaxares launched a surprise attack on the Assyrian heartlands, sacking the cities of Kalhu (the Biblical Calah, Nimrud) and Arrapkha (modern Kirkuk), Nabopolassar was still pinned down in southern Mesopotamia and thus not involved in this breakthrough.
There are many Babylonian literary works whose titles have come down to us.
The Babylonian king crushed these rebellions, deposed Jehoiakim, the king of Judah and deported a sizeable part of the population to Babylonia.
He was deposed and killed during the same year in a palace conspiracy.
During the first centuries of what is called the "Amorite period", the most powerful city states in the south were Isin, Eshnunna and Larsa, together with Assyria in the north.
Three years later Cyrus had become king of all Persia, and was engaged in a campaign to put down a revolt among the Assyrians.
Nebuchadnezzar I (1124–1103 BC) was the most famous ruler of this dynasty.
Both of these kings continued to struggle unsuccessfully against The Sealand Dynasty.
However, Nebuchadnezzar failed to extend Babylonian territory further, being defeated a number of times by Ashur-resh-ishi I (1133–1115 BC), king of the Middle Assyrian Empire, for control of formerly Hittite-controlled territories in Aram.
The Babylonians, like their predecessor states, engaged in regular trade with the Amorite and Canaanite city-states to the west; with Babylonian officials or troops sometimes passing to the Levant and Canaan, with Amorite merchants operating freely throughout Mesopotamia.
A considerable amount of Babylonian literature was translated from Sumerian originals, and the language of religion and law long continued to be written in the old agglutinative language of Sumer.
The term "Babylonia", especially in writings from around the early 20th century, was formerly used to include Southern Mesopotamia's earliest history, and not only in reference to the later city-state of Babylon proper.
However Merodach-Baladan and his Elamite protectors continued to unsuccessfully agitate against Assyrian rule.
Babylonia remained weak during this period, with whole areas of Babylonia now under firm Aramean and Sutean control, and by 850 BC the migrant Chaldeans had established their own land in the extreme south east.
According to Plutarch, Seleucus even proved the heliocentric system, but it is not known what arguments he used.
Eriba-Marduk, another Chaldean, succeeded him in 769 BC and his son, Nabu-shuma-ishkun in 761 BC.
Nabonidus and Belshazzar's Assyrian heritage is also likely to have added to this resentment.
The armies of Babylonia under Hammurabi were well-disciplined.
There are dozens of cuneiform records of original Mesopotamian eclipse observations.
Vocabularies, grammars, and interlinear translations were compiled for the use of students, as well as commentaries on the older texts and explanations of obscure words and phrases.
He seemed to have left the defense of his kingdom to Belshazzar (a capable soldier but poor diplomat who alienated the political elite), occupying himself with the more congenial work of excavating the foundation records of the temples and determining the dates of their builders.
His reign was concerned with establishing statehood amongst a sea of other minor city states and kingdoms in the region.
Ninurta-nadin-shumi took the throne in 1137 BC, and also attempted an invasion of Assyria, his armies seem to have skirted through eastern Aramea (modern Syria) and then made an attempt to attack the Assyrian city of Arbela (modern Erbil) from the west.
He was a member of the Chaldean tribe who had a century or so earlier settled in a small region in the far south eastern corner of Mesopotamia, bordering the Persian Gulf and south western Elam.
To the west, the Amorite states of the Levant (modern Syria and Jordan) including the powerful kingdom of Mari were conquered.
The oldest significant astronomical text that we possess is Tablet 63 of 'Enūma Anu Enlil', the Venus tablet of Ammi-Saduqa, which lists the first and last visible risings of Venus over a period of about 21 years and is the earliest evidence that the phenomena of a planet were recognized as periodic.
Past scholars originally extrapolated from this text that it means he defeated the invading Amorites to the south, but there is no explicit record of that.
The ''ner'' of 600 and the ''sar'' of 3600 were formed from the unit of 60, corresponding with a degree of the equator.
The volume of a cylinder was taken as the product of the base and the height, however, the volume of the frustum of a cone or a square pyramid was incorrectly taken as the product of the height and half the sum of the bases.
Most divine attributes ascribed to the Amorite kings of Babylonia disappeared at this time; the title "god" was never given to a Kassite sovereign.
However he refused and managed to somehow successfully fight his way out of Nineveh and to the northern Assyrian city of Harran in Upper Mesopotamia where he founded a new capital.
The date of the sack of Babylon by the Hittites under king Mursili I is considered crucial to the various calculations of the early chronology of the ancient Near East, as it is taken as a fixed point in the discussion.
Suggestions for its precise date vary by as much as 230 years, corresponding to the uncertainty regarding the length of the "Dark Age" of the ensuing Late Bronze Age collapse, resulting in the shift of the entire Bronze Age chronology of Mesopotamia with regard to the Egyptian chronology.
Upon his death, and in an effort to maintain harmony within his vast empire (which stretched from the Caucasus to Egypt and Nubia and from Cyprus to Iran), he installed his eldest son Shamash-shum-ukin as a subject king in Babylon, and his youngest, the highly educated Ashurbanipal (669–627 BC), in the more senior position as king of Assyria and overlord of Shamash-shum-ukin.
In the later years of his reign, he devoted himself to peaceful building projects and securing Babylonia's borders.
From c. 3500 BC until the rise of the Akkadian Empire in the 24th century BC, Mesopotamia had been dominated by largely Sumerian city states, such as Ur, Lagash, Uruk, Kish, Isin, Larsa, Adab, Eridu, Gasur, Awan, Hamazi, Akshak and Umma, although Semitic Akkadian names began to appear on the king lists of some of these states (such as Eshnunna and Assyria) between the 29th and 25th centuries BC.
His dynasty was to remain in power for some 125 years.
Neriglissar died young however, and was succeeded by his son Labashi-Marduk (556 BC), who was still a boy.
These include the symptoms for many varieties of epilepsy and related ailments along with their diagnosis and prognosis.
By the end of his reign Babylonia had shrunk to the small and relatively weak nation it had been upon its foundation, although the city itself was far larger than it had been prior to the rise of Hammurabi.
However, Ulamburiash managed to attack it conquered parts of the land from ''Ea-gamil'', a king with a distinctly Sumerian name, around 1450 BC, whereupon Ea-Gamil fled to his allies in Elam.
A battle was fought at Opis in the month of June, where the Babylonians were defeated; and immediately afterwards Sippar surrendered to the invader.
Burnaburiash I succeeded him and drew up a peace treaty with the Assyrian king Puzur-Ashur III, and had a largely uneventful reign, as did his successor Kashtiliash III.
Babylon was regarded as a sacred city by all Mesopotamians, including Assyrians, and this act eventually led Sennacherib to be murdered by his own sons while praying to the god Nisroch in Nineveh in 681 BC.
The Babylonian monarchy's western connections remained strong for quite some time.
The south Mesopotamian dynasty was replaced by another Kassite Dynasty (Dynasty VI; 1003–984 BC) which also seems to have regained control over Babylon itself.
The Hittite Empire of the northern and western Levant and eastern Anatolia had been largely annexed by the Middle Assyrian Empire, and its heartland finally overrun by invading Phrygians from the Balkans.
This was an important contribution to astronomy and the philosophy of science and some scholars have thus referred to this new approach as the first scientific revolution.
Rather, they had first appeared in the Zagros Mountains of what is today northwestern Iran.
The earliest mention of the city of Babylon can be found in a clay tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad (2334–2279 BC), dating back to the 23rd century BC.
The Babylonian system of mathematics was sexagesimal, or a base 60 numeral system.
Assyrian domination continued until c. 1050 BC, with Marduk-ahhe-eriba and Marduk-zer-X regarded as vassals of Assyria.
However East Semitic-speaking Babylonia soon began to suffer repeated incursions from West Semitic nomadic peoples migrating from the Levant, and during the 11th century BC large swathes of the Babylonian countryside was appropriated and occupied by these newly arrived Arameans and Suteans.
Each division contains the story of a single adventure in the career of Gilgamesh.
Nabonidus (hence his son, the regent Belshazzar) was, at least from the mother's side, neither Chaldean nor Babylonian, but ironically Assyrian, hailing from its final capital of Harran (Kharranu).
The empire eventually disintegrated due to economic decline, climate change and civil war, followed by attacks by the Gutians from the Zagros Mountains.
He excited a strong feeling against himself by attempting to centralize the polytheistic religion of Babylonia in the temple of Marduk at Babylon, and while he had thus alienated the local priesthoods, the military party also despised him on account of his antiquarian tastes.
The Elamites occupied huge swathes of southern Mesopotamia, and the early Amorite rulers were largely held in vassalage to Elam.
In addition, Mesopotamian military might had usually been concentrated in the martial state of Assyria.
The Babylonians were able to make great advances in mathematics for two reasons.
He went on to conquer the eastern lands of Elam.
Esarhaddon (681–669 BC) ruled Babylon personally, he completely rebuilt the city, bringing rejuvenation and peace to the region.
These policies were continued by his successors Erishum I and Ikunum.
He supported the heliocentric theory where the Earth rotated around its own axis which in turn revolved around the Sun.
The long reigning Assyrian king Ashur-dan I (1179–1133 BC) resumed expansionist policies and conquered further parts of northern Babylonia from both kings, and the Elamite ruler Shutruk-Nakhunte eventually conquered most of eastern Babylonia.
An Assyrian governor named Kandalanu was placed on the throne to rule on behalf of the Assyrian king.
During the 8th and 7th centuries BC, Babylonian astronomers developed a new approach to astronomy.
Sumer rose up again with the Third Dynasty of Ur in the late 22nd century BC, and ejected the Gutians from southern Mesopotamia.
Shamshu-Ditana was overthrown following the "sack of Babylon" by the Hittite king Mursili I.
The conquests of Hammurabi gave the region stability after turbulent times and coalesced the patchwork of states of southern and central Mesopotamia into one single nation, and it is only from the time of Hammurabi that southern Mesopotamia came to be known historically as ''Babylonia''.
Following the collapse of the Sumerian "Ur-III" dynasty at the hands of the Elamites in 2002 BC, the Amorites, a foreign Northwest Semitic-speaking people, began to migrate into southern Mesopotamia from the northern Levant, gradually gaining control over most of southern Mesopotamia, where they formed a series of small kingdoms, while the Assyrians reasserted their independence in the north.
After six years of civil war in Assyria, a native king named Adasi seized power c. 1735 BC, and went on to appropriate former Babylonian and Amorite territory in central Mesopotamia, as did his successor Bel-bani.
However, southern Mesopotamia had no natural, defensible boundaries, making it vulnerable to attack.
The Scythians from north of the Caucasus, and the Cimmerians from the Black Sea who had both also been subjugated by Assyria, joined the alliance, as did regional Aramean tribes.
One of the most important works of the First Babylonian Dynasty, as it was called by the native historians, was the compilation of Babylonian law, a law code both influenced by and improved upon the much earlier codes of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria.
Painted terracotta cones for torches were also embedded in the plaster.
One of the first acts of Cyrus accordingly was to allow the Jewish exiles to return to their own homes, carrying with them their sacred temple vessels.
However, Assyria soon descended into a series of brutal internal civil wars which were to cause its downfall.
I purified their copper.
Babylonia and Assyria then became part of the Greek Seleucid Empire.
A crystal lens, turned on the lathe, was discovered by Austen Henry Layard at Nimrud along with glass vases bearing the name of Sargon; this could explain the excessive minuteness of some of the writing on the Assyrian tablets, and a lens may also have been used in the observation of the heavens.
This geographic usage of the name "Babylonia' has generally been replaced by the more accurate term ''Sumer'' in more recent writing, referring to the pre-Assyro-Babylonian Mesopotamian civilization.
He fought and defeated the Elamites and drove them from Babylonian territory, invading Elam itself, sacking the Elamite capital Susa, and recovering the sacred statue of Marduk that had been carried off from Babylon during the fall of the Kassites.
They were followed in the late 10th or early 9th century BC by the Chaldeans, an Aramean tribe described in Assyrian annals as the "Kaldu".
Bronze Age to Early Iron Age Mesopotamian culture is sometimes summarized as "Assyro-Babylonian", because of the close cultural interdependence of the two political centers.
Despite the loss of territory, military weakness, and evident reduction in literacy and culture, the Kassite dynasty was the longest-lived dynasty of Babylon, lasting until 1155 BC, when Babylon was conquered by Shutruk-Nakhunte of Elam, and reconquered a few years later by the Nebuchadnezzar I, part of the larger Late Bronze Age collapse.
This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a ''sprachbund''.
After securing his empire, which included marrying a Median princess, he devoted himself to maintaining the empire and conducting numerous impressive building projects in Babylon.
Meli-Shipak II (1188–1172 BC) seems to have had a peaceful reign.
The Hittites did not remain for long, but the destruction wrought by them finally enabled the Kassites to gain control.
Upon the death of Shalmaneser II, Baba-aha-iddina was reduced to vassalage by the Assyrian queen Shammuramat (known as Semiramis to the Persians and Greeks), acting as regent to his successor Adad-nirari III who was merely a boy.
After only one year on the throne amidst continual civil war, Sinsharishkun (622–612 BC) ousted him as ruler of Assyria and Babylonia in 622 BC.
Sin-shar-ishkun somehow managed to rally against the odds during 613 BC, and drove back the combined forces ranged against him.
Of the reign of the last Babylonian king, Nabonidus (''Nabu-na'id'', 556–539 BC) who is the son of the Assyrian priestess Adda-Guppi and who managed to kill the last Chaldean king, Labashi-Marduk, and took the reign, there is a fair amount of information available.
They also seem to have gained ascendancy over most of the territory of the Akkadian kings of Assyria in northern Mesopotamia for a time.
Babylonia briefly fell to another foreign ruler when Marduk-apla-usur ascended the throne in 780 BC, taking advantage of a period of civil war in Assyria.
4 is the length and 5 is the diagonal.
Tablets dating back to the Old Babylonian period document the application of mathematics to the variation in the length of daylight over a solar year.
Amorite rule survived in a much reduced Babylon, Samshu-iluna's successor Abi-Eshuh made a vain attempt to recapture the Sealand Dynasty for Babylon, but met defeat at the hands of king Damqi-ilishu II.
Some sections of the Assyrian Army and Administration may have still continued in and around Dur-Katlimmu in north west Assyria for a time, however by 599 BC Assyrian records from this region fell silent.
*ultra-short chronology: 1499 BC
However, when Sargon I (1920–1881 BC) succeeded as king in Assyria in 1920 BC, he eventually withdrew Assyria from the region, preferring to concentrate on continuing the vigorous expansion of Assyrian colonies in Anatolia, and eventually southern Mesopotamia fell to the Amorites, a Northwest Semitic-speaking people from the northern Levant.
Kashtiliash IV's (1242–1235 BC) reign ended catastrophically as the Assyrian king Tukulti-Ninurta I (1243–1207 BC) routed his armies, sacked and burned Babylon and set himself up as king, ironically becoming the first ''native'' Mesopotamian to rule the state, its previous rulers having all been ''non-Mesopotamian'' Amorites and Kassites.
He raised a major revolt against his brother, Ashurbanipal.
In 620 BC Nabopolassar seized control over much of Babylonia with the support of most of the inhabitants, with only the city of Nippur and some northern regions showing any loyalty to the Assyrian king.
The new king successfully drove out the Elamites and prevented any possible Kassite revival.
The Sealand Dynasty region remained independent however, and the Kassite king seems to have been unable to finally conquer it.
The seat of empire was thus transferred to Babylonia for the first time since Hammurabi over a thousand years before.
The Assyrian king Shalmaneser V was declared king of Babylon in 727 BC, but died whilst besieging Samaria in 722 BC.
After 1050 BC the Middle Assyrian Empire descended into a period of civil war, followed by constant warfare with the Arameans, Phrygians, Syro-Hittite states and Hurrians, allowing Babylonia to once more largely free itself from the Assyrian yoke for a few decades.
However, the alliance launched a renewed combined attack the following year, and after five years of fierce fighting Nineveh was sacked in late 612 BC after a prolonged siege, in which Sin-shar-ishkun was killed defending his capital.
Shamshi-Adad V attacked him and retook northern Babylonia, forcing a border treaty in Assyria's favour upon him.
Elam was destroyed once and for all, and the Babylonians, Persians, Chaldeans, Arabs, Medes, Elamites, Arameans, Suteans and Canaanites were violently subjugated, with Assyrian troops exacting savage revenge on the rebelling peoples.
However, this dynasty too fell, when the Arameans once more ravaged Babylon.
This led to the infuriated Assyrian king Sennacherib invading and subjugating Elam and sacking Babylon, laying waste to and largely destroying the city.
He then had to contend with the Suteans, ancient Semitic-speaking peoples from the southeastern Levant who invaded Babylonia and sacked Uruk.
*long chronology: 1651 BC
A small Amorite-ruled state emerged in 1894 BC, which contained at this time the minor city of Babylon.
The oldest rectangular astrolabe dates back to Babylonia c. 1100 BC.
After a protracted unresolved struggle over decades with the Assyrian king Ishme-Dagan, Hammurabi forced his successor Mut-Ashkur to pay tribute to Babylon c. 1751 BC, thus giving Babylonia control over Assyria's centuries old Hattian and Hurrian colonies in Anatolia.
Babylonian astronomy was the basis for much of what was done in ancient Greek astronomy, in classical Indian astronomy, in Sasanian, Byzantine and Syrian astronomy, astronomy in the medieval Islamic world, and in Central Asian and Western European astronomy.
The paucity of stone in Babylonia made every pebble precious, and led to a high perfection in the art of gem-cutting.
He was offered the chance of accepting a position of vassalage by the leaders of the alliance according to the Babylonian Chronicle.
Burna-Buriash II ascended to the throne in 1359 BC, he retained friendly relations with Egypt, but the resurgent Middle Assyrian Empire (1365-1050 BC) to the north was now encroaching into northern Babylonia, and as a symbol of peace, the Babylonian king took the daughter of the powerful Assyrian king Ashur-uballit I in marriage.
Immediately after Darius seized Persia, Babylonia briefly recovered its independence under a native ruler, Nidinta-Bel, who took the name of Nebuchadnezzar III, and reigned from October 522 BC to August 520 BC, when Darius took the city by storm, during this period Assyria to the north also rebelled.
The zodiac was a Babylonian invention of great antiquity; and eclipses of the sun and moon could be foretold.
Despite not being able to regain northern Babylonia from Assyria, no further territory was lost, Elam did not threaten, and the Late Bronze Age collapse now affecting the Levant, Canaan, Egypt, the Caucasus, Anatolia, Mediterranean, North Africa and Balkans seemed to have little impact on Babylonia (or indeed Assyria).
Nabonidus fled to Babylon, where he was pursued by Gobryas, and on the 16th day of Tammuz, two days after the capture of Sippar, "the soldiers of Cyrus entered Babylon without fighting."
Enlil-nadin-ahhe (1157–1155 BC) was finally overthrown and the Kassite dynasty ended after Ashur-dan I conquered yet more of northern and central Babylonia, and the equally powerful Shutruk-Nahhunte pushed deep into the heart of Babylonia itself, sacking the city and slaying the king.
However, Babylon continued to be the capital of the kingdom and one of the 'holy' cities of western Asia, where the priests of the ancient Mesopotamian religion were all-powerful, and the only place where the right to inheritance of the short lived old Babylonian empire could be conferred.
The Assyrians fought on with Egyptian aid until a final victory was achieved against them at Carchemish in north western Assyria in 605 BC.
It is possible that Babylonian philosophy had an influence on Greek philosophy, particularly Hellenistic philosophy.
The Kassites renamed Babylon Karduniaš and their rule lasted for 576 years, the longest dynasty in Babylonian history.
It was during the reign of Sin-shar-ishkun that Assyria's vast empire began to unravel, and many of its former subject peoples ceased to pay tribute, most significantly for the Assyrians; the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Arameans and Cimmerians.
He led a powerful coalition of peoples also resentful of Assyrian subjugation and rule, including; Elam, the Persians, Medes, the Babylonians, Chaldeans and Suteans of southern Mesopotamia, the Arameans of the Levant and southwest Mesopotamia, the Arabs and Dilmunites of the Arabian Peninsula and the Canaanites-Phoenicians.
Later Babylonian medicine resembles early Greek medicine in many ways.
Agum III also campaigned against the Sealand Dynasty, finally wholly conquering the far south of Mesopotamia for Babylon, destroying its capital Dur-Enlil in the process.
In Babylonia, an abundance of clay, and lack of stone, led to greater use of mudbrick; Babylonian temples were massive structures of crude brick, supported by buttresses, the rain being carried off by drains.
However, he too was beset by constant unremitting civil war in the Assyrian heartland.
What is the breadth?
However an attempt to take Egypt itself as his Assyrian predecessors had succeeded in doing failed, mainly due to a series of rebellions from the Israelites of  Judah and  the former kingdom of Ephraim, the Phoenicians of Caanan and the Arameans of the Levant.
However, with the rise of Hammurabi, this honour was transferred to Babylon, and the south Mesopotamian god Marduk rose to supremacy in the pantheon of southern Mesopotamia (with the god Ashur remaining the dominant deity in the northern Mesopotamian state of Assyria).
One such drain at Ur was made of lead.
Astyages' army betrayed him to his enemy, and Cyrus established himself at Ecbatana, thus putting an end to the empire of the Medes and making the Persian faction dominant among the Iranic peoples.
Hammurabi freed Babylon from Elamite dominance, and indeed drove them from southern Mesopotamia entirely.
Cyrus did not arrive until the 3rd of ''Marchesvan'' (October), Gobryas having acted for him in his absence.
After this a puppet ruler was placed on the Elamite throne.
In addition, the ''Diagnostic Handbook'' introduced the methods of therapy and aetiology and the use of empiricism, logic and rationality in diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.
Traditionally, the major religious center of all Mesopotamia was the city of Nippur, and it would remain so until replaced by Babylon during the reign of Hammurabi in the mid-18th century BC.
From this point on the coalition of Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Cimmerians and Arameans fought in unison against a civil war ravaged Assyria.
The Akkadian Empire (2334–2154 BC) saw the Akkadian Semites and Sumerians of Mesopotamia unite under one rule, and the Akkadians fully attain ascendancy over the Sumerians and indeed come to dominate much of the ancient Near East.
The Elamites did not remain in control of Babylonia long, instead entering into an unsuccessful war with Assyria, allowing Marduk-kabit-ahheshu (1155–1139 BC) to establish the Dynasty IV of Babylon, from Isin, with the very first native Akkadian-speaking south Mesopotamian dynasty to rule Babylonia, with Marduk-kabit-ahheshu becoming only the second native Mesopotamian to sit on the throne of Babylon, after the Assyrian king Tukulti-Ninurta I.
The whole story is a composite product, and it is probable that some of the stories are artificially attached to the central figure.
After the collapse of the Akkadian empire, the south Mesopotamian region was dominated by the Gutian people for a few decades before the rise of the Third Dynasty of Ur, which, apart from northern Assyria, encompassed the whole of Mesopotamia, including the city of Babylon.
After some impressive initial successes he was ultimately defeated, and lost yet more territory to Assyria.
They began studying philosophy dealing with the ideal nature of the early universe and began employing an internal logic within their predictive planetary systems.
In particular, the early treatises of the Hippocratic Corpus show the influence of late Babylonian medicine in terms of both content and form.
In Babylonia, in place of the relief, there was greater use of three-dimensional figures—the earliest examples being the Statues of Gudea, that are realistic if somewhat clumsy.
Some initial success in these conflicts gave way to catastrophic defeat at the hands of the powerful Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser I (1115–1076 BC), who annexed huge swathes of Babylonian territory, thus further expanding the Assyrian Empire.
Asōristān was dissolved as a geopolitical entity in 637, and the native Aramaic-speaking and largely Christian populace of southern and central Mesopotamia gradually underwent Arabization and Islamization.
Babylonia appears to have been in a state of chaos during this time, with the north occupied by Assyria, its throne occupied by foreign Chaldeans, and civil unrest prominent throughout the land.
Hammurabi then entered into a protracted war with the Old Assyrian Empire for control of Mesopotamia and the Near East.
During the 3rd millennium BC, an intimate cultural symbiosis between Sumerian and Akkadian-speakers, which included widespread bilingualism.
Nabopolassar was followed by his son Nebuchadnezzar II (605–562 BC), whose reign of 43 years made Babylon once more the ruler of much of the civilized world, taking over portions of the former Assyrian Empire, with the eastern and north eastern portion being taken by the Medes and the far north by the Scythians.
Adad-nirari III eventually killed Baba-aha-iddina and ruled there directly until 800 BC until Ninurta-apla-X was crowned.
Samsu-Ditana was to be the last Amorite ruler of Babylon.
Also, there was a recent discovery in which a tablet used π as 3 and 1/8.
He is credited with building the fabled Hanging Gardens of Babylon.
Upon Ashurbanipal's death in 627 BC, his son Ashur-etil-ilani (627–623 BC) became ruler of Babylon and Assyria.
The states of the south were unable to stem the Amorite advance.
In 539 BC Cyrus invaded Babylonia.
The Sealand Dynasty of southern Mesopotamia  remained independent of Babylonia and in native Akkadian-speaking hands.
He campaigned in Aram and Phoenicia, successfully maintaining Babylonian rule in these regions.
Possible dates for the sack of Babylon are:
There was a brief interlude of Roman conquest (the provinces of Assyria and Mesopotamia; 116-8 AD) under Trajan, after which the Parthians reasserted control.
Early in his reign he came under pressure from the Kassites, a people speaking an apparent language isolate originating in the mountains of northwest Iran.
In Seleucid and Parthian times, the astronomical reports were of a thoroughly scientific character; how much earlier their advanced knowledge and methods were developed is uncertain.
That copy is now in the Louvre.
c. 1728&nbsp;– 1686 BC (short).
You take 16 from 25 and there remains 9.
The Chaldeans settled in the far southeast of Babylonia, other Arameans settled much of the countryside in eastern and central Babylonia and the Suteans in the western deserts, with the weak Babylonian kings being unable to stem these migrations.
Kurigalzu I maintained friendly relations with Assyria, Egypt and the Hittites throughout his reign.
Sin-Muballit was the first of these Amorite rulers to be regarded officially as a king of Babylon, and then on only one single clay tablet.
Adad-nirari II twice attacked and defeated Shamash-mudammiq of Babylonia, annexing a large area of land north of the Diyala River and the towns of Hīt and Zanqu in mid Mesopotamia.
Under these kings, the nation in which Babylon lay remained a small nation which controlled very little territory, and was overshadowed by neighbouring kingdoms that were both older, larger, and more powerful, such as; Isin, Larsa, Assyria to the north and Elam to the east in ancient Iran.
A number of factors arose which would ultimately lead to the fall of Babylon.
