The bachelor's degree has also been used since the late 1990s in a number of areas like nursing and teaching.
Bachelor's degrees exist in almost every country in Europe.
is a special-purpose degree that allows someone who has had some prior studies but has not achieved a bachelor's degree to resume his or her education and take up the study of law with the goal of eventually receiving the juris doctor degree.
It is the academic arm of The Tun Hussein Onn National Eye Hospital and the only eye hospital based institution in Malaysia.
Students, after successfully completing their first two years, can pursue either theoretical specialization (''études fondamentales'') or professional specialization (''études professionnelles'').
Bachelor of Computer Applications is a three-year under-graduate degree course awarded in India in the field of Computer Applications.
is a professional undergraduate degree, awarded by the Cincinnati College of Mortuary Science of Cincinnati, Ohio and Southern Illinois University Carbondale.
Even if he or she does not go to an institution of higher learning, a person can get a bachelor's degree through the Bachelor's Degree Examination for Self-Education.
Polytechnical schools (polytechnics) in Nigeria are not considered universities.
It is earned after three years of studies, of which at least a year and a half in the major subject.
Some universities compress the three-year course into two years by teaching for a full calendar year (180 credits) rather than a standard academic year (120 credits), thus maintaining the full 360-credit size of the course.
The Honours program allows students to pursue an independent research project in an area of interest under the supervision of an academic staff member.
As in the rest of the UK, Certificates and Diplomas of Higher Education may be earned by those completing one and two years of a bachelor's degree course respectively.
A master's degree will require another two to three years of coursework and a thesis.
Currently three to four years of study are required to be awarded a bachelor's degree.
)is a specialized degree in the field of human movement and kinetics.
Stanford University's Bachelor of Arts and Science degree is for students who are receiving one degree but who have completed two arts and sciences majors, one of which would ordinarily lead to the B.A.
There are also some integrated programmes.
The "Título de Grado" is now the prerequisite to access to a Master study.
The Diploma of Higher Education is a level 5 (first year of bachelor's degree) qualification and requires 240 credits, a minimum of 90 at level 5; The Certificate of Higher Education is a level 4 (second year of bachelor's degree) qualification and requires 120 credits, a minimum of 90 at level 4.
Compared to the Bachelor of Arts, which allows students to study a vast range of disciplines, the Bachelor of Social Science enables students to develop more central and specialized knowledge of the social sciences.
When degree is earned after a three-year post secondary Diploma of Associate Engineer, it is called B.Tech.
), 30%–35% of undergraduate programs;
In February, 2011, the Dutch State Secretary of Education decided to adhere to the recommendations written in a report by the Veerman Commission.
* General Management
First- and second-class graduates are immediately eligible for advanced postgraduate degrees (i.e., M.Sc.
The usual degree for mathematics in all other countries is the B.Sc.
These professional bachelor's degrees are considered to be a full education.
Former degrees included:
On the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications, standard undergraduate bachelor's degrees with and without honours are at level 6, although the courses include learning across levels 4 to 6.
for those having graduated from technical university after a minimum of five years, corresponding to a M.Sc., but it may be formally rendered as M, instead of ir.
Science undergraduate degrees may require six months or a semester dedicated to SIWES (Students Industrial Work Experience Scheme) but it is usually mandatory for all engineering degrees.
For example, the Nigerian university system is similar to the British system, while the Ivorian system is akin to the French.
The first one is called a "Profesional" (professional career), which is similar to a bachelor's degree requiring from four to six years of study according to the chosen program, However, strictly-career-related subjects are taken from the very beginning unlike US where focused career-related subjects usually are part of the curriculum from the third year.
The Bachelor of Veterinary Science program is generally a five-year course of study that is required for becoming a veterinarian.
prepares teachers for completion of either M.A.
The National Institute of Ophthalmic Sciences is among the post-secondary institutions that offer such programs.
degrees, which in some countries are only offered after taking a first bachelor's degree.
While the theological bachelor's degree is generally conferred upon completion of a four-year program, it is also conferred in some specialized three-year programs.
The historical situation in Austria is very similar to the situation in Germany.
The Bachelor of Philosophy (B.Phil.
Physiotherapy is offered both as an undergraduate and a graduate course of study.
degree is either an undergraduate or graduate degree.
The specialist's degree (), () was the first academic distinction in the Soviet Union, awarded to students upon completion of five-year studies at the university level.
Where students opt to study two bachelor's degrees simultaneously—referred to as a "conjoint degree" or "double degree"—an extra year of study is added.
The degree was created as a direct response to the changing nature of civic society and the growing need for university graduates who can work effectively in the new policy environment.
In the United States, the Bachelor of Fine Arts degree differs from a Bachelor of Arts degree in that the majority of the program consists of a practical studio component, as contrasted with lecture and discussion classes.
In this case, the degree candidate will complete the normal curriculum for all subjects except the selected discipline ("English," in the preceding example).
), Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.
Degrees are classified as First Class, Second Class Division One (2:1), Second Class Division Two (2:2) and Third as in English degrees, but without being described as honours.
In addition to bachelor's degrees, some institutions offer integrated master's degrees as first degrees in some subjects (particularly in STEM fields).
Bachelor's degrees should not be confused with Engineering Degrees, where an ''Ingeniería'' is prefixed to the name and requieres additional courses for certification as an Engineer.
degree is a four-year undergraduate degree.
Some private institutions are however literally naming their degrees Bachelor's, Master's and Executive, such as the Bordeaux MBA/Collège International de Bordeaux.
In the United States the "main line" Protestant clergy typically take a four-year bachelor's degree in whatever field they choose, then earn the M.Div.
in Art, the ratio might be reversed.
* Bachelor of Civil Law: BCL
The Swedish equivalent of a bachelor's degree is called ''kandidatexamen.''
This is generally not the case in the Netherlands, with the difficulty level in the first year serving as a type of "self-selection" with less committed and less able students routinely finding it difficult to keep up.
Mexico's regulations established as an obligation in order to receive their license and title the fulfillment of a "Social Service" to the nation (usually for those who finished their studies in a public institution) as a remuneration to society in the form of social actions, the benefits, as students, were received during training.
By the end of the 13th century, it was also used by junior members of guilds or universities.
), 1% of total programs, however widely accepted in the law discipline.
degree, a degree which often indicates an interdisciplinary course of study for many majors within its School of Arts and Science.
After completing their "bachillerato" (high school), students can take one of three options.
as an external candidate (external candidate are enrolled for examination & study program on self basis or through private tuition providers).
is an interdisciplinary bachelor's degree offered by several universities in the United States and Canada.
Alternate titles include Bachelor of Science in Nursing and Bachelor of Nursing Science, with abbreviations B.Sc.N., B.N.Sc.
The first cycle comprises the first, or propedeutic, year.
* To demonstrate a substantial understanding of concepts in key areas of computer science.
The Bachelor of Design (B.Des., or S.Des.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, bachelor's degrees normally take three years of study to complete, although courses may take four years where they include a year abroad or a placement year.
Mostly preferred universities of Turkey are Middle East Technical University, Boğaziçi University, Sabanci University, Koc University, Hacettepe University, Ankara University, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul University, Yildiz Technical University, Bilkent University, Koç University,  by B.A.
and Bachelor of Arts (B.A.
In the United States, schools tend to offer the B.A.
Those who had already started the doctorandus program could, upon completing it, opt for the doctorandus degree (before their name, abbreviated to 'drs.
degree program is of five to six years' duration.
Bachelor's degrees should not be confused with baccalaureate qualifications, which derive their name from the same root.
Both honours degrees and ordinary degrees qualify as first cycle (end of cycle) qualifications in the Bologna Process.
As a consequence, there is no ''de jure'' "honors degree" (although some universities market some of their programs as being ''de facto'' honors degrees in their English-language materials), but there are some specializations called "concentrations" in French, which are mostly taken as optional courses.
Students who complete a double degree program will have two separate bachelor's degrees at the end of their studies.
In keeping with the Scottish "broad education" philosophy, ordinary degrees (and more rarely honours ones) may mix different disciplines such as sciences and humanities taught in different faculties and in some cases even different universities.
Bachelor's degrees may take an average of five years (from four to five years) to complete depending on the course load and the program and they are awarded by colleges and universities.
There is also a similar degree called engineer (''Inżynier'') which differs from the licencjat in that it is awarded by technical universities and the program usually lasts for 3.5 years.
These courses tend to have highly specified curricula, leaving students without many options for broader study.
and Ph.D.), but other classes may be required for an additional postgraduate diploma before such eligibility.
Generally these programs are of four years duration as elsewhere in the world and begin after completing higher secondary school education by receiving a HSSC certificate acknowledging one's twelve years of study by the respective board.
The Bachelor of Tourism Studies (B.T.S.)
A ''licenciatura'' could also be obtained by performing two years of study after obtaining a ''bacharelato''.
Bachelor's degrees in the Faroe Islands are much the same as in Denmark.
; it corresponds to M.A.
The NYSC is a paramilitary service that involves students' being posted to different parts of the country to serve in various capacities.
* Master of Computer Application (MCA)
degree is awarded to students who complete the five- (in some countries four-) year course of study in the field.
After that, the student can continue education for 2 or 1.5 years, respectively, to obtain the Polish magisterium degree, which corresponds to a master's degree.
The colonial link and the establishment of the University of the South Pacific in 1968 allowed the education system to follow suit from the qualification system of the Commonwealth.
The Bachelor of Fine Arts (B.F.A.)
The Bachelor of Public Affairs and Policy Management degree (B.P.A.P.Mgt.)
The degree was created as a direct response to the increasing pace of innovation in today's society and the need for graduates that understanding effective teaming, as well as the innovation process.
In the near future, the distinction between academic and higher vocational degrees will disappear.
In accordance with the agreements made in the Bologna process, the system of higher education in Belgium was reformed.
After graduating from high-school, hopeful students must present a nationwide exam that determines their eligibility to apply for their desired program, depending on the score the student achieves on the exam.
The degree can be compared both to the bachelor's and master's degree.
Consistently high-performing students may also be invited to complete the 'honours' program.
It is also the highest ranked in the university ranking in the island region and also ranked above some Australian universities like the University of Canberra, University of Sunshine Coast and New Zealand universities like Lincoln University and Waikato Institute of Technology.
Normally, about 90% of graduates are able to obtain a degree; however, no degree is awarded with excellency or honor.
Some bachelor's degrees in medicine, dentistry and veterinary science offer intercalated degrees en route to the final qualification.
Several universities, mostly in Canada and Australia, award such degrees.
Programs accredited by the Council on Social Work Education require B.S.W.
Some are in very specialized areas, like the five-year B.I.Des.
However, the B.ScP.Sc.
In some cases, it may also be the name of a ''second'' bachelor's degree, such as the Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.
The Bachelor of Science in Forestry (B.Sc.F.)
In Brazil it would be possible to have a specialization "lato-sensu" degree—which differs from a Brazilian "stricto-sensu" master's degree—in as little as three years (two years for a "tecnólogo" degree and an additional year for a specialization) or as long as eight years (six years for professional degrees, plus two years for a master's "stricto-sensu" degree—typical in medicine or engineering).
(six years), and other specialized undergraduate degrees, such as B.Eng.
The possession of a B.Ed.
A one-year "postgraduate" (With) Honours degree can be achieved as a consecutive stand-alone Bachelor (with) Honours degree following a bachelor's degree in the same field.
degree is a degree awarded to students who have completed a course of study in the field of psychology.
Preparation for the M.S.
Students on these courses specialise later in their degree programmes.
degree requires three years of full-time study, but a double B.Com.–LL.B.
along with the Bachelor of Arts degrees are the most common undergraduate degrees given.
)—awarded exclusively by the University of Sydney in Australia—requires a previous bachelor's degree.
Nursing, Bachelor of Nursing (B.N.
Programs vary in their focus on studio work and may or may not involve professional practice.
In South Africa, Rhodes University has the oldest school of journalism in Africa and allows students to take a fourth-year specialisation to raise their B.A.
Each province loosely follows the United States-based model but, e.g.
It was introduced in 1986 and it is awarded to students that complete 120 semester hours of course work and receive passing scores on the National Board Exam administered by The International Conference of Funeral Service Examining Boards.
Optometry is a four-year or five-year course.
University of the South Pacific is the only university in the Oceania region to be internationally recognized outside Australia and New Zealand with its bachelor's and other awards program.
In Nepal, there is no top up, honours and exchange or related tie up degree courses authorised and practiced by Nepalese Government and other educational Institution but these day, Affiliation from foreign universities, online and distance mode is popular in modern working youth population.
A diploma award is credited with 'PGDip' and the name of the degree (for example, 'PGDipArts' or 'PGDipScience'.
from a university grants 'immediate' entry into a master's program.
* Bachelor of Arts: BA
degree as a part of the seven-year Pharm.D.
Currently, there is an undergraduate bachelor's degree called "Título de Grado" or simply "Grado" (its duration generally being four years), a postgraduate master's degree called "Título de Máster" or "Máster" (between one and two years), and a doctor's degree called "Título de Doctor" or "Doctorado".
The second bachelor's degree is, thus, a type of graduate degree.
and a second bachelor's degree is required to teach in most public anglophone and francophone schools in Canada.
While the titles ing., bc., ir., mr., drs.
), although "kinesiology" or "human kinetics" is currently the more popularly accepted term for the discipline.
Students are normally asked to leave if they must take longer.
program in the United States consists of two-thirds study in the arts, with one-third in more general liberal arts studies.
are two degrees, they must be taken together, and by convention entitle the bearer to use the title of ''doctor''.
Completion of just the first two years of the course can lead to a Diploma of Higher Education and completion of only the first year to a Certificate of Higher Education.
degrees in most colleges and universities.
These programs prepare graduates for further postgraduate research degrees or for employment in a variety of roles in the information technology industry.
Although notionally M.B.
In Kenya, university education is highly valued and supported by the government, affluent individuals as well as corporate entities who demonstrate this by providing loans and scholarships to students who perform exceptionally well in their Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE) examination.
(Hons)) and a pass (no honours).
The system draws on both British and American models.
degree is a professional or academic undergraduate degree in music at most conservatories in the US and the UK.
Some bachelor's degrees (e.g.
* Master of Science in Information Technology (MSc-IT)
), awarded to students whose main focus is on humanistic, theological, or jurisprudence areas.
As in the rest of the UK, integrated master's degrees, taking five years in Scotland, are also offered as first degrees alongside bachelor's degrees.
Many other specialized bachelor's degrees are offered as well.
Some universities offer it as BTech and some as BE.
Five notable exceptions are Reed College, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The Evergreen State College, Sarah Lawrence College, and Bennington College, which do not have deans' lists, Latin honors recognitions, or undergraduate honors programs or subjects.
In some cases, it may be offered as an "on-course" degree program, which takes one year of research at the completion of an undergraduate four-year (Bachelor's) degree.
The nonuniversity (licentiate) qualifications allowing registration as a medical practitioner in the UK, a registration that has not been granted by the United Examining Board since 1999, also conferred the courtesy title of "doctor."
Since the undergraduate education system in Jordan is modeled after its American counterpart, all the degrees are adapted from those of the United States excepting the release of the degree certificate.
In the early 1990s, ''Bakalavr'' (Бакалавр, "bachelor") degrees were introduced in all the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States except Turkmenistan.
Like Austria and Germany, Switzerland did not have a tradition of bachelor's and master's degrees.
), but in recent years there have been a numbers of degrees named after specific subjects, such as Bachelor of Library and Information.
A student is eligible to study BBA in India only if s/he has passed the 10+2 level examination or higher secondary examination from a recognised board or council in the country.
), awarded to students with main focus on scientific, medical, or technical areas;
Bachelor's degrees at the University of Botswana normally take four years.
in Québec, also the French-based, as well as the United Kingdom-Irish based and Commonwealth based model.
takes precedence over a Ph.D. in Cambridge University's order of seniority.
, certificates of equivalence are issued by the university that issued the original degree.
Even without a formal adhesion to the Bologna system, a Brazilian "bachelor's" would correspond to a European "first cycle."
The same historical usage of indicating an undergraduate degree by it being in the faculty of arts rather than being a bachelor's degree gives rise to the Oxbridge MA and the Scottish MA).
Employability prospects vary by the reputation of the institute and course.
is a specialized four-year honors degree dedicated to the study of public policy within an interdisciplinary framework.
Bachelor's degrees in engineering are four-year degree programmes while medical colleges are five-year degree programmes.
* ''doctorandus'' (prefix abbreviated to drs.
The '''Bachelor of Arts or Science in Psychology''' (B.A.Psy., B.Sc.Psy., B.Psych., or Psy.B.)
The project work must be submitted in the semester before graduation and usually takes a significant number of points.
In cases of poor performance, the time limit is double the standard amount of time.
''A complete list of under graduate and graduate programs approved by ICFES can be found here: ''
Three years full-time bachelor's degree without an area of specialization is known as a general degree.
For instance, S.Psi for ''Sarjana Psikologi'' (literally translated as "Bachelor of Psychology/B.Psy., B.A.
* Master in Business Administration (MBA)
The Bachelor of Science in Agriculture, BSc or is a four-year full-time degree.
Bachelor's degrees with honours are at level 10 of the Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework (SCQF) and require 480 credits with a minimum of 90 at level 10 and 90 at level 9.
To obtain the licencjat degree, one must complete three years of study.
degree, it may be formally rendered as "B", followed by the specialization field, instead of "bc.")
These are, from highest to lowest; first class, upper second class (2:1), lower second class (2:2), and third class.
However, there are four-year part-time courses as well.
In contrast to the B.A.
Generally, it entails independent research or a thesis/capstone project.
is a four-year undergraduate professional degree offered by many American colleges and universities for those preparing to be licensed as teachers.
The Bachelor of Film and Television (B.F.T.V.)
The Bachelor of Applied Arts and Sciences (B.A.A.Sc.)
* Bachelor of Arts degree (B.A.
The degree is typically identical to the program of France's universities, as specified in the LMD reform.
It is similar to a B.A.Sc., B.Eng., B.B.E., B.A.S.
(Hons), and when a four-year B.Tech.
after three years of study, passing a further supervised preregistration year is required to become a fully qualified optometrist.
Main universities offering these two programs are University of Punjab and University of Karachi where more than 50,000 students appear in B.A.
In Canada, the bachelor of education is a two-year professional degree in which students will specialise in either elementary or secondary education, and that is taken after the completion of a three or four year bachelor's degree with a major in a teachable subject, such as English, French, Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, or a social science.
