* Hazara University, Mansehra, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
The requirements of each of the states vary, and in some states sufficient years of practice in one's home country may allow for those otherwise excluded to sit for the bar exam.
programme, students are taught Social Sciences (History, Political Science, Sociology and Economics) associated with B.A.
The core subjects are those regularly required for legal practice.
graduates practice as a solicitor or barrister, while others work in academia, for the government or for a private company (i.e.
It should be noted, though, that Ireland is a common law jurisdiction (in fact there are two common law jurisdictions on the island) and the expression "civil law" is used to differentiate common law from ecclesiastical law or Canon Law in the republic.
is an undergraduate degree in law (or a first professional degree in law, depending on jurisdiction) originating in England and offered in most common law jurisdictions.
However upon the suggestion by the Law Commission of India and also given the prevailing cry for reform the Bar Council of India, the governing body of legal education in India, instituted upon an experiment in terms of establishing specialized national law universities solely devoted to legal education similar to Indian Institutes of Technology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Indian Institutes of Management,etc.
Students who had an LL.B or J.D degree, whether conferred by local universities or the accredited universities overseas, would be eligible to apply for admission to PCLL, the 1-year legal qualification programme in Hong Kong.
degree (four years) and one-year LL.M.
The United States no longer offers the LL.B., though some universities have introduced a Bachelor of Science degree in Legal Studies that includes Constitutional Law, Tort Law, and Criminal Law within the curriculum.
degrees prior to 1971 were similarly permitted to change their degree to a J.D., although many did not take the option, retaining their LL.B.
* Lailpur Law College Faisalabad
The "arts" designation of the degree traditionally signifies that the student has undertaken a certain amount of study of the classics.
It is sometimes erroneously called "Bachelor of Legal Letters" to account for the double "L".
Malaysia inherited a common law system through its former British colonial masters.
Like other Common Law countries, Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.)
Under the Legal Profession Act 1976, a person is deemed to be a qualified person to be admitted as an Advocate & Solicitor if he/she completes and passed the course of Bar Vocational Course in UK & Wales from any Inns of Court, passed the Certificate in Legal Practice for graduates of recognized(C.L.P) examination or completed a 4-year LL.B.
Alternatively, students may choose to use the LL.B.
Bangladesh is a common law country.
The '''Bachelor of Laws''' (; '''LL.B.'''
In Australia some LL.B.
alongside standard legal subjects, such as torts, contracts and constitutional law.
degrees include McGill University, Université de Montréal, Université de Québec à Montréal, Université de Sherbrooke, Université Laval and the University of Ottawa.
Hence all lawyers eligible and has been admitted to the High Court as a legal professional is entitled to be bestowed with the title "Advocate & Solicitor".
The common law programme is three years in length.
degrees from one EU Member State, e.g., Ireland, France, Germany or the UK, who practise law and who are qualified lawyers in one of these countries for three or more years, to practise also in every other member state.
By the seventeenth century, the Inns obtained a status as a kind of university akin to the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge, though very specialized in purpose.
Like other first-entry university programmes in Quebec it requires a college diploma for entry.
Many law schools converted their basic law degree programmes from LL.B.
The preliminary courses acquaint the students with both the background and the foundations of the South African legal system, and with legal thinking and analysis in general.
The programme is four years in length.
Some universities also offer a one-year programme for holders of the BProc degree.
* Bahauddin Zakaria University, Multan
William Blackstone became the first lecturer in English common law at the University of Oxford in 1753, but the university did not establish the programme for the purpose of professional study, and the lectures were very philosophical and theoretical in nature.
Upon graduation, one holds a Bachelor of Laws degree, but cannot yet practise law.
* University of Malakand, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
With the frequent absence of parties to suits during the Crusades, the importance of the lawyer role grew tremendously, and the demand for lawyers grew.
courses can continue LL.M.
Both the types of degree are recognized and are also qualifying degrees for practice of legal profession in India.
Several South African universities offer B.A.
Master's courses are also offered to university graduates; those who graduate from such courses are entitled to use the initials LL.M.
In Malta, the Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.)
These days the University of London external programme has widely attracted many potential candidates who wish to pursue a career in Law in Pakistan.
The eligibility requirement for these degrees was that the applicant already have a bachelor's degree in any subject from a recognized institution.
Because of Canada's dual system of laws, some law schools offer joint or dual degrees of common law and civil law.
Two English universities (University of the West of England and Nottingham Trent University) and one Welsh university (University of Wales) award the LL.B.
After the call ceremony, he/she can designate him/herself as a "Barrister and Solicitor", and can practice law in the province in which they are licensed.
On top of LL.B, University of Hong Kong offers a variety of Mixed-Degree programmes that allow students to take a first degree and then have an option to take a conjunctive law degree, including Bachelor of Business Administration (Law) (abbreviated as "BBA(Law)&LLB", or as B-Law), Bachelor of Social Science (Government & Laws) ("BSocSc(Govt&Laws)&LLB", or as G-Law), and Bachelor of Arts (Literary Studies) ("BA&LLB", or as A-Law).
(Hons) in Irish Law is conferred by the University of the West of England, LL.B.
In the states that maintain as split Bar system, barristers are a separate and distinct profession to that of a solicitor, and entry is attained through the successful completion of an exam and a 9-month reading period (in other words, tutelage) under a senior barrister.
At the postgraduate level, the programme generally requires three years.
In England in 1292 when Edward I first requested that lawyers be trained, students merely sat in the courts and observed, but over time the students would hire professionals to lecture them in their residences, which led to the institution of the Inns of Court system.
In Ontario and other provinces, licensed lawyers may also exercise the powers of a Commissioner of Oaths.
The apprenticeship programme for solicitors thus emerged, structured and governed by the same rules as the apprenticeship programmes for the trades.
To practise law, the graduate must obtain a licence from the Law Society of the province where he/she wishes to practise law, which also requires a year of articling.
awarded by the University of London External Programme is of the same standard and quality irrespective of the mode or manner of learning.
programmes, replacing the ''Diplom-Wirtschaftsjurist'' degree.
The advanced courses (usually) comprise further study in these core subjects, deepening and / or broadening the student's knowledge as appropriate.
Most states require completion of a law degree from a law school accredited by the American Bar Association.
with Specialization in Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and the B.Tech Computer Science & Engineering + LL.B.
degree that is accepted by the Law Society and Inns of Court as equivalent to an LL.B.
in other common law jurisdictions.
NUS also offers a 3-year LL.B.
In Denmark, universities now offer three-year LL.B.
programmes, the B.Tech Energy Technology + LL.B.
The undergraduate LL.B.
The law degree offered by McGill University is a mandatory joint common law LL.B.
Pursuant thereto, various other National Law Schools including the National Academy of Legal Studies and Research University of Law, Hyderabad (NALSAR), National University of Advanced Legal Studies, Cochin (NUALS) were established that administer a five-year (5 year) undergraduate degree programme and confer an integrated honours degree upon completion, such as "B.A., LL.B (Hons.
In either articling or clerkship, there is the expectation that the law graduate will work in a variety of legal fields and be exposed to the realities of legal practice that are absent from law school's academic atmosphere.
* Swat University, Swat, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
The Inns of Court continued but became less effective and admission to the bar still did not require any significant educational activity or examination, therefore in 1846 the Parliament examined the education and training of prospective barristers and found the system to be inferior to the legal education provided in the United States.
programmes while others remain offering the traditional three-year programme.
Because of this, there are two Canadian law degrees generally in use.
in common law in two or three semesters, depending on the offering university's programme.
studies, and in some cases sit for the first State Examination after one or more years of additional law studies in order to qualify for practicing law in Germany.
The vast majority of law graduates article (i.e.
In Canada, the lawyer licensing process usually requires the law graduate to (1) take further classroom law courses taught by the Law Society itself, and pass a set of written examinations, known as '''bar exams''', related to the taken courses and (2) undertake an articled clerkship, commonly known as '''articling''' under the supervision of an established lawyer called a '''principal'''.
In the past NUI B.C.L.
(Independent Colleges LL.B.
The National Law School of India University, Bangalore still continues to be the premier law school of India and constantly ranks as the best law school in India.
In the UK, as well as in other Common Law jurisdictions, the main approach to this, is the Graduate Entry (undergraduate) LL.B.
Possession of an LLB with a Lower Second Class of honours from NUS or a Grade Point Average of 3.00 from SMU is required to be called to the Singapore Bar.
The eligibility requirement for the five years integrated law degree is that the applicant must have successfully completed Class XII from a recognized Board of Education in India like CISCE, CBSE, etc.
* International Islamic University, Islamabad
Note that the structure of the undergraduate programme is under review.
Along with Latin, these were, but are no longer, "subjects compelled by statute", and were typically entrance requirements for the LL.B., having been studied as undergraduate modules.
those universities have also started offering the Juris Doctor as a Graduate entry degree.
degree in common law from a Canadian law school.
The University of London External Programme in Laws (LL.B.)
The electives - often comprising these advanced courses, amongst others - allow students to specialise in a particular area of law, to an extent, by choosing from a range of optional courses.
* University of Waikato
In South Africa the LL.B.
degree, a person wishing to practise has to intimate the respective Provincial Bar Council that he is starting a one-year training/articleship under the supervision of a senior advocate who has a ten-year standing as an advocate.
programmes, although this is not sufficient to practice law.
Six New Zealand universities offer LL.B.
)", "B.Com., LL.B (Hons.)"
The first university, that of Bologna, was founded as a school of law by four famous legal scholars in the 12th century who were students of the glossator school in that city.
typically takes four years to complete, and is usually combined with another degree programme, such as a Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.)
For example, some universities in the United Kingdom offer a combined study of law and history leading to a B.A.
The civil law programme in Canada is three years in length.
courses on civil procedure, Constitutional law, criminal law, legal research and analysis, and jurisprudence.
Although not required by the licensing process, many first- and second- year law students work in law firms during the summer off-school season to earn extra money and to guarantee themselves an articling position (with the same law firms) upon their graduation from law school, because there is always fierce competition for articling positions, especially for those in large law firms offering attractive remuneration and prestige, and a law graduate cannot become a licensed lawyer in Canada if he/she has not gone through articled clerkship.
(Honours) course from any of the following Universities:-
However, a few institutions, such as Cardiff University's Department of Canon (Ecclesiastical) Law and McGill University's and the University of Ottawa's combined programme, continue to offer alternatives to the common law.
Law schools that offer civil law B.C.L., LL.B., or LL.L.
Only seven Public Universities offer LL.B.
The University of Bologna served as the model for other law schools of the medieval age.
programme were already holders of one or more degrees, or, at a minimum (with very few exceptions), have completed two years of study in a first-entry, undergraduate degree in another discipline.
programme, students are taught a combination of Physical, Life and Applied Sciences associated with B.Sc.
Previous mixed-Degree programme also includes Bachelor of Engineering (Civil Engineering).
One such example of a conversion course in England and Wales is the GDL (Graduate Diploma in Law), which takes one year to complete.
degree with an LL.M.
* UMT School of Law and Policy,Lahore
on clerical and lay students at St. Patrick's College, Carlow from 1840 onwards.
The entire procedure of enrolment and post-enrolment professional conduct is regulated and supervised by the Bar Council of India.
and B.S.W respectively along with the standard legal subjects as mentioned earlier.
programmes, the BBA-LLB Business Administration + LL.B.
* University of Otago
A number of Canadian law schools offer students the opportunity to earn, besides their three-year first degrees in common law, programmes in common law for holders of baccalaureate degrees in Quebec civil law enabling those individuals to earn the LL.B.
* Hamdard University, Karachi
in exchange for a J.D.
The membership eligibility bestowed may be subject to completion of professional exams.
A unique degree of LL.B.
A student may have to gain a further qualification at postgraduate level, for example a traineeship and the Legal Practice Course or Bar Vocational Course in England and Wales or the Postgraduate Certificate in Laws in Hong Kong.
LL.B is 4 years in length, while J.D.
The King's Inns Barrister-at-Law degree BL is a postgraduate degree and is required to practice as a Barrister in Ireland.
Similarly, the University of Ottawa offers, besides its three-year LL.L.
of the abbreviation for the degree is from the genitive plural ''legum'' (of ''lex'', law).
Upon completion of the LL.B.
alongside standard legal subjects, such as torts, contracts and constitutional law and in the B.Sc., LL.B (Hons.)
degree is a condition precedent to practise as an Advocate in the Courts of Law of Bangladesh.
An advocate has to be member of one of the provincial Bar Councils, i.e., Punjab Bar Council, Sindh Bar council, Baluchistan Bar Council or the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar Council to practice as an advocate.
Additionally, both New York and Massachusetts permit Canadian LL.B.
Canadian common-law LL.B.
as a 1-year postgraduate course for holders of the BCorp(Bachelor of Corporate Law) or BA Legal Science degrees.
Further, there are those who question the academic standard of the new degree.
degree programmes concentrate on private law and can feature a component of education in business administration.
degree (now obsolete) but students were required to have independent means to complete the second degree.
* Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad
* Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan
University College Cork and NUIG offer the LL.B.
In the province of Quebec, a system of civil law is used.
Admission to that programme is a first-entry programme in the case of Quebec students (as a college diploma is required) while it is a second-entry programme in the case of students from other provinces (since two years of university studies is required - effectively one extra year of studies more than for a college diploma).
There are also conversion courses available for non-law graduates, available as an alternative to the full-length LL.B.
The curriculum is typically structured around preliminary, core and advanced courses, and most universities also offer elective coursework.
degree, a direct-entry undergraduate degree, meets all professional requirements when coupled with the Diploma in Legal Practice.
In this case, it is more likely that the second degree will be taken as a self-funding mature student, possibly on a part-time basis.
may be conferred by either the National University of Singapore or the Singapore Management University after 4 years (8 Semesters) of study.
Creating an abbreviation for a plural, especially from Latin, is often done by doubling the first letter (e.g., "pp" for "pages"), thus "LL.B."
* University of Canterbury
However, unlike the United Kingdom and some other Commonwealth countries.
In the province of Ontario, for example, the licensing process for the Law Society of Upper Canada (Ontario's governing law society) consists of three mandatory components: The Skills and Professional Responsibility Program with assignments and assessments, Licensing Examinations (a Barrister Licensing Examination and a Solicitor Licensing Examination), and a 10-month Articling term.
As of 1996 it is the universal and only legal qualification for legal practice, superseding the existing B.Juris and B.Proc degrees.
Canada has a dual system of laws.
graduates to retroactively receive the new doctorate degrees by returning their LL.B.
graduates who do choose to practice law, in some states of Australia (namely, Victoria and New South Wales), LL.B.
Classes included in these "American Law" "Comparative Law" ''inter alia'' LL.M.
from recognised Pakistani or common law country universities.
* Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur
may depart from this structure.
Besides, the National University of Bangladesh also offers two-years LL.B.
Depending on the state where a lawyer is admitted to practice, membership in the Bar may be either restricted to barristers or open to both solicitors and barristers.
The following universities are authorised to award law degrees in Pakistan:
)", "B.Sc., LL.B (Hons.
* University of Gujrat
The Master of Science of Laws (MSL) is also offered in some universities accredited by the American Bar Association.
The first academic degrees were all law degrees in medieval universities, and the first law degrees were doctorates.
Actually it is a three-year LL.B.
Blackstone insisted that the study of law should be university based, where concentration on foundational principles can be had, instead of concentration on detail and procedure had through apprenticeship and the Inns of Court.
While it was common for students of law to visit and study at schools in other countries, such was not the case with England because of the English rejection of Roman law (except for certain jurisdictions such as the Admiralty Court), and although the University of Oxford and University of Cambridge did teach canon law until the English Reformation, its importance was always superior to civil law in those institutions.
programmes for foreign attorneys; many such law schools may have no other LL.M.
The bachelor's degree originated at the University of Paris, whose system was implemented at Oxford and Cambridge.
The issues noted are: graduates of these programmes are seen to be less prepared for the profession as compared to those pursuing the graduate LLB; only 20% of entrants complete the programme within four years;  only about 50% of graduates here enter the legal profession at all.
in the 1960s, and permitted prior LL.B.
On continental Europe the bachelor's degree was phased out in the 18th or early 19th century but it continued at Oxford and Cambridge.
The University of Cambridge has recently replaced their LL.B.
* Islamia University, Bhawalpur
(Hons) Sharia and Law has been introduced by the International Islamic University, Islamabad.
* Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur
holders to take the bar exam.
At the federal level, as well as in every province or territory except Quebec, a system of common law is used.
* School of Law, Gulberg,Lahore
At various universities in the UK such as Oxford, Nottingham and Cambridge the principal law degree is often a B.A., in either Jurisprudence or Law.
Therefore, it is not entirely correct to regard it as an 'accelerated' degree.
The actual procedure to receive the respective national licence is regulated by the member state and therefore differs from country to country, and temporary restrictions may in certain cases exist, but every EU member has to apply the relevant EU Directives to its own national law.
A holder of either type of degree may approach a Bar Council of any States of India and get upon compliance with the necessary standards, be enrolled on the rolls of the said Bar Council.
••Subjected to further requirements by the Legal Profession Qualifying Board to be announced from time to time.
as a second degree, although this may occasionally require taking qualifying law courses within the first degree to meet professional requirements in full.
* University of Punjab, Lahore
Historically, law students studied both canon law and civil law.
with Specialization in Cyber Laws & The Glocal Law School at the The Glocal University offers five year integrated LL.B.
Credits in English and Afrikaans are also often included.
At the conclusion of the licensing process, the law graduate is "called to the bar" whereby he/she signs his/her name in the Rolls of the Court of Appeal for Ontario and the Superior Court of Justice and swears lawyer-related oaths in a formal ceremony where he/she must appear in a complete barrister's gown and bow before judges of the local superior court and benchers of the licensing law society.
or the Doctor of Laws (LL.D, S.J.D or D.C.L).
Law College Karachi, for example, a five-year joint B.A./LL.B.
While the degree awarded is at the first-degree level and admission may be granted to applicants with two or three years of undergraduate studies towards a degree, in practice, entrants to the programme generally hold an  undergraduate degree before registration in the law programme.
When law degrees were required by the English bar and bar associations in other common law countries, the LL.B.
In Punjab, and Sindh Muslim Govt.
In the first two years of B.A., LL.B (Hons.)
