H. J. R. Murray details many versions of backgammon; modern Nard is noted there as being the same as backgammon and maybe dating back to 300–500 AD in the Babylonian Talmud, although others believe the Talmud references the Greek race game Kubeia.
It was written by Hans Berliner in the late 1970s on a DEC PDP-10 as an experiment in evaluating board game positions.
Players who doubled their opponent, seeing the opponent beaver the cube, may in turn then double the stakes once again ("raccoon") as part of that cube phase before any dice are rolled.
The opponent retains the doubling cube.
Major tournaments are held yearly worldwide.
The most recent major development in backgammon was the addition of the doubling cube.
For example, if a player has exactly one checker remaining on the 6-point, and rolls a 6 and a 1, the player may move the 6-point checker one place to the 5-point with the lower die roll of 1, and then bear that checker off the 5-point using the die roll of 6; this is sometimes useful tactically.
Some players may opt to invoke '''The Murphy rule''' or the "automatic double rule".
'''Acey-deucey''' is a variant of backgammon in which players start with no checkers on the board, and must bear them on at the beginning of the game.
He applied principles of fuzzy logic to improve its play between phases, and by July 1979, BKG 9.8 was strong enough to play against the reigning world champion Luigi Villa.
A common method of cheating online is the use of a computer program to find the optimal move on each turn; to combat this, many online sites use move-comparison software that identifies when a player's moves resemble those of a backgammon program.
The two players move their checkers in opposing directions, from the 24-point towards the 1-point.
There are four games of Tavli commonly played:
In variants that originate from early 20th century New York, players may raise the stakes during the game.
Real-time online play began with the First Internet Backgammon Server in July 1992.
Using a backgame as an initial strategy is usually unsuccessful.
In the course of a move, a checker may land on any point that is unoccupied or is occupied by one or more of the player's own checkers.
Excavations at Shahr-e Sukhteh (Persian شهر سوخته, literally "The Burnt City") in Iran have shown that a board race game existed there around 3000 BC.
Asodio: Also known as Acey-deucey where all checkers are off the board, and you enter by rolling either doubles or acey-deucey.
In this case, the blot has been "hit", and is placed in the middle of the board on the bar that divides the two sides of the playing surface.
Neural network research has resulted in three modern proprietary programs, JellyFish, Snowie and eXtreme Gammon as well as the shareware BGBlitz and the free software GNU Backgammon.
For example, players may position all of their blots in such a way that the opponent must roll a 2 in order to hit any of them, reducing the probability of being hit more than once.
There is another variant called asker tavlası (meaning soldiers' tavla) where the pieces are thrown to the board randomly and the opponents try to flip their pieces over the opponents' pieces to beat them.
The  World Backgammon Association (WBA) has been holding the biggest backgammon Tour of the circuit since 2007, the " European Backgammon Tour" (EBGT).
The game has been strongly solved, meaning that exact equities are available for all 32 million possible positions.
He describes an encounter between Burzoe and a Raja visiting from India.
Backgammon is a member of the tables family, one of the oldest classes of board games in the world.
Although 64 is the highest number depicted on the doubling cube, the stakes may rise to 128, 256, and so on.
This reduces the likelihood of loaded dice being used, which is the main way of cheating in face-to-face play.
The "priming game" involves building a wall of checkers, called a prime, covering a number of consecutive points.
Checkers placed on the bar must re-enter the game through the opponent's home board before any other move can be made.
The points are considered to be connected across one edge of the board, forming a continuous track in the shape of a horseshoe, and are numbered from 1 to 24.
The epigram of Zeno describes a particularly bad dice roll the emperor had for his given position.
"Duplication" refers to the placement of checkers such that one's opponent needs the same dice rolls to achieve different goals.
The Raja introduces the game of chess, and Burzoe demonstrates ''nard'', played with dice made from ivory and teak.
In the modern Middle East, backgammon is a common feature of coffeehouses.
It is a two player game where playing pieces are moved according to the roll of dice, and a player wins by removing all of his pieces from the board before their opponent.
This obstructs opposing checkers that are behind the prime.
Currently, the only real money Backgammon community available on Mobile devices is  Backgammon For Money by Gamytech.
There is no limit to the number of checkers that can occupy a point at any given time.
'''Hypergammon''' is a variant of backgammon in which players have only three checkers on the board, starting with one each on the 24-, 23- and 22-points.
For unknown reasons, there was no championship in 1970, but in 1971, Tim Holland again won the title.
PartyGaming sponsored the first World Series of Backgammon in 2006 from Cannes and later the 'Backgammon Million' tournament held in the Bahamas in January 2007 with a prize pool of one million dollars, the largest for any tournament to date.
In Japan ''ban-sugoroku'' is thought to have been introduced from China in the sixth century.
A wooden board and checkers were recovered from the wreck of the Vasa among the belongings of the ship's officers.
On any roll, a player must move according to the numbers on both dice if it is at all possible to do so.
After the Crawford game, normal use of the doubling cube resumes.
It is possible for a Crawford game never to occur in a match.
Backgammon clubs may also organize tournaments.
If the Crawford rule is in effect, then another option is the '''Holland rule''', named after
In 2008, the World Series of Backgammon ran the world's largest international events in London, the UK Masters, the biggest tournament ever held in the UK with 128 international class players; the Nordic Open, which instantly became the largest in the world with around 500 players in all flights and 153 in the Championship, and Cannes, which hosted the Riviera Cup, the traditional follow-up tournament to the World Championships.
By the 21st century, the largest international tournaments had established the basis of a tour for top professional players.
Little specific text about the gameplay of Ludus duodecim scriptorum has survived; it may have been related to the older Ancient Greek dice game Kubeia.
After the closing arguments, Judge Stephen S. Walker concluded that backgammon is a game of skill, not a game of chance, and found the defendant, backgammon tournament director Ted Barr, not guilty of promoting gambling.
Checkers can enter on unoccupied points, or on points occupied by a single opposing checker; in the latter case, the single checker is hit and placed on the bar.
The other variant kız tavlası (meaning girls' tavla) is a game that depends only on the dice and involves no strategy.
Tim Holland was declared the winner that year and at the tournament the following year.
Zeno, who was white, had a stack of seven checkers, three stacks of two checkers and two ''blots'', checkers that stand alone on a point and are therefore in danger of being put outside the board by an incoming opponent checker.
The checkers are, in the most often-played variants, scattered at first, and may be blocked or hit by the opponent.
There are many variants of tavla in Turkey, where the course of play changes drastically.
In this variant, doubles are more powerful: four moves are played as in standard backgammon, followed by four moves according to the difference of the dice value from 7, and then the player has another turn (with a few exceptions).
Computer-versus-computer competitions are also held at Computer Olympiad events.
Players often use mental calculation techniques to determine pip counts in live play.
When backgammon is played for money, the most common arrangement is to assign a monetary value to each point, and to play to a certain score, or until either player chooses to stop.
Fevga: A game where one checker by itself can block a point.
Thus, records of matches between players are good indicators of relative skill.
'''Plakoto''', '''Fevga''' and '''Portes''' are three versions of backgammon played in Greece.
Owing to this research, backgammon software has been developed that is capable of beating world-class human players (see TD-Gammon for an example).
If the losing player has not borne off any checkers and still has checkers on the bar or in the opponent's home board, then the player has lost '''a backgammon''', which counts for three times a normal loss.
As the playing time for each individual game is short, it is often played in matches, where victory is awarded to the first player to reach a certain number of points.
As the game progresses, this player may gain an advantage by hitting an opponent's blot from the anchor, or by rolling large doubles that allow the checkers to escape into a running game.
If a player rolls two of the same number, called doubles, that player must play each die twice.
if two automatic doubles have occurred putting the cube up to 4, the first in-game double will be for 8 points).
Cannes also hosted the WSOB Championship, the WSOB finale, which saw 16 players play three-point shootout matches for €160,000.
To start the game, each player rolls one die, and the player with the higher number moves first using the numbers shown on both dice.
The USBGF has recently created a  Standards of Ethical Practice to address issues on which tournament rules fail to touch.
The τάβλη of Zeno's time is believed to be a direct descendant of the earlier Roman ''Ludus duodecim scriptorum'' ("Game of twelve lines") with that board's middle row of points removed, and only the two outer rows remaining.
A roll of 1 may be used to bear off a checker from the 1-point, a 2 from the 2-point, and so on.
A particularly successful priming effort may lead to a "blitz", which is a strategy of covering the entire home board as quickly as possible while keeping one's opponent on the bar.
In the 11th century ''Shahnameh'', the Persian poet Ferdowsi credits Burzoe with the invention of the tables game ''nard'' in the 6th century.
Race board games involving dice have existed for millennia in the Near East and eastern Mediterranean, including the game senet of Ancient Egypt and the Royal Game of Ur in Babylon.
The strength of these programs lies in their neural networks' weights tables, which are the result of months of training.
A few clubs offer additional services, maintaining their own facilities or offering computer analysis of troublesome plays.
The event was recorded for television in Europe airing on Eurosport.
Cigarette, liquor and car companies began to sponsor tournaments and Hugh Hefner held backgammon parties at the Playboy Mansion.
The ''jeux de tables'' (Games of Tables), predecessors of modern backgammon, first appeared in France during the 11th Century and became a favorite pastime of gamblers.
It is a game in which Greeks usually tease their opponent and they create a lively atmosphere.
People young and old all across the country dusted off their boards and checkers.
Backgammon is sometimes available in casinos.
When a player decides to double the opponent, the value is then a double of whatever face value is shown (e.g.
The rollout score of the human (or the computer) is the difference of the average game results by following the selected move versus following the best move, then averaged for the entire set of taken moves.
The name τάβλη is still used for backgammon in Greece, where it is frequently played in town plateias and cafes.
A "running game" describes a strategy of moving as quickly as possible around the board, and is most successful when a player is already ahead in the race.
The stakes are raised by gammons, backgammons, and use of the doubling cube.
For example, a roll of 5-5 allows the player to make up to four moves of five spaces each.
WBA also staged the "US Open" and other events around the globe.
'''Coan ki''' is an ancient Chinese board game that is very similar.
On the board found at Shahr-e Sukhteh the fields are fashioned by the coils of a snake.
TD-Gammon, developed by Gerald Tesauro of IBM, was the first of these programs to play near the expert level.
Backgammon is popular among Greeks.
WBA has contributed to a high-stakes event called "Crowns Cup" broadcast on several TV-channels.
it is possible to roll doubles for the opening move).
For example, if a player rolls a 6 and a 5, but has no checkers on the 6-point and two on the 5-point, then the 6 and the 5 must be used to bear off the two checkers from the 5-point.
When all of a player's checkers are in that player's home board, that player may start removing them; this is called "bearing off".
The objective is to remove (''bear off'') all of one's own checkers from the board before one's opponent can do the same.
Both dice must land completely flat on the right-hand side of the gameboard.
The anchors obstruct the opponent's checkers and create opportunities to hit them as they move home.
In the early Edo-era, a new and quick gambling game called ''Chō-han'' appeared and sugoroku quickly dwindled.
The players then alternate turns, rolling two dice at the beginning of each turn.
The object of the game, to be the first to bear off all of one's checkers, was also the same.
It used tetrahedral dice.
If a player has checkers on the bar, but rolls a combination that does not allow any of those checkers to re-enter, the player does not move.
Because the opponent has difficulty re-entering from the bar or escaping, a player can quickly gain a running advantage and win the game, often with a gammon.
Though using a board that is quite different from backgammon, it may be a predecessor.
He also established the World Backgammon Club of Manhattan, devised a backgammon tournament system in 1963, then organized the first major international backgammon tournament in March, 1964, which attracted royalty, celebrities and the press.
Others are the Hell of Bosch and interior of an Inn by Jan Steen.
It is the longest running backgammon server on the internet.
"Obe", as he was called by friends, co-founded the International Backgammon Association, which published a set of official rules.
Other minor variants to the standard game are common among casual players in certain regions.
Backgammon software has been developed not only to play and analyze games, but also to facilitate play between humans over the internet.
Without them, these programs play no better than a human novice.
Hitting a blot, reentering a piece from the bar, and bearing off, all followed the modern rules.
Some surviving artworks are "Cardsharps" by Caravaggio (the backgammon board is in the lower left) and "The Triumph of Death" by Pieter Bruegel the Elder (the backgammon board is in the lower right).
After the opening, backgammon players frequently rely on some established general strategies, combining and switching among them to adapt to the changing conditions of a game.
In English, the word "backgammon" is most likely derived from "back" and Middle English "''gamen''", meaning "game" or "play".
Zeno threw the three dice with which the game was played and obtained 2, 5 and 6.
A variant of the doubling cube "beaver" is the "'''raccoon'''".
It may also land on a point occupied by exactly one opposing checker, or "blot".
As a gambling game it was made illegal several times.
Whether the game is worth one point or two, the trailing player must win to continue the match.
Variants commonly alter the starting position, restrict certain moves, or assign special value to certain dice rolls, but in some geographic regions even the rules and directions of the checkers movement change, rendering the game fundamentally different.
The same checker may be moved twice, as long as the two moves can be made separately and legally: six and then three, or three and then six.
If the opponent's home board is completely "closed" (i.e.
In money play, the theoretically correct checker play and cube action would never vary based on the score.
Board and committee members include many of the top players, tournament directors and writers in the worldwide backgammon community.
The earliest use documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was in 1650.
In 1979, Lewis Deyong, who had promoted the Bahamas World Championship for the prior three years, suggested that the two events be combined.
There is an established repertoire of common tactics and occurrences.
This encourages a player with a large lead to double, possibly ending the game, rather than to play it to conclusion hoping for a gammon or backgammon.
Each game counts as 1 point, if the opponent has borne off at least 1 stone, otherwise 2 points (gammon/backgammon).
The first world championship competition in backgammon was held in Las Vegas, Nevada in 1967.
The Monte Carlo tournament draws hundreds of players and spectators, and is played over the course of a week.
The 2013 season of the European Backgammon Tour featured 11 stops and 19 qualified players competing for 19,000 € in a Grand Finale in Lefkosa, Northern Cyprus.
Like chess, backgammon has been studied with great interest by computer scientists.
"Match" play means that the players play until one side scores (or exceeds) a certain number of points.
The person who uses that information in the most effective manner will win."
For the bearoff phase, backgammon software usually relies on a database containing precomputed equities for all possible bearoff positions.
In 2011, the WBA collaborated with the online backgammon provider Play65 for the 2011 season of the European Backgammon Tour and with "Betfair" in 2012.
The artifacts include two dice and 60 checkers, and the set is believed to be 100 to 200 years older than the Royal Game of Ur.
In Spain, the Alfonso X manuscript ''Libro de los juegos'', completed in 1283, describes rules for a number of dice and table games in addition to its extensive discussion of chess.
Large club tournaments sometimes draw competitors from other regions, with final matches viewed by hundreds of spectators.
A player also receives an extra turn after a roll of 1-2 or of doubles.
When this fails, one may opt for a "holding game", maintaining control of a point on one's opponent's side of the board, called an anchor.
Most recently, the United States Backgammon Federation (USBGF) was organized in 2009 to repopularize the game in the United States.
Players start with no checkers on the board, and both players move in the same direction to bear off in a common home board.
For example, if the player rolls a 6 and a 3 (notated as "6-3"), the player must move one checker six points forward, and another or the same checker three points forward.
With each roll of the dice, players must choose from numerous options for moving their checkers and anticipate possible counter-moves by the opponent.
Checkers may not enter on a point occupied by two or more opposing checkers.
As with most gambling games, successful play requires a combination of luck and skill, as a single dice roll can sometimes significantly change the outcome of the game.
Such a move adds greatly to the risk of having to face the doubling cube coming back at 8 times its original value when first doubling the opponent (offered at 2 points, counter offered at 16 points) should the luck of the dice change.
A die may not be used to bear off checkers from a lower-numbered point unless there are no checkers on any higher points.
''Tάβλη (tabula)'' meaning "table" or "board" in Byzantine Greek, is the oldest game with rules known to be nearly identical to backgammon; it is described in an epigram of Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–491).
Backgammon is not such a game.
The top players at regional tournaments often compete in major national and international championships.
Berliner stated that the victory was largely a matter of luck, as the computer received more favorable dice rolls.
There is no doubling cube.
The only differences with modern backgammon were the use of an extra die (three rather than two) and the starting of all pieces off the board (with them entering in the same way that pieces on the bar enter in modern backgammon).
When bearing off, a player may also move a lower die roll before the higher even if that means the full value of the higher die is not fully utilized.
The usual tavla is also known as erkek tavlası meaning boys' or men's tavla.
If both opponents roll the same opening number, the doubling cube is incremented on each occasion yet remains in the middle of the board, available to either player.
The popularity of backgammon surged in the mid-1960s, in part due to the charisma of Prince Alexis Obolensky who became known as "The Father of Modern Backgammon".
"Diversification" refers to a complementary tactic of placing one's own checkers in such a way that more numbers are useful.
Backgammon appears widely in paintings of this period, mainly those of Dutch and German painters (Van Ostade, Jan Steen, Hieronymus Bosch, Bruegel and others).
For example, a player leading a 9-point match by a score of 7-5 would be very reluctant to turn the doubling cube, as their opponent could take and make a costless redouble to 4, placing the entire outcome of the match on the current game.
Monte Carlo was universally acknowledged as the site of the World Backgammon Championship and has remained as such for thirty years.
Together, the three are referred to as '''Tavli'''.
A backgammon chouette permits three or more players to participate in a single game, often for money.
The years 1976, 1977 & 1978 saw "dual" World Championships, one in the Bahamas attended by the Americans, and the ''European Open Championships'' in Monte Carlo with mostly European players.
The usual Tavla rules are same as in the other neighboring Arab countries and Greece, as established over a millennium ago.
At the start of each game, the doubling cube is placed on the bar with the number 64 showing; the cube is then said to be "centered, on 1".
If a player is one point away from winning a match, that player's opponent will always want to double as early as possible in order to catch up.
Before the commercialization of neural network programs, proposition bets on specific positions were very common among backgammon players and gamblers.
The Crawford rule is routinely used in tournament match play.
The board was the same with 24 points, 12 on each side.
While the dice may determine the outcome of a single game, over a series of many games, the better player will accumulate the better record, somewhat like poker.
A checker may never land on a point occupied by two or more opposing checkers; thus, no point is ever occupied by checkers from both players simultaneously.
As today, each player had 15 checkers and used cubical dice with sides numbered one to six.
By the 17th Century, tables games had spread to Sweden.
Woolsey said of the program that "There is no question in my mind that its positional judgment is far better than mine."
The white and black checkers were so distributed on the points that the only way to use all of the three results, as required by the game rules, was to break the three stacks of two checkers into blots, exposing them and ruining the game for Zeno.
Points 1 through 6 are called the home board or inner board, and points 7 through 12 are called the outer board.
Early versions of BKG played badly even against poor players, but Berliner noticed that its critical mistakes were always at transitional phases in the game.
'''Nackgammon''' is a variant of backgammon invented by Nick "Nack" Ballard in which players start with one fewer checker on the six point and midpoint and two checkers on the 23 point.
The difference between the two players' pip counts is frequently used as a measure of the leader's racing advantage.
Before starting a match, each player rolls 1 die, and the player with the highest roll picks up both dice and re-rolls (i.e.
Paul Magriel was a key witness for the defence, contradicting Dr. Roger Nelson, the expert prosecution witness, by saying, "Game theory, however, really applies to games with imperfect knowledge, where something is concealed, such as poker.
The cube required players not only to select the best move in a given position, but also to estimate the probability of winning from that position, transforming backgammon into the expected value-driven game played in the 20th and 21st centuries.
The play will iterate among Backgammon, Gul Bara, and Tapa until one of the players reaches a score of 7 or 5.
To balance the situation, the Crawford rule requires that when a player first reaches a score one point short of winning, neither player may use the doubling cube for the following game, called the '''Crawford game'''.
These programs not only play the game, but offer tools for analyzing games and detailed comparisons of individual moves.
