Transformation, unlike transduction or conjugation, depends on numerous bacterial gene products that specifically interact to perform this complex process, and thus transformation is clearly a bacterial adaptation for DNA transfer.
The vast majority of the bacteria in the body are rendered harmless by the protective effects of the immune system, and some are beneficial.
Growth in stirred liquid media occurs as an even cell suspension, making the cultures easy to divide and transfer, although isolating single bacteria from liquid media is difficult.
Many types of bacteriophage exist, some simply infect and lyse their host bacteria, while others insert into the bacterial chromosome.
Specimens that are normally sterile, such as blood, urine or spinal fluid, are cultured under conditions designed to grow all possible organisms.
This motor drives the motion of the filament, which acts as a propeller.
Bacteria often attach to surfaces and form dense aggregations called ''biofilms'' or bacterial mats.
Other researchers reported related studies that microbes thrive inside rocks up to 580 metres below the sea floor under 2.6 kilometres of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States.
The cell membrane and cell wall comprise the ''cell envelope''.
Other bacterial predators either attach to their prey in order to digest them and absorb nutrients, such as ''Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus'', or invade another cell and multiply inside the cytosol, such as ''Daptobacter''.
''Chlamydia'', another phylum of obligate intracellular parasites, contains species that can cause pneumonia, or urinary tract infection and may be involved in coronary heart disease.
Bacterial infections may be treated with antibiotics, which are classified as bacteriocidal if they kill bacteria, or bacteriostatic if they just prevent bacterial growth.
''β''-Lactam antibiotics, such as penicillin, inhibit the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links in the bacterial cell wall.
The archaea and eukaryotes are more closely related to each other than either is to the bacteria.
''Gas vacuoles'', which are freely permeable to gas, are membrane-bound vesicles present in some species of ''Cyanobacteria''.
Examples include fruiting body formation by ''Myxobacteria'' and aerial hyphae formation by ''Streptomyces'', or budding.
For example, about one in 10 cells migrate to the top of these fruiting bodies and differentiate into a specialised dormant state called myxospores, which are more resistant to drying and other adverse environmental conditions than are ordinary cells.
Bacteria are further divided into ''lithotrophs'' that use inorganic electron donors and ''organotrophs'' that use organic compounds as electron donors.
Bacteria capable of digesting the hydrocarbons in petroleum are often used to clean up oil spills.
Some bacteria may be even smaller, but these ultramicrobacteria are not well-studied.
In 2008, fossils of macroorganisms were discovered and named as the Francevillian biota.
Bacteria were among the first life forms to appear on Earth, and are present in most of its habitats.
There are many types of antibiotics and each class inhibits a process that is different in the pathogen from that found in the host.
Certain bacterial species, such as the photosynthetic Cyanobacteria, produce internal gas vesicles, which they use to regulate their buoyancy&nbsp;– allowing them to move up or down into water layers with different light intensities and nutrient levels.
Certain types, such as species of the genus ''Nocardia'', even form complex, branched filaments, similar in appearance to fungal mycelia.
In such cases, gene acquisition from other bacteria or the environment is called ''horizontal gene transfer'' and may be common under natural conditions.
The ancestors of modern bacteria were unicellular microorganisms that were the first forms of life to appear on Earth, about 4 billion years ago.
The cells reduce their metabolic activity and consume non-essential cellular proteins.
The first phase of growth is the ''lag phase'', a period of slow growth when the cells are adapting to the high-nutrient environment and preparing for fast growth.
There are broadly speaking two different types of cell wall in bacteria, a thick one in the gram-positives and a thinner one in the gram-negatives.
This is achievable in some well-studied bacteria, with models of ''Escherichia coli'' metabolism now being produced and tested.
For example, a few biologists argue that the Archaea and Eukaryotes evolved from gram-positive bacteria.
Here, eukaryotes resulted from the entering of ancient bacteria into endosymbiotic associations with the ancestors of eukaryotic cells, which were themselves possibly related to the Archaea.
There are typically 40 million bacterial cells in a gram of soil and a million bacterial cells in a millilitre of fresh water.
However, due to the relatively recent introduction of molecular systematics and a rapid increase in the number of genome sequences that are available, bacterial classification remains a changing and expanding field.
They are distributed over the surface of the cell, and resemble fine hairs when seen under the electron microscope.
In ''Koch's postulates'', he set out criteria to test if an organism is the cause of a disease, and these postulates are still used today.
Disinfectants such as bleach are used to kill bacteria or other pathogens on surfaces to prevent contamination and further reduce the risk of infection.
Bacteria resist phage infection through restriction modification systems that degrade foreign DNA, and a system that uses CRISPR sequences to retain fragments of the genomes of phage that the bacteria have come into contact with in the past, which allows them to block virus replication through a form of RNA interference.
Budding involves a cell forming a protrusion that breaks away and produces a daughter cell.
Lipopolysaccharides, also called ''endotoxins'', are composed of polysaccharides and ''lipid A'' that is responsible for much of the toxicity of gram-negative bacteria.
Elongation is associated with swimming.
''Borrelia burgdorferi'', the cause of Lyme disease, contains a single linear chromosome and several linear and circular plasmids.
The cell wall of bacteria is also distinct from that of Archaea, which do not contain peptidoglycan.
Although the term ''bacteria'' traditionally included all prokaryotes, the scientific classification changed after the discovery in the 1990s that prokaryotes consist of two very different groups of organisms that evolved from an ancient common ancestor.
''Intracellular membranes'' called ''chromatophores'' are also found in membranes of phototrophic bacteria.
The word ''bacteria'' is the plural of the New Latin '''', which is the latinisation of the Greek  (''bakterion''), the diminutive of βακτηρία (''bakteria''), meaning "staff, cane", because the first ones to be discovered were rod-shaped.
Bacteria also live in symbiotic and parasitic relationships with plants and animals.
The secretions are often proteins and may act as enzymes that digest some form of food in the environment.
Certain genera of gram-positive bacteria, such as ''Bacillus'', ''Clostridium'', ''Sporohalobacter'', ''Anaerobacter'', and ''Heliobacterium'', can form highly resistant, dormant structures called ''endospores''.
&nbsp;Cyanobacteria, Green sulfur bacteria, Chloroflexi, or Purple bacteria&nbsp;
The lag phase has high biosynthesis rates, as proteins necessary for rapid growth are produced.
In soil, microorganisms that reside in the rhizosphere (a zone that includes the root surface and the soil that adheres to the root after gentle shaking) carry out nitrogen fixation, converting nitrogen gas to nitrogenous compounds.
In both aerobic phototrophy and chemolithotrophy, oxygen is used as a terminal electron acceptor, whereas under anaerobic conditions inorganic compounds are used instead.
Most bacteria have a single circular chromosome that can range in size from only 160,000 base pairs in the endosymbiotic bacteria ''Candidatus Carsonella ruddii'', to 12,200,000 base pairs in the soil-dwelling bacteria ''Sorangium cellulosum''.
This can occur in three main ways.
Bacteria were once seen as simple bags of cytoplasm, but structures such as the ''prokaryotic cytoskeleton'' and the localisation of proteins to specific locations within the cytoplasm that give bacteria some complexity have been discovered.
The final phase is the ''death phase'' where the bacteria run out of nutrients and die.
These efforts were effective on beaches that were not too thickly covered in oil.
A bacteriophage can contain genes that contribute to its host's phenotype: for example, in the evolution of ''Escherichia coli'' O157:H7 and ''Clostridium botulinum'', the toxin genes in an integrated phage converted a harmless ancestral bacterium into a lethal pathogen.
An additional criterion of respiratory microorganisms are the electron acceptors used for aerobic or anaerobic respiration.
In this dormant state, these organisms may remain viable for millions of years, and endospores even allow bacteria to survive exposure to the vacuum and radiation in space.
bacillus, from Latin ''baculus'', stick).
Transformation appears to be common among bacterial species, and thus far at least 60 species are known to have the natural ability to become competent for transformation.
Another way of life of chemotrophs in the absence of possible electron acceptors is fermentation, wherein the electrons taken from the reduced substrates are transferred to oxidised intermediates to generate reduced fermentation products (e.g., lactate, ethanol, hydrogen, butyric acid).
Bacteria can be classified on the basis of cell structure, cellular metabolism or on differences in cell components, such as DNA, fatty acids, pigments, antigens and quinones.
Those antibiotics kill bacteria without affecting the larger 80S ribosomes of eukaryotic cells and without harming the host.
Only the intimate association with the hydrogen-consuming Archaea keeps the hydrogen concentration low enough to allow the bacteria to grow.
Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg introduced the word "bacterium" in 1828.
Genetic changes in bacterial genomes come from either random mutation during replication or "stress-directed mutation", where genes involved in a particular growth-limiting process have an increased mutation rate.
Surgical and dental instruments are also sterilised to prevent contamination by bacteria.
Often these techniques are designed for specific specimens; for example, a sputum sample will be treated to identify organisms that cause pneumonia, while stool specimens are cultured on selective media to identify organisms that cause diarrhoea, while preventing growth of non-pathogenic bacteria.
coli'') have two distinct modes of movement: forward movement (swimming) and tumbling.
In the laboratory, bacteria are usually grown using solid or liquid media.
Carbon metabolism in bacteria is either ''heterotrophic'', where organic carbon compounds are used as carbon sources, or ''autotrophic'', meaning that cellular carbon is obtained by fixing carbon dioxide.
Plasmids replicate independently of chromosomes, so it is possible that plasmids could be lost in bacterial cell division.
This uncertainty was due to the lack of distinctive structures in most bacteria, as well as lateral gene transfer between unrelated species.
These transfer proteins from the cytoplasm into the periplasm or into the environment around the cell.
The bacteria in this association are unable to consume the organic acids as this reaction produces hydrogen that accumulates in their surroundings.
They have a distinctive helical body that twists about as it moves.
These two domains, along with Eukarya, are the basis of the three-domain system, which is currently the most widely used classification system in microbiolology.
In industry, bacteria are important in sewage treatment and the breakdown of oil spills, the production of cheese and yogurt through fermentation, and the recovery of gold, palladium, copper and other metals in the mining sector, as well as in biotechnology, and the manufacture of antibiotics and other chemicals.
''Volutin granules'' are cytoplasmic inclusions of complexed inorganic polyphosphate.
One such mutualistic association, called interspecies hydrogen transfer, occurs between clusters of anaerobic bacteria that consume organic acids, such as butyric acid or propionic acid, and produce hydrogen, and methanogenic Archaea that consume hydrogen.
There are also some algae that originated from even later endosymbiotic events.
On 17 March 2013, researchers reported data that suggested bacterial life forms thrive in the Mariana Trench, which with a depth of up to 11 kilometres is the deepest part of the Earth's oceans.
The thick layers of peptidoglycan in the "gram-positive" cell wall stain purple, while the thin "gram-negative" cell wall appears pink.
Endospores show no detectable metabolism and can survive extreme physical and chemical stresses, such as high levels of UV light, gamma radiation, detergents, disinfectants, heat, freezing, pressure, and desiccation.
Bacterial diseases are also important in agriculture, with bacteria causing leaf spot, fire blight and wilts in plants, as well as Johne's disease, mastitis, salmonella and anthrax in farm animals.
Flagella are driven by the energy released by the transfer of ions down an electrochemical gradient across the cell membrane.
Yet these organisms are also part of the normal human flora and usually exist on the skin or in the nose without causing any disease at all.
The cell wall is essential to the survival of many bacteria, and the antibiotic penicillin is able to kill bacteria by inhibiting a step in the synthesis of peptidoglycan.
Non-respiratory anaerobes use fermentation to generate energy and reducing power, secreting metabolic by-products (such as ethanol in brewing) as waste.
In fact, his ''Bacterium'' was a genus that contained non-spore-forming rod-shaped bacteria, as opposed to ''Bacillus'', a genus of spore-forming rod-shaped bacteria defined by Ehrenberg in 1835.
First, bacteria can take up exogenous DNA from their environment, in a process called ''transformation''.
This bioluminescence often occurs in bacteria that live in association with fish, and the light probably serves to attract fish or other large animals.
Many important biochemical reactions, such as energy generation, use concentration gradients across membranes.
It is seldom that a conjugative plasmid integrates into the host bacterial chromosome, and subsequently transfers part of the host bacterial DNA to another bacterium.
Other proteins import nutrients across the cell membrane, or expel undesired molecules from the cytoplasm.
Bacterial species differ in the number and arrangement of flagella on their surface; some have a single flagellum (''monotrichous''), a flagellum at each end (''amphitrichous''), clusters of flagella at the poles of the cell (''lophotrichous''), while others have flagella distributed over the entire surface of the cell (''peritrichous'').
These include organisms such as ''Myxococcus xanthus'', which forms swarms of cells that kill and digest any bacteria they encounter.
Consequently, the need to identify human pathogens was a major impetus for the development of techniques to identify bacteria.
If the bacterial cell wall is entirely removed, it is called a ''protoplast'', whereas if it is partially removed, it is called a ''spheroplast''.
The high mycolic acid content of ''Mycobacteria'', is responsible for the staining pattern of poor absorption followed by high retention.
The third method of gene transfer is ''conjugation'', whereby DNA is transferred through direct cell contact.
Energy metabolism of bacteria is either based on ''phototrophy'', the use of light through photosynthesis, or based on ''chemotrophy'', the use of chemical substances for energy, which are mostly oxidised at the expense of oxygen or alternative electron acceptors (aerobic/anaerobic respiration).
The myxobacteria move only when on solid surfaces, unlike ''E.
A pathogenic cause for a known medical disease may only be discovered many years after, as was the case with ''Helicobacter pylori'' and peptic ulcer disease.
Unlike in multicellular organisms, increases in cell size (cell growth) and reproduction by cell division are tightly linked in unicellular organisms.
S-layers have diverse but mostly poorly understood functions, but are known to act as virulence factors in ''Campylobacter'' and contain surface enzymes in ''Bacillus stearothermophilus''.
''Flagella'' are rigid protein structures, about 20&nbsp;nanometres in diameter and up to 20&nbsp;micrometres in length, that are used for motility.
This is known as secondary endosymbiosis.
Many bacteria (such as ''E.
The phylum Planctomycetes and candidate phylum Poribacteria may be exceptions to the general absence of internal membranes in bacteria, because they appear to have a double membrane around their nucleoids and contain other membrane-bound cellular structures.
Certain bacteria form close spatial associations that are essential for their survival.
Some antibiotics bind specifically to 70S ribosomes and inhibit bacterial protein synthesis.
In nature, many organisms live in communities (e.g., biofilms) that may allow for increased supply of nutrients and protection from environmental stresses.
Bacteria can also be used in the place of pesticides in the biological pest control.
Some bacteria, called ''vibrio'', are shaped like slightly curved rods or comma-shaped; others can be spiral-shaped, called ''spirilla'', or tightly coiled, called ''spirochaetes''.
According to one of the researchers, "You can find microbes everywhere&nbsp;— they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are."
They can also generate movement where they are called ''type IV pili'' (see movement, below).
''Inclusions'' are considered to be nonliving components of the cell that do not possess metabolic activity and are not bounded by membranes.
Bacteria, as asexual organisms, inherit identical copies of their parent's genes (i.e., they are clonal).
Mutation rates vary widely among different species of bacteria and even among different clones of a single species of bacteria.
Other organisms may need to be identified by their growth in special media, or by other techniques, such as serology.
These subcellular levels of organisation have been called "bacterial hyperstructures".
In order for a bacterium to bind, take up and recombine donor DNA into its own chromosome, it must first enter a special physiological state termed competence (see Natural competence).
Pathogenic bacteria are a major cause of human death and disease and cause infections such as tetanus, typhoid fever, diphtheria, syphilis, cholera, foodborne illness, leprosy and tuberculosis.
Many bacterial species exist simply as single cells, others associate in characteristic patterns: ''Neisseria'' form diploids (pairs), ''Streptococcus'' form chains, and ''Staphylococcus'' group together in "bunch of grapes" clusters.
Bacterial metabolism is classified into nutritional groups on the basis of three major criteria: the kind of energy used for growth, the source of carbon, and the electron donors used for growth.
This ensures the availability of the strain to scientists worldwide.
This layer provides chemical and physical protection for the cell surface and can act as a macromolecular diffusion barrier.
''Acid-fast bacteria'', such as ''Mycobacteria'', are resistant to decolorisation by acids during staining procedures.
The genes in bacterial genomes are usually a single continuous stretch of DNA and although several different types of introns do exist in bacteria, these are much rarer than in eukaryotes.
The stationary phase is a transition from rapid growth to a stress response state and there is increased expression of genes involved in DNA repair, antioxidant metabolism and nutrient transport.
The flagella of a unique group of bacteria, the spirochaetes, are found between two membranes in the periplasmic space.
Some bacteria, including the Spirochaetes of the genus ''Borrelia'' are a notable exception to this arrangement.
As with bacterial classification, identification of bacteria is increasingly using molecular methods.
Bacteria were Leeuwenhoek's most remarkable microscopic discovery.
The distribution of metabolic traits within a group of bacteria has traditionally been used to define their taxonomy, but these traits often do not correspond with modern genetic classifications.
Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria.
Culture techniques are designed to promote the growth and identify particular bacteria, while restricting the growth of the other bacteria in the sample.
''Plasmids'' are small extra-chromosomal DNAs that may contain genes for antibiotic resistance or virulence factors.
For example, the presence of over 1,000 bacterial species in the normal human gut flora of the intestines can contribute to gut immunity, synthesise vitamins, such as folic acid, vitamin K and biotin, convert sugars to lactic acid (see ''Lactobacillus''), as well as fermenting complex undigestible carbohydrates.
Following present classification, there are a little less than 9,300 known species of prokaryotes, which includes bacteria and archaea; but attempts to estimate the true number of bacterial diversity have ranged from 107 to 109 total species&nbsp;– and even these diverse estimates may be off by many orders of magnitude.
These relationships can be essential for growth of a particular organism or group of organisms (syntrophy).
An early idea was that bacteria might contain membrane folds termed mesosomes, but these were later shown to be artefacts produced by the chemicals used to prepare the cells for electron microscopy.
Bacteria are vital in recycling nutrients, with many of the stages in nutrient cycles dependent on these organisms, such as the fixation of nitrogen from the atmosphere and putrefaction.
Lithotrophic bacteria can use inorganic compounds as a source of energy.
Infections can be prevented by antiseptic measures such as sterilising the skin prior to piercing it with the needle of a syringe, and by proper care of indwelling catheters.
Bacteria frequently secrete chemicals into their environment in order to modify it favourably.
Unlike cells of animals and other eukaryotes, bacterial cells do not contain a nucleus and rarely harbour membrane-bound organelles.
In these fruiting bodies, the bacteria perform separate tasks; this type of cooperation is a simple type of multicellular organisation.
Robert Koch, a pioneer in medical microbiology, worked on cholera, anthrax and tuberculosis.
Bacterial cell walls are different from the cell walls of plants and fungi, which are made of cellulose and chitin, respectively.
This membrane encloses the contents of the cell and acts as a barrier to hold nutrients, proteins and other essential components of the ''cytoplasm'' within the cell.
The most common staining technique used to identify acid-fast bacteria is the Ziehl-Neelsen stain or acid-fast stain, in which the acid-fast bacilli are stained bright-red and stand out clearly against a blue background.
These processes are also important in biological responses to pollution; for example, sulfate-reducing bacteria are largely responsible for the production of the highly toxic forms of mercury (methyl- and dimethylmercury) in the environment.
In most bacteria, a ''cell wall'' is present on the outside of the cell membrane.
(Yeasts and moulds, commonly associated with fermentation, are not bacteria, but rather fungi.)
In 1910, Paul Ehrlich developed the first antibiotic, by changing dyes that selectively stained ''Treponema pallidum''&nbsp;— the spirochaete that causes syphilis&nbsp;— into compounds that selectively killed the pathogen.
More recently, some bacteria were discovered deep under Earth's crust that grow as branching filamentous types with a star-shaped cross-section.
Solid ''growth media'', such as agar plates, are used to isolate pure cultures of a bacterial strain.
''Carboxysomes'' are bacterial microcompartments that contain enzymes involved in carbon fixation.
Most laboratory techniques for growing bacteria use high levels of nutrients to produce large amounts of cells cheaply and quickly.
Respiratory organisms use chemical compounds as a source of energy by taking electrons from the reduced substrate and transferring them to a terminal electron acceptor in a redox reaction.
The nucleoid contains the chromosome with its associated proteins and RNA.
The identification of bacteria in the laboratory is particularly relevant in medicine, where the correct treatment is determined by the bacterial species causing an infection.
In his research into tuberculosis Koch finally proved the germ theory, for which he received a Nobel Prize in 1905.
However, even using these improved methods, the total number of bacterial species is not known and cannot even be estimated with any certainty.
Many other bacteria are found as symbionts in humans and other organisms.
This serves to provide an easily absorbable form of nitrogen for many plants, which cannot fix nitrogen themselves.
Among the smallest bacteria are members of the genus ''Mycoplasma'', which measure only 0.3&nbsp;micrometres, as small as the largest viruses.
Inorganic compounds
Diagnostics using DNA-based tools, such as polymerase chain reaction, are increasingly popular due to their specificity and speed, compared to culture-based methods.
&nbsp;Organic compounds (photoheterotrophs) or carbon fixation (photoautotrophs)
They can also act as antigens and be involved in cell recognition, as well as aiding attachment to surfaces and the formation of biofilms.
The development of competence in nature is usually associated with stressful environmental conditions, and seems to be an adaptation for facilitating repair of DNA damage in recipient cells.
Because of their specificity, these pesticides are regarded as environmentally friendly, with little or no effect on humans, wildlife, pollinators and most other beneficial insects.
For example, when starved of amino acids, Myxobacteria detect surrounding cells in a process known as quorum sensing, migrate towards each other, and aggregate to form fruiting bodies up to 500&nbsp;micrometres long and containing approximately 100,000 bacterial cells.
This nutrient limitation has led the evolution of different growth strategies (see r/K selection theory).
Bacteria exhibit an extremely wide variety of metabolic types.
It is implicated as responsible for the heat resistance of the endospore.
The names originate from the reaction of cells to the Gram stain, a long-standing test for the classification of bacterial species.
He then published his observations in a series of letters to the Royal Society of London.
Bacteria display a wide diversity of shapes and sizes, called ''morphologies''.
Bacteria do not have a membrane-bound nucleus, and their genetic material is typically a single circular DNA chromosome located in the cytoplasm in an irregularly shaped body called the ''nucleoid''.
Some organisms are best identified by stains other than the Gram stain, particularly mycobacteria or ''Nocardia'', which show acid-fastness on Ziehl–Neelsen or similar stains.
They allow the bacteria to control their buoyancy.
''Pili'' (''sing''.
Motile bacteria are attracted or repelled by certain stimuli in behaviours called '''taxes''': these include chemotaxis, phototaxis, energy taxis, and magnetotaxis.
When a population of bacteria first enter a high-nutrient environment that allows growth, the cells need to adapt to their new environment.
''L-form bacteria'' are strains of bacteria that lack cell walls.
''Bacterial microcompartments'', such as carboxysomes, provide a further level of organisation; they are compartments within bacteria that are surrounded by polyhedral protein shells, rather than by lipid membranes.
+ Nutritional types in bacterial metabolism
Some organisms can grow extremely rapidly when nutrients become available, such as the formation of algal (and cyanobacterial) blooms that often occur in lakes during the summer.
&nbsp;''Bacillus'', ''Clostridium'' or ''Enterobacteriaceae''&nbsp;
Fimbriae are believed to be involved in attachment to solid surfaces or to other cells, and are essential for the virulence of some bacterial pathogens.
The enzyme lysozyme, found in human tears, also digests the cell wall of bacteria and is the body's main defence against eye infections.
coccus, from Greek ''kókkos'', grain, seed), or rod-shaped, called ''bacilli'' (''sing''.
