Although the depth of the net was of no consequence, it was preferred that it should reach the ground.
Singles is a game of patient positional manoeuvring, unlike the all-out aggression of doubles.
Although badminton holds the record for the fastest initial speed of a racquet sports projectile, the shuttlecock decelerates substantially faster than other projectiles such as tennis balls.
At high levels of play, doubles rallies are extremely fast.
Players should also ensure that they learn safe and proper footwork, with the knee and foot in alignment on all lunges.
This can be used to improve the shuttle's trajectory, by making it dip more rapidly as it passes the net; for example, a sliced low serve can travel slightly faster than a normal low serve, yet land on the same spot.
Players frequently play certain strokes on the forehand side with a backhand hitting action, and vice versa.
'''Badminton''' is a racquet sport played using racquets to hit a shuttlecock across a net.
In mixed doubles, both pairs typically try to maintain an attacking formation with the woman at the front and the man at the back.
In doubles, a lift is the safest option but it usually allows the opponents to continue smashing; blocks and drives are counter-attacking strokes, but may be intercepted by the smasher's partner.
For the same reasons, badminton players can generate power from a short racquet swing: for some strokes such as net kills, an elite player's swing may be less than .
Many players use a backhand hitting action for returning smashes on both the forehand and backhand sides, because backhands are more effective than forehands at covering smashes directed to the body.
'''In the forecourt''', a high shuttlecock will be met with a ''net kill'', hitting it steeply downwards and attempting to win the rally immediately.
For example, it is often claimed that badminton is the fastest racquet sport.
In the BWF World Championships, first held in 1977, currently only the highest ranked 64 players in the world, and a maximum of four from each country, can participate in any category.
Although initiated in England, competitive men's badminton has traditionally been dominated in Europe by Denmark.
Since one person needs to cover the entire court, singles tactics are based on forcing the opponent to move as much as possible; this means that singles strokes are normally directed to the corners of the court.
Expert players prepare for many different strokes that look identical, and use slicing to deceive their opponents about the speed or direction of the stroke.
The full width of the court is 6.1&nbsp;metres (20&nbsp;ft), and in singles this width is reduced to 5.18&nbsp;metres (17&nbsp;ft).
Badminton was a demonstration event in the 1972 and 1988 Summer Olympics.
* When playing a netshot, slicing underneath the shuttlecock may cause it to turn over itself (tumble) several times as it passes the net.
'''In the midcourt''', a high shuttlecock will usually be met with a powerful ''smash'', also hitting downwards and hoping for an outright winner or a weak reply.
Players may also use ''double motion'', where they make an initial racquet movement in one direction before withdrawing the racquet to hit in another direction.
The shuttlecocks were coated with India rubber and, in outdoor play, sometimes weighted with lead.
The doubles court is wider than the singles court, but both are of same length.
The shuttlecock is a feathered or (in informal matches) plastic projectile which flies differently from the balls used in many other sports.
If an opponent tries to anticipate the stroke, he may move in the wrong direction and may be unable to change his body momentum in time to reach the shuttlecock.
Play ends once the shuttlecock has struck the floor or if a fault has been called by the umpire, service judge, or (in their absence) the opposing side.
If the netshot is tight and tumbling, then the opponent's lift will not reach the back of the court, which makes the subsequent smash much harder to return.
The exception, which often causes confusion to newer players, is that the doubles court has a shorter serve-length dimension.
This is because the male players are usually substantially stronger, and can therefore produce smashes that are more powerful.
Hard shots directed towards the body are difficult to defend.
This produces a smaller change in direction, but does not require as much time.
An alternative view suggests that the optimum tension for power depends on the player: the faster and more accurately a player can swing their racquet, the higher the tension for maximum power.
Earlier still, racquets were made of wood.
The use of grip tightening is crucial to these techniques, and is often described as ''finger power''.
Games employing shuttlecocks have been played for centuries across Eurasia but the modern game of badminton developed in the mid-19th century among the British as a variant of the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock.
The most common choices are PU synthetic grips or towelling grips.
Lifted serves may be either ''high serves'', where the shuttlecock is lifted so high that it falls almost vertically at the back of the court, or ''flick serves'', where the shuttlecock is lifted to a lesser height but falls sooner.
The name derives from the Duke of Beaufort's Badminton House in Gloucestershire, but why or when remains unclear.
Each side may only strike the shuttlecock once before it passes over the net.
At high levels of play, the backhand serve has become popular to the extent that forehand serves have become fairly rare at a high level of play.
China, Denmark, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, and South Korea are the nations which have consistently produced world-class players in the past few decades, with China being the greatest force in men's and women's competition recently.
After a successful drive or push, the opponents will often be forced to lift the shuttlecock.
However, players with strong smashes will sometimes use the shot to create openings, and players commonly smash weak returns to try to end rallies.
European play came to be dominated by Denmark but the game has become very popular in Asia, with recent competition dominated by China.
Flick serves are used to prevent the opponent from anticipating the low serve and attacking it decisively.
Forehand strokes are hit with the front of the hand leading (like hitting with the palm), whereas backhand strokes are hit with the back of the hand leading (like hitting with the knuckles).
This natural spin affects certain strokes: a tumbling netshot is more effective if the slicing action is from right to left, rather than from left to right.
If a pair cannot hit downwards, they will use flat strokes in an attempt to gain the attack.
No formal study currently exists evaluating the physical condition of the players or demands during game play.
Against weaker players whose intended strokes are obvious, an experienced player may move before the shuttlecock has been hit, anticipating the stroke to gain an advantage.
The players change ends at the start of the second game; if the match reaches a third game, they change ends both at the start of the game and when the leading player's or pair's score reaches 11 points.
'''In the rearcourt''', players strive to hit the shuttlecock while it is still above them, rather than allowing it to drop lower.
Spinning the shuttlecock is also used to create ''spinning netshots'' (also called ''tumbling netshots''), in which the shuttlecock turns over itself several times (tumbles) before stabilizing; sometimes the shuttlecock remains inverted instead of tumbling.
The racquet movement is typically used to suggest a straight angle but then play the stroke cross court, or vice versa.
These nylon shuttles may be constructed with either natural cork or synthetic foam base, and a plastic skirt.
Compared to running shoes, badminton shoes have little lateral support.
In badminton a server has far less an advantage, and is unlikely to score an ''ace'' (unreturnable serve).
String tension is normally in the range of 80 to 160&nbsp;N (18 to 36 lbf).
Cheap racquets are still often made of metals such as steel, but wooden racquets are no longer manufactured for the ordinary market, because of their excessive mass and cost.
Some string manufacturers measure the thickness of their strings under tension so they are actually thicker than specified when slack.
Players exploit the length of the court by combining lifts and clears with drop shots and net shots.
''Slicing'' and using a ''shortened hitting action'' are the two main technical devices that facilitate deception.
This is in fact incorrect, for a higher string tension can cause the shuttle to slide off the racquet and hence make it harder to hit a shot accurately.
The drag also influences the flight path of a lifted (''lobbed'') shuttlecock: the parabola of its flight is heavily skewed so that it falls at a steeper angle than it rises.
Overgrips are thinner (less than 1&nbsp;mm), and are often used as the final layer.
Worldwide, Asian nations have become dominant in international competition.
Badminton strings are thin, high performing strings with thicknesses ranging from about 0.62 to 0.73&nbsp;mm.
Deception is also important.
At high levels of play, singles demands extraordinary fitness.
* In tennis, the server has two chances to hit a serve into the service box; in badminton, the server is allowed only one attempt.
In tennis a match is played best of 3 or 5 sets, each set consisting of 6 games and each game ends when one player wins 4 points or wins two consecutive points at deuce points.
At the start of the rally, the server and receiver stand in diagonally opposite ''service courts'' (see court dimensions).
For example, a netshot can force the opponent to lift the shuttlecock, which gives an opportunity to smash.
The most effective way for a player to find a good string tension is to experiment.
In particular, the feathers create much higher drag, causing the shuttlecock to decelerate more rapidly.
By 1875, returning officers had started a badminton club in Folkestone.
For example, a singles player may hold his racquet ready for a netshot, but then flick the shuttlecock to the back instead with a shallow lift when she or he notices the opponent has moved before the actual shot was played.
Badminton, however, requires powerful lateral movements.
The net is 1.55&nbsp;metres (5&nbsp;ft 1&nbsp;inch) high at the edges and 1.524&nbsp;metres (5&nbsp;ft) high in the centre.
The arguments for this generally rely on crude mechanical reasoning, such as claiming that a lower tension string bed is more bouncy and therefore provides more power.
Grip choice is a matter of personal preference.
* In tennis, the ball may bounce once before the point ends; in badminton, the rally ends once the shuttlecock touches the floor.
''Lifts'', where the shuttlecock is hit upwards to the back of the opponents' court, can be played from all parts of the court.
However, at 29all, whoever scores the golden point will win.
Men's doubles is the most aggressive form of badminton, with a high proportion of powerful jump smashes and very quick reflex exchanges.
For the same reason, ''backhand smashes'' tend to be weak.
This is similar to tennis, except that a badminton serve must be hit below waist height and with the racquet shaft pointing downwards, the shuttlecock is not allowed to bounce and in badminton, the players stand inside their service courts unlike tennis.
In tennis, if the score is tied 66 in a set, a tiebreaker will be played, which ends once a player reaches 7 points or when one player has a two-point advantage.
This is more than just a safety concern: proper footwork is also critical in order to move effectively around the court.
In turn, this qualification must be qualified by consideration of the distance over which the shuttlecock travels: a smashed shuttlecock travels a shorter distance than a tennis ball during a serve.
The Sudirman Cup, a gender-mixed international team event held once every two years, began in 1989.
Different racquets have playing characteristics that appeal to different players.
"Deception" in badminton is often used in both of these senses.
'''The service''' is restricted by the Laws and presents its own array of stroke choices.
In singles, players will often start the rally with a forehand high serve or with a flick serve.
When a player is genuinely deceived, he will often lose the point immediately because he cannot change his direction quickly enough to reach the shuttlecock.
This is called a ''spinning netshot'' or ''tumbling netshot''.
The cork is covered with thin leather or synthetic material.
''Triple motion'' is also possible, but this is very rare in actual play.
In the forecourt and midcourt, most strokes can be played equally effectively on either the forehand or backhand side; but in the rear court, players will attempt to play as many strokes as possible on their forehands, often preferring to play a ''round-the-head'' forehand overhead (a forehand "on the backhand side") rather than attempt a backhand overhead.
Badminton is often played as a casual outdoor activity in a yard or on a beach; formal games are played on a rectangular indoor court.
A consequence of this system is that, each time a side regains the service, the server will be the player who did ''not'' serve last time.
A shuttlecock (often abbreviated to ''shuttle''; also called a ''birdie'') is a high-drag projectile, with an open conical shape: the cone is formed from sixteen overlapping feathers embedded into a rounded cork base.
Smashing tends to be less prominent in singles than in doubles because the smasher has no partner to follow up his effort and is thus vulnerable to a skillfully placed return.
If the receiver is not ready when the service is delivered, a let shall be called; yet, if the receiver attempts to return the shuttlecock, the receiver shall be judged to have been ready.
At the start of 2007, the BWF  introduced a new tournament structure for the highest level tournaments aside from those in level one: the BWF Super Series.
In doubles, players generally smash to the middle ground between two players in order to take advantage of confusion and clashes.
This is why it is best to drop the shuttlecock just over the net in this situation.
In doubles, the service court is also marked by a long service line, which is 0.76&nbsp;metres (2&nbsp;ft 6&nbsp;inch) from the back boundary.
Neither view has been subjected to a rigorous mechanical analysis, nor is there clear evidence in favour of one or the other.
When the opportunity arises, however, the pair will switch back to the standard mixed attacking position, with the woman in front and men in the back.
India joined as an affiliate in 1936.
Players may choose between a variety of grip materials.
An alternative to double motion is to use a ''racquet head fake'', where the initial motion is continued but the racquet is turned during the hit.
These include the regional competitions in Asia (Badminton Asia Championships) and Europe (European Badminton Championships), which produce the world's best players as well as the Pan America Badminton Championships.
Synthetic shuttles are often used by recreational players to reduce their costs as feathered shuttles break easily.
The full length of the court is 13.4&nbsp;metres (44&nbsp;ft).
The lightness of the shuttlecock and of badminton racquets allow badminton players to make use of the wrist and fingers much more than tennis players; in tennis the wrist is normally held stable, and playing with a mobile wrist may lead to injury.
When the serving side loses a rally, the serve immediately passes to their opponent(s) (this differs from the old system where sometimes the serve passes to the doubles partner for what is known as a "second serve").
Points are scored by striking the shuttlecock with the racquet and landing it within the opposing side's half of the court.
'''When the shuttlecock is near to net height''', players can hit ''drives'', which travel flat and rapidly over the net into the opponents' rear midcourt and rearcourt.
Once players have mastered these basic strokes, they can hit the shuttlecock from and to any part of the court, powerfully and softly as required.
The BWF now governs international badminton.
If the rearcourt attacker plays a dropshot, his partner will move into the forecourt to threaten the net reply.
Because of this, spectator interest is sometimes greater for men's doubles than for singles.
Among the tournaments in this series is the venerable All-England Championships, first held in 1900, which was once considered the unofficial world championships of the sport.
Carbon fibre has an excellent strength to weight ratio, is stiff, and gives excellent kinetic energy transfer.
First, the player must turn their back to their opponents, restricting their view of them and the court.
Athletic ''jump smashes'', where players jump upwards for a steeper smash angle, are a common and spectacular element of elite men's doubles play.
In both the Olympic and BWF World competitions restrictions on the number of participants from any one country have caused some controversy because they sometimes result in excluding elite world level players from the strongest badminton nations.
For strokes that require more power, a longer swing will typically be used, but the badminton racquet swing will rarely be as long as a typical tennis swing.
This ''overhead'' hitting allows them to play smashes, ''clears'' (hitting the shuttlecock high and to the back of the opponents' court), and ''drop shots'' (hitting the shuttlecock softly so that it falls sharply downwards into the opponents' forecourt).
It is also a technical sport, requiring good motor coordination and the development of sophisticated racquet movements.
The ''backhand clear'' is considered by most players and coaches to be the most difficult basic stroke in the game, since precise technique is needed in order to muster enough power for the shuttlecock to travel the full length of the court.
Before the adoption of carbon fibre composite, racquets were made of light metals such as aluminum.
Moreover, frequent smashing can be exhausting in singles where the conservation of a player's energy is at a premium.
Beyond the basics, however, badminton offers rich potential for advanced stroke skills that provide a competitive advantage.
'''When the shuttlecock is well below net height''', players have no choice but to hit upwards.
The competitions now take place once every two years.
Elite players develop finger power to the extent that they can hit some power strokes, such as net kills, with less than a  racquet swing.
While fans of badminton and tennis often claim that their sport is the more physically demanding, such comparisons are difficult to make objectively because of the differing demands of the games.
They are composed of many different materials ranging from carbon fibre composite (graphite reinforced plastic) to solid steel, which may be augmented by a variety of materials.
To win in badminton, players need to employ a wide variety of strokes in the right situations.
Since 1992, badminton has been a Summer Olympic sport with five events: men's singles, women's singles, men's doubles, women's doubles, and mixed doubles.
The players collect points that determine whether they can play in Super Series Finals held at the year end.
* In tennis, the serve is dominant to the extent that the server is expected to win most of his service games (at advanced level & onwards); a ''break'' of service, where the server loses the game, is of major importance in a match.
Drive serves are rare.
The court is rectangular and divided into halves by a net.
To win the tournament, a country must perform well across all five disciplines (men's doubles and singles, women's doubles and singles, and mixed doubles).
Shuttlecocks also have a high top speed compared to the balls in other racquet sports.
For example, a good crosscourt ''sliced dropshot'' will use a hitting action that suggests a straight clear or smash, deceiving the opponent about both the power and direction of the shuttlecock.
A short hitting action is not only useful for deception: it also allows the player to hit powerful strokes when he has no time for a big arm swing.
The lightness of modern racquets allows players to use a very short hitting action for many strokes, thereby maintaining the option to hit a powerful or a soft stroke until the last possible moment.
For the first rally of any doubles game, the serving pair may decide who serves and the receiving pair may decide who receives.
Nowadays, nanomaterials such as fullerene and carbon nanotubes are added to racquets giving them greater durability.
Initially, the sport was played with sides ranging from 1–4 players but it was quickly established that games between two or four competitors worked the best.
The minimum height for the ceiling above the court is not mentioned in the Laws of Badminton.
High levels of lateral support are useful for activities where lateral motion is undesirable and unexpected.
In singles, the server stands in their right service court when their score is even, and in her/his left service court when her/his score is odd.
The level four tournaments, known as International Challenge, International Series, and Future Series, encourage participation by junior players.
* The fastest recorded tennis stroke is Samuel Groth's  serve, whereas the fastest badminton stroke during gameplay was Fu Haifeng's  recorded smash.
Pushes may also be hit flatter, placing the shuttlecock into the front midcourt.
Tennis balls are more than eleven times heavier than shuttlecocks,  versus .
There are two main types of grip: ''replacement'' grips and ''overgrips''.
Many players, however, prefer to use replacement grips as the final layer.
It is often argued that high string tensions improve control, whereas low string tensions increase power.
The following information is a simplified summary of badminton rules based on the BWF Statutes publication, ''Laws of Badminton''.
The game may have originally developed among expatriate officers in British India, where it was very popular by the 1870s.
The server and receiver must remain within their service courts, without touching the boundary lines, until the server strikes the shuttlecock.
* Tennis racquets are about four times as heavy as badminton racquets,  versus .
The main advantage of a spinning netshot is that the opponent will be unwilling to address the shuttlecock until it has stopped tumbling, since hitting the feathers will result in an unpredictable stroke.
One consequence of the shuttlecock's drag is that it requires considerable power to hit it the full length of the court, which is not the case for most racquet sports.
Due to the way that its feathers overlap, a shuttlecock also has a slight natural spin about its axis of rotational symmetry.
Ball badminton, a form of the game played with a wool ball instead of a shuttlecock, was being played in Thanjavur as early as the 1850s and was at first played interchangeably with badminton by the British, the woollen ball being preferred in windy or wet weather.
Often rallies finish with a smash, but setting up the smash requires subtler strokes.
The Badminton Association of England published these rules in 1893 and officially launched the sport at a house called "Dunbar" in Portsmouth on 13 September.
In 1890, Hart and Bagnel Wild again revised the rules.
The final tournament involves 12 teams, following an increase from eight teams in 2004.
Courts are usually marked for both singles and doubles play, although badminton rules  permit a court to be marked for singles only.
A player's forehand side is the same side as their playing hand: for a right-handed player, the forehand side is their right side and the backhand side is their left side.
The sport was played under the Pune rules until 1887, when the J.H.E.
If both team are tied at "game point", they must play until one team achieves a two-point advantage.
An 1863 article in ''The Cornhill Magazine'' describes badminton as "battledore and shuttlecock played with sides, across a string suspended some five feet from the ground".
Badminton offers a wide variety of basic strokes, and players require a high level of skill to perform all of them effectively.
A more sophisticated slicing action involves brushing the strings around the shuttlecock during the hit, in order to make the shuttlecock spin.
These range from powerful jumping smashes to delicate tumbling net returns.
Slicing also causes the shuttlecock to travel more slowly than the arm movement suggests.
At high levels of play, the formations will generally be more flexible: the top women players are capable of playing powerfully from the back-court, and will happily do so if required.
The Thomas, Uber, and Sudirman Cups, the Olympics, and the BWF World (and World Junior Championships), are all categorized as level one tournaments.
Badminton rules restrict the design and size of racquets and shuttlecocks.
The game developed in British India from the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock.
The server can choose a ''low serve'' into the forecourt (like a push), or a lift to the back of the service court, or a flat ''drive serve''.
The traditional oval head shape is still available, but an isometric head shape is increasingly common in new racquets.
Professionals string between about 110 and 160 N (25 and 36&nbsp;lbf).
Recreational players generally string at lower tensions than professionals, typically between 80 and 110 N (18 and 25&nbsp;lbf).
Top players can collect the world ranking points and enable them to play in the BWF Super Series open tournaments.
As early as 1860, a London toy dealer named Isaac Spratt published a booklet titled ''Badminton Battledore—A New Game'' but unfortunately no copy has survived.
It is also possible to reverse this style of deception, by suggesting a powerful stroke before slowing down the hitting action to play a soft stroke.
