Nepali is also widely spoken in the Nepalese workers and Gurkha Soldiers community.
Former Governorates
The opening up of politics saw big gains for both Shīa and Sunnī Islamists in elections, which gave them a parliamentary platform to pursue their policies.
The first municipal elections to be held in Bahrain after independence in 1971, was in 2002.
In 1958, the municipality started water purification projects.
3  – '''Northern Governorate'''
MCG is one of the oldest private institutes in the country.
Sunni Arabs are the most influential ethnic group in Bahrain, they hold most government positions and the Bahraini monarchy are Sunni Arabs.
, Bahrain maintains a network of 25 embassies, 3 consulates and 4 permanent missions to the Arab League, United Nations and European Union respectively.
There are also private schools that offer either the IB Diploma Programme or United Kingdom's A-Levels.
The V8s returned every November to the Sakhir circuit until 2010, in which it was the second event of the series.
Both the above races were won by Fernando Alonso of Renault.
The resulting clash with police soon grew into civil unrest.
The agricultural and domestic sectors' over-utilisation of the Dammam Aquifer, the principal aquifer in Bahrain, has led to its salinisation by adjacent brackish and saline water bodies.
Journalists were targeted by officials during anti-government protests in 2011.
In 2007 Bahrain became the first Arab country to institute unemployment benefits as part of a series of labour reforms instigated under Minister of Labour, Dr. Majeed Al Alawi.
The Al Bin Ali were the dominant group controlling the town of Zubarah on the Qatar peninsula, originally the center of power of the Bani Utbah.
The modern art movement in the country officially emerged in the 1950s, culminating in the establishment of an art society.
Bahrain's port of Mina Salman is the main seaport of the country and consists of 15 berths.
The architecture of Bahrain is similar to that of its neighbours in the Persian Gulf.
Often described as an archipelago of 33 islands, extensive land reclamation projects have changed this; by August 2008 the number of islands and island groups had increased to 84.
Inspired by the regional Arab Spring, Bahrain's Shia majority started large protests against its Sunni rulers in early 2011.
Arabic plays an important role in political life, as, according to article 57 (c) of Bahrain's constitution, an MP must be fluent in Arabic to stand for parliament.
The telecommunications sector in Bahrain officially started in 1981 with the establishment of Bahrain's first telecommunications company, Batelco and until 2004, it monopolised the sector.
Sea grass beds are important foraging grounds for some threatened species such as dugongs and the green turtle.
In 2008, the jobless figure was at 4%, with women over represented at 85% of the total.
Some place names on Bahrain go back to the Tylos era; for instance the name of Arad, a residential suburb of Muharraq, is believed to originate from "Arados", the ancient Greek name for Muharraq.
Since the late 20th century, Bahrain has invested in the banking and tourism sectors.
To the east, a bridge connected Manama to Muharraq since 1929, a new causeway was built in 1941 which replaced the old wooden bridge.
The municipalities are listed below:
More importantly the British promised to support the rule of the Al Khalifa in Bahrain, securing its unstable position as rulers of the country.
The government then launched a crackdown on the opposition that included conducting thousands of arrests and systematic torture.
Bahrain's banking and financial services sector, particularly Islamic banking, have benefited from the regional boom driven by demand for oil.
Thereafter, the Qarmatians demanded tribute from the caliph in Baghdad, and in &nbsp;930 sacked Mecca and Medina, bringing the sacred Black Stone back to their base in Ahsa, in medieval Bahrain, for ransom.
Sickle cell anaemia and thalassaemia are prevalent in the country, with a study concluding that 18% of Bahrainis are carriers of sickle cell anaemia while 24% are carriers of thalassaemia.
It gave a new prominence to clerics within the political system, with the most senior Shia religious leader, Sheikh Isa Qassim, playing a vital role.
The Parthians established garrisons along the southern coast of the Persian Gulf  to control trade routes.
2  – '''Muharraq Governorate'''
In the early 1930s Bahrain Airport was developed.
Manama was named the Arab Capital of Culture for 2012 and ''Capital of Arab Tourism'' for 2013 by the Arab League.
Bird watching (primarily in the Hawar Islands), scuba diving and horse riding are popular tourist activities in Bahrain.
These municipalities were administered from Manama under a central municipal council whose members are appointed by the king.
However, ten years later they were forced to pay yearly tributes to Egypt despite seeking Persian and British protection.
Bahrain has been connected to the internet since 1995 with the country's domain suffix is '.bh'.
Bahrain was also the site of the first recording studio amongst the Persian Gulf states.
The BS is a United States Department of Defense school that provides a K-12 curriculum including International Baccalaureate offerings.
In the late 1800s, following successive treaties with the British, Bahrain became a protectorate of the United Kingdom.
The group's leaders were subsequently arrested and exiled to India.
Bahrain also encourages institutions of higher learning, drawing on expatriate talent and the increasing pool of Bahrain nationals returning from abroad with advanced degrees.
Four alternatives for the management of groundwater quality that are available to the water authorities in Bahrain are discussed and their priority areas are proposed, based on the type and extent of each salinisation source, in addition to groundwater use in that area.
The Bahrain national museum houses a permanent contemporary art exhibition.
As a result, cases of malaria and TB have declined in recent decades with cases of contractions amongst Bahraini nationals becoming rare.
Muharraq Governorate
Malayalam, Tamil and Hindi are spoken among significant Indian communities.
After World War I, Bahrain became open to western influences, and a demand for modern educational institutions appeared.
A causeway stretching over , connect Manama with Muharraq Island, and another bridge joins Sitra to the main island.
In 1923, the British introduced administrative reforms and replaced Sheikh Issa bin Ali with his son.
Education is compulsory for children between the ages of 6 and 14.
Nearchus is believed to have been the first of Alexander's commanders to visit the island, and he found a verdant land that was part of a wide trading network; he recorded: “That on the island of Tylos, situated in the Persian Gulf, are large plantations of cotton trees, from which are manufactured clothes called ''sindones'', of strongly differing degrees of value, some being costly, others less expensive.
According to historian Al-Juwayni, the stone was returned 22 years later in 951 under mysterious circumstances.
'''Bahrain''' (;  ), officially the '''Kingdom of Bahrain''' ( '''') A small Arab monarchy in the Persian Gulf, Bahrain consists of a group of islands between the Qatar peninsula  and the north eastern coast of Saudi Arabia.
The Portuguese were expelled from the islands in 1602 by Abbas I of the Safavid dynasty of Persia, which gave impetus to Shia Islam.
Expressionism and surrealism, as well as calligraphic art are the popular forms of art in the country.
Relations improved with neighbouring Qatar after the border dispute over the Hawar Islands was resolved by the International Court of Justice in The Hague in 2001.
He instituted elections for parliament, gave women the right to vote, and released all political prisoners.
The decision to hold the race despite ongoing protests and violence has been described as "controversial" by Al Jazeera English, CNN, AFP and Sky News.
According to the 2001 census, 81.2% of Bahrain's population was Muslim, 10% were Christian, and 9.8% practised Hinduism or other religions.
Bahrain is currently suffering from an obesity epidemic as 28.9% of all males and 38.2% of all females are classified as obese.
The Central Governorate was abolished in September 2014, its territory divided between the Northern Governorate, Southern Governorate, and Capital Governorate.
The use of these is not confined to India, but extends to Arabia.” The Greek historian, Theophrastus, states that much of Bahrain was covered by these cotton trees and that Bahrain was famous for exporting walking canes engraved with emblems that were customarily carried in Babylon.
They were traditional schools aimed at teaching children and youth the reading of the Qur'an.
Following a period of Arab rule, Bahrain was occupied by the Portuguese in 1521, who in turn were expelled in 1602 by Shah Abbas I of the Safavid dynasty under the Persian Empire.
The Uyunids controlled Bahrain until 1235, when the archipelago was briefly occupied by the Persian ruler of Fars.
Association football is the most popular sport in Bahrain.
Bahrain is a generally flat and arid archipelago in the Persian Gulf, east of Saudi Arabia.
This was Iqlīm al-Bahrayn's "Bahrayn Province".
In 1927, Rezā Shāh, then Shah of Iran, demanded sovereignty over Bahrain in a letter to the League of Nations, a move that prompted Belgrave to undertake harsh measures including encouraging conflicts between Shia and Sunni Muslims in order to bring down the uprisings and limit the Iranian influence.
He had gotten news that some tribes were assembling an army on Bahrain and preparing to attack the mainland.
The riots focused on the Jewish community.
The Tree of Life, a 400-year-old tree that grows in the Sakhir desert with no nearby water, is also a popular tourist attraction.
A month later it requested security assistance from Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries and declared a three-month state of emergency.
Bahrain hosted the opening Grand Prix of the 2006 season on 12 March of that year.
Millions of migratory birds pass through the Persian Gulf region in the winter and autumn months.
Human rights conditions started to decline by 2007 when torture began to be employed again.
Expatriate Christians make up the majority of Christians in Bahrain, while native Christian Bahrainis (who hold Bahraini citizenship) make up a smaller community.
Writing letters to the Persians and Ottomans, Al Khalifas agreed to place Bahrain under the latter's protection in March due to offering better conditions.
This theory was accepted by the 19th-century German classicist Arnold Heeren who said that: "In the Greek geographers, for instance, we read of two islands, named Tyrus or Tylos, and Arad, Bahrain, which boasted that they were the mother country of the Phoenicians, and exhibited relics of Phoenician temples."
In 1860, the Al Khalifas used the same tactic when the British tried to overpower Bahrain.
The Hawar Islands Protected Area provides valuable feeding and breeding grounds for a variety of migratory seabirds, it is an internationally recognised site for bird migration.
Following the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran, in 1981 Bahraini Shī'a fundamentalists orchestrated a failed coup attempt under the auspices of a front organisation, the Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain.
The Bahrain Petroleum Company (Bapco), a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of California (Socal), discovered oil in 1931 and production began the following year.
Self-censorship is widespread.
In 1816, the British political resident in the Gulf, William Bruce, received a letter from the Sheikh of Bahrain who was concerned about a rumour that Britain would support an attack on the island by the Imam of Muscat.
Wrapped in a sack, it was thrown into the Great Mosque of Kufa in Iraq, accompanied by a note saying "By command we took it, and by command we have brought it back."
Institutes have also opened which educate South Asian students, such as the Pakistan Urdu School, Bahrain and the Indian School, Bahrain.
The peninsula of Qatar is also nearby, about  to the southeast across the Gulf of Bahrain.
Current Governorates
By June 2012, Bahrain had 961,000 internet users.
This TV film showed all the violations that have been taken against the rights of Bahraini citizens during the uprising.
Bahrain has a well-developed road network, particularly in Manama.
Belgrave brought a number of reforms such as establishment of the country's first modern school in 1919, the Persian Gulf's first girls school in 1928 and the abolition of slavery in 1937.
Another supposition by al-Jawahari suggests that the more formal name ''Bahri'' (lit.
The number of Bahraini internet users has risen from 40,000 in 2000 to 250,000 in 2008, or from 5.95 to 33 percent of the population.
Other agreements in 1880 and 1892 sealed the protectorate status of Bahrain to the British.
In 1820, the Al Khalifa tribe were recognised by Great Britain as the rulers ("Al-Hakim" in Arabic) of Bahrain after signing a treaty relationship.
The island and kingdom were also commonly spelled '''Bahrein''' into the 1950s.
Non-Muslim Bahraini residents numbered 367,683 per the  2010 census, most of whom are Christians.
In 2010, about half of the government was composed of the Al Khalifa family.
*Al Areen Wildlife Park, which is a zoo and a breeding centre for endangered animals, is the only protected area on land and also the only protected area which is managed on a day-to-day basis.
In September, a government appointed commission confirmed reports of grave human rights violations including systematic torture.
Since only 2.9% of the country's land is arable, agriculture contributes to 0.5% of Bahrain's GDP.
The country's natural resources include large quantities of oil and natural gas as well as fish in the offshore waters.
The municipality was in charge of cleaning roads and renting buildings to tenants and shops.
In December 1994, a group of youths threw stones at female runners during an international marathon for running bare-legged.
The uprising developed further with some protesters killed by British forces.
A large share of exports consist of petroleum products made from imported crude oil, which accounted for 51% of the country's imports in 2007.
On 19 October 1940, four Italian SM.82s bombers bombed Bahrain alongside Dhahran oilfields in Saudi Arabia, targeting Allied-operated oil refineries.
The project's objective is to connect all schools within the kingdom with the Internet.
Unemployment, especially among the young, and the depletion of both oil and underground water resources are major long-term economic problems.
Muhammad's first interaction with the people of Bahrain was the Al Kudr Invasion.
Dr. Nada Haffadh became the country's first female cabinet minister on her appointment as Minister of Health in 2004.
In addition to the Arabian Gulf University, AMA International University and the College of Health Sciences, these are the only medical schools in Bahrain.
In 1783, the Bani Utbah clan captured Bahrain from Nasr Al-Madhkur and it has since been ruled by the Al Khalifa royal family, with Ahmed al Fateh as Bahrain's first hakim.
Environmental issues facing Bahrain include desertification resulting from the degradation of limited arable land, coastal degradation (damage to coastlines, coral reefs, and sea vegetation) resulting from oil spills and other discharges from large tankers, oil refineries, distribution stations, and illegal land reclamation at places such as Tubli Bay.
Many large financial institutions have a presence in Manama, the country's capital.
In 2011, Alice Samaan, a Christian woman was appointed ambassador to the UK.
Abstract expressionism has gained popularity in recent decades.
Petroleum production and processing is Bahrain's most exported product, accounting for 60% of export receipts, 70% of government revenues, and 11% of GDP.
Bahrain has its own top-tier domestic professional football league, the Bahraini Premier League.
Following their &nbsp;976 defeat by the Abbasids, the Qarmations were overthrown by the Arab Uyunid dynasty of al-Hasa, who took over the entire Bahrain region in 1076.
The Huwala are descendants of Sunni Iranians; some of them are Sunni Persians, while others Sunni Arabs.
Members of the municipality were elected annually; the municipality was said to have been the first municipality to be established in the Arab world.
Imperial Airways flew there, including the Handley Page HP42 aircraft.
Bahrain also hosts 36 embassies.
The first public hospital, and also tertiary hospital, to open in Bahrain was the Salmaniya Medical Complex, in the Salmaniya district of Manama, in 1957.
Arabic is the official language of Bahrain, though English is widely used.
The first hospital in Bahrain was the American Mission Hospital, which opened in 1893 as a dispensary.
In 1903, German explorer, Hermann Burchardt, visited Bahrain and took many photographs of historical sites, including the old ''Qaṣr es-Sheikh'', photos now stored at the Ethnological Museum of Berlin.
1919 marked the beginning of modern public school system in Bahrain when the Al-Hidaya Al-Khalifia School for boys opened in Muharraq.
The only sovereign states with larger population densities are city states.
The north of the country is so urbanised that it is considered by some to be one large metropolitan area.
In 2006, Lateefa Al Gaood became the first female MP after winning by default.
This was especially evident when in 2005 the government called off the Shia branch of the "Family law" after over 100,000 Shia took to the streets.
An opposition satellite station, Lualua TV, operates from London but has found its signals blocked.
Much of this population is concentrated in the north of the country with the Southern Governorate being the least densely populated part.
It is just  east off Saudi Arabia, connected to it through the King Fahd Causeway.
"belonging to the sea") would have been misunderstood and so was opted against.
When Bahrain was elected to head the United Nations General Assembly in 2006 it appointed lawyer and women's rights activist Haya bint Rashid Al Khalifa President of the United Nations General Assembly, only the third woman in history to head the world body.
It specified that the ruler could not dispose of any of his territory except to the United Kingdom and could not enter into relationships with any foreign government without British consent.
Bahrain's national football team has competed multiple times at the Asian Cup, Arab Nations Cup and played in the FIFA World Cup qualifiers, though it has never qualified for the World Cup.
Malaria and tuberculosis (TB) do not constitute major problems in Bahrain as neither disease is indigenous to the country.
Traditional Islamic accounts state that Al-ʿAlāʾ Al-Haḍrami was sent as an envoy during the Expedition of Zaid ibn Haritha (Hisma) to the Bahrain region by the prophet Muhammad in &nbsp;628 and that Munzir ibn-Sawa al-Tamimi, the local ruler, responded to his mission and converted the entire area.
However, reports by human rights organisations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch issued in April 2012 said the same violations were still happening.
Most Shia Bahrainis are ethnic Baharna.
At this time, Bahrain was known as Mishmahig (which in Middle-Persian/Pahlavi means "ewe-fish").
Analysts of democratisation in the Middle East cite the Islamists' references to respect human rights in their justification for these programmes as evidence that these groups can serve as a progressive force in the region.
King Hamad enjoys wide executive authorities which include appointing the Prime Minister and his ministers, commanding the army, chairing the Higher Judicial Council, appointing the parliament's upper half and dissolving its elected lower half.
In response to the failure of women candidates, six were appointed to the Shura Council, which also includes representatives of the Kingdom's indigenous Jewish and Christian communities.
The appointed council "exercises a ''de facto'' veto" over the elected, because draft acts must be approved so they may pass into law.
Bahraini physicians and nurses form a majority of the country's workforce in the health sector, unlike neighbouring Gulf states.
Around the 1760s, the Al Jalahma and Al Khalifa clans, both belonging to the Utub federation, migrated to Zubarah in modern-day Qatar, leaving Al Sabah as the sole proprietors of Kuwait.
Some of the popular historical tourist attractions in the kingdom are the Al Khamis Mosque, which is the one of the oldest mosques in the region, the Arad fort in Muharraq, Barbar temple, which is an ancient temple from the Dilmunite period of Bahrain, as well as the A'ali Burial Mounds and the Saar temple.
4  – '''Southern Governorate'''
Following the political liberalisation of the country, Bahrain negotiated a free trade agreement with the United States in 2004.
The sedentary people of pre-Islamic Bahrain were Aramaic speakers and to some degree Persian speakers, while Syriac functioned as a liturgical language.
Currently there are three modern bridges connecting the two locations.
Belgrave even went further by suggesting to rename the Persian Gulf to the "Arabian Gulf"; however, the proposal was refused by the British government.
The people of Tyre in particular have long maintained Persian Gulf origins, and the similarity in the words "Tylos" and "Tyre" has been commented upon.
The Al Khalifa family moved from Qatar to Bahrain in 1799.
Private vehicles and taxis are the primary means of transportation in the city.
The four main islands and all the towns and villages are linked by well-constructed roads.
This why we have eyes from the American Embassy watching us during our sessions, to ensure things are swinging their way".
The platform "provides a welcome free space for journalists, although one that is increasingly monitored", according to Reporters Without Borders.
Bahrain's national carrier, Gulf Air operates and bases itself in the BIA.
Bahrain participated in the Second World War on the Allied side, joining on 10 September 1939.
A referendum on 14–15 February 2001 massively supported the National Action Charter.
Relations with the United Kingdom became closer, as evidenced by the British Royal Navy moving its entire Middle Eastern command from Bushehr in Iran to Bahrain in 1935.
The period between 1975 and 1999 known as the "State Security Law Era", saw wide range of human rights violations including arbitrary arrests, detention without trial, torture and forced exile.
Due to this, Bahrain lost some of the high International rankings it had gained before.
Bahrain even became the site of Greek athletic contests.
The first revolt and widespread uprising took place in March 1895 against Sheikh Issa bin Ali, then ruler of Bahrain.
Bahrain's largest islands are Bahrain Island, the Hawar Islands, Muharraq Island, Umm an Nasan, and Sitra.
The documentary TV film ''Bahrain: Shouting in the Dark'' which was produced by the Qatari channel Al Jazeera, talks about the Bahraini protests during 2011.
After the Bani Utbah gained control of Bahrain, the Al Bin Ali had a practically independent status there as a self-governing tribe.
Amnesty International's  2015/6 report on the country points to continued suppression of dissent, restricted freedom of expression, unjust imprisonment, and frequent torture and other ill-treatment of its citizens.
During that time, they started purchasing date palm gardens in Bahrain; a document shows that 81 years before arrival of the Al-Khalifa, one of the shaikhs of the Al Bin Ali tribe (an offshoot of the Bani Utbah) had bought a palm garden from Mariam bint Ahmed Al Sanadi in Sitra island.
Ghada Jamsheer, a leading woman activist said the government was using the law as a "bargaining tool with opposition Islamic groups".
Relations with Iran tend to be tense as a result of a failed coup in 1981 which Bahrain blames Iran for and occasional claims of Iranian sovereignty over Bahrain by ultra-conservative elements in the Iranian public.
The 40 members of the Shura are appointed by the king.
Before the development of petroleum, the island was largely devoted to pearl fisheries and, as late as the 19th century, was considered to be the finest in the world.
Rainfalls mostly occur in winter, with a recorded maximum of .
''The Independent'' named it "one of the most controversial in the history of the sport".
In the 1950s, the National Union Committee, formed by reformists following sectarian clashes, demanded an elected popular assembly, removal of Belgrave and carried out a number of protests and general strikes.
Ali Al Shargawi, a decorated longtime poet, was described in 2011 by ''Al Shorfa'' as the literary icon of Bahrain.
Ali Bahar was one of the most famous singers in Bahrain.
However, no women were elected to office in that year's polls.
All commercial institutions and road signs are bilingual, displaying both English and Arabic.
The 2010 census records that the Muslim proportion had fallen to 70.2% (the 2010 census did not differentiate between the non-Muslim religions).
The country participated in military action against the Taliban in October 2001 by deploying a frigate in the Arabian Sea for rescue and humanitarian operations.
In 1971, Bahrain declared independence.
