Most of the walls and towers, strengthened after the Russian conquest in 1806, survived.
Between the 12th and 14th centuries, massive fortifications were undertaken in Baku and the surrounding towns.
Baku Boulevard is a pedestrian promenade that runs parallel to Baku's seafront.
The films ''The World Is Not Enough'' and ''The Diamond Arm'' are set in the city, while ''Amphibian Man'' includes several scenes filmed in Old City.
In the 1st century, the Romans organized two Caucasian campaigns and reached Baku.
The fall of the Ak Koyunlu brought the city immediately into the sphere of the newly formed Iranian Safavid dynasty, who, led by Shah Ismail I laid siege to Baku in 1501 and captured it making it an integral part of his empire and the successive Iranian dynasties to come for the next centuries, until the irrevocable cession in the first half of the 19th century.
The Shirvan era greatly influenced Baku and the remainder of Azerbaijan.
During World War II and the Nazi German invasion of the southwestern Soviet Union, Baku had become of vital strategic importance.
In fact, capturing the oil fields of Baku was one of the ultimate goals of Operation Edelweiss, carried out between May and November 1942.
Some of the many prestigious residents include: Academy Award winners Rustam Ibrahimbeyov and Vladimir Menshov, one of the founders and head of the Soviet space program Kerim Kerimov, Nobel Prize winner and physicist Lev Landau and famous musicians such as Gara Garayev, Uzeyir Hajibeyov, Muslim Magomayev, Vagif Mustafazadeh and Alim Qasimov.
However the German Army's closest approach to Baku was no closer than some  northwest of Baku in November 1942, falling far short of the city's capture before being driven back during the Soviet Operation Little Saturn in mid-December 1942.
The new Baku Cargo Terminal was officially opened in March 2005.
The oil boom contributed to the massive growth of Baku.
Indeed, the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds.
The city is growing dynamically and developing at full speed on an east-west axis along the shores of the Caspian Sea.
Today the vast majority of the population of Baku are ethnic Azerbaijanis (more than 90%).
In the post-WWII period, a few more universities were established such as Azerbaijan Technical University, Azerbaijan University of Languages and the Azerbaijan Architecture and Construction University.
During the 8th century Baku was the realm of the Shirvanshahs.
At the same time Baku is noted as a very windy city throughout the year, hence the city's nickname the "City of Winds", and gale-force winds, the cold northern wind ''khazri'' and the warm southern wind ''gilavar'' are typical here in all seasons.
International and local exhibitions are presented at the Baku Expo Center.
Commercial exploitation began in 1872, and by the beginning of the 20th century the Baku oil fields were the largest in the world.
The move was part of £16 million agreement between Manganese Bronze and Baku Taxi Company.
Many sizable world hotel chains have a presence in the city.
Among Baku's prestigious cultural venues are Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall, Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre.
Baku is also featured in the video game ''Battlefield 4''.
However it was not until the aftermath of the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828) and the Treaty of Turkmenchay that Baku came under nominal Russian rule and the city was irrevocably lost, as it was retaken by Iran during the war.
Winter is cool and occasionally wet, with the daily mean temperature in January and February averaging .
Towards the end of the 20th century much of the onshore petroleum had been exhausted, and drilling had extended into the sea offshore.
The World War II Battle of Stalingrad was fought to determine who would have control of the Baku oil fields.
Between 1856 and 1910 Baku's population grew at a faster rate than that of London, Paris or New York.
Baku is situated on the western coast of Caspian Sea.
In recent years, Baku has become an important venue for international events.
These projects also caught the attention of international media as notable programs such as Discovery Channel's Extreme Engineering did pieces focusing in on changes to the city.
Baku is home to restaurants catering to every cuisine and occasion.
When Baku was occupied by the Russian troops during the war of 1804–1813, nearly the entire population of some 8,000 people was ethnic Tat.
Religious minorities include Russian Orthodox Christians, Catholic Levantines, Georgian Orthodox Christians, Lutherans, Ashkenazi Jews and Sufi Muslims.
Many clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city.
Western-style clubs target younger, more energetic crowds.
Baku also has several football clubs in the premier and regional leagues, including AZAL and Ravan in Premier League.
From the Bronze age there have been rock carvings discovered near Bayil, and a bronze figure of a small fish discovered in the territory of the Old City.
Publicly run kindergartens and elementary schools (years 1 through 11) are operated by local wards or municipal offices.
Local rail transport includes the Baku Funicular and the Baku Metro, a rapid-transit system notable for its art, murals, mosaics and ornate chandeliers.
With economic development, old buildings such as Atlant House were razed to make way for new ones.
The daily mean temperature in July and August averages , and there is very little rainfall during that season.
Among them were the firms of the Nobel brothers together with the family von Börtzell-Szuch (Carl Knut Börtzell, who also owned the Livadia Palace) and the Rothschild family.
First class sporting facilities were built for the indoor games, including the Palace of Hand Games and Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex.
File:National Museum of History of Azerbaijan 10.JPG|National Museum of History
There are also several smaller military airbases near Baku, such as Baku Kala Air Base, intended for private aircraft, helicopters and charters.
When Baku was occupied by the Russian troops during the war of 1804–1813, nearly the entire population of some 8,000 people was ethnic Tat.
Many of the city's most impressive buildings were built during the early 20th Century, when architectural elements of the European styles were combined in eclectic style.
Plans are afoot to introduce a single Smart Card for payment on all types of city transport.
Baku State University, the first established university in Azerbaijan was opened in 1919 by the government of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.
The main movie theatre is Azerbaijan Cinema.
File:National Art Museum of Azerbaijan (de Burs House) edited.jpg|National Art Museum
Throughout history the transport system of Baku used the now-defunct horsecars, trams and narrow gauge railways.
The first oil well was mechanically drilled in the Bibi-Heybat suburb of Baku in 1846, though a number of hand-dug wells predate it.
Further archeological excavations revealed various prehistoric settlements, native temples, statues and other artifacts within the territory of the modern city and around it.
It was ruled by Mirza Muhammed Khan but soon became a dependency of the much stronger Quba Khanate.
File:Gusman Yliy.jpg|Yuli Gusman, Film director and actor, founder and CEO of the prestigious Nika Award.
After 1991 when Azerbaijan gained independence from the Soviet Union, the fall of communism led to the development of a number of private institutions, including Qafqaz University and Khazar University which are currently considered the most prestigious academic institutions.
Shirvanshah Akhsitan I built a navy in Baku and successfully repelled another Rus assault in 1170.
In 1813, following the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813), Qajar Iran was forced to sign the Treaty of Gulistan with Russia, which provided for the irrevocable cession of Baku and most of Iran's territories in the North Caucasus and South Caucasus to Russia.
Apart from the private universities, the government established the Academy of Public Administration, the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy and various military academies.
Restaurants range from luxurious and expensive to ordinary and affordable.
Professor A. V. Williams Jackson of Columbia University wrote in his work ''From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam'' (1911):
Shipping services operate regularly from Baku across the Caspian Sea to Turkmenbashi (formerly Krasnovodsk) in Turkmenistan and to Bandar Anzali and Bandar Nowshar in Iran.
In 2003 Baku additionally had 153,400 internally displaced persons and 93,400 refugees.
The city is listed 48th in the 2011 list of the most expensive cities in the world conducted by the Mercer Human Resource Consulting.
The largest sport hub in the city is Baku Olympic Stadium with 68,700 seating capacity whose construction was completed in 2015.
The Kars–Tbilisi–Baku railway, which will directly connect Turkey, Georgia and Azerbaijan, began to be constructed in 2007 and is scheduled for completion in 2015.
This is largely because of its northerly latitude and the fact that it is located on a peninsula on the shore of the Caspian Sea.
According to the Lonely Planet's ranking, Baku is also among the world's top ten destinations for urban nightlife.
By article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state and ensures religious freedom.
In the vicinity of the city there are a number of mud volcanoes (Keyraki, Bogkh-bogkha, Lokbatan and others) and salt lakes (Boyukshor, Khodasan and so on).
The city's second largest stadium, Tofiq Bahramov Stadium hosts a number of domestic and international competitions and was the main sport centre of the city for a long period until the construction of Baku Olympic Stadium.
Baku hosts many universities, junior colleges and vocational schools.
Sea transport is vital for Baku, as the city is practically surrounded by the Caspian Sea to the east.
The urban landscape of Baku is shaped by many communities.
From April to November the Baku Port is accessible to ships loading cargoes for direct voyages from Western European and Mediterranean ports.
Festivals include the Baku International Film Festival, Baku International Jazz Festival, Novruz Festival, ''Gül Bayramı'' (Flower Festival) and the National Theater Festival.
Baku has wildly varying architecture, ranging from the Old City core to modern buildings and the spacious layout of the Baku port.
It has been home to legendary jazz musicians like Vagif Mustafazadeh, Aziza Mustafa Zadeh, Rafig Babayev and Rain Sultanov.
This is also reflected in the city's nickname as the "City of Winds".
Among Baku's prominent annual fairs and festivals is Baku International Jazz Festival, which features some of the world's most identifiable jazz names.
In 2008, the Chief of the Baku Metro, Taghi Ahmadov, announced plans to construct 41 new stations over the next 17 years.
Shortly after this Baku was proclaimed the new capital of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.
Large-scale oil exploration started in 1872, when Russian imperial authorities auctioned the parcels of oil-rich land around Baku to private investors.
The fall of the Iranian Safavids gave rise to the various Caucasian khanates, most of whom were already established in the late Safavid era while the rest were established during the rule of Iranian ruler Nader Shah.
File:Landau.jpg|Physicist Lev Landau, studied at the Baku State University, won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1962.
One of the more prominent institutions headquartered in Baku is the International Bank of Azerbaijan, which employs over 1,000 people.
This is reflected in the city's nickname, the "City of Winds".
The average annual temperature in Baku and that of the Earth differ by less than : it is .
Clubs with an eastern flavor provide special treats from the cuisine of Azerbaijan along with local music.
The completed branch will connect Baku with Tbilisi in Georgia, and from there trains will continue to Akhalkalaki, and Kars in Turkey.
File:Vagit Alekperov2011.jpg|Vagit Alekperov, President of the leading Russian oil company LUKOIL.
In the Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League, Baku is represented by Rabita Baku, Azerrail Baku, Lokomotiv Baku and Azeryol Baku.
In 1917, after the October revolution and amidst the turmoil of World War I and the breakup of the Russian Empire, Baku came under the control of the Baku Commune, which was led by veteran Bolshevik Stepan Shahumyan.
Baku is divided into eleven administrative districts (raions) and 48 townships.
The pioneer of oil extracting from the bottom of the sea was Polish geologist Witold Zglenicki.
The metro is now the only form of transport in Baku to use any type of card-based fare-payment system.
Many of these facilities have high technology equipment, which has contributed to the recent upsurge in "medical tourism" to Baku, particularly from post-Soviet countries such as Georgia and Moldova, whose governments send lower-income patients to the city for inexpensive high-tech medical treatments and operations.
, 1000 black cabs are ordered by Baku Taxi Company, and as part of a programme originally announced by the Transport Ministry of Azerbaijan, there is a plan to introduce London cabs into Baku.
In the 10th century, the Arabian traveler, Marudee, reported that both white and black oil were being extracted naturally from Baku.
World-famous cellist Mstislav Rostropovich was born and raised in Baku, as was world-famous chess player, Garry Kasparov.
The majority of Azerbaijan's media companies (including television, newspaper and radio, such as ANS, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Ictimai TV, Lider TV and Region TV) are headquartered in Baku.
As a result, Baku played a great role in many branches of the Soviet life.
Many sizeable Azerbaijani institutions have their headquarters there, including SOCAR, one of the world's top 100 companies.
After the death of Nader Shah in 1747, the semi-independent Persian-ruled  principality of the Baku Khanate was formed.
It hosted the 57th Eurovision Song Contest in 2012, the 2015 European Games, the 2016 European Grand Prix and will host UEFA Euro 2020.
The city's notable mosques include Juma Mosque, Bibi-Heybat Mosque, Muhammad Mosque and Taza Pir Mosque.
During the time, the population of Baku was small (approximately 5,000), and the economy was ruined as a result of constant warfare.
ANS ChM was one of the first private and independent FM radio broadcasting service in the Caucasus and Central Asia regions when it was established in May 1994.
File:Tofik Bahramov stamp.jpg|Tofiq Bahramov as a Soviet footballer and football referee from Azerbaijan.
By 1900 the city had more than 3,000 oil wells, of which 2,000 were producing oil at industrial levels.
On 2 September 2010, with the inauguration of National Flag Square, Baku became home to the world's tallest flagpole, according to the Guinness Book of Records.
The motorway network around Baku is well developed and is constantly being extended.
The Heydar Aliyev International Airport is the only commercial airport serving Baku.
It was constructed to be a major cargo hub in the CIS countries and is actually now one of the biggest and most technically advanced in the region.
Since 2011 the city annually hosts WTA tennis event called Baku Cup.
File:Villa Petrolea front.jpg|Villa Petrolea
File:RIAN archive 438589 Mstislav Rostropovich.jpg|Mstislav Rostropovich, Grammy Award-winning cellist.
Baku boasts a vibrant nightlife.
Currently the oil economy of Baku is undergoing a resurgence, with the development of the massive Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli field (Shallow water Gunashli by SOCAR, deeper areas by a consortium led by BP), development of the Shah Deniz gas field, the expansion of the Sangachal Terminal and the construction of the BTC Pipeline.
The boulevard contains an amusement park, yacht club, musical fountain, statues and monuments.
The city frequently came under assault of the Khazars and (starting from the 10th century) the Rus.
The State Road M-1 and the European route E60 are the two main motorway connections between Europe and Azerbaijan.
Near Nardaran, in a place called Umid Gaya, a prehistoric observatory was discovered, where on the rock the images of sun and various constellations are carved together with a primitive astronomic table.
By the 15th century, oil for lamps was obtained from hand-dug surface wells.
Baku made a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and 2020 Summer Olympics, but failed to become a Candidate City both times.
In 1578 the Ottomans captured Baku and held it till 1603, when it was again put under Iranian control, under which it stayed, intermittently, up to the course of the 19th century.
The park is popular with dog-walkers and joggers, and is convenient for tourists.
Baku is one of the most important tourist destinations in the Caucasus, with hotels in the city earning 7 million euros in 2009.
Beginning in 2010, the Baku International Sea Trade Port is being reconstructed.
After a devastating earthquake struck Shamakhy, the capital of Shirvan, Shirvanshah’s court moved to Baku in 1191.
Baku is located  below sea level, which makes it the lowest lying national capital in the world and also the largest city in the world located below sea level.
Other prominent parks and gardens include Heydar Aliyev Park, Samad Vurgun Park, Narimanov Park, Alley of Honor and the Fountains Square.
By the end of the 19th century skilled workers and specialists flocked to Baku.
File:Stamps of Azerbaijan, 2007-813.jpg|Kerim Kerimov, one of the founders of the Soviet space program.
It also boasts many museums such as Baku Museum of Modern Art and Azerbaijan State Museum of History, most notably featuring historical artifacts and art.
''Baga'' (now ''بغ'' ''bagh'') and ''kuy'' are the Old Persian words for "god" and "town" respectively; the name ''Baghkuy'' may be compared with ''Baghdād'' ("God-given") in which ''dād'' is the Old Persian word for "give".
File:A view of the Baku bay, Azerbaijan.jpg|A view of the Baku bay
The Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, the main state research organization in Azerbaijan is locating in Baku as well.
Soon after that Swiss, British, French, Belgian, German, Swedish and American investors appeared in Baku.
The commuter ferries, along with the high-speed catamaran ''Seabus'' (''Deniz Avtobusu''), also form the main connection between the city and the Absheron peninsula.
Thousands of buildings from the Soviet period were demolished to make way for a green belt on its shores; parks and gardens were built on the land reclaimed by filling up the beaches of the Baku Bay.
The Maiden Tower, the Ramana Tower, the Nardaran Fortress, the Shagan Castle, the Mardakan Castle, the Round Castle and also the famous Sabayil Castle on the island of the Bay of Baku was built during this period.
Most of the public houses and bars are located near Fountains Square and are usually open until the early hours of the morning.
Some of the most influential Baku newspapers include the daily ''Azadliq'', ''Zaman'' (The Time), ''Bakinskiy Rabochiy'' (The Baku Worker), ''Echo'' and the English-language ''Baku Today''.
Baku's vicinities feature Yanar Dag, an ever-blazing spot of natural gas.
By the beginning of the 20th century almost half of world production was being extracted in Baku.
Officially, about 25 percent of all inhabitants of the country live in Baku's metropolitan area.
During Soviet times, Baku with its long hours of sunshine and dry healthy climate, was a vacation destination where citizens could enjoy beaches or relax in now-dilapidated spa complexes overlooking the Caspian Sea.
By the end of the 18th century, Tsarist Russia now began a more firm policy with the intent to conquer all of the Caucasus especially at the expense of Iran and to a lesser extent Turkey.
Baku has a temperate semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: ''BSk'') with warm and dry summers, cool and occasionally wet winters, and strong winds all year long.
At this time the city was enclosed within the lines of strong walls, which were washed by the sea on one side and protected by a wide trench on land.
It hosted many sporting events, including FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, Rhythmic Gymnastics European Championships in 2007 and 2009, 2005 World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships, 2007 FILA Wrestling World Championships and 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2011 World Amateur Boxing Championships, 2009 Women's Challenge Cup and European Taekwondo Championships in 2007.
After the massacre, on 28 May 1918, the Azerbaijani faction of the Transcaucasian Sejm proclaimed the independence of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) in Ganja, thereby becoming the first Muslim-majority democratic and secular republic.
The Baku International Sea Trade Port is capable of handling two million tons of general and dry bulk cargoes per year.
Its Nizami Street is one of the most expensive streets in the world.
The construction will take place in three stages and will be completed by 2016.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Baku embarked on a process of restructuring on a scale unseen in its history.
On 13 June 1796, a Russian flotilla entered Baku Bay, and a garrison of Russian troops was placed inside the city.
The city's past as a Soviet industrial center has left it as one of the most polluted cities in the world.
In 1540 Baku was again captured by the Safavid troops following a brief occupation by the Ottomans as a result of the Battle of Chaldiran.
Among these are the townships on the islands of the Baku Archipelago, and the town of Oil Rocks built on stilts in the Caspian Sea,  away from Baku.
A relatively large number of transnational companies are headquartered in Baku.
The old town core also has dozens of small mosques, often without any particular sign to distinguish them as such.
, the city along with Ganja and Lankaran participates in Earth Hour movement.
Late modern and postmodern architecture began to appear in the early 2000s.
File:Hokuma Qurbanova.jpg|Hokuma Gurbanova, People’s Artist of the USSR and famous theatre and film actress.
Baku and the Absheron Peninsula on which it is situated, is the most arid part of Azerbaijan (precipitation here is around or less than  a year).
Moreover, Baku has numerous libraries, many of which contain vast collections of historic documents from the Roman, Byzantine, Ottoman and Soviet periods, as well as from other civilisations of the past.
File:Nizami Museum of Azerbaijan Literature, Baku, 2015.jpg|Nizami Museum of Literature
The population increased again from about 13,000 in the 1860s to 112,000 in 1897 and 215,000 in 1913, making Baku the largest city in the Caucasus region.
File:Mushfig.JPG|Mikayil Mushfig, Bakuvian poet and victim of the Stalinist purges.
Baku was also chosen to host the Eurovision Dance Contest 2010.
The most important libraries in terms of historic document collections include the Nizami Museum of Azerbaijan Literature, the National Library of Azerbaijan, the Mirza Alakbar Central Library, the Samad Vurgun Library and the Baku Presidential Library.
After the Battle of Baku, the Azerbaijani irregular troops, with the tacit support of the Turkish command, conducted four days of pillaging and killing of 10–30,000 of the Armenian residents of Baku.
In 1604 the Baku fortress was destroyed by Shah Abbas I.
Partnership relations also exist at different levels with: Berlin, Paris, Vienna, Tbilisi, Astana, Minsk, Moscow, Volgograd, Kizlyar, Tashkent and Chengdu.
Near the city, in Gobustan, Roman inscriptions dating from 84–96&nbsp;AD were discovered.
The speed of the ''khazri'' sometimes reaches 144 kph (89&nbsp;mph), which can cause damage to crops, trees and roof tiles.
The House of Shirvan, who ruled Baku since the 9th century, was extinguished in the course of the Safavid rule.
The religion with the largest community of followers is Islam.
The city walls of Baku were also rebuilt and strengthened.
However, unlike many other cities with this climate, Baku does not see extremely hot summers.
Indeed, the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds.
During the infamous March Days, Bolsheviks and Dashnaks seeking to establish control over the Baku streets, were faced with armed Azerbaijani groups.
However, on 24 May 2011 Baku lost this record by just 3m to the city of Dushanbe in Tajikistan.
It is located on the southern shore of the Absheron Peninsula, alongside the Bay of Baku.
Around 100,000 years ago, the territory of modern Baku and Absheron was savanna with rich flora and fauna.
File:Garayev Piano.jpg|Gara Garayev, one of Baku's greatest composers.
An estimated 3–12,000 Azerbaijanis were killed in their own capital.
Baku ranked as one of the largest centres for the production of oil industry equipment before World War II.
Baku has many popular tourist and entertainment spots, such as the downtown Fountains Square, the One and Thousand Nights Beach, Shikhov Beach and Oil Rocks.
Baku Metro was opened in November 1967 and includes 23 stations at present; 170 million people used Baku Metro over the past five years.
In 2003, UNESCO placed the Inner City on the List of World Heritage in Danger, citing damage from a November 2000 earthquake, poor conservation as well as "dubious" restoration efforts.
Baku is derived from the Persian name of the city باد-کوبه ''Bād-kube'', meaning "Wind-pounded city", in which ''bād'' means "wind" and ''kube'' is rooted in the verb کوبیدن ''kubidan'', "to pound", thus referring to a place where wind is strong and pounding.
Out of the city's radio stations ANS ChM, ''Ictimai Radio'', ''Radio Antenn'', ''Burc FM'', and ''Lider FM Jazz'' are some of the more influential competitors with large national audiences.
In the early years of the Soviet era, Baku already had Azerbaijan State Oil Academy, Azerbaijan Medical University and Azerbaijan State Economic University.
