As with their ultimate body size, egg size tends to increase further away from the Equator.
In the Chesapeake Bay area, bald eagles are reportedly the main natural predators of raccoons.
Bald eagles have been recorded as killing other raptors on occasion.
Bald eagles are less active, bold predators than golden eagles and get relatively more of their food as carrion and from kleptoparasitism (although it is now generally thought that golden eagles eat more carrion than was previously assumed).
On San Juan Island in Washington, introduced European rabbits (''Oryctolagus cuniculus''), mainly those killed by auto accidents, comprise nearly 60% of the dietary intake of eagles.
Predators who leave behind scraps of dead fish that they kill, such as brown bears (''Ursus arctos''), gray wolves (''Canis lupus'') and red foxes (''Vulpes vulpes''), may be habitually followed in order to scavenge the kills secondarily.
Bald eagles have powerful talons and have been recorded flying with a  mule deer (''Odocoileus hemionus'') fawn.
Franklin opposed the creation of the Society because he viewed it, with its hereditary membership, as a noble order unwelcome in the newly independent Republic, contrary to the ideals of Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, for whom the Society was named; his reference to the two kinds of birds is interpreted as a satirical comparison between the Society of the Cincinnati and Cincinnatus.
Supplemental prey are readily taken given the opportunity.
In some areas reptiles may become regular prey, especially warm areas such as Florida where reptile diversity is high.
The young fledge at anywhere from 8 to 14 weeks of age, though will remain close to the nest and attended to by their parents for a further 6 weeks.
It may swim to safety, in some cases pulling the catch along to the shore as it swims, but some eagles drown or succumb to hypothermia.
The bald eagle was officially removed from the U.S. federal government's list of endangered species on July 12, 1995, by the U.S.
Raptorial birds reported to be hunted by these eagles have included large adults of species such as red-tailed hawks (''Buteo jamaicensis''), ospreys (''Pandion haliaetus'') and black (''Coragyps atratus'') and turkey vultures (''Cathartes aura'').
The eagle nest is represented by the fork of the lodge where the dance is held.
The bald eagle is an opportunistic carnivore with the capacity to consume a great variety of prey.
The bald eagle is usually quite sensitive to human activity while nesting, and is found most commonly in areas with minimal human disturbance.
The bald eagle appears on its seal.
Many bald eagles are habitual kleptoparasites, especially in winters when fish are harder to come by.
They will scavenge carcasses up to the size of whales, though carcasses of ungulates and large fish are seemingly preferred.
A young eaglet can gain up to  a day, the fastest growth rate of any North American bird.
The bald eagle is a sacred bird in some North American cultures, and its feathers, like those of the golden eagle, are central to many religious and spiritual customs among Native Americans.
In Florida, nesting habitats often consist of mangrove swamps, the shorelines of lakes and rivers, pinelands, seasonally flooded flatwoods, hardwood swamps, and open prairies and pastureland with scattered tall trees.
In Chesapeake Bay, nesting trees averaged  in diameter and  in total height, while in Florida, the average nesting tree stands  high and is  in diameter.
However, more formidable prey such as adult raccoons and subadult beavers are sometimes attacked.
The bald eagle is important in various Native American cultures and, as the national bird of the United States, is prominent in seals and logos, coinage, postage stamps, and other items relating to the U.S. federal government.
Increasingly, eagles nest in man-made reservoirs stocked with fish.
2005 was the last year that the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife counted occupied nest.
Because of this more extensive predation, some biologist have expressed concern that murres are heading for a "conservation collision" due to heavy eagle predation.
Sexual maturity is attained at the age of four to five years.
Juvenile eagles first start dispersing away from their parents about 8 weeks after they fledge.
DDT itself was not lethal to the adult bird, but it interfered with the bird's calcium metabolism, making the bird either sterile or unable to lay healthy eggs.
The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act, approved by the U.S. Congress in 1940, protected the bald eagle and the golden eagle, prohibiting commercial trapping and killing of the birds.
If its territory has access to open water, it remains there year-round, but if the body of water freezes during the winter, making it impossible to obtain food, it migrates to the south or to the coast.
Contrary to popular legend, there is no evidence that Benjamin Franklin ever publicly supported the wild turkey (''Meleagris gallopavo''), rather than the bald eagle, as a symbol of the United States.
Eagles living in the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland were found to subsist largely on American gizzard shad (''Dorosoma cepedianum''), threadfin shad (''D.
The greatest distance from open water recorded for a bald eagle nest was over , in Florida.
It is the only sea eagle endemic to North America.
Eagles in captivity have been capable of producing up to seven eggs.
Eagle feathers are often used in traditional ceremonies, particularly in the construction of regalia worn and as a part of fans, bustles and head dresses.
it is rare for all three chicks to successfully reach the fledging stage.
It is found in the southern United States and Baja California Peninsula.
In Sonora (Mexico) and Arizona, 77% and over 73%, respectively, of prey remains at the nests were from fish, largely various catfish and rainbow trout (''Oncorhynchus mykiss'').
Nestlings are usually exempt from predation by terrestrial carnivores that are poor tree-climbers, but Arctic foxes (''Vulpes lagopus'') occasionally snatched nestlings from ground nests on Amchitka Island in Alaska before they were extirpated from the island.
Permits are primarily issued to public educational institutions, and the eagles which they show are permanently injured individuals which cannot be released to the wild.
It builds the largest nest of any North American bird and the largest tree nests ever recorded for any animal species, up to  deep,  wide, and  in weight.
The calls of young birds tend to be more harsh and shrill than those of adults.
Selected trees must have good visibility, be over  tall, an open structure, and proximity to prey.
Bald eagles are not actually bald; the name derives from an older meaning of the word, "white headed".
The nest is the largest of any bird in North America; it is used repeatedly over many years and with new material added each year may eventually be as large as  deep,  across and weigh ; one nest in Florida was found to be  deep,  across, and to weigh .
On June 20, 1782, the Continental Congress adopted the design for the Great Seal of the United States depicting a bald eagle grasping 13 arrows and an olive branch with its talons.
In captivity, they often live somewhat longer.
Together with the golden eagle, bald eagles are occasionally accused of preying on livestock, especially sheep (''Ovis aries'').
When seen well, the golden eagle is distinctive in plumage with a more solid warm brown color than an immature bald eagle, with a reddish-golden patch to its nape and (in immature birds) a highly contrasting set of white squares on the wing.
They are not very selective about the condition or origin, whether provided by humans, other animals, auto accidents or natural causes, of a carcass's presence, but will avoid eating carrion where disturbances from humans are a regular occurrence.
In the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill of 1989 an estimated 247 were killed in Prince William Sound, though the local population returned to its pre-spill level by 1995.
In Wyoming, groves of mature cottonwoods or tall pines found along streams and rivers are typical bald eagle nesting habitats.
In Sonora, Mexico, eagles have been observed nesting on top of Hecho catcuses (''Pachycereus pectinaboriginum'').
The bald eagle is a powerful flier, and soars on thermal convection currents.
It was removed from the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife in the Lower 48 States on June 28, 2007.
The nest is built out of branches, usually in large trees found near water.
In Oregon's Columbia River Estuary, the most significant prey species were largescale suckers (''Catostomus macrocheilus'') (17.3% of the prey selected there), American shad (''Alosa sapidissima''; 13%) and common carp (''Cyprinus carpio''; 10.8%).
However, one nest in the Midwest was occupied continuously for at least 34 years.
palustris''), loblolly pines (''P.
Osprey also have this adaptation.
c. canadensis''), is merely  lighter in mean body mass and exceeds the bald eagle in mean wing chord length by around .
For the first two to three weeks of the nestling period, at least one adult is at the nest almost 100% of the time.
Occasionally, nestling or egg fatalities are due to nest collapses, starvation, sibling aggression or inclement weather.
Prey fish targeted by bald eagles are often quite large.
American herring gull (''Larus smithsonianus'') are the favored avian prey species for eagles living around Lake Superior.
The Choctaw considered the bald eagle, who has direct contact with the upper world of the sun, as a symbol of peace.
As with size, the average lifespan of an eagle population appears to be influenced by its location and access to prey.
If food access is low, parental attendance at the nest may be lower because both parents may have to forage thus resulting in less protection.
Wintering eagles on the Platte River in Nebraska preyed mainly on American gizzard shads and common carp.
There are two recognized subspecies of bald eagle:
Eagles living in the Columbia River Estuary in Oregon were found to rely on fish for 90% of their dietary intake.
Occasionally, bald eagles may hunt cooperatively when confronting prey, especially relatively large prey such as jackrabbits or herons, with one bird distracting potential prey, while the other comes behind it in order to ambush it.
Fish & Wildlife Service, when it was reclassified from "Endangered" to "Threatened."
The bald eagle is thought to be much more numerous in North America than the golden eagle, with the bald species estimated to number at least 150,000 individuals, about twice as many golden eagles there are estimated to live in North America.
The facilities where eagles are kept must be equipped with adequate caging and facilities, as well as workers experienced in the handling and care of eagles.
Of 1,428 individuals from across the range necropsied by National Wildlife Health Center from 1963 to 1984, 329 (23%) eagles died from trauma, primarily impact with wires and vehicles; 309 (22%) died from gunshot; 158 (11%) died from poisoning; 130 (9%) died from electrocution; 68 (5%) died from trapping; 110 (8%) from emaciation; and 31 (2%) from disease; cause of death was undetermined in 293 (20%) of cases.
Another distinguishing feature of the immature bald eagle over the mature bird is its black,  yellow-tipped beak; the mature eagle has a fully yellow beak.
Despite the potential for contention between these animals, in New Jersey during winter, a golden eagle and numerous bald eagles were observed to hunt snow geese alongside each other without conflict.
The contribution of such birds to the eagle's diet is variable, depending on the quantity and availability of fish near the water's surface.
In these New Jersey nests, mainly subadult and small adults were taken, ranging in carapace length from .
In the late 20th century it was on the brink of extirpation in the contiguous United States.
When food is abundant, an eagle can gorge itself by storing up to  of food in a pouch in the throat called a crop.
Occupying varied habitats from the bayous of Louisiana to the Sonoran Desert and the eastern deciduous forests of Quebec and New England, northern birds are migratory, while southern birds are resident, remaining on their breeding territory all year.
In the Pacific Northwest, spawning trout and salmon provide most of the bald eagles' diet from late summer throughout fall.
Later illegal shooting was described as "the leading cause of direct mortality in both adult and immature bald eagles," according to a 1978 report in the Endangered Species Technical Bulletin.
In landlocked areas of North America, wintering bald eagles may become habitual predators of medium-sized mammals that occur in colonies or local concentrations, such as prairie dogs (''Cynomys'') and jackrabbits (''Lepus'').
While adults often actively prey on waterbirds, congregated wintering waterfowl are frequently exploited for carcasses to scavenge by immature eagles in harsh winter weather.
This species pair consists of a white-headed and a tan-headed species of roughly equal size; the white-tailed eagle also has overall somewhat paler brown body plumage.
Many sources claim that bald eagles, like all large eagles, cannot normally take flight carrying prey more than half of their own weight unless aided by favorable wind conditions.
Due to easy accessibility and lack of formidable nest defense by such species, bald eagles are capable of preying on such seabirds at all ages, from eggs to mature adults, and can effectively cull large portions of a colony.
The main species found were common musk turtles (''Sternotherus odoratus''), diamondback terrapin (''Malaclemys terrapin'') and juvenile common snapping turtles (''Chelydra serpentina'').
Many pow wow dancers use the eagle claw as part of their regalia as well.
However, in a letter written to his daughter in 1784 from Paris, criticizing the Society of the Cincinnati, he stated his personal distaste for the bald eagle's behavior.
Larger waterbirds are occasionally prey as well, with wintering emperor geese (''Chen canagica'') and snow geese (''C.
It reaches speeds of  when gliding and flapping, and about  while carrying fish.
Bald eagles also may sometimes feed on material scavenged or stolen from campsites and picnics, as well as garbage dumps (dump usage is habitual mainly in Alaska).
When breeding where there are no trees, the bald eagle will nest on the ground, as has been recorded largely in areas largely isolated from terrestrial predators, such as Amchitka Island in Alaska.
Eggs in Alaska averaged  in mass, while in Saskatchewan they averaged .
Bird prey may occasionally be attacked in flight, with prey up to the size of Canada geese attacked and killed in mid-air.
It has also been assigned a risk level of Least Concern category on the IUCN Red List.
The average lifespan of bald eagles in the wild is around 20 years, with the oldest confirmed one having been 38 years of age.
The adult is mainly brown with a white head and tail.
Bald eagles are sexually mature at four or five years of age.
It has been estimated that the gripping power (pounds by square inch) of the bald eagle is ten times greater than that of a human.
The legs are feather-free, and the toes are short and powerful with large talons.
The beak is large and hooked, with a yellow cere.
''Bald'' in the English name is derived from the word ''piebald'', and refers to the white head and tail feathers and their contrast with the darker body.
In the northern half of North America (especially the interior portion), this terrestrial inhabitance by bald eagles tends to be especially prevalent because unfrozen water may not be accessible.
However, bald eagles will occasionally venture into large estuaries or secluded groves within major cities, such as Hardtack Island on the Willamette River in Portland, Oregon or John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge at Tinicum in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, which are surrounded by a great quantity of human activity.
The plumage of an adult bald eagle is evenly dark brown with a white head and tail.
While hunting waterfowl, bald eagles repeatedly fly at a target and cause it to dive repeatedly, hoping to exhaust the victim so it can be caught (white-tailed eagles have been recorded hunting waterfowl in the same way).
In modern times, it may be given on an event such as a graduation from college.
The bald eagle can be long-lived in captivity if well cared for, but does not breed well even under the best conditions.
Gorging allows the bird to fast for several days if food becomes unavailable.
With regulations in place and DDT banned, the eagle population rebounded.
When they are old enough to breed, they often return to the area where they were born.
caerulescens''), which gather in large groups, sometimes becoming regular prey.
Thanks to their superior foraging ability and experience, adults are generally more likely to hunt live prey than immature eagles, which often obtain their food from scavenging.
Occasionally, as is recorded in many large raptorial birds, the oldest sibling sometimes attacks and kills its younger sibling(s), especially early in the nesting period when their sizes are most different.
tshawytscha''), due to their large size ( average adult size) probably being taken only as carrion.
Usually nests are used for under five years or so, as they either collapse in storms or break the branches supporting them by their sheer weight.
erythrorhynchos'').
In this study, 68% of mortality was human-caused.
Bird species most preferred as prey by eagles tend to be medium-sized, such as western grebes (''Aechmophorus occidentalis''), mallards (''Anas platyrhynchos'') and American coots (''Fulica americana'') as such prey is relatively easy for the much larger eagles to catch and fly with.
kisutch'') and, more locally, sockeye salmon (''O.
Its dive speed is between , though it seldom dives vertically.
The sexes are identical in plumage, but females are about 25 percent larger than males.
Neither species is known to be dominant, and the outcome depends on the size and disposition of the individual eagles involved.
The oldest chick often bears the advantage of larger size and louder voice, which tends to draw the parents attention towards it.
Eggs hatch from mid April to early May, and the young fledge late June to early July.
Eagles have been confirmed to attack nocturnally active, burrow-nesting seabird species such as storm petrels and shearwaters by digging out their burrows and feeding on all animals they find inside.
It is found near large bodies of open water with an abundant food supply and old-growth trees for nesting.
Also during the dance, a medicine man may direct his fan, which is made of eagle feathers, to people who seek to be healed.
In the Columbia River estuary, most preyed on by eagles were estimated to measure between  in length, and carp flown with (laboriously) were up to  in length.
It is estimated that in the early 18th century, the bald eagle population was 300,000–500,000, but by the 1950s there were only 412 nesting pairs in the 48 contiguous states of the US.
These have been verified to be preyed by large gulls, corvids (including ravens, crows and magpies), wolverines (''Gulo gulo''), hawks, owls, eagles, bobcats (''Lynx rufus''), American black bears (''Ursus americanus'') and raccoons.
The bald eagle's natural range covers most of North America, including most of Canada, all of the continental United States, and northern Mexico.
Waterbirds can seasonally comprise from 7% to 80% of the prey selection for eagles in certain localities.
The bald eagle has sometimes been considered the largest true raptor (accipitrid) in North America.
They use their naturally molted feathers for religious and cultural ceremonies.
In Washington State, there were only 105 occupied nests in 1980.
The bald eagle is an opportunistic feeder which subsists mainly on fish, which it swoops down and snatches from the water with its talons.
However, nearly half of known bald eagle produce two fledgings (more rarely three), unlike in some other "eagle" species such as some in the ''Aquila'' genus, in which a second fledging is typically observed in less than 20% of nests, despite two eggs typically being laid.
In the letter Franklin states:
The closely related African fish eagle (''H.
nerka''), with chinook salmon (''O.
The beak is large and hooked.
Bald eagles also regularly exploit water turbines which produce battered, stunned or dead fish easily consumed.
Perhaps most significant in the species' recovery, in 1972, DDT was banned from usage in the United States.
Even eagles living in relatively arid regions still typically rely primarily on fish as prey.
Both the male and female take turns incubating the eggs, but the female does most of the sitting.
The species was first protected in the U.S. and Canada by the 1918 Migratory Bird Treaty, later extended to all of North America.
The bald eagle forms a species pair with the Eurasian white-tailed eagle.
As they are no longer heavily persecuted, adult mortality is quite low.
The scientific name is derived from ''Haliaeetus'', New Latin for "sea eagle" (from the Ancient Greek ''haliaetos''), and ''leucocephalus'', Latinized Ancient Greek for "white head," from λευκος ''leukos'' ("white") and κεφαλη ''kephale'' ("head").
Trees used for nesting in the Greater Yellowstone area average  high.
While wintering, bald eagles tend to be less habitat and disturbance sensitive.
In one case, an adult eagle investigating a peregrine falcon nest for prey items sustained a concussion from a swooping parent peregrine, and ultimately died days later from it.
It has occurred as a vagrant twice in Ireland; a juvenile was shot illegally in Fermanagh on January 11, 1973 (misidentified at first as a white-tailed eagle), and an exhausted juvenile was captured in Kerry on November 15, 1987.
The only larger species of raptor-like bird is the California condor (''Gymnogyps californianus''), a New World vulture which today is not generally considered a taxonomic ally of true accipitrids.
However, the golden eagle, averaging  and  in wing chord length in its American race (''A.
The bald eagle was declared an endangered species in the U.S. in 1967, and amendments to the 1940 act between 1962 and 1972 further restricted commercial uses and increased penalties for violators.
Alternately, non-breeding or wintering bald eagles, particularly in areas with a lack of human disturbance, spend their time in various upland, terrestrial habitats sometimes quite far away from waterways.
Immature bald eagles are distinguishable from the golden eagle (''Aquila chrysaetos''), the only other very large, non-vulturine bird in North America, in that the former has a larger, more protruding head with a larger beak, straighter edged wings which are held flat (not slightly raised) and with a stiffer wing beat and feathers which do not completely cover the legs.
Bald eagles will also congregate in certain locations in winter.
The two species fill the same ecological niche in their respective ranges.
l. washingtoniensis'' (Audubon, 1827), synonym ''H.
Additionally, the bald eagle's close cousins, the relatively longer-winged but shorter-tailed white-tailed eagle and the overall larger Steller's sea eagle (''H.
A whistle made from the wing bone of an eagle is used during the course of the dance.
Females are about 25% larger than males, averaging , and against the males' average weight of .
It was de-listed on June 28, 2007.
pelagicus''), may, rarely, wander to coastal Alaska from Asia.
The Pawnee considered eagles as symbols of fertility because their nests are built high off the ground and because they fiercely protect their young.
Behind fish, the next most significant prey base for bald eagles are other waterbirds.
The tail is moderately long and slightly wedge-shaped.
Even more contrary to the usual sensitivity to disturbance, a family of bald eagles moved to the Harlem neighborhood in New York City in 2010.
They have been recorded stealing fish from other predators such as ospreys, herons and even otters.
They have also been recorded opportunistically pirating birds from peregrine falcons (''Falco peregrinus''), prairie dogs from ferruginous hawks (''Buteo regalis'') and even jackrabbits from golden eagles.
The bald eagle typically requires old-growth and mature stands of coniferous or hardwood trees for perching, roosting, and nesting.
Preferred avian prey includes grebes, alcids, ducks, gulls, coots, herons, egrets, and geese.
As a rule, the bald eagle is a poor choice for public shows, being timid, prone to becoming highly stressed, and unpredictable in nature.
Wyoming eagles may inhabit habitat types ranging from large, old-growth stands of ponderosa pines (''Pinus ponderosa'') to narrow strips of riparian trees surrounded by rangeland.
In 20 food habit studies across the species' range, fish comprised 56% of the diet of nesting eagles, birds 28%, mammals 14% and other prey 2%.
In the early 1980s, the estimated total population was 100,000 individuals, with 110,000–115,000 by 1992; the U.S. state with the largest resident population is Alaska, with about 40,000–50,000, with the next highest population the Canadian province of British Columbia with 20,000–30,000 in 1992.
Around 50% of eagles survive their first year.
Rarely, four eggs have been found in nests but these may be exceptional cases of polygyny.
23, or nearly half, of the 48 contiguous states now have at least 100 breeding pairs of bald eagles.
Once a common sight in much of the continent, the bald eagle was severely affected in the mid-20th century by a variety of factors, among them the thinning of egg shells attributed to use of the pesticide DDT.
The '''bald eagle''' (''Haliaeetus leucocephalus'', from Greek ''hali'' "sea", ''aiētos'' "eagle", ''leuco'' "white", ''cephalos'' "head") is a bird of prey found in North America.
vocifer'') (from far outside the bald eagle's range) also has a brown body, white head and tail, but differs from the bald in having a white chest and black tip to the bill.
It chooses sites more than  from low-density human disturbance and more than  from medium- to high-density human disturbance.
A number of populations are subject to post-breeding dispersal, mainly in juveniles; Florida eagles, for example, will disperse northwards in the summer.
Bald eagles have also been killed by oil, lead, and mercury pollution, and by human and predator intrusion at nests.
Typical wingspan is between  and mass is normally between .
However, if one member of a pair dies or disappears, the other will choose a new mate.
