Despite its name, the pygmy right whale is more genetically similar to rorquals and gray whales than to right whales.
Whaling was controlled in 1982 when the International Whaling Commission (IWC) placed a moratorium setting catch limits to protect species from dying out from over-exploitation, and eventually banned it:
Mysticeti comprise the families Balaenidae (right whales), Balaenopteridae (rorquals), Cetotheriidae (the pygmy right whale), and Eschrichtiidae (the gray whale).
This behavior was only documented in toothed whales until footage of a humpback whale sleeping (vertically) was shot in 2014.
The inflation of the mouth causes the cavum ventrale, the throat pleats on the underside stretching to the navel, to expand, increasing the amount of water that the mouth can store.
The whale watching industry and anti-whaling advocates argue that whaling catches "friendly" whales that are curious about boats, as these whales are the easiest to catch.
Right whales feed with a wide-open mouth, risking entanglement in any rope or net fixed in the water column.
Rorquals, needing to build speed to feed, have several adaptions for reducing drag, including a streamlined body; a small dorsal fin, relative to its size; and lack of external ears or long hair.
Some species of barnacle, such as ''Conchoderma auritum'' and whale barnacles, attach to the baleen plates, though this seldom occurs.
This analysis claims that once the economic benefits of hotels, restaurants and other tourist amenities are considered, hunting whales is a net economic loss.
18th and 19th century whalers hunted down whales mainly for their oil, which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant, and baleen (or whalebone), which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops.
Like in the rorquals, their throat pleats increase the capacity of their throat, allowing them to filter larger volumes of water at once.
They usually turn on their side and scoop up sediment into their mouth and filter out benthic creatures like amphipods, which leaves a noticeable mark on their head.
All mammals sleep, but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown.
Some baleen whales can become victims of bycatch, which is especially serious for North Atlantic right whales considering there are only 450 left.
Baleen whales are promiscuous, with none showing pair bonds.
However, in doing so it does not harm nor benefit the whale, so their relationship is often labeled as an example of commensalism.
Doing so may cause serious complications such as embolism.
One survived for three months, another (a calf) survived for two weeks, and another was kept for a year before breaking through the nets.
''Eomysticetus'' and others like it showed no evidence in the skull of echolocation abilities, suggesting they mainly relied on their eyesight for navigation.
Unlike other mammals, the lungs of baleen whales lack lobes and are more sacculated.
The penis on a right whale can be up to  – the testes, at up to  in length,  in diameter, and weighing up to , are also the largest of any animal on Earth.
Baleen whales are K-strategists, meaning they raise one calf at a time, have a long life-expectancy, and a low infant mortality rate.
Whaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age.
Baleen whales are cetaceans classified under the parvorder Mysticeti, and consist of four extant families: Balaenidae (right whales), Balaenopteridae (rorquals), Cetotheriidae (pygmy right whale), and Eschrichtiidae (gray whale).
Like in humans, the food is mixed with hydrochloric acid and protein-digesting enzymes.
Rorquals also tend to be longer than the latter.
The "skimming" may take place on the surface, underwater, or even at the ocean's bottom, indicated by mud occasionally observed on right whales' bodies.
The tip of the penis, which tapers toward the end, is called the ''pars intrapraeputialis'' or ''terminal cone''.
They are positioned parallel to air flow, as opposed to the perpendicular vocal cords of terrestrial mammals.
Whaling rorquals was not effective until the harpoon cannon was invented in the late 1860s.
Baleen whales continue to be harvested.
Right whales gulp-feed, meaning they use their enlarged head to effectively take in a large amount of water and sieve the slow-moving prey.
The Basques started whaling as early as the 11th century, sailing as far as Newfoundland in the 16th century in search of right whales.
Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, gray whales may be as numerous as they were prior to whaling, making it the first marine mammal to be taken off the Endangered species list.
While feeding, the rorqual jaw expands to a volume that can be bigger than the whale itself; to do this, the mouth inflates.
Their resting heart rate is 60 to 140 beats per minute (bpm), as opposed to the 60 to 100 bpm in humans.
Balaenidae consists of two genera: ''Eubalaena'' (right whales) and ''Balaena'' (the bowhead whale, ''B.
This feeding behavior allows them to grow very big and bulky, without the necessity for a streamlined body.
Species like ''Mammalodon colliveri'' had little to no baleen, while later species like ''Aetiocetus weltoni'' had both baleen and teeth, suggesting they had limited filter feeding capabilities; later genera like ''Cetotherium'' had no teeth in their mouth, meaning they were fully dependent on baleen and could only filter feed.
In right whales, the calving interval is usually three years.
Sexual dimorphism is usually reversed, with the males being larger, but the females of all baleen whales are usually five percent larger than males.
They reach sexual maturity when  long.
For species like the North Atlantic right whale, which migrates through some of the world's busiest shipping lanes, the biggest threat is from being struck by ships.
Balaenidae was thought to have consisted of only one genus until studies done through the early 2000s reported that bowhead whales and right whales are morphologically (different skull shape) and phylogenically different.
buelli'' had heterodont dentition.
The heart of baleen whales functions similarly to other mammals, with the major difference being the size.
Rorquals are specialized at lunge-feeding, and have a streamlined body to reduce drag while accelerating.
However, a 2014 study suggests that the pelvic bone serves as support for whale genitalia.
This allows baleen whales to detect chemicals and pheromones released by their prey.
Like toothed whales, they have a dense network of blood vessels (rete mirabile) which prevents heat-loss.
The degree of calcification varies between species, with the sei whale having 14.5% hydroxyapatite, a mineral that coats teeth and bones, whereas minke whales have 1–4% hydroxyapatite.
Blue whales stop producing foraging D calls once a mid-frequency sonar is activated, even though the sonar frequency range (1–8&nbsp;kHz) far exceeds their sound production range (25–100&nbsp;Hz).
The two populations, one in the Sea of Okhotsk and Sea of Japan and the other in the Mediterranean Sea and East Atlantic, are thought to be genetically and physiologically dissimilar.
Rorquals generally have a streamlined physique to reduce drag in the water while doing this.
Rope wraps around their upper jaw, flippers and tail.
They have rarely been kept in captivity, and this has only been attempted with juveniles or members of one of the smallest species.
In 1864, it was moved into the genus ''Caperea'' after a skull of another specimen was discovered.
The discovery of ''Janjucetus'' and others like it suggests that baleen evolution went through several transitional phases.
This process takes a lot of mechanical work, and is only energy-effective when used against a large baitball.
Balaenopterids grew bigger during this time, with species like ''Balaenoptera sibbaldina'' rivaling the blue whale in terms of size.
Male strategies for reproductive success vary between performing ritual displays (whale song) or lek mating.
Prey must occur in sufficient numbers to trigger the whale's interest, be within a certain size range so that the baleen plates can filter it, and be slow enough so that it cannot escape.
Accessory plates taper off into small hairs.
As well as this, heat inevitably given off by the arteries warms blood in the surrounding veins as it travels back into the core.
Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths.
These animals rely on their baleen plates to sieve plankton and other small organisms from the water.
The males are generally more scarred than females which is thought to be because of aggression during mating season.
Six years later, the pygmy right whale was classified under the family Neobalaenidae.
For example, Antarctic residents mostly feed on Euphausiids; however, this is mainly effective for lunge-feeders, whereas gulp-feeders, like the right whales, feed primarily on copepods.
The baleen of baleen whales are keratinous plates.
Adult baleen whales, because of their great size, do not have any natural predators.
Cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) and artiodactyls are now classified under the order Cetartiodactyla, often still referred to as Artiodactyla (given that the cetaceans are deeply nested with the artiodactyls).
Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of ongoing climate change, particularly declines in sea ice, as well as ocean acidification.
Because of international protection, the Southern right whale's population has been growing 7% annually since 1970.
For example, a single gray whale calf would need to eat  of fish per day, and the pool would have to accommodate the  calf, along with ample room to swim.
Baleen whales get the water they need from their food; however, the salt content of most of their prey (invertebrates) are similar to that of seawater, whereas the salt content of a whale's blood is considerably lower (three times lower) than that of seawater.
To prevent stretching the mouth too far, rorquals have a sensory organ located in the middle of the jaw to regulate these functions.
Balaenids rely on their huge head, as opposed to the rorquals' throat pleats, to feed effectively.
Males typically mate with more than one female (polygyny), although the degree of polygyny varies with the species.
The inflation of the mouth causes the throat pleats to expand, increasing the amount of water that the mouth can store.
Their large size and appetite make them expensive creatures to maintain.
The retina is surrounded by a reflective layer of cells (tapetum lucidum), which bounces light back at the retina, enhancing eyesight in dark areas.
Eschrichtiidae consists of only one living member: the gray whale (''Eschrichtius robustus'').
While doing this, baleen whales use their tail fluke to propel themselves forward through vertical motion while using their flippers for steering, much like an otter.
A 2014 study noted that a lower vessel speed correlated with lower collision rates.
Baleen whales have a small, yet functional, vomeronasal organ.
Baleen whales get the water they need from their food, and their kidneys excrete excess salt.
They have callosities, unlike other whales, with the exception of the bowhead whale.
Sexual dimorphism is also displayed through whale song, notably in humpback whales where the males of the species sing elaborate songs.
It is largely unknown how sound is received by baleen whales.
Animal-rights activist groups, such as the Greenpeace, object to Japan's scientific whaling, with some calling it a substitute for commercial whaling.
Rorquals use throat pleats to expand their mouth which allows them to feed more effectively.
While cetaceans were historically thought to have descended from mesonychids, molecular evidence supports them as relatives of even-toed ungulates (Artiodactyla).
They are polygynous, in that a male may mate with more than one female.
The meat, blubber, baleen, and oil of baleen whales have traditionally been used by the indigenous peoples of the Arctic.
Other whales, such as humpback whales, can also be entangled.
It has been speculated that man-made sonar results in strandings.
Whale lice eat dead skin, resulting in minor wounds in the skin.
Combined with spreading and acoustic shadowing effects, the result is that the whale is unable to hear an approaching vessel before it has been run over or entrapped by the hydrodynamic forces of the vessel's passage.
A species of copepod, ''Balaenophilus unisetus'', inhabits baleen plates of whales in tropical waters.
japonica'') and Southern right (''E.
The Mito Aquarium in Numazu, Shizuoka, Japan, housed three minke whales in the nearby bay enclosed by nets.
Before reaching adulthood, baleen whales grow at an extraordinary rate.
The Southern right whale was hunted to near extinction in the mid-to-late 20th century, with only a small (unknown) population around Antarctica.
The mysticete ear is adapted for hearing underwater, where it can hear sound frequencies as low as 7 Hz and as high as 22 kHz, with the exception of the 52-hertz whale.
Though not a parasite, whale barnacles latch onto the skin of a whale during their larval stage.
They are made of a calcified hard α-keratin material, a fiber-reinforced structure made of intermediate filaments (proteins).
Baleen whales can have streamlined or large bodies, depending on the feeding behavior, and two limbs that are modified into flippers.
The aorta, an artery, can be  thick.
This is probably because they feed on slow or immobile prey, combined with the fact that most sunlight does not pass , and hence they do not need acute vision.
Their cerebrum only makes up about 68% of their brain's weight, as opposed to human's 83%.
The epidermis itself is only  thick.
musculus''), the common minke whale (''B.
Besides hunting, baleen whales also face threats from marine pollution and ocean acidification.
Their evolutionary link to archaic toothed cetaceans (Archaeoceti) remained unknown until the extinct ''Janjucetus hunderi'' was discovered in the early 1990s in Victoria, Australia.
The second gray whale, who was captured in 1972 from the same lagoon, was named Gigi II and was released a year later after becoming too big.
Because of this, it is thought that baleen whales, or at least humpback whales, have consciousness.
'''Baleen whales''' (systematic name '''Mysticeti'''), known earlier as '''whalebone whales''', form a parvorder of the infraorder Cetacea (whales, dolphins and porpoises).
The plates decrease in size as they go further back into the jaw; the largest ones are called the "main baleen plates" and the smallest ones are called the "accessory plates".
People from Norway started hunting whales around 4,000 years ago, and people from Japan began hunting whales in the Pacific at least as early as that.
Unlike in toothed whales, baleen whales have small hairs on the top of their head, stretching from the tip of the rostrum to the blowhole, and, in right whales, on the chin.
They are sexually dimorphic.
They were small with shortened rostra, and a primitive dental formula ().
Just before they ram the baitball, the jaw swings open at almost a 90° angle and bends which lets in more water.
The scars on male whales suggest they fight for the right to mate with females during breeding season, somewhat similar to lek mating.
Archaeomysticetes from the Oligocene are the Mammalodontidae (''Mammalodon'' and ''Janjucetus'') from Australia.
However, its jaw also contained teeth, with incisors and canines built for stabbing and molars and premolars built for tearing.
Baleen whales have two flippers on the front, near the head.
Like a modern baleen whale, ''Janjucetus'' had baleen in its jaw and had very little biosonar capabilities.
Baleen whales produce a number of vocalizations, notably the songs of the humpback whale.
Flipper movement is continuous.
The muscular wall of the ventricle, which is responsible for pumping blood out of the heart, can be  thick.
They are believed to exhibit unihemispheric slow-wave sleep, in which they sleep with half of the brain while the other half remains active.
All species were exploited, and as one type's stock depleted, another type was targeted.
australis'') whales are more closely related to each other than to the North Atlantic right whale (''E.
The eyeballs are protected by a thick outer layer to prevent abrasions, and an oily fluid (instead of tears) on the surface of the eye.
Lunge-feeding is where a whale rams a bait ball (a swarm of small fish) at high speeds.
They grow very rapidly during their first year, after which they hardly increase in size for several years.
Like other early toothed mysticetes, or "archaeomysticetes", ''F.
The septum that separates the blowholes has two plugs attached to it, making the blowholes water-tight while the whale dives.
When sieved from the water, food is swallowed and travels through the esophagus where it enters a three-chambered-stomach.
is an archaic word for "whale", derived from the Latin word ''balæna''.
A species of Antarctic diatom, ''Cocconeis ceticola'', forms a film on the skin, which takes a month to develop; this film causes minor damage to the skin.
The whale lungs are very efficient at extracting oxygen from the air, usually 80%, whereas humans only extract 20% of oxygen from inhaled air.
The last gray whale, J.J., beached herself in Marina del Rey, California, where she was rushed to SeaWorld San Diego and, after 14 months, was released because she got too big to take care of.
Then they must decelerate.
Whale louse infestations are especially evident in right whales, where colonies propagate on their callosities.
acutorostrata''), the Antarctic minke whale (''B.
Peru, Uruguay, Australia, and New Zealand also support proposals to permanently forbid whaling south of the Equator, as Solor (an island of Indonesia) is the only place of the Southern Hemisphere that takes whales.
JARPN is focused in the North Pacific and JARPA around the Antarctic.
Fleeing only occurs in species that can swim away quickly, the rorquals.
The most successful whaling nations at this time were the Netherlands, Japan, and the United States.
All baleen whales use sound for communication and are known to "sing", especially during the breeding season.
It is unknown where this occurred, but it is generally believed that they, like their descendants, followed plankton migrations.
Unlike other whales (and most other mammals), the females are larger than the males.
Baleen whales have a relatively small brain compared to their body mass.
In the toothed Oligocene mammalodontid ''Janjucetus'', the symphysis is short and the mouth enlarged, the rostrum is wide, and the edges of the maxillae are thin, indicating an adaptation for suction feeding.
Mysticetes are also known as baleen whales because of the presence of baleen.
Baleen whales range in size from the  and  pygmy right whale to the  and  blue whale, which is also the largest creature on earth.
The first compartment is known as the fore-stomach; this is where food gets ground up into an acidic liquid, which is then squirted into the main stomach.
Brazil, Argentina and South Africa argue that whale watching is a growing billion-dollar industry that provides more revenue than commercial whaling would provide.
A 7-to-11 month lactation period is normally followed by a year of rest before mating starts again.
Balaenids are distinguished by their enlarged head and thick blubber, while rorquals and gray whales generally have a flat head, long throat pleats, and are more streamlined than Balaenids.
It is thought that annual whale migration occurs to protect the calves from the killer whales.
Lung volume is relatively low compared to terrestrial mammals because of the inability of the respiratory tract to hold gas while diving.
Like all mammals, baleen whales breathe air and must surface periodically to do so.
The mandible is connected to the skull by dense fibers and cartilage (fibrocartilage), allowing the jaw to swing open at almost a 90° angle.
It is also postulated by a 2008 study that these take place to avoid calves being predated on by killer whales.
borealis''), Bryde's whale (''B.
Rorquals have a higher proportion of muscle tissue and tend to be negatively buoyant, whereas right whales have a higher proportion of blubber and are positively buoyant.
Unlike most animals, whales are conscious breathers.
However, DNA analysis by studies, such as the one by Takeshi Sasaki (of the Tokyo Institute of Technology) and colleagues, indicates certain rorquals, such as the humpback whale, ''Megaptera novaeangliae'', and the fin whale, ''Balaenoptera physalus'', are more closely related to the gray whale than they are to some other rorquals, such as the minke whale, ''Balaenoptera acutorostrata''.
The lineages of rorquals and right whales split almost 20&nbsp;mya.
physalus''), the Sei whale (''B.
The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially through the 1960s as all whale stocks had been depleted, and practically stopped in 1988 after the International Whaling Commission placed a moratorium which banned whaling for commercial use.
They recommend that the genus ''Balaenoptera'' be limited to the fin whale, have minke whales fall under the genus ''Pterobalaena'', and have ''Rorqualus'' contain the Sei whale, Bryde's whale, Eden's whale, the blue whale, and Omura's whale.
After those stocks were depleted, rorquals in the South Pacific were targeted by nearly all whaling organizations; however, they often out-swam whaling vessels.
However, only three nations take whales: Iceland, Norway, and Japan.
Like in humans, the left lung is smaller than the right to make room for the heart.
The unique lungs of baleen whales are built to collapse under the pressure instead of resisting the pressure which would damage the lungs, enabling some, like the fin whale, to dive to a depth of .
However, calves can be preyed on by the killer whale.
One species—the North Atlantic right whale—is Endangered with only around 400(±50) individuals left, and four more are also classified as Endangered (North Pacific right whale, the blue whale, the fin whale, and the Sei whale), and another 5 ranked as Data deficient (Bryde's whale, Eden's whale, Omura's whale, Southern minke whale, and pygmy right whale).
Adults normally start reproducing when 5–10 years old and reach their full length after 20–30 years.
Whaling basically stopped when stocks of all species were depleted to a point that they could not be harvested on a commercial scale.
It is largely unknown how baleen whales produce sound because of the lack of a melon and vocal cords.
To feed, lunge-feeders expand the volume of their jaw to a volume bigger than the original volume of the whale itself; to do this, the mouth inflates to expand the mouth.
The whale kidney is adapted to excreting excess salt; however, while producing urine more concentrated than seawater, it wastes a lot of water which must be replaced.
Baleen whales have fibroelastic (connective tissue) penises, similar to those of artiodactyls.
These paired blowholes are longitudinal slits that converge anteriorly and widen posteriorly, which causes a V-shaped blow.
Miocene baleen whales were preyed upon by larger predators like killer sperm whales and ''Megalodon''.
Conversely, the eastern stock of North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range, which stretched from the coast of North Africa to the North Sea and Iceland; it is thought that the entire stock consists of only ten individuals, making the eastern stock functionally extinct.
Though the palate is not well-preserved in these specimens, they are thought to have had baleen and been filter feeders.
There has been one report of a shark attacking and killing a whale calf.
By the early 1790s, whalers, namely the British (Australian) and Americans, started to focus efforts in the South Pacific; in the mid 1900s, over 50,000 humpback whale were taken from the South Pacific.
To conserve oxygen, blood is rerouted from pressure-tolerant-tissue to internal organs, and they have a high concentration of myoglobin which allows them to hold their breath longer.
The lunge-feeders are the rorquals and the pygmy right whale.
They are also plagued by internal parasites such as stomach worms, cestodes, nematodes, liver flukes, and acanthocephalans.
Like other mammals, their brain has a large, folded cerebrum, the part of the brain responsible for memory and processing sensory information.
When it reaches sexual maturity after 5–10 years, it will be  long and possibly live as long as 80–90 years.
