In the late 1890s, struggles between Balinese kingdoms in the island's south were exploited by the Dutch to increase their control.
It has successfully been implemented in other ASEAN countries and will be implemented at other crossings in Bali.
Crops grown in smaller amounts include fruit, vegetables, ''Coffea arabica'' and other cash and subsistence crops.
As of July 2015, no details of this proposed railways have been released.
The current pier is only  but will eventually be extended to  to accommodate international cruise ships.
Bali is also famous for its artisans who produce a vast array of handicrafts, including batik and ikat cloth and clothing, wooden carvings, stone carvings, painted art and silverware.
Balinese cuisine is also distinctive.
Jayapangus appears on inscriptions between 1178 and 1181, while Adikuntiketana and his son Paramesvara in 1204.
It was not originally a target in their Netherlands East Indies Campaign, but as the airfields on Borneo were inoperative due to heavy rains, the Imperial Japanese Army decided to occupy Bali, which did not suffer from comparable weather.
Three decades ago, the Balinese economy was largely agriculture-based in terms of both output and employment.
The Ngurah Rai Bypass is a four-lane expressway that partly encircles Denpasar.
An attempted coup in Jakarta was put down by forces led by General Suharto.
This has led to new versions of many of these performances which have developed according to the preferences of foreign audiences; some villages have a ''barong'' mask specifically for non-ritual performances as well as an older mask which is only used for sacred performances.
Every element of nature, therefore, possesses its own power, which reflects the power of the gods.
Hence, it is not uncommon to find local Sino-Balinese during the local temple's ''odalan''.
On higher grounds that receive more moisture, for instance around Kintamani, certain species of fern trees, mushrooms and even pine trees thrive well.
Imperial Japan occupied Bali during World War II.
Three small islands lie to the immediate south east and all are administratively part of the Klungkung regency of Bali: Nusa Penida, Nusa Lembongan and Nusa Ceningan.
The second monkey, endemic to Java and some surrounding islands such as Bali, is far rarer and more elusive is the Javan langur, locally known as "lutung".
Western tourists began to visit the island.
These spaces serve as performance venues since most Balinese rituals are accompanied by any combination of music, dance and drama.
Bali has no major waterways, although the Ho River is navigable by small ''sampan'' boats.
They are born an orange colour, though by their first year they would have already changed to a more blackish colouration.
Visitor arrivals for 2009 were forecast to drop 8% (which would be higher than 2007 levels), due to the worldwide economic crisis which has also affected the global tourist industry, but not due to any travel warnings.
Snakes include the king cobra and reticulated python.
The harbour here is safer than the existing facility at Benoa and has a scenic backdrop of east Bali mountains and green rice fields.
Lastly, performances meant solely for the entertainment of humans take place outside the walls of the temple and are called ''bali-balihan''.
It was the first time Indonesia hosted an international beauty pageant.
Two species of monkey occur.
Rice comes in many varieties.
The tender for improvement was subject to delays, and as of July 2013 the situation remained unclear with cruise line operators complaining and even refusing to use the existing facility at Tanah Ampo.
Following Japan's Pacific surrender in August 1945, the Dutch returned to Indonesia, including Bali, to reinstate their pre-war colonial administration.
I was both astonished and delighted; for as my visit to Java was some years later, I had never beheld so beautiful and well-cultivated a district out of Europe.
Religion as it is practised in Bali, is a composite belief system that embraces not only theology, philosophy, and mythology, but ancestor worship, animism and magic.
With a population of 3,890,757 in the 2010 census, and 4,225,000 as of January 2014, the island is home to most of Indonesia's Hindu minority.
It was during this time that the people developed their complex irrigation system ''subak'' to grow rice in wet-field cultivation.
In June 2012, Subak, the irrigation system for paddy fields in Bali was enlisted as a Natural UNESCO world heritage site.
A mass Javanese immigration to Bali occurred in the next century when the Majapahit Empire fell in 1520.
Bali real estate has been rapidly developing in the main tourist areas of Kuta, Legian, Seminyak and Oberoi.
In the Dutch intervention in Bali, a similar massacre occurred in the face of a Dutch assault in Klungkung.
Many of the ceremonial art forms such as ''wayang kulit'' and ''topeng'' are highly improvisatory, providing flexibility for the performer to adapt the performance to the current situation.
Kawi and Sanskrit are also commonly used by some Hindu priests in Bali, for Hinduism literature was mostly written in Sanskrit.
It took place at Ubud and Padang-Padang Beach at Bali.
The west monsoon is in place from approximately October to April, and this can bring significant rain, particularly from December to March.
There was only a Native Auxiliary Corps ''Prajoda'' (Korps Prajoda) consisting of about 600 native soldiers and several Dutch KNIL officers under the command of KNIL Lieutenant Colonel W.P.
There are an estimated 30,000 expatriates living in Bali.
This influence strengthened the belief that the gods and goddesses are present in all things.
Famous Balinese dances include ''pendet'', ''legong'', ''baris'', ''topeng'', ''barong'', ''gong keybar'', and ''kecak'' (the monkey dance).
Typical flavours include lemon and other citrus notes.
It is renowned for its highly developed arts, including traditional and modern dance, sculpture, painting, leather, metalworking, and music.
The Indonesian International Film Festival is held every year in Bali.
The 2006 book, which spent 57 weeks at the No.
While 30.26 percent are middle class with spending between $662 to $1,285.
In Java however, there is more of a tendency for this species to retain its juvenile orange colour into adulthood, and so you can see a mixture of black and orange monkeys together as a family.
The average coverage level of healthy coral was 36% (better than in Raja Ampat and Halmahera by 29% or in Fakfak and Kaimana by 25%) with the highest coverage found in Gili Selang and Gili Mimpang in Candidasa, Karangasem regency.
Although tourism produces the GDP's largest output, agriculture is still the island's biggest employer; most notably rice cultivation.
A team of scientists conducted a survey from 29 April 2011 to 11 May 2011 at 33 sea sites around Bali.
The 1963 eruption of Mount Agung killed thousands, created economic havoc and forced many displaced Balinese to be ''transmigrated'' to other parts of Indonesia.
Fishing also provides a significant number of jobs.
Mirroring the widening of social divisions across Indonesia in the 1950s and early 1960s, Bali saw conflict between supporters of the traditional caste system, and those rejecting this system.
This attack, and another in 2005, severely reduced tourism, producing much economic hardship to the island.
The project goes through  of mangrove forest and through  of beach, both within  area.
The water monitor can grow to at least  in length and  and can move quickly.
Based on Bank Indonesia survey in May 2013, 34.39 percent of tourists are upper-middle class with spending between $1,286 to $5,592 and dominated by Australia, France, China, Germany and the US with some China tourists move from low spending before to higher spending currently.
Balinese performing arts often portray stories from Hindu epics such as the Ramayana but with heavy Balinese influence.
PT Jasa Marga Bali Tol will construct the  toll road (totally  with access road).
Bali's tourism economy survived the terrorist bombings of 2002 and 2005, and the tourism industry has in fact slowly recovered and surpassed its pre-terrorist bombing levels; the longterm trend has been a steady increase of visitor arrivals.
The population of Bali was 3,890,757 as of the 2010 Census; the latest estimate (for January 2014) is 4,225,384.
Forecasts for 2013 are at 3.1 million.
Bali's central mountains include several peaks over  in elevation.
Bali is renowned for its diverse and sophisticated art forms, such as painting, sculpture, woodcarving, handcrafts, and performing arts.
In addition to spatial orientation, ''kaja'' and ''kelod'' have the connotation of good and evil; gods and ancestors are believed to live on the mountain whereas demons live in the sea.
The Wallace Line is a faunal boundary that runs through the strait between Bali and Lombok.
The island was quickly captured.
The crab-eating macaque, known locally as "kera", is quite common around human settlements and temples, where it becomes accustomed to being fed by humans, particularly in any of the three "monkey forest" temples, such as the popular one in the Ubud area.
In the 1930s, anthropologists Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson, artists Miguel Covarrubias and Walter Spies, and musicologist Colin McPhee all spent time here.
The rich coral reefs around the coast, particularly around popular diving spots such as Tulamben, Amed, Menjangan or neighbouring Nusa Penida, host a wide range of marine life, for instance hawksbill turtle, giant sunfish, giant manta ray, giant moray eel, bumphead parrotfish, hammerhead shark, reef shark, barracuda, and sea snakes.
Mountains range from centre to the eastern side, with Mount Agung the easternmost peak.
Stone tools dating from this time have been found near the village of Cekik in the island's west.
On 17 July 2011 the first cruise ship (Sun Princess) anchored about  away from the wharf of Tanah Ampo harbour.
The usage of different Balinese languages was traditionally determined by the Balinese caste system and by clan membership, but this tradition is diminishing.
On the day before New Year, large and colourful sculptures of ''ogoh-ogoh'' monsters are paraded and finally burned in the evening to drive away evil spirits.
In 2003, around 80% of Bali's economy was tourism related.
Since the 1930s sacred rituals such as the ''barong'' dance have been performed both in their original contexts, as well as exclusively for paying tourists.
Today, the largest mammals are the Javan rusa deer and the wild boar.
Other festivals throughout the year are specified by the Balinese ''pawukon'' calendrical system.
The 300 litres capacity of water per second will be channelled to Denpasar, Badung and Gianyar in 2013.
Day time temperatures at low elevations vary between 20-33⁰ C (68-91⁰ F), although it can be much cooler than that in the mountains.
Bali lies just to the west of the Wallace Line, and thus has a fauna that is Asian in character, with very little Australasian influence, and has more in common with Java than with Lombok.
When sea levels dropped during the Pleistocene ice age, Bali was connected to Java and Sumatra and to the mainland of Asia and shared the Asian fauna, but the deep water of the Lombok Strait continued to keep Lombok Island and the Lesser Sunda archipelago isolated.
The high season in Bali is during the "dry season" in July and August,  as well as during the Easter and Christmas holidays, when the weather is very unpredictable.
To solve chronic traffic problems, the province will also build a toll road connecting Serangan with Tohpati, a toll road connecting Kuta, Denpasar and Tohpati and a flyover connecting Kuta and Ngurah Rai Airport.
An offshoot of tourism is the growing real estate industry.
Many celebrations call for a loud, boisterous atmosphere with lots of activity and the resulting aesthetic, ''ramé'', is distinctively Balinese.
The performances that take place in the inner courtyard are classified as ''wali'', the most sacred rituals which are offerings exclusively for the gods, while the outer courtyard is where ''bebali'' ceremonies are held, which are intended for gods and people.
Their accounts of the island and its peoples created a western image of Bali as "an enchanted land of aesthetes at peace with themselves and nature."
Minority religions include Islam (13.3%), Christianity (1.7%), and Buddhism (0.5%).
The first known European contact with Bali is thought to have been made in 1512, when a Portuguese expedition led by Antonio Abreu and Francisco Serrão sighted its northern shores.
They occur in few places apart from the Bali Barat National Park.
They are also quite often kept as pets by locals.
Most recently, high-end 5-star projects are under development on the Bukit peninsula, on the south side of the island.
On this day everyone stays at home and tourists are encouraged to remain in their hotels.
Moreover, Balinese Hindu priests are invited to perform rites alongside a Chinese priest in the event of the death of a Sino-Balinese.
Million dollar villas are being developed along the cliff sides of south Bali, commanding panoramic ocean views.
Bali's second-largest city is the old colonial capital, Singaraja, which is located on the north coast and is home to around 100,000 people.
In this area alone over 500 reef building coral species can be found.
Bali was inhabited around 2000 BC by Austronesian people who migrated originally from Southeast Asia and Oceania through Maritime Southeast Asia.
Balinese culture was strongly influenced by Indian, Chinese, and particularly Hindu culture, beginning around the 1st century AD.
One of the most important concepts that Balinese ceremonies have in common is that of ''désa kala patra'', which refers to how ritual performances must be appropriate in both the specific and general social context.
A bombing in 2002 by militant Islamists in the tourist area of Kuta killed 202 people, mostly foreigners.
Bali boasts one of the most diverse and innovative performing arts cultures in the world, with paid performances at thousands of temple festivals, private ceremonies, or public shows.
In 1946, the Dutch constituted Bali as one of the 13 administrative districts of the newly proclaimed State of East Indonesia, a rival state to the Republic of Indonesia, which was proclaimed and headed by Sukarno and Hatta.
Both are ease the heavy traffic congestion.
Wisnu Airfield is found in north-west Bali.
In ancient Bali, nine Hindu sects existed, namely Pasupata, Bhairawa, Siwa Shidanta, Waisnawa, Bodha, Brahma, Resi, Sora and Ganapatya.
Bali received the Best Island award from Travel and Leisure in 2010.
Other important cities include the beach resort, Kuta, which is practically part of Denpasar's urban area, and Ubud, situated at the north of Denpasar, is the island's cultural centre.
The island had no regular Royal Netherlands East Indies Army (KNIL) troops.
Other foreign languages, such as Japanese, Korean, French, Russian or German are often used in multilingual signs for foreign tourists.
The Australian government issued an advice on Friday, 4 May 2012.
The northern side of the mountains slopes more steeply to the sea and is the main coffee producing area of the island, along with rice, vegetables and cattle.
Most recently, Bali was the host of the 2011 ASEAN Summit, 2013 APEC and Miss World 2013.
In 1585, a ship foundered off the Bukit Peninsula and left a few Portuguese in the service of Dewa Agung.
The elevated toll road is built over the mangrove forest on 18,000 concrete pillars which occupied 2 hectares of mangroves forest.
Ritualizing states of self-control are a notable feature of religious expression among the people, who for this reason have become famous for their graceful and decorous behaviour.
Bali's government then became an independent collection of Hindu kingdoms which led to a Balinese national identity and major enhancements in culture, arts, and economy.
Bali is the home of the Subak Irrigation System, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
For comparison, this is about 7 times as many as in the entire Caribbean.
Colonel I Gusti Ngurah Rai, by then 29 years old, finally rallied his forces in east Bali at Marga Rana, where they made a suicide attack on the heavily armed Dutch.
The Hindu Majapahit Empire (1293–1520 AD) on eastern Java founded a Balinese colony in 1343.
The harshness of war requisitions made Japanese rule more resented than Dutch rule.
In May 2011, an integrated Areal Traffic Control System (ATCS) was implemented to reduce traffic jams at four crossing points: Ngurah Rai statue, Dewa Ruci Kuta crossing, Jimbaran crossing and Sanur crossing.
On 16 March 2011 (Tanjung) Benoa port received the "Best Port Welcome 2010" award from London's "Dream World Cruise Destination" magazine.
The island of Bali won because of its attractive surroundings (both mountain and coastal areas), diverse tourist attractions, excellent international and local restaurants, and the friendliness of the local people.
It was the first expedition of a series of bi-annual fleets to the Moluccas, that throughout the 16th century usually traveled along the coasts of the Sunda Islands.
The province includes the island of Bali and a few smaller neighbouring islands, notably Nusa Penida, Nusa Lembongan, and Nusa Ceningan.
Bali has no railway lines.
They discovered 952 species of reef fish of which 8 were new discoveries at Pemuteran, Gilimanuk, Nusa Dua, Tulamben and Candidasa, and 393 coral species, including two new ones at Padangbai and between Padangbai and Amed.
Culturally and linguistically, the Balinese are closely related to the people of the Indonesian archipelago, Malaysia, the Philippines and Oceania.
The overall level of the advice was lowered to 'Exercise a high degree of caution'.
During the Japanese occupation, a Balinese military officer, Gusti Ngurah Rai, formed a Balinese 'freedom army'.
This results in a sweet, soft coffee with good consistency.
Government plans to expand the role of Benoa port as export-import port to boost Bali's trade and industry sector.
The tourism industry has since recovered from these events.
There are several indigenous Balinese languages, but most Balinese can also use the most widely spoken option: modern common Balinese.
This was the smallest and rarest of all tiger subspecies and was never caught on film or displayed in zoos, whereas few skins or bones remain in museums around the world.
The Hindu New Year, ''Nyepi'', is celebrated in the spring by a day of silence.
It pervades nearly every aspect of traditional life.
Despite Dutch demands for surrender, an estimated 200 Balinese marched to their death against the invaders.
In his travel memoir ''The Malay Archipelago,'' Wallace wrote of his experience in Bali, of which has strong mention of the unique Balinese irrigation methods:
Bali was the host of Miss World 2013 (63rd edition of the Miss World pageant).
To ease the shortage, the central government plans to build a water catchment and processing facility at Petanu River in Gianyar.
Balinese Hinduism is deeply interwoven with art and ritual.
In 2010, Bali received 2.57 million foreign tourists, which surpassed the target of 2.0–2.3 million tourists.
A DNA study in 2005 by Karafet et al.
East to west, the island is approximately 153&nbsp;km (95&nbsp;mi) wide and spans approximately 112&nbsp;km (69&nbsp;mi) north to south; administratively it covers 5,780&nbsp;km2, or 5,577&nbsp;km2 without Nusa Penida District, its population density is roughly 750 people/km2.
This has been done by seven state-owned enterprises led by PT Jasa Marga with 60% of shares.
Squirrels are quite commonly encountered, less often is the Asian palm civet, which is also kept in coffee farms to produce Kopi Luwak.
Since 2011, China has displaced Japan as the second-largest supplier of tourists to Bali, while Australia still tops the list.
The Arabica coffee production region is the highland region of Kintamani near Mount Batur.
The relatively small size of the island, conflict with humans, poaching and habitat reduction drove the Bali tiger to extinction.
With an estimated 20,000 puras (temples) and shrines, Bali is known as the "Island of a Thousand Puras", or "Island of the Gods".
Balinese Hinduism is an amalgam in which gods and demigods are worshipped together with Buddhist heroes, the spirits of ancestors, indigenous agricultural deities and sacred places.
The Balinese battalion was entirely wiped out, breaking the last thread of Balinese military resistance.
In August 2010, the film ''Eat Pray Love'' was released in theatres.
File:The Rock Bar Bali (7188376333).jpg|Sunset view from The Rock Bar at Ayana Resort, Jimbaran Bay
The average occupancy of starred hotels achieved 65%, so the island is still able to accommodate tourists for some years without any addition of new rooms/hotels, although at the peak season some of them are fully booked.
In January 2016, after music icon David Bowie died, it was revealed that in his will, Bowie asked for his ashes to be scattered in Bali, conforming to Buddhist rituals.
The Subak Abian system is ideally suited to the production of fair trade and organic coffee production.
According to this philosophy, the three causes of happiness are good relations with God, other people, and the environment.
A second, smaller species of deer, the Indian muntjac, also occurs.
The island is surrounded by coral reefs.
The transition is known as the Wallace Line, named after Alfred Russel Wallace, who first proposed a transition zone between these two major biomes.
Bali reported that it has 2.88 million foreign tourists and 5 million domestic tourists in 2012, marginally surpassing the expectations of 2.8 million foreign tourists.
A coastal road circles the island, and three major two-lane arteries cross the central mountains at passes reaching to 1,750m in height (at Penelokan).
Numerous flowers can be seen: hibiscus, frangipani, bougainvillea, poinsettia, oleander, jasmine, water lily, lotus, roses, begonias, orchids and hydrangeas exist.
The Dutch mounted large naval and ground assaults at the Sanur region in 1906 and were met by the thousands of members of the royal family and their followers who fought against the superior Dutch force in a suicidal ''puputan'' defensive assault rather than face the humiliation of surrender.
Bali was also mapped in 1512, in the chart of Francisco Rodrigues, aboard the expedition.
According to the 2010 Census, 83.5% of Bali's population adhered to Balinese Hinduism, followed by 13.4% Muslim, Christianity at 2.5%, and Buddhism 0.5%.
It has been found to be a boundary between species of Asiatic origin west of the line and a mixture of Australian and Asian species to the east.
The name ''Bali dwipa'' ("Bali island") has been discovered from various inscriptions, including the Blanjong pillar inscription written by Sri Kesari Warmadewa in 914 AD and mentioning "Walidwipa".
The banteng still occurs in its domestic form, whereas leopards are found only in neighbouring Java, and the Bali tiger is extinct.
Chinese tourists increased by 17% from last year due to the impact of ACFTA and new direct flights to Bali.
Tourism, Bali's chief industry, has provided the island with a foreign audience that is eager to pay for entertainment, thus creating new performance opportunities and more demand for performers.
Its population is around 491,500 (2002).
The construction is estimated to cost Rp.2.49 trillion ($273.9 million).
These islands are separated from Bali by the Badung Strait.
Black sand beaches between Pasut and Klatingdukuh are being developed for tourism, but apart from the seaside temple of Tanah Lot, they are not yet used for significant tourism.
Notably, individual villages typically adopt a single product, such as wind chimes or wooden furniture.
To the east, the Lombok Strait separates Bali from Lombok and marks the biogeographical division between the fauna of the Indomalayan ecozone and the distinctly different fauna of Australasia.
Suradhipa reigned from 1115 to 1119, and Jayasakti from 1146 until 1150.
Bali was the host of 2008 Asian Beach Games.
With no Islamic forces involved as in Java and Sumatra, upper-caste PNI landlords led the extermination of PKI members.
According to BBC Travel released in 2011, Bali is one of the World's Best Islands, ranking second after Santorini, Greece.
This marriage also brought more Hinduism and Javanese culture to Bali.
Wallace's trip to Bali was instrumental in helping him devise his Wallace Line theory.
An exception is the yellow-crested cockatoo, a member of a primarily Australasian family.
In January 2012, Chinese tourists year on year (yoy) increased by 222.18% compared to January 2011, while Japanese tourists declined by 23.54% yoy.
Houses and villages, marked out by dense clumps of coconut palms, tamarind and other fruit trees, are dotted about in every direction; while between them extend luxurious rice-grounds, watered by an elaborate system of irrigation that would be the pride of the best cultivated parts of Europe.
Dutch political and economic control over Bali began in the 1840s on the island's north coast, when the Dutch pitted various competing Balinese realms against each other.
