In July 2010, the International Court of Justice, ruled that the declaration of independence was legal.
In 2015, Serbia is expected to start accession negotiations with the EU.
The Gross domestic product (Purchasing power parity) per capita is highest in Slovenia and Greece (over $25,000), followed by Croatia (21,000) and then Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Montenegro, Serbia, Macedonia ($10,000 – $15,000), Bosnia, Albania and Kosovo (below $10,000).
The next year Bulgaria joined the Central Powers attacking Serbia, which was successfully fighting Austro-Hungary to the north for a year.
Ιn 2001 an Albanian uprising in Macedonia forced the country to give local autonomy to the ethnic Albanians in the areas where they predominate.
As the only non-communist countries, Greece and Turkey were (and still are) part of NATO composing the southeastern wing of the alliance.
** Territories members of the Partnership for Peace with Individual Partnership Action Plan and Membership Action Plan for joining NATO: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Montenegro
Most of the republics are parliamentary, excluding Romania and Bosnia which are semi-presidential.
In 2005, the European Union decided to start accession negotiations with candidate countries; Turkey, and Macedonia were accepted as candidates for EU membership.
* On the recent political, social and economic criteria there are two groups of countries:
Iron ore is rare, but in some countries there is a considerable amount of copper, zinc, tin, chromite, manganese, magnesite and bauxite.
In Turkish Balkan means "a chain of wooded mountains" (''''), while in Bulgarian language the word ''balkan'' (балкан) means "mountain".
Many people in the Balkans place their greatest folk heroes in the era of either the onslaught or the retreat of the Ottoman Empire.
** Slovenia: Islam (2%), Orthodox (2%), other and undeclared (36%)
** Territories using the Euro without authorization by the EU: Kosovo and Montenegro
From Antiquity through the Middle Ages, the Balkan Mountains had been called by the local Thracian name ''Haemus''.
** Serbia: Catholicism (5%),  Islam (3%), Protestantism (1%), other and undeclared (6%)
Most UN member states recognise Kosovo.
Greece has been a member of the NATO since 1952.
The Bulgars and Slavs arrived in the 6th-century and began assimilating and displacing already-assimilated (through Romanization and Hellenization) older inhabitants of the northern and central Balkans, forming the Bulgarian Empire.
Zeune's goal was to have a geographical parallel term to the Italic and Iberian Peninsula, and seemingly nothing more.
** Territories that are legally bound to join the Schengen Area: Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania
* Territories where the predominant language is Hellenic:
In 1912–1913 the First Balkan War broke out when the nation-states of Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece and Montenegro united in an alliance against the Ottoman Empire.
They left behind a region largely ruined as a result of wartime exploitation.
A less popular hypothesis regarding its etymology is that it derived from the Persian ''Balā-Khān''a meaning ''big, high, house''.
There has been no other documented usage of the word to refer to the region before that, despite the fact that other Turkic tribes had already settled earlier or were passing through the Peninsula.
Sephardi Jews used to have a large presence in the city of Thessaloniki, and by 1900, some 80,000, or more than half of the population, were Jews.
D. Dechev considers that Haemus (Αἷμος) is derived from a Thracian word ''*saimon'', 'mountain ridge'.
As examples, for Greeks, Constantine XI Palaiologos and Kolokotronis; and for Serbs, Miloš Obilić and Tzar Lazar; for Montenegrins, Đurađ I Balšić and Ivan Crnojević; for Albanians, George Kastrioti Skanderbeg; for ethnic Macedonians, Nikola Karev and Goce Delčev; for Bulgarians, Vasil Levski, Georgi Sava Rakovski and Hristo Botev and for Croats, Nikola Šubić Zrinjski.
As a result of the war, almost all remaining European territories of the Ottoman Empire were captured and partitioned among the allies.
According to Greek mythology, the Thracian king Haemus was turned into a mountain by Zeus as a punishment and the mountain has remained with his name.
Thus, the region would include: Croatia (now an EU member), Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Kosovo, Macedonia and Albania.
The myth relates to a fight between Zeus and the monster/titan Typhon.
** Territories members of the Central European Free Trade Agreement: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
Among Russian travelers not so burdened by classical toponymy, Balkan was the preferred term."
The highest mountain of the region is Rila in Bulgaria, with Musala at 2925&nbsp;m, Mount Olympus in Greece, the throne of Zeus, being second at 2917&nbsp;m and Vihren in Bulgaria being the third at 2914&nbsp;m. The karst field or polje is a common feature of the landscape.
However, the regions of Trieste and Istria are not usually considered part of the Balkans by Italian geographers, due to a definition of the Balkans that limits its western border to the Kupa River.
Being the Macedonian part of Yugoslavia (see Vardar Macedonia), the federated Republic under the Yugoslav identity had the name Republic of Macedonia on which it declared its sovereignty in 1991.
** Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
The Romans considered the Rhodope Mountains to be the northern limit of the Peninsula of Haemus and the same limit applied approximately to the border between Greek and Latin use in the region (later called the Jireček Line).
The gradually acquired political connotations are newer and, to a large extent, due to oscillating political circumstances.
In the northern part of the peninsula and on the mountains, winters are frosty and snowy, while summers are hot and dry.
See also the Black Sea Regional organizations
Two early culture-complexes have developed in the region, Starčevo culture and Vinča culture.
In the southern part winters are milder.
*  (Dobruja 's mainland): 12,000&nbsp;km2 (5%)
In March 2004, Bulgaria and Slovenia have become members of NATO.
** Bosnia and Herzegovina: Orthodoxy (31%), Catholicism (15%), other and undeclared (14%)
Serbia in turn declared the dissolution of the union as unconstitutional and the Yugoslavian army unsuccessfully tried to maintain status quo.
As time passed, the term gradually acquired political connotations far from its initial geographic meaning, arising from political changes from the late 19th-century to the creation of post–World War I Yugoslavia (initially the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes).
The highest point of the Balkans is Mount Musala  on the Rila mountain range in Bulgaria.
A European Union initiative of 1999 is called the ''Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe'', and the online newspaper ''Balkan Times'' renamed itself ''Southeast European Times'' in 2003.
The Ottoman Empire also used the opportunity to recapture Eastern Thrace, establishing its new western borders that still stand today.
The Western Balkans is a neologism coined to describe the countries of "ex-Yugoslavia (minus Slovenia) and Albania".
), and is also classified with very high HDI in contrast to the remaining states which are classified with high HDI.
During the occupation the population suffered considerable hardship due to repression and starvation, to which the population reacted by creating a mass resistance movement.
** Albania: Catholicism (10%), Orthodoxy (7%), other and undeclared (24%)
The Balkan region today is a very diverse ethno-linguistic region, being home to multiple Slavic, Romance, and Turkic languages, as well as Greek, Albanian, and others.
*  (southwest part): 10,000&nbsp;km2 (50%)
The Jewish communities in the Balkans suffered immensely during World War II, and the vast majority were killed during the Holocaust.
Its northern boundary is often given as the Danube, Sava and Kupa Rivers.
* Territories in the time zone of UTC+01:00: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia
A part of the population in the Balkans defines itself as irreligious.
Vojvodina and North Belgrade): 55,000&nbsp;km2 (69%)
** Territories members of NATO: Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Romania, Slovenia and Turkey
The participation of Greece in the war three years later, in 1918, on the part of the Entente finally altered the balance between the opponents leading to the collapse of the common German-Bulgarian front there, which caused the exit of Bulgaria from the war, and in turn the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, ending the First World War.
Zeus injured Typhon with a thunder bolt and Typhon's blood fell on the mountains from which they got their name.
** Territories in the Schengen Area: Greece and Slovenia
Eastern Orthodoxy is the majority religion in both the Balkan peninsula and the Balkan region.
During the 1820s, "Balkan became the preferred although not yet exclusive term alongside Haemus among British travelers...
Greece has been the member of the European Union since 1981 while Slovenia is a member since 2004, Bulgaria and Romania are members since 2007, and Croatia is a member since 2013.
Since 2000, all Balkan countries are friendly towards the EU and the USA.
Provoked by the backstage deals between its former allies Serbia and Greece on allocation the spoils at the end of the First Balkan War, while it fights at the main Thracian Front, Bulgaria marks the beginning of Second Balkan War when attacked them.
Yugoslavia, led by Marshal Josip Broz Tito (1892–1980), first propped up then rejected the idea of merging with Bulgaria and instead sought closer relations with the West, later even spearheaded, together with India and Egypt the Non-Aligned Movement.
A variety of different traditions of each faith are practiced, with each of the Eastern Orthodox countries having its own national church.
** Territories members of the European Union: Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Romania and Slovenia
* : 13,440&nbsp;km2 (>99%)
In the southern part and on the coast there is evergreen vegetation.
It is more or less identical to the region known as  Southeastern Europe.
The main ranges are the Balkan mountains, running from the Black Sea coast in Bulgaria to its border with Serbia, the Rhodope mountains in southern Bulgaria and northern Greece, the Dinaric Alps in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro, the Šar massif which spreads from Albania to Macedonia, and the Pindus range, spanning from southern Albania into central Greece and the Albanian Alps.
However, despite being under communist governments, Yugoslavia (1948) and Albania (1961) fell out with the Soviet Union.
** Macedonia: 64% (Macedonian Orthodox Church)
* Territories in the time zone of UTC+02:00: Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey
This civil war, unleashed by the Communist Party of Greece, backed by communist volunteers from neighboring countries (Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia), led to massive American assistance for the non-communist Greek government.
Till October 1991, the Army withdrew from Slovenia, and in Croatia, the Croatian War of Independence would continue until 1995.
Hydropower is in wide use, from over 1,000 dams.
* On border control and trade criteria the divisions are as follows:
Greece, having a large region (see Macedonia) also under the same name opposed to the usage of this name as an indication of a nationality.
Wars between the former Yugoslav republics broke out after Slovenia and Croatia held free elections and their people voted for independence on their respective countries' referenda.
** Territories members of the Eurozone: Greece and Slovenia
The Balkan Peninsula is surrounded by the Adriatic Sea to the west, the Mediterranean Sea (including the Ionian and Aegean seas) and the Marmara Sea to the south and the Black Sea to the east.
The First World War was sparked in the Balkans in 1914 when members of Mlada Bosna, a revolutionary organization with predominately Serbian and pro-Yugoslav members, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Bosnia and Herzegovina's capital, Sarajevo.
An exception were the Bulgarian Jews, most of whom were saved by Boris III of Bulgaria, who resisted Adolf Hitler, opposing their deportation to Nazi concentration camps.
The Balkan region was the first area in Europe to experience the arrival of farming cultures in the Neolithic era.
The Gini coefficient, which indicates the level of difference by monetary welfare of the layers, is on the second level at the highest monetary equality in Albania, Bulgaria and Serbia, on the third level in Greece, Montenegro and Romania, on the fourth level in Macedonia, on the fifth level in Turkey, and the most unequal by Gini coefficient is Bosnia at the eighth level which is the penultimate level and one of the highest in the world.
Although the new government reaffirmed Serbia's intentions to fulfill its obligations as member of the Axis, Germany, using its other two allied countries in the region, Bulgaria and Hungary, invaded both Greece and Yugoslavia.
Mostly or partially within the Balkans:
The concept of the "Balkans" was created by the German geographer August Zeune in 1808.
** Albania and Kosovo
The Sephardi Jewish cemetery in Sarajevo has tombstones of a unique shape and inscribed in ancient Ladino.
The Balkans are also the location of the first advanced civilizations.
According to Suraiya Faroqhi and Donald Quataert, "The population of the Balkans, according to one estimate, fell from a high of 8 million in the late 16th-century to only 3 million by the mid-eighteenth.
A reverse name scheme has also been suggested.
That led to Serbia's defeat and the intervention of the Entente in the Balkans which sent an expeditionary force to establish a new front, the third one of that war, which soon also became static.
), however, Greece has high income economies (over $12,000 p.c.
Inland there are woods typical of Central Europe (oak and beech, and in the mountains, spruce, fir and pine).
The Balkans have been inhabited since the Paleolithic and are the route by which farming from the Middle East spread to Europe during the Neolithic (7th millennium BC).
* Territories where the predominant language is Turkic:
After repelling the attack, the Greeks counterattacked, invading Italy-held Albania and causing Nazi Germany's intervention in the Balkans to help its ally.
In 2012, Montenegro started accession negotiations with the EU.
There exists also a claim about an earlier Bulgar Turkic origin of the word popular in Bulgaria, however it is only an unscholary assertion.
*  (south part excl.
** Croatia:  Eastern Orthodoxy (4%), Islam (1%), other and undeclared (7%)
Metal ores are more usual than other raw materials.
The unemployment is lowest in Romania (below 10%), followed by Bulgaria, Turkey, Albania (10 – 15%), Greece (15 – 20%), Montenegro, Serbia, Bosnia (20 – 30%), Macedonia (over 30%) and Kosovo (over 40%).
Later the Roman Empire conquered most of the region and spread Roman culture and the Latin language, but significant parts still remained under classical Greek influence.
The population only of European Turkey, that excludes the Anatolian peninsula, which otherwise has a population of 75,627,384 and a density of 97.
** Territories members of the Partnership for Peace: Serbia
The two countries were partitioned between the three Axis allies, Bulgaria, Germany and Italy, and the Independent State of Croatia, a puppet state of Italy and Germany.
*  (mainland): 104,470&nbsp;km2 (80%)
Most of the area is covered by mountain ranges running from the northwest to southeast.
The word was used by the Ottomans in  Rumelia in its general meaning of mountain, as in ''Kod̲j̲a-Balkan'', ''Čatal-Balkan'', and ''Ungurus-Balkani̊'', but especially it was applied to the Haemus mountain.
The identity of the Balkans is dominated by its geographical position; historically the area was known as a crossroads of cultures.
** Territories in a customs union with the EU: Turkey
Other deposits of coal, especially in Bulgaria, Serbia and Bosnia, also exist.
Natural gas deposits are scarce.
All the states have open market economies, most of which are in the upper-middle income range ($4,000 – $12,000 p.c.
These communities were Sephardi Jews, except in Romania where the Jewish communities were Ashkenazi Jews.
After the dissolution of Yugoslavia beginning in June 1991, the term "Balkans" again received a negative meaning, especially in Croatia and Slovenia, even in casual usage (see Balkanization).
Days before the German invasion a successful coup d'état in Belgrade by neutral military personnel seized power.
* On military criteria the divisions are as follows:
* On political, social and economic criteria the divisions are as follows:
In the 1990s, the transition of the regions' ex-Soviet bloc countries towards democratic free-market societies went peacefully with the exception of Yugoslavia.
The practices of growing grain and raising livestock arrived in the Balkans from the Fertile Crescent by way of Anatolia and spread west and north into Pannonia and Central Europe.
*  : 108,400&nbsp;km2 (>99%)
* Territories where the predominant language is Romance:
The issue is currently under negotiations after a UN initiation.
Share of land area within the Balkan Peninsula by country by the Danube-Sava definition:
** Bulgaria: 59% (Bulgarian Orthodox Church)
The often relentless bora wind is also being harnessed for power generation.
The states from the former Eastern Bloc that formerly had planned economy system and Turkey mark gradual economic growth each year, only the economy of Greece drops for 2012 and meanwhile it was expected to grow in 2013.
The Jewish communities of the Balkans were some of the oldest in Europe and date back to ancient times.
Most of the Balkan nation-states emerged during the 19th and early 20th centuries as they gained independence from the Ottoman Empire or the Austro-Hungarian empire (Greece in 1821, Serbia, Montenegro in 1878, Bulgaria in 1908, Albania in 1912).
English traveler John Morritt introduced this term into the English literature at the end of the 18th-century, and other authors started applying the name to the wider area between the Adriatic and the Black Sea.
On the Adriatic and Aegean coasts the climate is Mediterranean, on the Black Sea coast the climate is humid subtropical and oceanic, and inland it is humid continental.
** Bosnia and Herzegovina (51%)
** Territories with capitalist past: Greece and Turkey
The Balkans are bordered by the Adriatic Sea on the northwest, the Ionian Sea on the southwest, the Mediterranean and Aegean Sea on the south and southeast, and the Black Sea on the east and northeast.
All of the aforementioned languages from the present and from the past belong to the wider Indo-European language family, with the exception of the Turkic languages (e.g., Turkish and Gagauz).
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the small and close-knit Jewish community is 90% Sephardic, and Ladino is still spoken among the elderly.
Throughout history many other ethnic groups with their own languages lived in the area, among them Thracians, Illyrians, Romans, Celts and various Germanic tribes.
During the Middle Ages, the Balkans became the stage for a series of wars between the Byzantine Roman and the Bulgarian Empires.
Slovenia and Croatia declared independence on 25 June 1991, followed by the Ten-Day War in Slovenia.
* Territories in which there are minority languages spoken by over 10% of the population:
During the Cold War, most of the countries on the Balkans were governed by communist governments.
** Kosovo: Roman Catholicism (2%), Eastern Orthodoxy (1%)
The current territory of Italy includes only the small area around Trieste inside the Balkan Peninsula.
With the dissolution of Yugoslavia an issue emerged over the name under which the former (federated) republic of Macedonia would internationally be recognized, between the new country and Greece.
*  (European part): 23,000&nbsp;km2 (3%)
The name is still preserved in Central Asia with the Balkan Daglary (Balkan Mountains) and the Balkan Province of Turkmenistan.
*  (Trieste and Monfalcone): 300&nbsp;km2 (0.1%)
Another possibility to its etymology is related to Persian ''bālk'' meaning "mud", and the Turkish suffix ''an'', i.e.
Balkan countries control the direct land routes between Western Europe and South West Asia (Asia Minor and the Middle East).
That caused a war between the two countries which—through the existing chains of alliances—led to the First World War.
** Territories using the national currencies and candidates for the Eurozone: Bulgaria (lev), Croatia (hrk), Romania (leu)
The tree line in the mountains lies at the height of 1800–2300&nbsp;m. The land provides habitats for numerous endemic species, including extraordinarily abundant insects and reptiles that serve as food for a variety of birds of prey and rare vultures.
Greece became the first battleground of the emerging Cold War.
*  (south mainland): 30,000&nbsp;km2 (54%)
With this backing, Greece managed to defeat the partisans and, ultimately, remained the only non-communist country in the region.
* Territories in which the principal religion is Eastern Orthodoxy (with national churches in parentheses):
Currently all of the states are republics, but until World War II all except Turkey were monarchies.
** Montenegro: 72% (Serbian Orthodox Church, Montenegrin Orthodox Church)
* : 27,390&nbsp;km2 (>99% of total land)
The Serbs and the Greeks repulse single attacks, but when the Greek army invaded Bulgaria together with an unprovoked Romanian intervention in the back, regardless of the single won battles, Bulgaria collapsed.
** Montenegro: Islam (19%), Catholicism (3%), other and undeclared (5%)
Over the centuries many woods have been cut down and replaced with bush.
By the end of the 16th-century, the Ottoman Empire had become the controlling force in the region after expanding from Anatolia through Thrace to the Balkans.
After the end of the wars a revolution broke in Serbia and Slobodan Milošević, the Serbian communist leader (elected president between 1989 and 2000), was overthrown and handed for trial to the International Criminal Tribunal for crimes against the International Humanitarian Law during the Yugoslav wars.
The first attested time the name "Balkan" was used in the West for the mountain range in Bulgaria was in a letter sent in 1490 to Pope Innocent VIII by Buonaccorsi Callimaco, an Italian humanist, writer and diplomat.
The earliest mention of the name appears in an early 14th-century Arab map, in which the Haemus mountains are referred to as ''Balkan''.
With the start of the Second World War all Balkan countries, with the exception of Greece, were allies of Nazi Germany, having bilateral military agreements or being part of the Axis Pact.
The Ottomans first mention it in a document dated from 1565.
The Ottoman Empire soon joined the Central Powers becoming one of the three empires participating in that alliance.
** Greece: Islam (1%), Catholicism, other and undeclared
It is home to two thirds of the city's 14,025,646 inhabitants.
* Territories where the predominant language is Albanian:
** Territories using the national currencies: Albania (lek), Bosnia and Herzegovina (convertible mark), Macedonia (denar), Serbia (dinar) and Turkey (lira).
From the dissolution of Yugoslavia six republics achieved international recognition as sovereign republics, but these are traditionally included in Balkans: Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
Ensuing events also led to the creation of an independent Albanian state.
Petroleum scarce reserves exist in Greece, Serbia and Albania.
It has been a juncture between the Latin and Greek bodies of the Roman Empire, the destination of a massive influx of pagan Bulgars and Slavs, an area where Orthodox and Catholic Christianity met, as well as the meeting point between Islam and Christianity.
As of 1920 until World War II, Italy included Istria and some Dalmatian areas (like ''Zara'', known as Zadar) that are within the general definition of the Balkan peninsula.
Fascist Italy expanded the war in the Balkans by using its protectorate Albania to invade Greece.
Almost all of the few survivors have emigrated to the (then) newly founded state of Israel and elsewhere.
In the past several centuries, because of the frequent Ottoman wars in Europe fought in and around the Balkans and the comparative Ottoman isolation from the mainstream of economic advance (reflecting the shift of Europe's commercial and political centre of gravity towards the Atlantic), the Balkans has been the least developed part of Europe.
Lignite deposits are widespread in Greece.
Elsewhere, land cultivation is mostly unsuccessful because of the mountains, hot summers and poor soils, although certain cultures such as olive and grape flourish.
The soils are generally poor, except on the plains, where areas with natural grass, fertile soils and warm summers provide an opportunity for tillage.
Resources of energy are scarce, except in the territory of Kosovo, where considerable coal, lead, zinc, chromium and silver deposits are located.
