The sea stretches from 53°N to 66°N latitude and from 10°E to 30°E longitude.
In the northernmost reaches of the Bothnian Bay, ice usually stays until late May; by early June it is practically always gone.
In 1945, the Baltic Sea became a mass grave for retreating soldiers and refugees on torpedoed troop transports.
Historically, the Kingdom of Denmark collected Sound Dues from ships at the border between the ocean and the land-locked Baltic Sea.
Sweden's defeat in the Great Northern War brought Russia to the eastern coast.
Starting in the 11th century, the southern and eastern shores of the Baltic were settled by migrants mainly from Germany, a movement called the ''Ostsiedlung'' ("east settling").
It is possible that Pliny refers to an island named ''Basilia'' ("kingdom" or "royal") in ''On the Ocean'' by Pytheas.
The goal of Swedish warfare during the 17th century was to make the Baltic Sea an all-Swedish sea (''Ett Svenskt innanhav''), something that was accomplished except the rout between Riga in Latvia and Szczecin in Poland.
A line joining Stevns Lighthouse () and Falsterbo Point ().
Severe winters can lead to ice formation around southern Sweden and even in the Danish straits.
Construction of the Great Belt Bridge in Denmark (completed 1997) and the Øresund Bridge-Tunnel (completed 1999), linking Denmark with Sweden, provided a highway and railroad connection between Sweden and the Danish mainland (the Jutland Peninsula, precisely the Zealand).
* Ancylus Lake, 9,500–8,000
The rest of the land is heavily populated.
From 1872, there exist regular and reliable records of water levels in the Baltic Sea.
The ice-covered area during such a typical winter includes the Gulf of Bothnia, the Gulf of Finland, the Gulf of Riga, the archipelago west of Estonia, the Stockholm archipelago, and the Archipelago Sea southwest of Finland.
The Polabian Slavs were gradually assimilated by the Germans.
A surface layer of brackish water discharges  per year into the North Sea.
This root and its basic meaning were retained in both Lithuanian (as ''baltas'') and Latvian (as ''balts'').
Válfojohka → Kamajåkka → Abiskojaure → Abiskojokk(total 40&nbsp;km) → Torneträsk (70&nbsp;km) → Torne älv
The Northern Baltic Sea lies between the Stockholm area, southwestern Finland and Estonia.
They were collected in the Øresund at Kronborg castle near Helsingør, in the Great Belt at Nyborg.
The westernmost part of the Baltic Sea is the Bay of Kiel.
An important source of salty water are infrequent inflows of North Sea water into the Baltic.
Even now fishermen accidentally retrieve some of these materials: the most recent available report from the Helsinki Commission notes that four small scale catches of chemical munitions representing approximately  of material were reported in 2005.
Seasonal winds also cause small changes in sea level, of the order of  .
The Baltic Proper is bordered on its northern edge, at the latitude 60°N, by the Åland islands and the Gulf of Bothnia, on its northeastern edge by the Gulf of Finland, on its eastern edge by the Gulf of Riga, and in the West by the South-Swedish part of the Scandinavian Peninsula.
* Eemian Sea, 130,000–115,000 (years ago)
the Littorina mollusk) that are clear markers of changing water temperatures and salinity.
The shallow sills are obstacles to the flow of heavy salt water from the Kattegat into the basins around Bornholm and Gotland.
Until now, the U.S. Government refuses to disclose the exact coordinates of the wreck sites.
The ratification instruments were deposited by the European Community, Germany, Latvia and Sweden in 1994, by Estonia and Finland in 1995, by Denmark in 1996, by Lithuania in 1997 and by Poland and Russia in November 1999.
Freezing begins in the northern extremities of Gulf of Bothnia typically in the middle of November, reaching the open waters of the Bothnian Bay in early January.
The decreasing salinity along this path causes restrictions in both physiology and habitats.
This border status restricted trade and travel.
European Route of Brick Gothic is a touristic route connecting cities with Brick Gothic architecture in three countries along the Baltic Sea: Denmark, Germany and Poland.
The Ocean X team has published one additional close-up sonar scan on their Web site and nine additional close-up sonar scans on their YouTube page that appear to show a 90-degree angle and other features of the object.
Satellite images taken in July 2010 revealed a massive algal bloom covering  in the Baltic Sea.
The Kattegat and the southwestern Baltic Sea are well oxygenated and have a rich biology.
The most saline water is vertically stratified in the water column to the north, creating a barrier to the exchange of oxygen and nutrients, and fostering completely separate maritime environments.
In the area, the former seabed is only gently sloping, leading to large areas of land being reclaimed in what are, geologically speaking, relatively short periods (decades and centuries).
Measures are also taken in the whole catchment area of the Baltic Sea to reduce land-based pollution.
Tacitus in his AD&nbsp;98 ''Agricola'' and ''Germania'' described the Mare Suebicum, named for the Suebi tribe, during the spring months, as a brackish sea where the ice broke apart and chunks floated about.
In recent years prior to 2011, the Bothnian Bay and the Bothnian Sea were frozen with solid ice near the Baltic coast and dense floating ice far from it.
However, several marine species have populations in the Baltic Sea adapted to the low salinity, such as the Baltic Sea herring which is smaller than the Atlantic herring.
The salinity gradient is paralleled by a temperature gradient.
A mediterranean sea of the Atlantic, with limited water exchange between the two bodies, the Baltic Sea drains through the Danish islands into the Kattegat by way of the straits of Øresund, the Great Belt, and the Little Belt.
:*''In the Sound.''
Russia's Peter the Great saw the strategic importance of the Baltic and decided to found his new capital, Saint Petersburg, at the mouth of the Neva river at the east end of the Gulf of Finland.
In 2011, the Gulf of Finland was completely frozen on 15 February.
This leads to decreased oxygen concentrations within the zone.
The object is at the end of what resembles a  "runway".
However, floating ice was additionally observed near Świnoujście harbour in January 2010.
The area of the bloom extended from Germany and Poland to Finland.
After 1945, the German population was expelled from all areas east of the Oder-Neisse line, making room for displaced Poles and Russians.
Yet another explanation is that the name originally meant "enclosed sea, bay" as opposed to open sea.
The lack of tides has affected the marine species as compared with the Atlantic.
The thickness decreases farther south.
Denmark gradually gained control over most of the Baltic coast, until she lost much of her possessions after being defeated in the 1227 Battle of Bornhöved.
Other notable megafauna include the basking sharks.
The Bay of Pomerania lies north of the islands of Usedom and Wolin, east of Rügen.
The Baltic then separated opposing military blocs: NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
During winter, fast ice, which is attached to the shoreline, develops first, rendering ports unusable without the services of icebreakers.
Because of this large anaerobic zone, the seafloor ecology differs from that of the neighbouring Atlantic.
* Yoldia Sea, 10,300–9500
The grey seal is adapted to reproducing also with no ice in the sea.
It is known that since 1720, the Baltic Sea has frozen over entirely a total of 20 times.
The open surface waters of the central basin have salinity of 0.5% to 0.8%, which makes the basin border-line freshwater.
The highest was the flood of 1872 when the water was an average of  above sea level at Warnemünde and a maximum of  above sea level in Warnemünde.
The gleaming expanse of ice is similar to the Arctic, with wind-driven pack ice and ridges up to .
The Gulf of Riga lies between the Latvian capital city of Riga and the Estonian island of Saaremaa.
Jordanes called it the ''Germanic Sea'' in his work, the ''Getica''.
The most recent case was in early 1987, which was the most severe winter in Scandinavia since that date.
Of the nations containing all or part of the basin, Poland includes 45% of the 85 million, Russia 12%, Sweden 10% and the others less than 6% each.
During World War II, Germany reclaimed all of the southern and much of the eastern shore by occupying Poland and the Baltic states.
The ice reaches its maximum extent in February or March; typical ice thickness in the northernmost areas in the Bothnian Bay, the northern basin of the Gulf of Bothnia, is about  for landfast sea ice.
This description meant that the whole of the Baltic Sea was covered with ice.
The narrowest part of Little Belt is the "Middelfart Sund" near Middelfart.
The Soviet Union gained another access to the Baltic with the Kaliningrad Oblast.
Several Pleistocene glacial episodes scooped out the river bed into the sea basin.
The water level is generally far more dependent on the regional wind situation than on tidal effects.
The Drogden Sill is situated north of Køge Bugt and connects Dragør in the south of Copenhagen to Malmö; it is used by the Øresund Bridge, including the ''Drogden Tunnel''.
The '''Baltic Sea''' (; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ) is a sea of the Atlantic Ocean, enclosed by Scandinavia, Finland, the Baltic countries, and the North European Plain.
Since the Baltic Sea is so young there are only a few endemic species.
Many of the stages are named after marine animals (e.g.
This finally happened during the Northern Crusades: Finland in the twelfth century by Swedes, and what are now Estonia and Latvia in the early thirteenth century by Danes and Germans (Livonian Brothers of the Sword).
Older, wood-based shipwrecks such as the ''Vasa'' tend to remain well-preserved, as the Baltic's cold and brackish water does not suit the shipworm.
By the time of the last, or Eemian Stage (MIS&nbsp;5e), the Eemian Sea was in place.
The ice cover is the main habitat for two large mammals, the grey seal (''Halichoerus grypus'') and the Baltic ringed seal (''Pusa hispida botnica''), both of which feed underneath the ice and breed on its surface.
In the 13th to 17th centuries, the strongest economic force in Northern Europe was the Hanseatic League, a federation of merchant cities around the Baltic Sea and the North Sea.
Rotting bottles leak Lost and other substances, thus slowly poisoning a substantial part of the Baltic Sea.
However, tidal currents occur in narrow passages in the western parts of the Baltic Sea.
Meanwhile, others have suggested that the name of the island originates from the Proto-Indo-European root  *''bhel'' meaning ''white, fair''.
During the Crimean War, a joint British and French fleet attacked the Russian fortresses in the Baltic.
During the winter of 2010–11, which was quite severe compared to those of the last decades, the maximum ice cover was , which was reached on 25 February 2011.
In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, Poland, Denmark, and Sweden fought wars for ''Dominium maris baltici'' ("Lordship over the Baltic Sea").
Another explanation is that, while derived from the aforementioned root, the name of the sea is related to names for various forms of water and related substances in several European languages, that might have been originally associated with colors found in swamps (compare Proto-Slavic ''*bolto'' "swamp").
In the last very heavy floods the average water levels reached  above sea level in 1904,  in 1913,  in January 1954,  on 2–4 November 1995 and  on 21 February 2002.
About 17% of the basin is unused open land with another 8% of wetlands.
They bombarded Sveaborg, which guards Helsinki; and Kronstadt, which guards Saint Petersburg; and they destroyed Bomarsund in the Åland Islands.
There was much trading not just within the Baltic region but also with the North Sea region, especially eastern England and the Netherlands: their fleets needed the Baltic timber, tar, flax and hemp.
Level ice, ice sludge, pancake ice, and rafter ice form in the more open regions.
The more rounded southern basin of the gulf is called Bothnian Sea and immediately to the south of it lies the Sea of Åland.
Consequently, the surface area and the depth of the sea are diminishing.
Since the Viking age, the Scandinavians have referred to the Baltic Sea as ''Austmarr'' ("Eastern Lake").
The Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Riga freeze typically in late January.
In spring, the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Bothnia normally thaw in late April, with some ice ridges persisting until May in the eastern extremities of the Gulf of Finland.
It might be connected to the Germanic word ''belt'', a name used for two of the Danish straits, the Belts, while others claim it to be directly derived from the source of the Germanic word, Latin ''balteus'' (belt).
The Bornholm Basin is the area east of Bornholm, and the shallower Arkona Basin extends from Bornholm to the Danish isles of Falster and Zealand.
After the unification of Germany in 1871, the whole southern coast became German.
The present contracting parties are Denmark, Estonia, the European Community, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Russia and Sweden.
Plans to artificially oxygenate areas of the Baltic that have experienced eutrophication have been proposed by the University of Gothenburg and Inocean AB.
'''Hydrography and biology'''
The phenomenon is known as post-glacial rebound.
In the Middle Ages the sea was known by variety of names.
According to the 18th-century natural historian William Derham, during the severe winters of 1703 and 1708, the ice cover reached as far as the Danish straits.
The 1974 Convention entered into force on 3 May 1980.
The salinity steadily decreases towards North and East.
Winter storms begin arriving in the region during October.
Saxo Grammaticus recorded in ''Gesta Danorum'' an older name, ''Gandvik'', ''-vik'' being Old Norse for "bay", which implies that the Vikings correctly regarded it as an inlet of the sea.
The mostly asexually reproducing brown alga ''Fucus radicans'' seems to have evolved in the basin.
From that time the waters underwent a geologic history summarized under the names listed below.
The proposal intends to use wind-driven pumps to inject oxygen (air) into waters at, or around, 130m below sea level.
At the northern part of the Gulf of Bothnia the water is no longer salty and many fresh water species live in the sea.
A peculiar feature of the fauna is that it contains a number of glacial relict species, isolated populations of arctic species which have remained in the Baltic Sea since the last glaciation, such as the large isopod ''Saduria entomon'', the Baltic subspecies of ringed seal, and the fourhorn sculpin.
The sinking of the ''Wilhelm Gustloff'' remains the worst maritime disaster in history, killing (very roughly) 9,000 people.
The Norse also used the rivers of Russia for trade routes, finding their way eventually to the Black Sea and southern Russia.
The origin of the latter name is speculative.
Violent and sudden storms often sweep the surface, due to large transient temperature differences and a long reach of wind.
The flow of fresh water into the sea from approximately two hundred rivers and the introduction of salt from the South builds up a gradient of salinity in the Baltic Sea.
Now extinct Atlantic grey whales and eastern population of North Atlantic right whales that is facing functional extinction once migrated into Baltic Sea.
The name ''Baltic Sea'' became dominant only after 1600.
The Baltic Sea somewhat resembles a riverbed, with two tributaries, the Gulf of Finland and Gulf of Bothnia.
The undersea tunnel of the Øresund Bridge-Tunnel provides for navigation of large ships into and out of the Baltic Sea.
The three Danish straits, the Great Belt, the Little Belt and The Sound (''Öresund''/''Øresund''), connect the Baltic Sea with the Kattegat  and Skagerrak strait in the North Sea.
World War I was partly fought in the Baltic Sea.
On the long-term average, the Baltic Sea is ice-covered at the annual maximum for about 45% of its surface area.
Due to the difference in salinity, by salinity permeation principle, a sub-surface layer of more saline water moving in the opposite direction brings in  per year.
The effects of the afore-mentioned high-pressure area did not reach the southern parts of the Baltic Sea, and thus the entire sea did not freeze over.
The remainder of the Sea is brackish, poor in oxygen and in species.
The governing body of the Convention is the Helsinki Commission, also known as HELCOM, or Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission.
Around 22 million live in population centers of over 250,000.
Fertilizer runoff from surrounding agricultural land has exacerbated the problem and led to increased eutrophication.
Such inflows, important to the Baltic ecosystem because of the oxygen they transport into the Baltic deeps, used to happen on average every four to five years until the 1980s.
This is a reduction from the 25 incidents representing  of material in 2003.
Approximately  of the Baltic's seafloor (a quarter of its total area) is a variable dead zone.
The ice then covered .
Later, the Norse fought for control of the Baltic against Wendish tribes dwelling on the southern shore.
Geographers widely agree that the preferred physical border of the Baltic is a line drawn through the southern Danish islands, Drogden-Sill and Langeland.
The Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area, 1992, entered into force on 17 January 2000.
Critically endangered populations of Atlantic white-sided dolphins and harbor porpoises inhabit the sea where white-colored porpoises have been recorded, and occasionally oceanic species such as bottlenose dolphins, orcas, and beaked whales visit the waters.
In Sweden the sea was then referred to as ''Mare Nostrum Balticum'' ("Our Baltic Sea").
There is also another smaller object not far away.
Offshore of the landfast ice, the ice remains very dynamic all year, and it is relatively easily moved around by winds and therefore forms pack ice, made up of large piles and ridges pushed against the landfast ice and shores.
The remainder of the Baltic does not freeze during a normal winter, with the exception of sheltered bays and shallow lagoons such as the Curonian Lagoon.
In the light of political changes and developments in international environmental and maritime law, a new convention was signed in 1992 by all the states bordering on the Baltic Sea, and the European Community.
The Gulf of Finland connects the Baltic Sea with Saint Petersburg.
In the early Middle Ages, Norse (Scandinavian) merchants built a trade empire all around the Baltic.
It is mainly bacteria that grow in it, digesting organic material and releasing hydrogen sulfide.
Some of these relicts are derived from glacial lakes, such as  ''Monoporeia affinis'', which is a main element in the benthic fauna of the low-salinity Bothnian Bay.
There are several cargo and passenger ferries that operate on the Baltic Sea, such as Scandlines, Silja Line, Polferries, the Viking Line, Tallink, and Superfast Ferries.
Below , the salinity is between 1.0% and 1.5% in the open Baltic Sea, and higher near the Danish Straits, but this is still less than half that of ocean water.
* Mastogloia Sea 8,000–7,500
The factors that determined the sea's characteristics were the submergence or emergence of the region due to the weight of ice and subsequent isostatic readjustment, and the connecting channels it found to the North Sea-Atlantic, either through the straits of Denmark or at what are now the large lakes of Sweden, and the White Sea-Arctic Sea.
Geological surveys show that before the Pleistocene, instead of the Baltic Sea, there was a wide plain around a great river paleontologists call the Eridanos.
Since the end of World War II, various nations, including the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States, have disposed of chemical weapons in the Baltic Sea, raising concerns of environmental contamination.
In recent decades they have become less frequent.
Much shipbuilding is carried out in the shipyards around the Baltic Sea.
The Bothnian Sea, the basin south of Kvarken, freezes on average in late February.
Additional fresh water comes from the difference of precipitation less evaporation, which is positive.
Russia became and remained a dominating power in the Baltic.
Many of the countries neighboring the Baltic Sea have been concerned about this, since a major oil leak in a seagoing tanker would be disastrous for the Baltic—given the slow exchange of water.
Had war broken out, the Polish navy was prepared to invade the Danish isles.
Usage of ''Baltic'' and similar terms to denote the region east of the sea started only in 19th century.
Researchers of the phenomenon have indicated that algal blooms have occurred every summer for decades.
About 85 million people live in the Baltic drainage basin, 15 million within  of the coast and 29 million within  of the coast.
In the Little Belt, the site of intake was moved to Fredericia, after that stronghold had been built.
Cetaceans in Baltic Sea have been monitored by the ASCOBANS.
The Baltic Sea flows out through the Danish straits; however, the flow is complex.
Since May 2004, with the accession of the Baltic states and Poland, the Baltic Sea has been almost entirely surrounded by countries of the European Union (EU).
The general circulation is anti-clockwise: northwards along its eastern boundary, and south along the western one .
They include the major rivers of north Europe, such as the Oder, the Vistula, the Neman, the Daugava and the Neva.
The Teutonic Order gained control over parts of the southern and eastern shore of the Baltic Sea, where they set up their monastic state.
While Tacitus called it ''Mare Suebicum'' after the Germanic people called the Suebi, the first to name it the ''Baltic Sea'' (''Mare Balticum'') was the eleventh-century German chronicler Adam of Bremen.
Instead of a true sea, the Baltic can even today also be understood as the common estuary of all rivers flowing into it.
In 2005, a Russian group of scientists found over five thousand airplane wrecks, sunken warships, and other material, mainly from World War II, on the bottom of the sea.
The uplift is about eight millimetres per year on the Finnish coast of the northernmost Gulf of Bothnia.
The sea ice also harbours several species of algae that live in the bottom and inside unfrozen brine pockets in the ice.
After 1920 Poland was connected to the Baltic Sea by the Polish Corridor and enlarged the port of Gdynia in rivalry with the port of the Free City of Danzig.
Little is known of their extent.
It mixes very slowly with the upper waters, resulting in a salinity gradient from top to bottom, with most of the salt water remaining below  deep.
The more saline (and therefore denser) water remains on the bottom, isolating it from surface waters and the atmosphere.
Some Swedish historians believe the name derives from the god Balder of Nordic mythology.
"Eastern Sea", appears in the ''Heimskringla'' and ''Eystra salt'' appears in ''Sörla þáttr''.
Strandings of Leatherback turtles have been recorded in Baltic Sea, too.
Historic flood events were the All Saints' Flood of 1304 and other floods in the years 1320, 1449, 1625, 1694, 1784 and 1825.
The Baltic Sea is connected by artificial waterways to the White Sea via the White Sea Canal and to the German Bight of the North Sea via the Kiel Canal.
The ice extent depends on whether the winter is mild, moderate, or severe.
Another endemic is the Copenhagen cockle ''Parvicardium hauniense''.
It ended only after the collapse of the Communist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe in the late 1980s.
The lands on the Baltic's eastern shore were among the last in Europe to be converted to Christianity.
