After Goodwin first performed historical and archival work, they coordinated their work with existing landscape features to locate the site of Old Baltimore.
The profit from sugar encouraged the cultivation of cane and the importation of food.
In contrast to the paid subscription ''Sun'', ''The Examiner'' was a free newspaper funded solely by advertisements.
John Waters characterized formstone as "the polyester of brick" in a 30-minute documentary film, ''Little Castles: A Formstone Phenomenon''.
Pressured by the Susquehannocks, the Piscataway tribe of Algonquians stayed well south of the Baltimore area and inhabited primarily the north bank of the Potomac River in what is now Charles and southern Prince George's south of the Fall Line.
The only highways within the city that are not maintained by BCDOT are I-95, I-395, I-695, and I-895; those four highways are maintained by the Maryland Transportation Authority.
The Morgan State University Choir is also one of the nation's most prestigious university choral ensembles.
The race then proceeds to other important focal points of the city such as Patterson Park, Clifton Park, Lake Montebello, the Charles Village neighborhood and the western edge of downtown.
The northern portion of Central Baltimore, between downtown and the Druid Hill Park, is home to many of the city's cultural opportunities.
Baltimore is home to the Pride of Baltimore Chorus, a three-time international silver medalist women's chorus, affiliated with Sweet Adelines International.
Due to lessened urban heat island (UHI) as compared to the city proper and distance from the moderating Chesapeake Bay, the outlying and inland parts of the Baltimore metro area are usually cooler, especially at night, than the city proper and the coastal towns.
The best remaining example of that history is the old American Brewery Building on North Gay Street and the National Brewing Company building in the Brewer's Hill neighborhood.
Mayor Dixon's administration ended less than three years after her election, the result of a criminal investigation that began in 2006 while she was still City Council President.
Fells Point also is a foodie neighborhood for tourists and locals and is where the oldest continuously running tavern in the country, "The Horse You Came In On Saloon," is located.
In the mid-1790s, developers began building entire neighborhoods of the British-style rowhouses, which became the dominant house type of the city early in the 19th century.
The Natty Boh logo appears on all cans, bottles, and packaging; and merchandise featuring him can still easily be found in shops in Maryland, including several in Fells Point.
The area's crime problems have provided subject material for television series, such as ''The Wire''.
Over a million people visited Baltimore during both festivals.
The Baltimore Basilica (1806–1821) is a neoclassical design by Benjamin Latrobe, and also the oldest Catholic cathedral in the United States.
It was constructed without the use of exterior scaffolding.
Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake led the signing of three bills that commit the city to the sale of bonds over the next 15 to 20 years to fund the infrastructure for the Port Covington development on September 28, 2016.
Order was restored in the city on July 21–22 when federal troops arrived to protect railroad property and end the strike.
Regardless, the King still gave his heir Cecil the 1632 grant for the Maryland colony.
The roads carrying bicycle routes are also labelled with either bike lanes, sharrows, or Share the Road signs.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Baltimore the 14th most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities.
However, Baltimore Street is north-south dividing line for the U.S.
On July 20, 1877, Maryland Governor John Lee Carroll called up the 5th and 6th Regiments of the National Guard to end the strikes, which had disrupted train service at Cumberland in western Maryland.
The city of Baltimore is protected by the over 1,800 professional firefighters of the Baltimore City Fire Department (BCFD), which was founded in December 1858 and began operating the following year.
The Green route runs between Johns Hopkins and City Hall.
Along with cargo terminals, the port also has a passenger cruise terminal, which offers year-round trips on several lines, including Royal Caribbean's Grandeur of the Seas and Carnival's Pride.
The event, held June 13–19, 2012, was the week encompassing Flag Day and the 200th anniversary of the Declaration of War.
During the course of the Star-Spangled 200 celebration the city was showcased on three separate live television broadcasts.
The increase, attributed to growing international migration and fewer people abandoning the city, is the second census estimate since Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake announced at her inauguration in December 2011 that her main goal is to increase the city's population by "10,000 families" within a decade.
Oriole Park at Camden Yards is considered by many to be the most beautiful baseball park in Major League Baseball, and has inspired many other cities to build their own versions of this retro style ballpark.
The waterway was often filled with garbage after heavy rainstorms, failing its 2014 water quality report card.
Baltimore is the home of non-profit chamber music organization Vivre Musicale.
In the early 1600s, the immediate Baltimore vicinity was sparsely populated, if at all, by Native Americans.
The median sale price for homes in Baltimore in 2012 was $95,000.
Visit Baltimore CEO, Tom Noonan, was quoted in the ''Baltimore Sun'' as calling the Spectacular, "the largest tourism event in our city's history."
The Baltimore City Department of Recreation and Parks manages the majority of parks and recreational facilities in the city including Patterson Park, Federal Hill Park, and Druid Hill Park.
Founded in 1996 by Kevin Plank, a University of Maryland alumnus, the company's headquarters are located in Tide Point, adjacent to Fort McHenry and the Domino Sugar factory.
Spring and autumn are warm, with spring being the wettest season in terms of the number of precipitation days.
Its influence distinguishes Baltimore, especially with words containing "oi" flattened into an "aw" sound.
Following the Battle of Baltimore, the city's population grew rapidly and was the first American city to illuminate its streets with hydrogen gas in 1816.
The area south of the Vietnam Veterans (Hanover Street) Bridge and the Patapsco River was annexed to the city in 1919 from being independent towns in Anne Arundel County.
Floating wetlands provide many environmental benefits to water quality and habitat enhancement, which is why the Waterfront Partnership of Baltimore has included them in their Healthy Harbor Initiative pilot projects.
A local Chinese-American association remains based there, but only one Chinese restaurant as of 2009.
The airport is named after Thurgood Marshall, a Baltimore native who was the first African American to serve on the Supreme Court of the United States.
The Town of Baltimore was founded and laid out shortly thereafter on July 30, 1729, and is named after Lord Baltimore (Cecilius Calvert), who was the first Proprietary Governor of the Province of Maryland.
The city's elevation ranges from sea level at the harbor to  in the northwest corner near Pimlico.
The city grew in area by annexing new suburbs from the surrounding counties, the last being in 1918, when the city acquired portions of Baltimore County and Anne Arundel County.
The first major league to base a team in Baltimore was the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), which had a team named the Baltimore Colts.
Located below Sinclair Lane and Erdman Avenue, above Orleans Street, East Baltimore is mainly made up of residential neighborhoods.
File:Res Hill HD Baltimore.JPG|Reservoir Hill
North Baltimore lies directly north of Central Baltimore and is bounded on the east by The Alameda and on the west by Pimlico Road.
That's nearly 200,000 bottles, 173,000 potato chip bags and a whopping 6.7 million cigarettes butts removed from the water.
File:Woodberry07.JPG|Woodberry
Cecilius Calvert was the oldest son of Sir George Calvert, (1579–1632), who became the First Lord Baltimore of County Longford, Ireland in 1625.
The Baltimore Marathon is the flagship race of several races.
The Water Wheel has been very successful at trash removal, visibly decreasing the amount of garbage that collects in the harbor, especially after a rainfall.
Soldiers from the 6th Regiment fired on the crowd, killing 10 and wounding 25.
Baltimore has been a Democratic stronghold for over 150 years, with Democrats dominating every level of government.
Mencken; jazz musician James "Eubie" Blake; singer Billie Holiday; actor and filmmaker John Waters; and baseball player Babe Ruth.
The field team worked from fall 1997 through winter 1998.
4.2% of Baltimore's population was of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin (they may be of any race).
The University of Maryland, Baltimore, the University of Maryland Medical Center, and Lexington Market are also in the central district, as well as the Hippodrome and many nightclubs, bars, restaurants, shopping centers and various other attractions.
Despite being located 40 miles northeast of Washington, D.C., Baltimore is a major media market in its own right, with all major English language television networks represented in the city.
VM won a 2011–2012 award for Adventurous Programming from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers and Chamber Music America.
In 1992, the Baltimore Orioles baseball team moved from Memorial Stadium to Oriole Park at Camden Yards, located downtown near the harbor.
Baltimore is the home of numerous places of higher learning, both public and private.
Extreme temperatures range from  on February 9, 1934, and February 10, 1899, up to  on July 22, 2011.
Currently the port has major roll-on/roll-off facilities, as well as bulk facilities, especially steel handling.
She was convicted on a single misdemeanor charge of embezzlement on December 1, 2009.
Mr. Trash Wheel is the world's first permanent water wheel trash interceptor to clean up the city's polluted Inner Harbor.
A February 2015 agreement with a local waste-to-energy plant, is believed to make Baltimore the first city to use reclaimed waterway debris to generate electricity.
From the 1830 through 1850 U.S. censuses, Baltimore was the second most-populous city, before being surpassed by Philadelphia in 1860.
In addition, the agency is in charge of vehicle towing and traffic cameras.
During the previous 10-year period, Baltimore had four legislative districts within the city limits, but four others overlapped the Baltimore County line.
For most governmental purposes under Maryland law, Baltimore City is treated as a county-level entity.
The building sits on a raised "island" of sorts between two open trenches, one for the Jones Falls Expressway and the other for the tracks of the Northeast Corridor (NEC).
The Baltimore County area northward was used as hunting grounds by the Susquehannocks living in the lower Susquehanna River valley who "controlled all of the upper tributaries of the Chesapeake" but "refrained from much contact with Powhatan in the Potomac region."
It is now the Chesapeake Shakespeare Company Theater.
Several historic and notable neighborhoods are in this district: Roland Park (1891), Guilford (1913), Homeland (1924), Hampden, Woodberry, Old Goucher, and Jones Falls.
The Maryland State Boychoir is located in the northeastern Baltimore neighborhood of Mayfield.
The city experienced challenges again in 1974 when teachers, municipal workers, and police officers conducted strikes.
Funded partly by a 16 percent increase in the city's parking fees, the circulator provides free bus service seven days a week, picking up passengers every 15 minutes at designated stops during service hours.
The average seasonal snowfall is , but it varies greatly depending on the winter, with some seasons seeing minimal snow while others see several major Nor'easters.
The Interstate highways serving Baltimore are I-70, I-83 (the Jones Falls Expressway), I-95 (the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway north of the city), I-395, I-695 (the Baltimore Beltway), I-795 (the Northwest Expressway), I-895 (the Harbor Tunnel Thruway), and I-97.
Baltimore has cultural museums in many areas of study.
The Gwynns Falls Trail runs from the Inner Harbor to the I-70 Park and Ride, passing through Gwynns Falls Park and possessing numerous branches.
The 1845 Greek Revival-style Lloyd Street Synagogue is one of the oldest synagogues in the United States.
Long term plans call for it to extend to the Mount Washington Light Rail Stop, and possibly as far north as the Falls Road stop to connect to the Robert E. Lee boardwalk north of the city.
National's two most prominent brands, were National Bohemian Beer colloquially "Natty Boh" and Colt 45.
At the end of the peninsula is historic Fort McHenry, a National Park since the end of World War I, when the old U.S. Army Hospital surrounding the 1798 star-shaped battlements was torn down.
Baltimore is known for its Maryland blue crabs, crab cake, Old Bay Seasoning, pit beef, and the "chicken box."
Lexington Market is one of the longest-running markets in the world and longest running in the country, having been around since 1782.
It was among the top 10 cities in population in the United States in every census up to the 1980 census, and after World War II had a population of nearly a million.
According to the 2010 Census, 63.7% of the population was Black, 29.6% White, 0.4% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.3% Asian, 1.8% from some other race and 2.1% of two or more races.
The site of the court house and jail for Baltimore County was evidently "Old Baltimore" near the Bush River.
Many of these routes pass through the downtown area.
The median age is 35 years old.
A number of projects are going on in Baltimore City and County that should result in better water quality scores.
The current Baltimore on the Patapsco River was established in 1729, but an earlier Baltimore existed on the Bush River as early as 1674, The first county seat of Baltimore County is known today as "Old Baltimore".
The city's public schools are managed by Baltimore City Public Schools and include schools that have been well known in the area: Carver Vocational-Technical High School, the first African American vocational high school and center that was established in the state of Maryland; Digital Harbor High School, one of the secondary schools that emphasizes information technology; Lake Clifton Eastern High School, which is the largest school campus in Baltimore City of physical size; the historic Frederick Douglass High School, which is the second oldest African American high school in the United States; Baltimore City College, the third oldest public high school in the country; and Western High School, the oldest public all-girls school in the nation.
By 1913, when Baltimore was averaging forty thousand immigrants per year, World War I closed off the flow of immigrants.
Other buildings have been reused such as the former Mercantile Deposit and Trust Company bank building.
West Baltimore is located west of downtown and the Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard and is bounded by Gwynns Falls Parkway, Fremont Avenue, and West Baltimore Street.
The event, held at the entrance to the $1.1 billion 1.6 million-square-foot-facility, honored the many donors including Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan, first president of the United Arab Emirates, and Michael Bloomberg.
Replacing several warring independent volunteer companies since the 1770s and the confusion resulting from a riot involving the "Know-Nothing" political party two years before, the establishment of a unified professional fire fighting force was a major advance in urban governance.
Sheila Dixon became the first female mayor of Baltimore on January 17, 2007.
MTA Maryland operates a comprehensive bus network, including many local, express, and commuter buses, a light rail network connecting Hunt Valley in the north to BWI Airport and Cromwell (Glen Burnie) in the south, and a subway line between Owings Mills and Johns Hopkins Hospital.
100,000 college students from around the country attend Baltimore City's 12 accredited two-year or four-year colleges and universities.
In the 1940s the National Brewing Company introduced the nation's first six-pack.
Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church, built in 1870 in memory of financier George Brown, has stained glass windows by Louis Comfort Tiffany and has been called "one of the most significant buildings in this city, a treasure of art and architecture" by ''Baltimore Magazine''.
Its Purple route, launched June 7, 2010, operates between Penn Station and Federal Hill.
Other major bicycle projects include a protected cycle track installed on both Maryland Avenue and Mount Royal Avenue, expected to become the backbone of a downtown bicycle network.
After the Civil War, a coffee ship was designed here for trade with Brazil.
According to the 2010 Census, the city has a total area of , of which  is land and  is water.
The team dug 420 test pits, and they uncovered several artifacts...."
Coinciding with riots in other cities, public order was not restored until April 12, 1968.
In 2011, the city undertook a campaign to reconstruct many sidewalk ramps in the city, coinciding with mass resurfacing of the city's streets.
By the beginning of the 1970s, Baltimore's downtown area known as the Inner Harbor had been neglected and was occupied by a collection of abandoned warehouses.
After the 1983 season, the team left Baltimore for Indianapolis in 1984, where it became the Indianapolis Colts.
Although Baltimore's population has continued to decline since 1950, the number of families living downtown has increased significantly in recent years, according to the Downtown Partnership of Baltimore, Inc.
It is by no means uncommon for the rain-snow line to set up in the metro area.
It was established by the Constitution of Maryland and is not part of any county; thus, it is the largest independent city in the United States.
During the epidemic of HIV/AIDS in the United States, Baltimore City Health Department official Robert Mehl persuaded the city's mayor to form a committee to address food problems; the Baltimore-based charity Moveable Feast grew out of this initiative in 1990.
As the former City Council President, she assumed the office of Mayor when former Mayor Martin O'Malley took office as Governor of Maryland.
Other firsts include: the first Post Office System in the United States (inaugurated in 1774) and the first water company chartered in the United States (Baltimore Water Company, 1792).
Also through this segment of Baltimore ran the beginnings of the historic National Road, which was constructed beginning in 1806 along Old Frederick Road and continuing into the county on Frederick Road into Ellicott City, Maryland.
The Baltimore Grand Prix debuted along the streets of the Inner Harbor section of the city's downtown on September 2–4, 2011.
Between 1820 and 1989, almost 2 million who were German, Polish, English, Irish, Russian, Lithuanian, French, Ukrainian, Czech, Greek and Italian came to Baltimore, most between the years 1861 to 1930.
Despite the increase in the number of families, Baltimore's downtown still lost about 10,000 total residents since the 2000 Census, a decline of about 6%.
Lasting effects of the riot can be seen on the streets of North Avenue, Howard Street, Gay Street, and Pennsylvania Avenue, where long stretches of the streets remain barren.
In 2007, Duke Realty Corporation began a new development near the Port of Baltimore, named the Chesapeake Commerce Center.
''The Wire ''was set and filmed in Baltimore.
It was also during this time when Baltimore saw the establishment of its public market system in 1763.
After Baltimore's founding, mills were built behind the wharves.
Baltimore is almost completely surrounded by Baltimore County, but is politically independent of it.
In 1608, Captain John Smith traveled 210 miles from Jamestown to the uppermost Chesapeake Bay, leading the first European expedition to the Patapsco River  The name "Patapsco" is derived from ''pota-psk-ut'', which translates to "backwater" or "tide covered with froth" in Algonquian dialect.
The two aforementioned trails carry sections of the East Coast Greenway through the city.
also operates and maintains a presence on Baltimore and Maryland waterways in the Patapsco River and Chesapeake Bay.
Downtown Baltimore's core area experienced a population increase of 130% since 2000.
Other sides in this district are: Carroll Park, one of the city's largest parks, the colonial Mount Clare Mansion, and Washington Boulevard, which dates to pre-Revolutionary War days as the prime route out of the city to Alexandria, Virginia, and Georgetown on the Potomac River.
Amtrak's ''Acela Express'', ''Palmetto'', ''Carolinian'', ''Silver Star'', ''Silver Meteor'', ''Vermonter'', ''Crescent'', and ''Northeast Regional'' trains are the scheduled passenger train services that stop in the city.
Notable neighborhoods include: Pimlico, Mount Washington, and Cheswolde, and Park Heights.
Baltimore has quite a history when it comes to making beer, an art that thrived in Baltimore from the 1800s to the 1950s with over 100 old breweries in the city's past.
The Inner Harbor East area has seen the addition of two new towers which have completed construction: a 24-floor tower that is the new world headquarters of Legg Mason, and a 21-floor Four Seasons Hotel complex.
By 1970, Baltimore's heyday as an immigration center was a distant memory.
Baltimore's Penn Station is one of the busiest in the country.
File:Baltimorewashingtonmonument.jpg|Mount Vernon
Biohabitats also developed a concept to transform a dilapidated wharf into a living pier that cleans Harbor water, provides habitat and is an aesthetic attraction.
Further inland, Mount Vernon is the traditional center of cultural and artistic life of the city; it is home to a distinctive Washington Monument, set atop a hill in a 19th-century urban square, that predates the more well-known monument in Washington, D.C. by several decades.
These revolts were led primarily by Barbara Mikulski, now a United States senator, which resulted in the abandonment of the original plan.
South Baltimore, a mixed industrial and residential area, consists of the "Old South Baltimore" peninsula below the Inner Harbor and east of the old B&O Railroad's Camden line tracks and Russell Street downtown.
A quarter century after John Smith's voyage, English colonists began to settle in Maryland.
The Sun Iron Building, designed by R.C.
Lake Montebello is in Northeast Baltimore.
The exact location of Old Baltimore was lost for years.
The Baltimore Consort has been a leading early music ensemble for over twenty-five years.
The city is home to the Baltimore School for the Arts, a public high school in the Mount Vernon neighborhood of Baltimore.
Founded in 1729, Baltimore is the second largest seaport in the Mid-Atlantic.
Bernard C. "Jack" Young has been the council president since February 2010, when he was unanimously elected by the other council members to replace Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, who had become mayor.
Due to its combination of rhoticity and glide deletion, the word "iron" is pronounced somewhat like "arn" and the word "fire" like "far".
Currently under design, the top of the pier will become a constructed tidal wetland.
The Shops at Canton Crossing opened in 2013.
Three years later, the NFL's Dallas Texans would itself fold, and its assets and player contracts purchased by an ownership team headed by Baltimore businessman Carroll Rosenbloom, who moved the team to Baltimore, establishing a new team also named the Baltimore Colts.
In ''The Baltimore Rowhouse'', Mary Ellen Hayward and Charles Belfoure considered the rowhouse as the architectural form defining Baltimore as "perhaps no other American city."
The city also has a fleet of trash skimmer operators to clean the harbor, which together accumulate a total of 200,000 tons of trash each year.
The United States Coast Guard, operating out of their shipyard and facility (since 1899) at Arundel Cove on Curtis Creek, (off Pennington Avenue extending to Hawkins Point Road/Fort Smallwood Road) in the Curtis Bay section of southern Baltimore City and adjacent northern Anne Arundel County.
It was located on the Bush River on land that in 1773 became part of Harford County.
Six former Orioles players, including Ripken (2007), and two of the team's managers have been inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
An air show from the Navy's Flight Demonstration Team, the Blue Angels performed during both festivals.
The Baltimore accent, however is noted for sounding more southern than Philadelphia's.
Baltimore acquired its moniker "The Monumental City" after an 1827 visit to Baltimore by President John Quincy Adams.
The total project comprises  in eastern Baltimore City, and the site will yield  of warehouse/distribution and office space.
Baltimore native John Waters parodies the city and its dialect extensively in his films.
In addition to the bicycle trails and cycletracks, Baltimore has the Stony Run Trail, a walking path that will eventually connect from the Jones Falls north to Northern Parkway, utilizing much of the old Ma and Pa Railroad corridor inside the city.
Baltimore–Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, generally known as "BWI," lies about  to the south of Baltimore in neighboring Anne Arundel County.
Southeast Baltimore, located below Fayette Street, bordering the Inner Harbor and the Northwest Branch of the Patapsco River to the west, the city line of 1919 on its eastern boundaries and the Patapsco River to the south, is a mixed industrial and residential area.
The Charm City Circulator (CCC), a shuttle bus service operated by Veolia Transportation for the Baltimore Department of Transportation, began operating in the downtown area in January 2010.
On February 7, 1904, the Great Baltimore Fire destroyed over 1,500 buildings in 30 hours, leaving more than 70 blocks of the downtown area burned to the ground.
Renovating Baltimore's historic theatres have become widespread throughout the city such as the Everyman, Centre, Senator and most recent Parkway theatre.
Also in this wedge of the city on 33rd Street is Baltimore City College high school, third oldest active public secondary school in the United States, founded downtown in 1839.
Baltimore is an independent city, and not part of any county.
The last three people to represent Maryland in the Senate represented the 3rd District before being elected to the Senate.
Rioters then damaged B&O trains and burned portions of the rail station.
She was elected to a full term in 2011, receiving 84% of the vote.
Thus, in the northern and western suburbs, winter snowfall is more significant, and some areas average more than  of snow per winter.
Public transit in Baltimore is mostly provided by the Maryland Transit Administration (abbreviated "MTA Maryland") and Charm City Circulator.
The court house on the Bush River referenced in the 1683 Act was in all likelihood the one created by the 1674 Act.
Both run along major surface streets; however, US 40 utilizes a small section of a freeway cancelled in the 1970s in the west side of the city originally intended for Interstate 170.
It reflects the popular interest in Greece when the nation was securing its independence, as well as a scholarly interest in recently published drawings of Athenian antiquities.
In January 2004, the historic Hippodrome Theatre reopened after significant renovation as part of the France-Merrick Performing Arts Center.
Baltimore is officially divided into nine geographical regions: North, Northeast, East, Southeast, South, Southwest, West, Northwest, and Central, with each district patrolled by a respective Baltimore Police Department.
''Baltimore Manor'' was the name of the estate in County Longford on which the Calvert family lived in Ireland.
Formstone facings, now a common feature on Baltimore rowhouses, were an addition patented in 1937 by Albert Knight.
The waterfront development that includes the new headquarters for Under Armour, as well as shops, housing, offices, and manufacturing spaces is projected to create 26,500 permanent jobs with a $4.3 billion annual economic impact.
Lexington Market, founded in 1782, continues to be known as one of the oldest continuously operating public markets in the United States today.
Each May, the Maryland Film Festival takes place in Baltimore, using all five screens of the historic Charles Theatre as its anchor venue.
