Four-foot-long sections of bamboo are cut, and a mixture of water and calcium carbide are introduced.
In milder climates, such as USDA zone 8 and above, some hardy bamboo may remain fully leafed out year-round.
Bamboo is also used to make eating utensils such as chopsticks, trays, and tea scoops.
In Maharashtra, the bamboo groves and forests are called ''Veluvana'', the name ''velu'' for bamboo is most likely from Sanskrit, while ''vana'' means forest.
Ballarpur (Chandrapur, Maharstra) paper mills use bamboo for paper production.
Picking immediately prior to the wet/growth season may also damage new shoots.
This brief life means culms are ready for harvest and suitable for use in construction within about three to seven years.
Food is cooked in East Timor in bamboo in fire.
Also during this high-rainfall period, sap levels are at their highest, and then diminish towards the dry season.
Bamboos seldom and unpredictably flower, and the frequency of flowering varies greatly from species to species.
During these several months, each new shoot grows vertically into a culm with no branching out until the majority of the mature height is reached.
Traditional Vietnamese villages are surrounded by thick bamboo hedges (''lũy tre'').
The "Three Friends of Winter" is traditionally used as a system of ranking in Japan, for example in sushi sets or accommodations at a traditional ''ryokan''.
In the Philippines, the nipa hut is a fairly typical example of the most basic sort of housing where bamboo is used; the walls are split and woven bamboo, and bamboo slats and poles may be used as its support.
On a similar note, Japanese knotweed is also sometimes mistaken for a bamboo, but it grows wild and is considered an invasive species.
Pine (''matsu'' 松) is of the first rank, bamboo (''také'' 竹) is of second rank, and plum (''ume'' 梅) is of the third.
*Subtribe Racemobambodinae
The longest mass flowering interval known is 130 years, and it is for the species ''Phyllostachys bambusoides'' (Sieb.
The Bozo ethnic group of West Africa take their name from the Bambara phrase ''bo-so'', which means "bamboo house".
Lucky bamboo has long been associated with the Eastern practice of ''feng shui'' and images of the plant widely available on the Web are often used to depict bamboo.
In small areas, regular maintenance may be the best method for controlling the running bamboos.
The word bamboo comes from the Kannada term ''bambu'', which was introduced to English through Indonesian and Malay.
'''3) Daily cycle''':
Regular observations indicate major growth directions and locations.
As all growth of new bamboo occurs during the wet season, disturbing the clump during this phase will potentially damage the upcoming crop.
Fresh bamboo shoots are sliced and pickled with mustard seeds and turmeric and kept in glass jar in direct sunlight for the best taste.
In fact, many only flower at intervals as long as 65 or 120 years.
Soft bamboo shoots, stems, and leaves are the major food source of the giant panda of China, the red panda of Nepal, and the bamboo lemurs of Madagascar.
These taxa exhibit mass flowering (or gregarious flowering), with all plants in a particular 'cohort' flowering over a several-year period.
As the number of rodents increases, they consume all available food, including grain fields and stored food, sometimes leading to famine.
''Bụt'' gave to him four magic words to attach the many nodes of bamboo: ''Khắc nhập, khắc xuất'', which means "joined together immediately, fell apart immediately".
A bamboo filter is used to remove the salt from seawater.
Bamboo or wooden strips were the standard writing material during the Han dynasty, and excavated examples have been found in abundance.
As bamboo has features such as uprightness, tenacity, and hollow heart, people endow bamboo with integrity, elegance, and plainness, though it is not physically strong.
Similarly, steamed tea is sometimes rammed into bamboo hollows to produce compressed forms of Pu-erh tea.
Bamboo was used for the structural members of the India pavilion at Expo 2010 in Shanghai.
The bamboos contains three clades classified as tribes, and these strongly correspond with geographic divisions representing the New World herbaceous species (Olyreae), tropical woody bamboos (Bambuseae), and temperate woody bamboos (Arundinarieae).
Once the poles are lined up together, they cut a hole crosswise through the poles at each end and use a small bamboo pole pushed through that hole like a screw to hold all the long bamboo poles together.
The hypothesis claims that bamboo flowering intervals grew by integer multiplication.
Bamboo has a wide range of hardiness depending on species and locale.
Arches may similarly be created by forcing the bamboo's growth into the desired form, costing much less than it would to obtain the same shape with regular wood timber.
The predator satiation hypothesis does not explain why the flowering cycle is 10 times longer than the lifespan of the local rodents, something not predicted.
During the height of the day, photosynthesis is at its peak, producing the highest levels of sugar in sap, making this the least ideal time of day to harvest.
*:4 genera: ''Eremocaulon, Guadua, Olmeca, Otatea''.
If neglected, over time, they can cause problems by moving into adjacent areas.
In Chinese culture, the bamboo, plum blossom, orchid, and chrysanthemum (often known as ''méi lán zhú jú'' 梅兰竹菊) are collectively referred to as the Four Gentlemen.
In modern times, some see bamboo tools as an ecofriendly alternative to other manufactured utensils.
The triumphant farmer returned to the landlord and demanded his daughter.
More recently, a mathematical explanation for the extreme length of the flowering cycles has been offered, involving both the stabilizing selection implied by the predator satiation hypothesis and others, and the fact that plants that flower at longer intervals tend to release more seeds.
In the United States, several companies are growing, harvesting, and distributing species such as ''Phyllostachys nigra'' (Henon) and ''Phyllostachys edulis'' (Moso).
A mutant bamboo plant flowering at a noninteger multiple of its population's flowering interval would release its seeds alone, and would not enjoy the benefits of collective flowering (such as protection from predators).
*Subtribe Arthrostylidiinae
*Subtribe Bambusinae
Soups are boiled and rice is cooked in the hollows of fresh stalks of bamboo directly over a flame.
The two women later became goddesses.
Recently, some attempts have been made to grow bamboo on a commercial basis in the Great Lakes region of east-central Africa, especially in Rwanda.
Bamboo symbolizes the spirit of Vovinam (a Vietnamese martial arts): ''cương nhu phối triển'' (coordination between hard and soft (martial arts)).
Several paper industries are surviving on bamboo forests.
One hypothesis to explain the evolution of this semelparous mass flowering is the predator satiation hypothesis, which argues that by fruiting at the same time, a population increases the survival rate of its seeds by flooding the area with fruit, so even if predators eat their fill, seeds will still be left over.
Continental Europe is not known to have any native species of bamboo.
*Subtribe Buergersiochloineae
The Song Dynasty (960–1279 AD) Chinese scientist and polymath Shen Kuo (1031–1095) used the evidence of underground petrified bamboo found in the dry northern climate of Yan'an, Shanbei region, Shaanxi province to support his geological theory of gradual climate change.
They use 8 to 12 poles, 6–7 m (20 to 24&nbsp;ft) long, laid together side by side to a width of about 1&nbsp;m (3.3&nbsp;ft).
This may be due to rats feeding upon the profusion of flowers, then multiplying and destroying a large part of the local food supply.
For example, devastating consequences occur when the ''Melocanna bambusoides'' population flowers and fruits once every 30–35 years around the Bay of Bengal.
*:2 genera: ''Chusquea, Neurolepis''.
The usual process by which textiles labeled as being made of bamboo are produced uses only rayon made from the fibers with heavy employment of chemicals.
The woody bamboos do not form a monophyletic group; instead, the tropical woody and herbaceous bamboos are sister to the temperate woody bamboos.
Bamboo, one of the "Four Gentlemen" (bamboo, orchid, plum blossom and chrysanthemum), plays such an important role in traditional Chinese culture that it is even regarded as a behavior model of the gentleman.
It is a resilient member of the lily family that grows in the dark, tropical rainforests of Southeast Asia and Africa.
However, a mutant bamboo plant flowering at an integer multiple of its population's flowering interval would release its seeds only during collective flowering events, and would release more seeds than the average plant in the population.
In Philippine mythology, one of the more famous creation accounts tells of the first man, ''Malakás'' ("Strong"), and the first woman, ''Maganda'' ("Beautiful"), each emerged from one half of a split bamboo stem on an island formed after the battle between Sky and Ocean.
An ancient Vietnamese legend (The Hundred-knot Bamboo Tree) tells of a poor, young farmer who fell in love with his landlord's beautiful daughter.
These rats can also carry dangerous diseases, such as typhus, typhoid, and bubonic plague, which can reach epidemic proportions as the rodents increase in number.
They are used in numerous Asian dishes and broths, and are available in supermarkets in various sliced forms, in both fresh and canned versions.
The mass fruiting also has direct economic and ecological consequences, however.
*:one genus: Buergersiochloa
The landlord decided to foil the marriage with an impossible deal; the farmer must bring him a "bamboo tree of 100 nodes".
Hence, harvesting is best  a few months prior to the start of the wet season.
*Subtribe Shibataeinae
Bamboo fiber has been used to make paper in China since early times.
They occur across East Asia, from 50°N latitude in Sakhalin through to Northern Australia, and west to India and the Himalayas.
The relationship between rat populations and bamboo flowering was examined in a 2009 ''Nova'' documentary "Rat Attack".
*Subtribe Olyrineae
It is also possible to make dissolving pulp from bamboo.
A bamboo cane is also the weapon of Vietnamese legendary hero, Saint Giong, who had grown up immediately and magically since the age of three because of his wish to liberate his land from Ân invaders.
In any case, flowering produces masses of seeds, typically suspended from the ends of the branches.
In Konkani cuisine, the tender shoots (''kirlu'') are grated and cooked with crushed jackfruit seeds to prepare ''kirla sukke''.
Curious to see such a long bamboo, the landlord was magically joined to the bamboo when he touched it, as the young farmer said the first two magic words.
The most common solution for this purpose is a mixture of borax and boric acid.
Floating houses use whole bamboo stalks tied together in a big bunch to support the house floating in the water.
Subsequently, paper began to displace bamboo and wooden strips from mainstream uses, and by the fourth century AD, bamboo slips had been largely abandoned as a medium for writing in China.
A total of  of bamboo was used.
Certain species of bamboo can grow 91&nbsp;cm (3&nbsp;ft) within a 24-hour period, at a rate of almost 4&nbsp;cm (1.5&nbsp;in) an hour (a growth around 1&nbsp;mm every 90 seconds, or one inch every 40 minutes).
''Bambusa vulgaris'', ''Bambusa balcooa'', and ''Dendrocalamus stocksii'' are common examples of such bamboo.
It is also commonly used to make ladders, which apart from their normal function, are also used for carrying bodies in funerals.
is expected to be worth $25 billion by 2012.
Several procedures must be followed to overcome this shortcoming.
This argues that the dead culms create a large fuel load, and also a large target for lightning strikes, increasing the likelihood of wildfire.
Then, the branches extend from the nodes and leafing out occurs.
Barriers and edging are unnecessary for clump-forming bamboos, although these may eventually need to have portions removed if they become too large.
More traditional forming methods, such as the application of heat and pressure, may also be used to curve or flatten the cut stalks.
The resulting acetylene gas is ignited with a stick, producing a loud bang.
But Gautama Buddha (''Bụt'') appeared to the farmer and told him that such a tree could be made from 100 nodes from several different trees.
Individual bamboo culms do not get any taller or larger in diameter in subsequent years than they do in their first year, and they do not replace any growth lost from pruning or natural breakage.
Following more recent molecular phylogenetic research, many tribes and genera of grasses formerly included in the Bambusoideae are now classified in other subfamilies, e.g.
According to laws, an ancient poet, Bai Juyi (772–846), thought that to be a gentleman, a man does not need to be physically strong, but he must be mentally strong, upright, and perseverant.
*:one genus: ''Racemobambos'' (''Neomicrocalamus, Vietnamosasa'')
Timber is harvested from both cultivated and wild stands, and some of the larger bamboos, particularly species in the genus ''Phyllostachys'', are known as "timber bamboos".
In Indonesia, they are sliced thin and then boiled with ''santan'' (thick coconut milk) and spices to make a dish called ''gulai rebung''.
The golden bamboo lemur ingests many times the quantity of the taxiphyllin-containing bamboo that would kill a human.
They also occur in sub-Saharan Africa, and in the Americas from the USA mid-Atlantic states south to Argentina and Chile, reaching their southernmost point at 47°S latitude.
Bamboo also symbolizes the Vietnamese hometown and Vietnamese soul: the gentlemanlike, straightforwardness, hard working, optimism, unity, and adaptability.
The rarity of its blossoming has led to the flowers' being regarded as a sign of impending famine.
Over the next 2–5 years (depending on species), fungus begins to form on the outside of the culm, which eventually penetrates and overcomes the culm.
The two general patterns for the growth of bamboo are "clumping" (sympodial) and "running" (monopodial).
If the containment area is small, this method can be detrimental to ornamental bamboo, as the bamboo within can become rootbound and start to display the signs of any unhealthy containerized plant.
The shoot is now considered a fully mature culm.
Countless poems praising bamboo written by ancient Chinese poets are actually metaphorically about people who exhibited these characteristics.
*:20 genera: ''Agnesia, Arberella, Cryptochloa, Diandrolyra, Ekmanochloa, Froesiochloa, Lithachne'', ''Maclurolyra, Mniochloa, Olyra (plant), Pariana, Parianella,  Parodiolyra, Piresia, Piresiella, Raddia, Raddiella, Rehia, Reitzia, Sucrea''.
The story ends with the happy marriage of the farmer and the landlord's daughter after the landlord agreed to the marriage and asked to be separated from the bamboo.
Bamboo shoot has always been a traditional dish on the Chinese dinner table, especially in southern China.
Many minority groups in remote areas that have water access in Asia use bamboo that is 3–5 years old to make rafts.
* Tringen ''Tring''
Clumping bamboo species tend to spread slowly, as the growth pattern of the rhizomes is to simply expand the root mass gradually, similar to ornamental grasses.
As each individual culm goes through a 5– to 7-year lifecycle, culms are ideally allowed to reach this level of maturity prior to full capacity harvesting.
*Subtribe Chusqueinae
Anji County of China, known as the "Town of Bamboo", provides the optimal climate and soil conditions to grow, harvest, and process some of the most valued bamboo poles available worldwide.
Baby shoots (Nepali: ''tusa'') of a very different variety of bamboo (Nepali: निगालो Nigalo) native to Nepal is cooked as a curry in hilly regions.
Bamboos include some of the fastest-growing plants in the world, due to a unique rhizome-dependent system.
The death of the bamboo plants following their fruiting means the local people lose their building material, and the large increase in bamboo fruit leads to a rapid increase in rodent populations.
The pine (''sōng'' 松), the bamboo (''zhú'' 竹), and the plum blossom (''méi'' 梅) are also admired for their perseverance under harsh conditions, and are together known as the "Three Friends of Winter" (岁寒三友 ''suìhán sānyǒu'') in Chinese culture.
;'''According to maranaw'''
In its natural form, bamboo as a construction material is traditionally associated with the cultures of South Asia, East Asia, and the South Pacific, to some extent in Central and South America, and by extension in the aesthetic of Tiki culture.
The fibrous roots that radiate from the rhizomes do not produce more bamboo.
These four plants also represent the four seasons and, in Confucian ideology, four aspects of the ''junzi'' ("prince" or "noble one").
However, the growth rate is dependent on local soil and climatic conditions, as well as species, and a more typical growth rate for many commonly cultivated bamboos in temperate climates is in the range of  per day during the growing period.
Once the rhizomes are cut, they are typically removed; however, rhizomes take a number of months to mature, and an immature, severed rhizome usually ceases growing if left in-ground.
Various structural shapes may be made by training the bamboo to assume them as it grows.
In Assam, India, for example, it is called ''khorisa''.
*Subtribe Melocanninae
It is also made into pancakes using rice flour as a binding agent.
In a Chinese legend, the Emperor Yao gave two of his daughters to the future Emperor Shun as a test for his potential to rule.
Giant bamboos are the largest members of the grass family.
In addition, bamboo is frequently used for cooking utensils within many cultures, and is used in the manufacture of chopsticks.
However, another argument against this is the lack of precedent for any living organism to harness something as unpredictable as lightning strikes to increase its chance of survival as part of natural evolutionary progress.
*:13 genera: ''Actinocladum, Alvimia, Apoclada, Arthrostylidium, Athroostachys, Atractantha, Aulonemia'' (''Matudacalamus''), ''Colanthelia, Elytrostachys, Glaziophyton, Merostachys, Myriocladus, Rhipidocladum''.
It is also cooked with tender pumpkin leaves to make sag green leaves.
Cooking food in bamboo is said to give the food a subtle but distinctive taste.
The absence of secondary growth wood causes the stems of monocots, including the palms and large bamboos, to be columnar rather than tapering.
This fermented bamboo shoot is used in various culinary preparations, notably ''amil'', a sour vegetable soup.
The most common bamboo species used for paper are ''Dendrocalamus asper'' and ''Bambusa blumeana''.
Bamboo pulps are mainly produced in China, Myanmar, Thailand, and India, and are used in printing and writing papers.
This process involves cutting stalks into thin strips, planing them flat, and boiling and drying the strips; they are then glued, pressed, and finished.
Bamboo has also long been used as scaffolding; the practice has been banned in China for buildings over six stories, but is still in continuous use for skyscrapers in Hong Kong.
Because bamboos can be aggressive as early successional plants, the seedlings would be able to outstrip other plants and take over the space left by their parents.
By having a flowering cycle longer than the lifespan of the rodent predators, bamboos can regulate animal populations by causing starvation during the period between flowering events.
Bamboo is used in traditional Chinese medicine for treating infections and healing.
Many Nepalese restaurant around the world serve this dish as ''aloo bodi tama''.
In bamboo, the internodal regions of the stem are usually hollow and the vascular bundles in the cross section are scattered throughout the stem instead of in a cylindrical arrangement.
The subfamily in its current sense belongs to the BOP clade of grasses, where it is sister to the Pooideae (bluegrasses and relatives).
The bamboo shoot in its fermented state forms an important ingredient in cuisines across the Himalayas.
The sap of young stalks tapped during the rainy season may be fermented to make ''ulanzi'' (a sweet wine) or simply made into a soft drink.
Bamboo has a higher compressive strength than wood, brick, or concrete and a tensile strength that rivals steel.
It is used alongside many dried beans in cooking during winters.
Pickled bamboo shoots (Nepali: तामा ''tama'') are cooked with black-eyed beans as a delicacy food in Nepal.
Bamboo does have the necessary strength to fulfil this function, but untreated bamboo will swell with water absorbed from the concrete, causing it to crack.
Shun passed the test of being able to run his household with the two emperor's daughters as wives, and thus Yao made Shun his successor, bypassing his unworthy son.
Bamboo species are found in diverse climates, from cold mountains to hot tropical regions.
Three ISO standards are given for bamboo as a construction material.
The quality of bamboo laminate varies among manufacturers and varies according to the maturity of the plant from which it was harvested (six years being considered the optimum); the sturdiest products fulfill their claims of being up to three times harder than oak hardwood while others may be softer than standard hardwood.
This mechanism, as well as the evolutionary cause behind it, is still largely a mystery.
The farmer asked the landlord for his daughter's hand in marriage, but the proud landlord would not allow her to be bound in marriage to a poor farmer.
These seeds give rise to a new generation of plants that may be identical in appearance to those that preceded the flowering, or they may produce new cultivars with different characteristics, such as the presence or absence of striping or other changes in coloration of the culms.
The shoots that have turned a little fibrous are fermented, dried, and ground to sand-sized particles to prepare a garnish known as ''hendua''.
Just as a bamboo is hollow-hearted, he should open his heart to accept anything of benefit and never have arrogance or prejudice.
Bamboo growth is also  controlled by surrounding the plant or grove with a physical barrier.
In Bali, Indonesia, an international K-12 school, the  Green School, is constructed entirely of bamboo, for its beauty and advantages as a sustainable resource.
In Malaysia, a similar story includes a man who dreams of a beautiful woman while sleeping under a bamboo plant; he wakes up and breaks the bamboo stem, discovering the woman inside.
The most recent flowering began in May 2006 (see Mautam).
The earliest surviving examples of such documents, written in ink on string-bound bundles of bamboo strips (or "slips"), date from the fifth century BC during the Warring States period.
Several bamboo species are never known to set seed even when sporadically flowering has been reported.
Several institutes, businesses, and universities are researching the use of bamboo as an ecological construction material.
Many Buddhist temples also have bamboo groves.
This is called ''tukir''.
A high-quality, handmade paper is still produced in small quantities.
*:8 genera: ''Chimonobambusa, Indosasa, Phyllostachys, Qiongzhuea, Semiarundinaria'' (''Brachystachyum''), ''Shibataea, Sinobambusa, Temburongia'' (incertae sedis).
Small or young specimens of an individual species produce small culms initially.
A Buddhist monk, Zan Ning, wrote a manual of the bamboo shoot called "''Sǔn Pǔ''筍譜" offering descriptions and recipes for many kinds of bamboo shoots.
The shoots of some species contain toxins that need to be leached or boiled out before they can be eaten safely.
Rats eat the fruits as described above.
Bamboo is also the national plant of St. Lucia.
In ancient times, those who could afford a big house with a yard would plant bamboo in their garden.
Therefore, the Vietnam nation and Vietnamese value will be maintained and developed eternally.
They spread mainly through their roots and/or rhizomes, which can spread widely underground and send up new culms to break through the surface.
Retailers have sold both end products as "bamboo fabric" to cash in on bamboo's current ecofriendly cachet; however, the Canadian Competition Bureau and the US Federal Trade Commission, as of mid-2009, are cracking down on the practice of labeling bamboo rayon as natural bamboo fabric.
Other recipes using bamboo shoots are ''sayur lodeh'' (mixed vegetables in coconut milk) and ''lun pia'' (sometimes written ''lumpia'': fried wrapped bamboo shoots with vegetables).
It could, therefore, take over the population, establishing a flowering interval that is an integer multiple of the previous flowering interval.
Bamboo was in widespread use in early China as a medium for written documents.
Consistent with the lifecycle described above, bamboo is harvested from two to three years through to five to seven years, depending on the species.
