Since then BBW has been diagnosed in Central and East Africa including the banana growing regions of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Kenya, Burundi, and Uganda.
Plantains are used in various stews and curries or cooked, baked or mashed in much the same way as potatoes, such as the ''Pazham Pachadi'' prepared in Kerala.
However, more care is required for shipping the Cavendish, and its quality compared to Gros Michel is debated.
Some commentators remarked that those variants which could replace what much of the world considers a "typical banana" are so different that most people would not consider them the same fruit, and blame the decline of the banana on monogenetic cultivation driven by short-term commercial motives.
Steamed with dishes they impart a subtle sweet flavor.
In a series of papers published from 1947 onwards, Ernest Cheesman showed that Linnaeus' ''Musa sapientum'' and ''Musa paradisiaca'' were actually cultivars and descendants of two wild seed-producing species, ''Musa acuminata'' and ''Musa balbisiana'', both first described by Luigi Aloysius Colla.
''sapientum'' (L.) Kuntze
The United States produces few bananas.
Banana fiber is used in the production of banana paper.
There are starchy cooking bananas which are smaller than those eaten raw.
In Malay folklore, the ghost known as Pontianak is associated with banana plants (''pokok pisang''), and its spirit is said to reside in them during the day.
Bananas have been an important source of disagreement in the Doha Round of trade talks.
The banana has an extensive trade history starting with firms such as the Irish Fyffes and the US United Fruit Company (now Chiquita) at the end of the 19th century.
The vivid yellow color consumers normally associate with supermarket bananas is, in fact, caused by the artificial ripening process.
There are numerous references to it in Islamic texts (such as poems and hadiths) beginning in the 9th century.
Banana leaves are large, flexible, and waterproof.
Not only did the large companies have access to cheap labor in the areas they worked, but they were better able to afford modern agronomic advances such as fertilization.
This is how TR4 travels and is its most likely route into Latin America.
It is not necessary to include the corm or root structure to propagate bananas; severed suckers without root material can be propagated in damp sand, although this takes somewhat longer.
In 1999 archaeologists in London discovered what they believed to be the oldest banana in the UK, in a Tudor rubbish tip.
× ''sapientum'' var.
In 650, Islamic conquerors brought the banana to Palestine.
Leaves are spirally arranged and may grow  long and  wide.
There is linguistic evidence that bananas were known in Madagascar around that time.
These companies were monopolistic, vertically integrated (meaning they controlled growing, processing, shipping and marketing) and usually used political manipulation to build enclave economies (economies that were internally self-sufficient, virtually tax exempt, and export oriented that contribute very little to the host economy).
Most farms supply local consumption.
Philippines was the next largest producer with around 7% of the worldwide crop.
Banana crops are vulnerable to destruction by high winds, such as tropical storms or cyclones.
After being originally identified on a close relative of bananas, ''Ensete ventricosum'', in Ethiopia in the 1960s, BBW occurred in Uganda in 2001 affecting all banana cultivars.
To obtain maximum shelf life, harvest comes before the fruit is mature.
Generally, modern classifications of banana cultivars follow Simmonds and Shepherd's system.
Dried bananas are also ground to make banana flour.
The ovary is inferior, meaning that the tiny petals and other flower parts appear at the tip of the ovary.
North Americans began consuming bananas on a small scale at very high prices shortly after the Civil War, though it was only in the 1880s that it became more widespread.
Linnaeus originally placed bananas into two species based only on their uses as food: ''Musa sapientum'' for dessert bananas and ''Musa paradisiaca'' for plantains.
Areas of secondary diversity are found in Africa, indicating a long history of banana cultivation in the region.
It has yet to reach the Americas; however, soil fungi can easily be carried on boots, clothing, or tools.
It affects all main cultivars of bananas and plantains (including the Cavendish cultivars), impeding photosynthesis by blackening parts of the leaves, eventually killing the entire leaf.
Bananas can be made into jam.
The fungus has shown ever-increasing resistance to treatment, with the current expense for treating  exceeding $1,000 per year.
Bananas must be transported over long distances from the tropics to world markets.
The primary component of the aroma of fresh bananas is isoamyl acetate (also known as ''banana oil''), which, along with several other compounds such as butyl acetate and isobutyl acetate, is a significant contributor to banana flavor.
the flesh of the fruit swells and ripens without its seeds being fertilized and developing.
The United Fruit Company based its business almost entirely on the banana trade, because the coffee trade proved too difficult to control.
Despite this, the original names are still recognized by some authorities today, leading to confusion.
Its predecessor 'Gros Michel', discovered in the 1820s, suffered this fate.
As late as 1960, the two crops accounted for 67% of the exports from the region.
Bananas were certainly grown in the Christian Kingdom of Cyprus by the late medieval period.
Triploid cultivars derived solely from ''M.&nbsp;acuminata'' are examples of "dessert bananas", whereas triploid cultivars derived from the hybrid between ''M.&nbsp;acuminata'' and ''M.&nbsp;balbinosa'' (in particular the plantain subgroup of the AAB Group) are "plantains".
''paradisiaca'' (L.) Baker, nom.
This property is attributed to the degradation of chlorophyll leading to the accumulation of a fluorescent product in the skin of the fruit.
At lower temperatures, ripening permanently stalls, and the bananas turn gray as cell walls break down.
* ''Musa'' × ''dacca'' Horan.
* ''Musa'' × ''sapientum'' L., and a large number of its varietal names, including ''M.''
The banana plant has long been a source of fiber for high quality textiles.
As new growth occurs in the centre of the pseudostem the edges are forced apart.
The banana fruits develop from the banana heart, in a large hanging cluster, made up of tiers (called "hands"), with up to 20 fruit to a tier.
The fruit is variable in size, color and firmness, but is usually elongated and curved, with soft flesh rich in starch covered with a rind which may be green, yellow, red, purple, or brown when ripe.
This method is preferred since it ensures disease-free planting material.
The plant is allowed to produce two shoots at a time; a larger one for immediate fruiting and a smaller "sucker" or "follower" to produce fruit in 6–8 months.
In global commerce in 2009, by far the most important cultivars belonged to the triploid AAA group of ''Musa acuminata'', commonly referred to as Cavendish group bananas.
It is unclear if any existing cultivar can replace Cavendish bananas, so various hybridisation and genetic engineering programs are attempting to create a disease-resistant, mass-market banana.
It is developing cultivars specifically for smallholder and subsistence farmers.
During the medieval ages, bananas from Granada were considered among the best in the Arab world.
The paper is either hand-made or by industrial process.
In some countries, bananas used for cooking may be called plantains.
The stated differences are that plantains are more starchy and less sweet; they are eaten cooked rather than raw; they have thicker skin, which may be green, yellow or black; and they can be used at any stage of ripeness.
As with artichokes, both the fleshy part of the bracts and the heart are edible.
Harvested shoots are first boiled in lye to prepare fibers for yarn-making.
Thus both Cavendish cultivars, the classic yellow dessert bananas, and Saba cultivars, used mainly for cooking, are called ''pisang'' in Malaysia and Indonesia, ''kluai'' in Thailand and ''chuoi'' in Vietnam.
They are often used as ecologically friendly disposable food containers or as "plates" in South Asia and several Southeast Asian countries.
In Tamil Nadu (India) leaves are fully dried and used as packing material for food stuffs and also making cups to hold liquid foods.
The term "banana" is also used as the common name for the plants which produce the fruit.
As a non-seasonal crop, bananas are available fresh year-round.
For example, the outermost fibers of the shoots are the coarsest, and are suitable for tablecloths, while the softest innermost fibers are desirable for kimono and kamishimo.
Cavendish is highly susceptible to TR4, and over time, Cavendish is almost certain to be eliminated from commercial production by this disease.
For example, during the 1970s, Uganda produced  of bananas per hectare.
It stunts leaves, resulting in a "bunched" appearance.
Cultivated banana plants vary in height depending on the variety and growing conditions.
Bananas can be ordered by the retailer "ungassed" (''i.e.''
A 2008 study reported that ripe bananas fluoresce when exposed to ultraviolet light.
Flavor and texture are also affected by ripening temperature.
The edges of the sheath meet when it is first produced, making it tubular.
Both the skin and inner part can be eaten raw or cooked.
A mere  were grown in Hawaii in 2001.
The banana equivalent dose of radiation is sometimes used in nuclear communication to compare radiation levels and exposures.
The new firm, named ChiquitaFyffes, is expected to sell about 160 million boxes of bananas annually.
The leaves contain the juices, protect food from burning and add a subtle flavor.
Banana pancakes are popular amongst backpackers and other travelers in South Asia and Southeast Asia.
Ripe bananas were found to contain serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine.
File:M. acuminata x balbisiana.JPG|Banana inflorescence, partially opened
Though the two were grown in similar regions, they tended not to be distributed together.
The banana may also have been present in isolated locations elsewhere in the Middle East on the eve of Islam.
These new cultivars taste different from the Cabana banana, which has slowed their acceptance by local farmers.
Black sigatoka is a fungal leaf spot disease first observed in Fiji in 1963 or 1964.
In all the important festivals and occasions of Hindus, the serving of bananas plays a prominent part.
Popular along Malaysia's east coast
In 2012, a team of scientists announced they had achieved a draft sequence of the genome of ''Musa acuminata''.
However, this approach proved inadequate to address the sheer number of cultivars existing in the primary center of diversity of the genus, Southeast Asia.
Thus the banana producer and distributor Chiquita produces publicity material for the American market which says that "a plantain is not a banana".
Recent archaeological and palaeoenvironmental evidence at Kuk Swamp in the Western Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea suggests that banana cultivation there goes back to at least 5000 BCE, and possibly to 8000 BCE.
Fe'i bananas, grown and eaten in the islands of the Pacific, are derived from entirely different wild species than traditional bananas and plantains.
The genus ''Musa'' was created by Carl Linnaeus in 1753.
Panama disease is caused by a fusarium soil fungus (Race 1), which enters the plants through the roots and travels with water into the trunk and leaves, producing gels and gums that cut off the flow of water and nutrients, causing the plant to wilt, and exposing the rest of the plant to lethal amounts of sunlight.
Instead of fresh eating, these bananas are best suited to cooking, as seen in Mexican culinary dishes.
The inflorescence contains many bracts (sometimes incorrectly referred to as petals) between rows of flowers.
On the other hand, yellow bananas taste sweeter due to higher sugar concentrations.
Researchers are examining hundreds of wild varieties for resistance.
Exports were dominated by Ecuador, with 29% of the world total.
They are easily torn by the wind, resulting in the familiar frond look.
Furthermore, ethylene signals the production of pectinase, an enzyme which breaks down the pectin between the cells of the banana, causing the banana to soften as it ripens.
× ''paradisiaca'', including ''M.
as "true" plantains, distinct from other cooking bananas.
The '''banana''' is an edible fruit, botanically a berry, produced by several kinds of large herbaceous flowering plants in the genus ''Musa''.
The old scientific name ''Musa sapientum'' is no longer used.
The range of colors, sizes and shapes is far wider than in those grown or sold in Africa, Europe or the Americas.
There are peasant sector banana growers who produce for the world market in the Caribbean, however.
Several resistant cultivars of banana have been developed, but none has yet received commercial acceptance due to taste and texture issues.
These arrangements have now been largely withdrawn under pressure from other major trading powers, principally the United States.
The earliest modern plantations originated in Jamaica and the related Western Caribbean Zone, including most of Central America.
Statistics on the production and export of bananas and plantains are available from the Food and Agriculture Organization.
The Unicode standard includes the emoji character .
In other regions, such as Southeast Asia, many more kinds of banana are grown and eaten, so the simple two-fold distinction is not useful and is not made in local languages.
It can also refer to members of the genus ''Ensete'', like the snow banana (''Ensete glaucum'') and the economically important false banana (''Ensete ventricosum'').
Southeast Asia is the region of primary diversity of the banana.
This virulent form of fusarium wilt has wiped out Cavendish in several southeast Asian countries.
For a list of the cultivars classified under this system see List of banana cultivars.
In Central American countries, banana leaves are often used as wrappers for tamales.
The bag is then sealed with a band or string.
The leaves of banana plants are composed of a "stalk" (petiole) and a blade (lamina).
Almost all modern edible parthenocarpic (seedless) bananas come from two wild species&nbsp;– ''Musa acuminata'' and ''Musa balbisiana''.
''Musa'' species are native to tropical Indomalaya and Australia, and are likely to have been first domesticated in Papua New Guinea.
The only known defense to TR4 is genetic resistance.
While in no danger of outright extinction, the most common edible banana cultivar Cavendish (extremely popular in Europe and the Americas) could become unviable for large-scale cultivation in the next 10–20 years.
The spread of Islam was followed by far-reaching diffusion.
Subsequently, further species names were added.
Many bananas are used both raw and cooked.
This has elicited the expression ''Banana Pancake Trail'' for those places in Asia that cater to this group of travelers.
Ten countries produced around two thirds of the total world production.
Banana chips are a snack produced from sliced dehydrated or fried banana or plantain, which have a dark brown color and an intense banana taste.
However, by adding mulch and manure to the soil around the base of the plant, these new cultivars have substantially increased yields in the areas where they have been tried.
Pisang goreng, bananas fried with batter similar to the Filipino ''maruya'' or Kerala ''pazhampori'', is a popular dessert in Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia.
Most producers are small-scale farmers either for home consumption or local markets.
The fruit has been described as a "leathery berry".
Tropical race 4 (TR4) is a reinvigorated strain of Panama disease first discovered in 1993.
Depending upon cultivar and ripeness, the flesh can vary in taste from starchy to sweet, and texture from firm to mushy.
This treatment has been shown to more than double lifespans up to 3–4 weeks without the need for refrigeration.
Export bananas are picked green, and ripen in special rooms upon arrival in the destination country.
Extracting juice is difficult, because when a banana is compressed, it simply turns to pulp.
Worldwide, there is no sharp distinction between "bananas" and "plantains".
North America shippers like Lorenzo Dow Baker and Andrew Preston, the founders of the Boston Fruit Company started this process in the 1870s, but railroad builders like Minor C Keith also participated, eventually culminating in the multi-national giant corporations like today's Chiquita Brands International and Dole.
Bananas feature prominently in Philippine cuisine, being part of traditional dishes and desserts like ''maruya'', ''turón'', and ''halo-halo'' or ''saba con yelo''.
not treated with ethylene), and may show up at the supermarket fully green.
Phytolith discoveries in Cameroon dating to the first millennium BCE triggered an as yet unresolved debate about the date of first cultivation in Africa.
Its national data does distinguish between bananas and plantains, and shows that the latter made up over 95% of production.
(More are sometimes produced; an exceptional plant in the Philippines produced five.)
It involved the combination of modern transportation networks of steamships and railroads with the development of refrigeration that allowed bananas to have more time between harvesting and ripening.
Members of the "plantain subgroup" of banana cultivars, most important as food in West Africa and Latin America, correspond to the Chiquita description, having long pointed fruit.
The Windward Islands are notable for the growing, largely of Cavendish bananas, for an international market, generally in Europe but also in North America.
Bananas were once grown in Florida and southern California.
With the arrival of black sigatoka, banana production in eastern Africa fell by over 40%.
These rooms are air-tight and filled with ethylene gas to induce ripening.
One banana provides about the same calories as one potato.
Caribbean countries have sought to redress this problem by providing government supported agronomic services and helping to organize producers' cooperatives.
Ease of transport and shelf life rather than superior taste make the Dwarf Cavendish the main export banana.
* A large number of subspecific and varietial names of ''M.''
From there it diffused into North Africa and Muslim Iberia.
A stem develops which grows up inside the pseudostem, carrying the immature inflorescence until eventually it emerges at the top.
File:YosriPengatPisang.jpg|Banana in sweet gravy, known as ''pengat pisang'' in Malay.
In Indonesian cuisine, banana leaf is employed in cooking method called pepes and botok; the banana leaf packages containing food ingredients and spices are cooked on steam, in boiled water or grilled on charcoal.
Bananas and plantains constitute a major staple food crop for millions of people in developing countries.
The inner part of the common yellow dessert variety can be split lengthwise into three sections that correspond to the inner portions of the three carpels by manually deforming the unopened fruit.
In the Japanese system, leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to ensure softness.
Some 70 species of ''Musa'' were recognized by the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families ; several produce edible fruit, while others are cultivated as ornamentals.
* ''Musa'' × ''sapidisiaca'' K.C.Jacob, nom.
Their costs of production were relatively high and the ending of favorable tariff and other supports, especially in the European Economic Community, made it difficult for peasant producers to compete with the bananas grown on large plantations by the well capitalized firms like Chiquita and Dole.
Banana bunchy top virus (BBTV) jumps from plant to plant using aphids.
A study of these cultivars showed that they could be placed into at least three groups based on their characteristics: dessert bananas, non-plantain cooking bananas, and plantains, although there were overlaps between dessert and cooking bananas.
In many cases the farmer earns additional money from other crops, from engaging in labor outside the farm, and from a share of the earnings of relatives living overseas.
While the original wild bananas contained large seeds, diploid or polyploid cultivars (some being hybrids) with tiny seeds are preferred for human raw fruit consumption.
The classification of cultivated bananas has long been a problematic issue for taxonomists.
In summary, in commerce in Europe and the Americas (although not in small-scale cultivation), it is possible to distinguish between "bananas", which are eaten raw, and "plantains", which are cooked.
Jules Verne introduces bananas to his readers with detailed descriptions in ''Around the World in Eighty Days'' (1872).
Plantains are one of many kinds of cooking bananas, which are not always distinct from dessert bananas.
Each pseudostem normally produces a single inflorescence, also known as the "banana heart".
Their political maneuvers, which gave rise to the term Banana republic for states like Honduras and Guatemala, included working with local elites and their rivalries to influence politics or playing the international interests of the United States, especially during the Cold War, to keep the political climate favorable to their interests.
The top three producing countries do not appear in this table, and two countries, Costa Rica and Guatemala, do not appear in the table of top producers.
These banana shoots produce fibers of varying degrees of softness, yielding yarns and textiles with differing qualities for specific uses.
There is no cure; however, its effect can be minimized by planting only tissue-cultured plants (in vitro propagation), controlling aphids, and immediately removing and destroying infected plants.
This system eliminated almost all the difficulties and inconsistencies of the earlier classification of bananas based on assigning scientific names to cultivated varieties.
Plants are normally tall and fairly sturdy, and are often mistaken for trees, but what appears to be a trunk is actually a "false stem" or pseudostem.
The female flowers (which can develop into fruit) appear in rows further up the stem (closer to the leaves) from the rows of male flowers.
Among other things, ethylene stimulates the formation of amylase, an enzyme that breaks down starch into sugar, influencing the taste of bananas.
The word banana is thought to be of West African origin, possibly from the Wolof word ''banaana'', and passed into English via Spanish or Portuguese.
Cultivated bananas are parthenocarpic, i.e.
Unripe bananas can not be held in home refrigerators because they suffer from the cold.
Bananas are refrigerated to between  during transport.
The APG III system assigns Musaceae to the order Zingiberales, part of the commelinid clade of the monocotyledonous flowering plants.
Seeded bananas (''Musa balbisiana''), one of the forerunners of the common domesticated banana, are sold in markets in Indonesia.
The European Union has traditionally imported many of its bananas from former European Caribbean colonies, paying guaranteed prices above global market rates (see Lomé Convention).
