It was only in the second half of the 19th century that bandy became popular among the masses throughout the Russian Empire.
The adult men's game in Norway today consists of Eliteserien with 8 teams, as well as 3 lower divisions.
Medeu in Almaty is the only arena with artificial ice.
Plans are made to reinvigorate the bandy section of the club Dynamo Almaty, who won the Soviet Championships in 1977 and 1990 as well as the European Cup in 1978.
The other countries adopted the border.
The rules do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper, but a number of player specialisations have evolved.
The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages.
As a winter sport, British bandy originated in the Fens of East Anglia where large expanses of ice formed on flooded meadows or shallow washes in cold winters, and skating was a tradition.
Bandy also has other rules that are similar to football.
The referee alone signals the end of the match.
A centre spot with a circle of radius  denotes the center of the field.
In addition to the aforementioned, various protections are used to protect knees, elbows, genitals and throat.
This does not apply in the event of a red card (see below).
Bandy is most often played at outdoor arenas during winter time, so the need for spectators to carry flask or thermoses of 'warming' liquid like glögg is a natural effect.
It has so far not happened.
Free-strokes can also be awarded upon incorrect execution of corner-strikes, free-strikes, goal-throws, and so on.
The offside rule is also employed.
After the victory in the 2016 World Championship, the fourth in a row, President Putin received four players of the national team, Head Coach and Vice-President of All Russian Bandy Federation Sergey Myaus, All Russian Bandy Federation as well as  Federation of International Bandy President Boris Skrynnik in The Kremlin.
For example, there are central defenders, and left and right midfielders.
closer to the opponent's goal-line) of the ball, the second-to-last defending player (which can include the goalkeeper), and the half-way line.
A similar game became popular among the Russian nobility in the early 1700s, with the imperial court of Peter the Great playing a predecessor of modern bandy on Saint Petersburg's frozen Neva river.
The sport was played sporadically during Soviet occupation 1944-1991.
The 2017 Winter Universiade will be held in Almaty with bandy as a demonstration sport.
The Federation of International Bandy (FIB) had 32 members in 2014.
The teams shoot five penalties each and if this doesn't settle the game, the teams shoot one more penalty each until one of them misses and the other scores.
The Asian Bandy Federation also has its headquarters in Almaty.
An indoor stadium will be built for the occasion.
Students from Oxford and Cambridge went to Switzerland to play each other – the predecessor of the recurring Ice Hockey Varsity Match was a bandy match played in St. Moritz in 1885.
In March 2004, Norwegian ex-player Edgar Malman invited two big clubs to play a rink bandy exhibition game in Streatham, London.
national federations exist in over 30 nations, including Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Canada, Czech Republic, People's Republic of China, Denmark, England, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russia, Serbia, Somalia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, and the United States.
A goal cannot be scored from a stroke-in or goal throw, but unlike football, a goal cannot be scored directly from a stroke-off or corner stroke.
When the Federation of International Bandy was formed in 1955, with the Soviet Union as one of its founding members, the Russians largely adopted the international rules of the game developed in England in the 19th century, with one notable exception.
A "bandy briefcase" ("bandyportfölj" in Swedish) is the classic accessory for spectating – it is typically made of brown leather, well worn and contain a warm drink in a thermos and/or a bottle of liquor.
The Russian Bandy Super League is played every year and the winner in the final becomes Russian champion.
Two World Championships for students is a requirement before being able to become a full medal sport at the Winter Universiade.
FIB is now a member of Association of IOC Recognised International Sports Federations.
India is one of 6 countries in Asia and in total 28 to be a member of Federation of International Bandy.
'''Bandy''' is a team winter sport played on ice, in which skaters use sticks to direct a ball into the opposing team's goal.
The game became particularly popular in the Cynffig-Margam district of the Vale of Glamorgan where wide stretches of sandy beaches afforded ample room for play.
If a defender violently attacks an opponent within the penalty area, a penalty shot is awarded.
It was played throughout the country in varying forms and is still found in some areas.
Ice hockey became more popular than bandy in most of Europe mostly because it had become an Olympic sport, while bandy had not.
The teams participating are mostly, and some years exclusively, from Sweden and Russia.
Each half runs continuously, meaning the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play; the referee can, however, make allowance for time lost through significant stoppages as described below.
Charles G Tebbutt of the Bury Fen bandy club was responsible for the first published rules of bandy in 1882, and also for introducing the game into the Netherlands and Sweden, as well as elsewhere in England where it became popular with cricket, rowing and hockey clubs.
The same year, the National Bandy Association was started in England.
Formed in 1955, the name was changed from ''International Bandy Federation'' in 2001 after the International Olympic Committee approved it as a so-called "recognized sport"; the abbreviation "IBF" was already used by another recognized sports federation.
It should not be attached to the ice, to glide upon collisions, and should end  away from the corners.
While players may spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time.
Since the number of countries playing bandy is not large, every country which can set up a team is welcome to take part in the World Championship.
Although players usually use their sticks to move the ball around, they may use any part of their bodies other than their heads, hands or arms and may use their skates in a limited manner.
After Slottsbrons IF won the Swedish championship in 1934 it became popular amongst workers in the smaller industrial towns and villages.
There are also Youth Bandy World Championship in different age groups for boys and young men and in one age group for girls.
The first recorded games of bandy on ice took place in The Fens during the great frost of 1813–1814, although it is probable that the game had been played there in the previous century.
At each of the corners, a  radius quarter-circle is drawn, and a dotted line is painted parallel to the shortline and  away from it without extending into the penalty area.
However, at the time, the game was called "hockey on the ice", probably as it was considered an ice variant of field hockey.
Free-strokes can be awarded to a team if a player of the opposite team breaks any rule, for example, by hitting with the stick against the opponent's stick or skates.
In modern times, Russia has held a top position in the bandy area, both as a founding nation of the International Federation in 1955 and fielding the most successful team in the World Championships.
Bandy was played in Ukraine when she was part of the Soviet Union.
Finland, Norway and Sweden usually play Russia in the Russian Government Cup.
Bandy was introduced to Norway in the 1910s.
The dotted line can be replaced with a  long line starting at the edge of the penalty area and extending towards the sideline,  from the shortline.
There are eighteen rules in official play, designed to apply to all levels of bandy, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, veterans or women are permitted.
In 2013 and 2014 the final was played indoors in Friends Arena, the new national stadium for football in Solna with retractable roof with a capacity of 50 000.
The third time a player receives a penalty, it will be a personal penalty, meaning he or she will miss the remainder of the match.
Because of this, as well as an increase of Swedish players in Norway, the competitiveness of the game has risen, especially in the first division Eliteserien.
The bandy stick should not have similar colours to the ball, such as orange or pink; it should be no longer than , and no wider than .
It is expected to return to Ljusdal once an indoor arena has been built.
After a stoppage, play can recommence with a free stroke, a penalty shot or a corner stroke.
It is a pre-season tournament held in Edsbyn, Sweden and features clubs from Russia and Sweden.
However, if the substitute enters the ice before his teammate has left it, this will result in a five-minute ban.
The oldest group is the under 23 championship, Bandy World Championship Y-23.
Bandy is mainly played as a recreational sport in Switzerland nowadays.
Russians played this game using ordinary footwear, with sticks made out of juniper wood, only later were skates introduced.
A full game penalty can be received upon using abusive language or directly attacking an opponent and means that the player can neither play nor be substituted for the remainder of the game.
The month after Igor Levitin held a follow-up meeting.
Bandy is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play, or when play is stopped by the referee.
Some FIB countries don't have a large ice surface and only play rink bandy at home, in fact most of the World Championships Group B participants.
Compared to the past, attendance is still fairly low, but important Eliteserien matches can attract around 1000 spectators.
This added time is commonly referred to as ''stoppage time'' or ''injury time'', and must be reported to the match secretary and the two captains.
A substitute can enter the field after five or ten minutes.
It should be made of an approved material such as wood or a similar material and should not contain any metal or sharp parts which can hurt the surrounding players.
The ten outfield players may be arranged in these positions in any combination (for example, there may be three defenders, five midfielders, and two forwards), and the number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders would create a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse would create a slower, more defensive style of play.
The rules are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game.
National teams also meet for friendly games from time to time.
The national team played friendlies against Finland in the 1920s and '30s.
As an alternative, the extra two times 15-minutes may be played as "golden goal" which means the first team that scores during the extra-time wins the game.
Bandy was introduced to Sweden in 1895.
Along the sidelines a  high border (vant, sarg, wand, wall) is placed to prevent the ball from leaving the ice.
A team can bring at the most four substitutes to the game and one of these is likely to be an extra goalkeeper.
Athletes in Europe who had played bandy switched to ice hockey in the 1920s to compete in the Olympics.
Bandy was played at the Nordic Games in Stockholm in 1905 and between Swedish, Finnish and Russian teams in Helsinki in 1907.
Recently bandy has started to gain popularity again outside of Oral.
The final offences that might mandate a penalty shot are those of hitting or blocking an opponent's stick or touching the ball with the hands, arms, stick or head.
Based on the number of participating athletes, bandy is the world's second most popular winter sport.
In the autumn of 2012 there was a report on the Federation of International Bandy homepage about activities about to start up, including a women's national team.
The typical European style of ice hockey, with flowing, less physical play, represents a heritage of bandy.
If the time runs out while a team is preparing for a free-stroke or penalty, the strike should still be made but it must go into the goal by one shot to count as a goal.
In Finnish the two sports are distinguished as "ice ball" (jääpallo) and "ice puck" (jääkiekko).
Bend 4 is the most common size in professional bandy.
In the World Championships the two halves can be 30 minutes each for the nations in the B division.
In the 2014 women's World Championship Russia won, for the first time toppling the Swedes from the throne.
The layout of the players on the pitch is called the team's ''formation'', and defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager(s).
The Swedes contributed largely, and clubs sprang up around the capital of Oslo.
Only ice hockey is more popular.
or the use of incorrect equipment, such as a broken stick.
Sticks are crooked and are available in five angles, where 1 has the smallest bend and 5 has the most.
The World Championships should not be confused with the annual World Cup in Ljusdal, Sweden, which has been played annually since the 1970s and is the biggest bandy tournament for elite level club teams.
In 2016 Sweden took the title back.
Bandy in Norway has also started to spread geographically, and while the sport is more popular than ice hockey in and around the capital Oslo, some clubs in apart locations in the 3rd division only have access to hockey rinks and therefore play rink bandy for home games.
If the ball has left the field along the sidelines, the referee must decide which team touched the ball last, and award a restart stroke to the opposing team, just like football's throw-in.
If both teams have scored an equal number of goals, then, with some exceptions, the game is a draw.
The federation is based in Cambridgeshire, the historical heartland.
Central European teams from Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and the Netherlands met for a four nation competition in January 2014, an event which is intended to be recurrent.
A team of fewer than eight players may not start a game.
Bandy has a long history in many parts of the country and it used to be one of the most popular sports in Soviet times.
Bandy is considered a national sport in Russia and is nowadays the third most popular one.
Three teams contested the inaugural competition, and Kazakhstan won the gold medal.
and are overseen by the Rules and Referee Committee.
Winter sports like skiing, sledding and bandy was played in Geneva and other towns.
However, after independence it suffered a rapid decline in popularity and only remained in Oral (often called by the Russian name, Uralsk), where the country's only professional club Akzhaiyk is located.
He talked, among other things, about the need to give more support to Russian bandy.
The former capital Almaty has in recent years hosted both the Asian Winter Games (with bandy on the program) as well as the Bandy World Championship in which Kazakhstan finished 3rd.
The final match for the Swedish Championship is played every year on the third Saturday of March.
The first international match took place in 1891 between Bury Fen and the then Haarlemsche Hockey & Bandy Club from the Netherlands (a club which after a couple of club fusions now is named HC Bloemendaal).
In the 1920s students played the game and it became a largely middle class sport.
The pants and gloves may contain padding.
A bandy field is  by , a total of , or about the same size as a football pitch and considerably larger than an ice hockey rink.
A variant of bandy, rink bandy, is played to the same rules but on a field the size of an ice hockey rink and with fewer people on each team.
There is usually a 15-minute half-time break.
The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within a short period of time, typically taken to be four to five seconds.
The Bandy World Championship for men were first held in 1957 and then every two years starting in 1961, and every year since 2003.
The activity is mainly centred to Minnesota even if a fan interest also exists in other states.
IFK Uppsala won 11 titles in the Swedish Championships between 1907 and 1920, which made them the most successful bandy club in the entire country.
Bandy is also the predecessor of floorball, which was invented when people started playing with plastic bandy-shaped sticks and light balls when running on the floors of indoor gym halls.
In Russian bandy is called "Russian hockey" (русский хоккей) or more frequently "hockey with a ball" (xоккей с мячом) while ice hockey is called "hockey with a puck" (xоккей с шайбой) or more frequently just "hockey".
After WWII the number of teams rose, as well as attendance which regularly were in the thousands, but mild winters in the 1970s and 80s shrunk the league, and in 2003 only 5 clubs (teams) fought out the 1st division with low attendance numbers and little media coverage.
Since a few years the state is supporting bandy.
United States bandy championships have been played annually since the early 1980s, but the league is still not widely followed by sports media in the country.
However, physical contact between opponents is limited.
The first Finnish national championships were held in 1908 and was the first national Finnish championship held in any team sport.
It is also the only discipline to have official support of the Russian Orthodox Church.
A European championship was held in 1913 with eight countries participating.
Russians see themselves as the creators of the sport, which is reflected by the unofficial title for bandy, "Russian hockey" (русский хоккей).
This popularity for Swiss venues of winter sport may have been a reason, the European Championship was held there in 1913.
Therefore, the first tournament will be organised in 2016, in Ulyanovsk.
A centre-line is drawn through the centre spot parallel with the shortlines.
Like football, the game is normally played in halves of 45 minutes each, there are eleven players on each team, and the bandy field is about the same size as a football pitch.
In 1912 the Norwegians played their first National Championship, which was played annually up to 1940.
has influenced its development and history – mainly in European and former Soviet countries.
The bandy clubs in the US only have teams but the interest is stable and even if some clubs fold after only some years, other clubs have been around from the start and have a steady following.
Bandy was played in Estonia in the 1910s to 1930s and the country had a national championship for some years.
A penalty shot should always be accompanied by a 5 or 10 minutes penalty (see below).
It will be repeated in Krasnoyarsk 2019, when also a women's tournament will take place.
The teams must wear uniforms that make it easy to distinguish the two teams.
After independence in 1991, it took some years before organised bandy formed again, but Ukrainian champions have been named annually since 2012.
The first national bandy league was started in Sweden in 1902.
They are competing in the Russian second division.
In 1946 legal play resumed and still goes on.
The game is designed to be played on a rectangle of ice the same size as a football field.
Stadion Yunost in Oral will get artificial ice for the 2015-16 season.
Bandy in Sweden is famous for its "culture" – both playing bandy and being a spectator requires great fortitude and dedication.
and Norwegian Strømsgodset IF and Mjøndalen IF, with the latter still having an active bandy section.
From 2015 onwards, Tele2 Arena in Stockholm has been chosen instead.
If the score is still tied after extra time, the game will be replayed.
England won the European Bandy Championships in 1913, but that turned out to be the grand finale, and bandy is now virtually unknown in England.
In Russia bandy is known as hockey with a ball or simply Russian hockey.
Bury Fen Bandy Club from Bluntisham-cum-Earith, near St Ives, was the most successful team, remaining unbeaten until the winter of 1890–1891.
These include a defender holding or hooking an attacker, or blocking a goal situation with a lifted skate, thrown stick or glove and so on.
Oslo, including neighbouring towns, is still today the region where bandy enjoys most popularity in Norway.
All free strokes are “direct” and allow a goal to be scored without another player touching the ball.
World Cup matches are played day and night, and the tournament is played in four days in late October.
A standard adult bandy match consists of two periods of 45 minutes each, known as halves.
Also, the defenders (with the exception of the goal-keeper) are not allowed to kneel or lie on the ice.
From the beginning of each playing period with a stroke-off (a set strike from the centre-spot by one team) until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee.
If it is very cold or if it is snowing, the match can be broken into thirds of 30 minutes each.
Its headquarters is in Mandi in Himachal Pradesh.
Attending the meeting were also Minister of Sport, Tourism and Youth policy Vitaly Mutko and presidential adviser Igor Levitin.
At the same time modern ice-hockey rules were formalized in British North America, bandy rules were formulated in Europe.
The referee may have one or two assistant referees.
A notable tradition is "annandagsbandy", bandy games played on Saint Stephen's Day, which for many Swedes is an important Christmas season tradition and always draw bigger crowds than usual.
Any number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game.
From 1991 to 2012, it was played at Studenternas Idrottsplats in Uppsala, at times drawing crowds in excess of 20,000.
Now, however, the record is held by the club Västerås SK.
The smaller ice fields needed for ice hockey also made its rinks easier to maintain, especially in countries with short winters.
The quality of the teams varies, however, with only six nations, the Soviet Union, Russia, Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Kazakhstan, having won medals (allowing for the fact that Russia's team took over from the Soviet Union in 1992).
The highest altitude where bandy has been played is in the capital of the Tajik  autonomous province of Gorno-Badakhshan, Khorugh.
Substitutions can be performed without notifying the referee and can be performed while the ball is in play.
If both extra periods are played without a scored goal, a penalty shootout will settle the game.
Even if an offence is not penalised because the referee plays an advantage, the offender may still be sanctioned (see below) for any associated misconduct at the next stoppage of play.
At the 2011 Asian Winter Games, open to members of the Olympic Council of Asia, men's bandy was included for the first time.
Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue when its continuation will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed.
Each team has 11 players, one of whom is a goalkeeper.
In 2004, FIB was fully accepted by IOC.
Certain other offences, when carried out within the penalty area, result in a penalty shot provided there is a goal situation.
It was the first time a head of state had accepted a meeting to talk about Russian bandy.
With football and bandy being dominant sports in parts of Europe, it was common for sports clubs to have bandy and football sections, with athletes playing both sports at different times of the year.
The Russian Cup has been played annually (except for just some years) since 1937.
It was played indoors in Sandviken from 2009 to 2011 because Ljusdal has no indoor arena.
The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner.
