Between 1972 and 1975, Bangladesh experienced socialism under a secular parliamentary system.
Ancient Bengal was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans as ''Gangaridai'' (Nation of Ganges).
The war ended after nine months with a victory for Bangladesh-India Allied Forces.
Bangladesh is noted for cultural pluralism within a Bengali Muslim majority.
It was mentioned in numerous Greco-Roman works, including the writings of Megasthenes, Diodorus Siculus, Quintus Curtius Rufus, Plutarch, Pliny the Elder and Claudius Ptolemy.
Factional competition between the ''motobdars'' is a major dynamic of social and political interaction.
It became an official language of the Sultanate of Bengal, where it was spoken as the main vernacular language.
The Bangladeshi diaspora is concentrated in the Middle East, North America and the United Kingdom.
It brought the Chittagong Hill Tracts under Mughal suzerainty after a treaty with the Chakma Raja in 1713.
The region is seperated from India by the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers.
The East India Company's policies in the region also led to the Opium Wars with China.
The majority of its administrative centers, known as Mint Towns, were located in East Bengal.
An informal council of ''shomaj'' elders (''matabdars'' or ''shordars'') settles village disputes.
A martial law government was later established.
90% of the population are Bengali Muslims (146 million).
The Nawabs were eventually displaced by European colonialism.
Most urban centers are rural administrative towns.
Among the functions of a ''shomaj'' might be the maintenance of a Mosque and support of a mullah.
The country is named after the historical region of Bengal, of which it constitutes the largest and eastern segment.
After getting an elected mandate in 1982, President Sattar was overthrown by the army chief Hussain Muhammad Ershad amid a growing food crisis.
It served as the seat of several of the Sultans of Bengal.
Hasina returned to power in 2008.
Martial law returned and continued till 1986.
After the British government established direct control as the British Raj in 1858, Bengal witnessed a period of stability and educational modernization between the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Mughal-era agrarian reforms increased productivity in East Bengal which further attracted the agriculturalist population into the Islamic mould.
M. N. Larma, a Chakma lawmaker, made a notable speech demanding the use of the term "Bangladeshi" as the country's nationality.
Today, the area makes up 10% of Bangladesh's territory.
Bengali nationalism rose in East Pakistan during the 1960s.
The majority of Chakmas are Therevada Buddhists, with a minority being Hindu.
The Bengali language developed from Magadhi Prakrit, and its written from Apabhramsa, between the 7th and 10th centuries.
The first Pakistani military coup in 1958 ushered the dictatorship of President Ayub Khan.
They originate from Arakan.
Its sultans, subedars and nawabs ruled over the wider region, including Bihar, Arakan and Orissa.
Under the Nawabs of Bengal, the region became a hub of international trade among Eurasian merchants in the 18th century, including the Armenians, French, Danish, English and Dutch.
As part of Ancient Bengal, the region of Bangladesh was home to several of the ancient Bengali seafaring kingdoms, including Samatata, Vanga, Gauda, Pundra and Harikela.
There are an estimated 500,000 Bengali Christians and 400,000 Bengali Buddhists.
The settlement of Sonargaon was recorded by travelers like Ibn Battuta and Niccolo De Conti as the most important political and commercial center in East Bengal.
They are among the oldest inhabitants of the region.
It once formed a single eastern Indo-Aryan language with Assamese and Odia, but later became distinct.
The Sena rulers reinforced the caste system.
The individual nuclear family often is submerged in the larger unit and might be known as the house (''ghor'').
The Portuguese were allowed to operate settlements on the coast of Chittagong.
In southeastern Bangladesh, the Chittagong Hill Tracts frontier has a district history.
The company forced opium and indigo cultivation, which caused local rebellions led by Titumir and Haji Shariatullah.
Festivals on the both the secular Bengali calendar and the Islamic calendar are widely celebrated.
Hindu nationalists such as Surya Sen also led rebel activities in the region.
Modern Bangladesh is an emerging economy.
Its inhabitants include people of Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Austroasiatic and Tibeto-Burman origins.
The indigenous Bengali alphabets descended from Brahmi serves as the Bengali script.
It is home to several indigenous ethnic groups in the three hill districts of Rangamati, Bandarban and Khagrachari.
*The Bawm people are a Tibeto-Burman Christian community.
In 1988, Islam was made the state religion.
They have a Raja and are concentrated in the distrcits of Bandarban and Khagrachari.
The language is Magadhi Prakrit.
Governor General Muhammad Ali Jinnah ignited controversy over the issue of official languages, which led to the Bengali Language Movement.
It witnessed a synthesis of Islamic, North Indian and indigenous Bengali cultures.
The Sena period coincided with the decline of Buddhism in South Asia.
Zia founded the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, restored free markets and pursued closer relations with the West.
8% of the population are Bengali Hindus.
"As citizens of Bangladesh we are all Bangladeshis, but we also have a separate ethnic identity" said Larma.
Khaleda Zia returned to power in 2001.
The hardline Islamic Faraizi movement shook British control of East Bengal.
Several ''paras'' constitute a ''mauza'', the basic revenue and census survey unit.
Most are native to East Bengal.
The genocidal operations of the Pakistani military, starting with Operation Searchlight, led to the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Most Bangladeshi Muslims are member of the Sunni branch of Islam.
'''Bangladeshis''' ( ) are a nation and the citizens of Bangladesh.
Buddhism, Christianity and animist beliefs are among the chief faiths of the Mros.
It was a exclusive zone for Tibeto-Burman tribes in Bengal during the British Raj.
Bengali Muslims are the predominant ethnoreligious group of Bangladesh, with a majority adhering to Sunni Islam, alongside a Shia minority and the prevalence of Sufism.
The traditional character of rural villages was changing in the latter half of the 20th century with the addition of brick structures of one or more stories scattered among the more common thatched bamboo huts.
The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea mentions the natural harbours of Chittagong near the mouth of the Ganges as the best seaports in the East.
He was assassinated in a military coup by junior army officers in August 1975.
*The Chakma people are the largest tribe of the Chittagong Hill Tracts and the second largest indigenous ethnic group of Bangladesh after Bengalis.
Bangladeshi culture is a mainly a synthesis of indigenous Bengali and Islamic cultures.
Buddhists have a mixture of Bengali and Tibeto-Burman surnames.
Chittagong became the chief port and a key commercial centre.
They were often vassals to the powerful empires of Magadha, particularly the Mauryans and Guptas.
He ruled for nine years, during which Islam was made the state religion.
Several hundred thousand Non-Resident Bangladeshis (NRBs) have dual citizenship in Commonwealth countries like the UK and Canada.
East Bengal was a hotbed of the failed Indian Mutiny of 1857.
Islam became known as the religion of the plough in the Bengal delta.
Bangladeshi Hindus have Sanskritized Bengali surnames.
Zia was succeeded by Justice Abdus Sattar.
Bangladeshi citizenship was formed in 1971, when the permanent residents of the former East Pakistan were transformed into citizens of a new republic.
An independent Sultanate of Bengal declared independence from Delhi and established a regional empire in the 14th century.
Bangladeshis Muslims carry surnames that have Arabic and Persian origins.
It absorbed vocubulary from Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit.
*The Marma people are second largest community in the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
Bangladesh has the third largest Hindu population in the world after India and Nepal.
Buddhism influenced the region in the first millennium, particularly during the four hundred year reign of the Pala dynasty.
Dhaka became the largest city in East Pakistan and was declared as country's legislative capital.
Ershad assumed the presidency in 1983.
The Bengali Muslims became the majority of East Bengal.
Given the reputation of East Bengal's seafaring kingdoms like Harikela (known to the Arabs as ''Harkand''), its seaports received many of the earliest Islamic missionaries.
Traditional Bengali secularism has been an important contributor to the nation's society and ethos.
These changes, however, did not prevent rural poverty from increasing greatly.
In 2010, the Bangladesh Supreme Court reaffirmed secularism in the constitution.
Further coups brought Major General Ziaur Rahman to power as the Chief Martial Law Administrator.
However, the deletion in 1977 of ''Bangalee'' as the nationality term for the country's citizens, in order to be inclusive of non-Bengali minorities, also reflects attempts to build a more cosmopolitan Bangladeshi society.
Sheikh Hasina of the Awami League was elected premier in 1996.
It elected its first female premier Khaleda Zia in 1991.
The Bengali population is concentrated in Bengal delta, the coastal areas of Chittagong Division and the river valleys of Sylhet Division.
Sufism played a liberating role for many of the region's inhabitants, who were integrated into the Islamic cultural sphere.
Mughal power collapsed as a result of both internal and external shocks.
Mosques and Sufi monasteries were built across the region.
British rule ended with the partition of India in 1947, when eastern Bengal was given to the Dominion of Pakistan.
A Tibeto-Burman community, they have been greatly influenced by Bengali culture, including in their native Chakma language, a branch of the Bengali-Assamese languages.
They became centers of promoting ideas of human equality, social reform and solidarity.
Another debate on national identity concerns attitudes towards the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
It was also noted for its large economy and extensive trade and diplomatic networks in Asia and Africa.
Amid rising political agitation, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman enacted a presidential government under a one party state in January 1975.
Their population is concentrated in Bandarban District.
He was assassinated in 1981.
The Bengali people have hybrid multiracial origins, including Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Tibeto-Burman, Middle Eastern and Austroasiatic ancestry.
The government preferred to label all citizens as Bengalis, however this discriminated against the country's indigenous non-Bengali minorities.
The high cost of importing Bengali muslin was debated in the Greek and Roman assemblies.
In 2010, the Bangladesh Supreme Court reaffirmed the principle of separation of mosque and state in the constitution, although Islam remains the state religion.
*The Tripuri people inhabit much of Khagrachari District.
Coupled with movements for democracy, autonomy and independence, an electoral stalemate plunged the union into a constitutional crisis in 1971, when Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was denied the right to form a government despite winning the country's first democratic election.
The language was modernized during the Bengali renaissance in the 19th century.
Land reform was accomplished with the abolishing of the permanent settlement.
The Palas patronized the flourishing of highly developed sculpture and architecture.
A famine struck the country in 1974.
Urban centers grew in number and population during the 1980s as a result of an administrative decentralization program that featured the creation of upazilas.
Bangladesh's non-Bengali Muslims are usually fluent in both Bengali and Hindustani.
Other Hindu dynasties included the Deva dynasty.
At the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh, a debate raged over what term to use for Bangladesh's citizens.
It is commemorated by UNESCO as International Mother Language Day, as part of worldwide efforts to preserve linguistic heritage.
East Bengal was a prosperous melting pot for centuries.
They also include former Stranded Pakistanis and their descendants.
*The Mro people are the third largest community in the region and have a Raja.
The Awami League was founded in 1949.
The Bengali language is a fundamental element of Bangladeshi identity.
The three largest communities in the region have a Raja as their tribal chief who is recognized by the Government of Bangladesh.
The Mughal Empire conquered the region by the 16th century.
It noted trade routes used by private merchants between Bengal and Roman Egypt dealing in the muslin trade.
The early Muslim League dominated politics in East Bengal, with statesmen such as Nawab Khwaja Salimullah and Sher-e-Bangla A. K. Fazlul Huq.
Despite a peace treaty in 1997, the Bangladeshi government is yet to implement many of its commitments to protect adivasi land rights.
It has influenced other languages in the region, including Chakma, Rohingya, Assamese, Odia and Nepali.
Islam made its first apperence in East Bengal in the last centuries of the first millennium CE, following the spread of Islamic missionaries that started during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad.
In 1977, Ziaur Rahman assumed the presidency.
Bangladesh constitutes the historical territory of East Bengal within the Greater Bengal region.
Settlers from different parts of the Muslim world migrated to Bengal.
Bengali is the 10th most spoken language in the world.
They include affluent sections of the country's merchant and business class, particularly Nizari Ismailism adherents.
The Constitution of Bangladesh was enacted in December 1972, proclaiming a secular democracy.
Groups of homes in a village are called ''Paras'', and each ''para'' has its own name.
In 1943, Bengal's premier supported the Lahore Resolution calling for the creation of a sovereign state in the eastern zone of British India.
*The Kuki people are the Bangladeshi counterparts of Chins in northern Myanmar and Mizos in northeast India.
Following mass protests and a caretaker administration in 1990, Bangladesh restored the parliamentary republic.
Mros are originally related to the Chin people of Myanmar.
Today, Bengalis enjoy strong cultural homogenity with a common standardized language and a variety of dialects.
Islamic Bengal was a medieval great power in the the East.
Dhaka is the largest city in Bangladesh and one of the world's most populous megacities.
However, it faces challenges of political instability, democratic reform, poverty and bureaucratic corruption.
Muslim conquests absorbed the entire Bengal region under the Delhi Sultanate.
Islamic rule abolished the caste system.
Many Bangladeshi Christians have Portuguese surnames.
It was found at Mahasthangarh and is written in the Brahmi script.
This makes Bangladesh the world's third largest Muslim majority country after Indonesia and Pakistan.
Trade between East Bengal and the Abbasid Caliphate increased from the 9th century, as evidenced in the excavation of numerous gold coins from the caliphate in the territory of Bangladesh.
The government generally respects freedom of religion and ensures protection for minorities.
The population of Bangladesh is concentrated in the fertile Bengal delta, which has been the center of urban and agrarian civilizations for millennia.
Bengali Hindus are the largest minority of Bangladesh, with a population between 10-12 million.
Traditional sources of prestige, such as landholding, distinguished lineage, and religious piety were beginning to be replaced by modern education, higher income, and steadier work.
The eastern part of Bengal, which was the most fertile part of the Bengal delta, became the center of the Muslim population.
*The Khumi people are one of the poorest and smallest tribes of the region.
Since independence, the relationship between religion and the state has been controversial.
A low-level insurgency took place in the region to demand constitutional autonomy against Bengali settlements.
Military coups ushered a sixteen year presidential regime, which restored the free market and promoted moderate Islamism.
The tribes of the Chittagong Hill Tracts often follow the Burmese calendar, which reflect the country's links with Southeast Asia.
The oldest literary inscription in Bangladesh dates back to the 3rd century BCE.
Above the ''bari'' level, patrilineal kin ties are linked into sequentially larger groups based on real, fictional, or assumed relationships.
The community is headed by the Chakma Raja.
Their population is divided between Bangladesh and their larger indigenous homeland in the Indian state of Tripura.
The country's ''lingua franca'' is Bengali, an eastern Indo-Aryan language of the Indo-European language family.
A significant unit larger than that of close kin is the voluntary religious and mutual benefit association known as "the society" (''shomaj'' or ''milat'').
The country's highlands, including the Chittagong Hill Tracts and the Sylhet Division, are home to various tribal minorities.
Bengali Muslims also make up the world's second largest Muslim ethnic group after Arab Muslims.
Bangladesh is the world's eighth most populous nation.
The creation of Eastern Bengal and Assam in 1905 set an important precedent for the future creation of Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Indian religions were practiced in the region, although East Bengal's inhabitants were not members of the wider Hindu social order.
The Bengali Language Movement sowed the seeds of East Pakistani nationalism, ultimately culminating in the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Bangladesh is also home to number of minority indigenous languages, including Santhali, Garo, Marma, Chakma and Bisnupriya Manipuri.
Several East Pakistani statesmen served as Pakistan's premier in the 1950s, including Khawaja Nazimuddin, Mohammad Ali of Bogra and Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy.
The first socialist government of Bangladesh nationalized major industries.
Non-Bengali Muslims make up the largest immigrant community; while the Tibeto-Burman Chakmas, who speak the Indo-Aryan Chakma language, are the second largest indigenous ethnic group after Bengalis.
There are significant minorities of the Shia and Ahmadiya branches.
In 2007, the military imposed a state of emergency and two-year caretaker administration after months of street protests.
Several famine struck the region.
The All India Muslim League was founded in Dhaka in 1906.
It is a secular language which evolved between the 7th and 10th centuries, with an indigenous alphabet, and unites people of different faiths and regions.
The Austroasiatic Santhals are the largest aboriginal community.
The Mughals built an imperial metropolis in Dhaka, which was the capital for Mughal Bengal for over seven decades.
Most Chakmas are concentrated in Rangamati District.
The basic social unit in a village is the family (''poribar'' or ''gushti''), generally consisting of a complete or incomplete patrilineally extended household (''chula'') and residing in a homestead (''bari'').
The Bengali Language Movement in East Pakistan was a key catalyst of forming Bangladeshi identity.
Bangladeshi identity is closely linked with language and geography.
An estimated 3 million Bangladeshi citizens are non-Bengali Muslim immigrants from different parts of South Asia.
