With the promotion of birth control in the 1980s, the growth rate began to slow.
Stranded Pakistani Biharis since 1971 living in various camps in Bangladesh speak Urdu.
During the Bengal Sultanate, medieval Bengali writers were influenced by Arabic and Persian works.
An insurgency began in the Chittagong Hill Tracts, due to demands by the region's indigenous people for autonomy.
By the 2000s, Bangladesh produced 80-100 films a year.
Lasting for nine months, the entire war ended with the surrender of Pakistan's military to the Bangladesh-India Allied Forces on 16 December 1971.
File:Madhupur shal forest.JPG|Sal forests in Gazipur District
In 1991, finance minister Saifur Rahman launched a range of liberal reforms.
76% of Bangladeshis viewed the United States favorably in 2014.
Other major cities, these and other municipalities electing a chairperson, include Mymensingh, Gopalganj, Jessore, Bogra, Dinajpur, Saidpur, Narayanganj and Rangamati.
The Hilsa is the national fish and immensely popular across Bangladesh.
The World Bank estimates that Bangladesh is ranked 1st in the world of the number of children suffering from malnutrition.
Similarly, Rohingya Refugees from Burma since 1978 living in various camps in Bangladesh speak Rohingya.
The steel industry in Bangladesh is concentrated in the port city of Chittagong.
Bangladesh's foreign policy follows a principle of ''friendship to all and malice to none'', which was first articulated by Bengali statesman H. S. Suhrawardy in 1957.
Historically renowned for muslin and silk, modern Bangladesh is one of the world's leading textile producers.
China is also one of Bangladesh's largest trade partners.
A short-lived one party state and several military coups in 1975 established a presidential government.
Excavations of glass beads suggest the city had trading links with Southeast Asia and the Roman world.
The zamindar gentry in Bangladesh built numerous Indo-Saracenic palaces and country mansions, such as the Ahsan Manzil, Tajhat Palace, Dighapatia Palace, Puthia Rajbari and Natore Rajbari.
This gave rise to the system of Indo-Arabic numerals.
Gas supplies generate 56% of the country's electricity.
The insufficient power supply is a significant obstacle to growth.
Both the municipal heads are elected for a span of five years.
Lieutenant General Ziaur Rahman took over the presidency in 1977 when Justice Sayem resigned.
Primary Education Closing (PEC) passed examinees proceed to three years Junior Secondary, which culminate in a Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination.
Many Bangladeshi writers, such as Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, K. Anis Ahmed and Farah Ghuznavi, are acclaimed for their short stories.
In 2005, Bangladesh was the world's 20th largest cement producer.
In 1962, Dacca was designated as the legislative capital of Pakistan in an appeasement of growing Bengali political nationalism.
Thirdly, trees that usually would have intercepted rain water had been cut down for firewood or to make space for animals.
In the Chittagong Hill Tracts, the government is yet to fully implement the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord.
The national cricket team participated in their first Cricket World Cup in 1999, and the following year was granted elite Test cricket status.
Khan's government also constructed the Kaptai Dam which controversially displaced the Chakma population from their indigenous homeland in the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
The Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research was founded in 1973, and traces to its roots to the East Pakistan Regional Laboratories established in Dhaka (1955), Rajshahi (1965) and Chittagong (1967).
On Language Movement Day, people congregate at the Shaheed Minar in Dhaka to remember the national heroes of the Bengali Language Movement, and at the Jatiyo Smriti Soudho on Independence Day and Victory Day to remember the national heroes of the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Agriculture mainly produces rice, jute and tea.
Hindu Rajas and the Baro-Bhuyan zamindars gained control of large parts of the region, especially in the fertile Bhati zone.
The number of hospital beds per 10,000 population is 4.
The country has never recorded an air temperature below 0&nbsp;°C, with a record low of 1.1&nbsp;°C in the north west city of Dinajpur on 3 February 1905.
Education is mainly offered in Bengali, but English is commonly taught and used.
Bangladesh has three UNESCO World Heritage Sites, and five tentative listed sites.
In the late 16th-century, the Mughal Empire led by Akbar the Great began conquering the Bengal delta after the Battle of Tukaroi, where he defeated the Bengal Sultanate's last rulers, the Karrani dynasty.
It has prioritized relations with ASEAN members in Southeast Asia.
The service sector accounts for 51% of GDP.
The faculty members are from many well-known academic institutions of North America, Europe, Asia, Australia, and the Middle East.
The trend of establishing libraries continued until the beginning of World War II.
Farrukh Ahmed, Sufia Kamal, Kaiser Haq and Nirmalendu Goon are important figures of modern Bangladeshi poetry.
They have called for the force to be disbanded.
In February 2015, Bangladesh had major deployments in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Darfur, Côte d'Ivoire, Haiti, South Sudan, Lebanon, Cyprus and the Golan Heights.
This unique trend started in Rajshahi and Dhaka in the 1950s.
Bangladesh has a strong record of nuclear nonproliferation as a party to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).
Water lilies and lotuses grow vividly during the monsoon.
In 1950, land reform was accomplished in East Bengal with the abolishment of the permanent settlement and the feudal zamindari system.
The sultanate was visited by numerous world explorers, including Niccolò de' Conti of Venice, Ibn Battuta of Morocco and Admiral Zheng He of China.
There was also an unsuccessful attempt to form a United Bengal.
Press freedom in Bangladesh is ranked as "Not Free".
Export-oriented industrialization has increased in recent years, with the country's exports amounting to US$30 billion in FY2014-15.
Ershad was later indicted and convicted on corruption charges.
Global public opinion turned against Pakistan as news of atrocities spread, with the Bangladesh Movement gaining support from prominent political and cultural figures in the West, including Ted Kennedy, George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Victoria Ocampo and Andre Malraux.
The proto-Bengali language emerged under Pala rule.
The American multinational Chevron produces 50% of Bangladesh's natural gas.
Major urban settlements formed during the Iron Age in the middle of the first millennium BCE, when the Northern Black Polished Ware culture developed in the Indian subcontinent.
The dance traditions of Bangladesh include indigenous tribal and Bengali dance forms, as well as classical Indian dances, including the Kathak, Odissi and the Manipuri dances.
File:Goodmorning Keokaradang (6830453822).jpg|thumb|Keokradong, one of the highest peaks in Bangladesh
There are also growing trade links with Latin American nations, particularly Brazil and Mexico.
Religious parties are banned from contesting elections, but the government is accused of courting religious extremist groups for votes.
The Pala-Sena School is regarded as the high point of ancient Bengali art.
The predominant ethnic group are Bengalis, with a politically-dominant Bengali Muslim majority, followed by Bengali Hindus, Chakmas, Bengali Christians, Marmas, Tanchangyas, Bisnupriya Manipuris,  Bengali Buddhists, Garos, Santhals, Biharis, Oraons, Tripuris, Mundas, Rakhines, Rohingyas, Ismailis and Bahais.
The telecoms industry in Bangladesh is one of the fastest growing markets in the world, with 114 million cellphone subscribers in December 2013.
In recent years, the once vibrant civil society and media in Bangladesh have come under attack from both the ruling Awami League government and far-right Islamic extremists.
In 1854, four major public libraries were opened, including the Bogra Woodburn Library, the Rangpur Public Library, the Jessore Institute Public Library and the Barisal Public Library.
Dhaka was established as the Mughal provincial capital in 1608.
The ceramics industry in Bangladesh is a prominent player in the international ceramics trade.
* Judicial: The legal system of Bangladesh is primarily in accordance with English Common Law.
Central Bangladesh includes the plainland Sal forest running along the districts of Gazipur, Tangail and Mymensingh.
The Tajhat Palace Museum preserves artifacts of the rich cultural heritage of North Bengal, including Hindu-Buddhist sculptures and Islamic manuscripts.
Bangladesh Betar is the state-run radio service.
Water bodies and wetland systems provide a habitat for many aquatic plants.
A plurality of Bangladeshis earn their living from agriculture.
Rahman was released during the 1969 popular uprising which ousted President Khan from power.
Bangladesh also has its own defense industry, including the establishments such as Bangladesh Ordnance Factories and the Khulna Shipyard.
BUET, CUET, KUET, RUET are the four public engineering universities in the country.
However, when military coups began in Bangladesh during the late 1970s, there was increasing distance between the two neighbors.
Earlier in 1972, Bangladesh became the first constitutionally secular country in South Asia.
Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah proclaimed himself as the first "Shah of Bangala" in 1342.
Buddhism is the third largest religion, at 0.6%.
Hinduism is followed by about 12% of the population, with most being Bengali Hindus.
Greater Bengal was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans as ''Gangaridai''.
Bangladesh has one of the largest population of Irrawaddy dolphins and Ganges dolphins.
The Hill Tracts region remains heavily militarized despite the signing of the peace treaty with indigenous people led by the United People's Party of the Chittagong Hill Tracts.
The share of the population with access to an improved water source was estimated at 98% in 2004,Data are based on  a very high level for a low-income country.
As the Brahmaputra, the Ganges and Meghna spilt over and swallowed 300,000 houses,  of road and  of embankment, 1,000&nbsp;people were killed and 30&nbsp;million more were made homeless, with 135,000 cattle killed,  of land destroyed and  of roads damaged or destroyed.
The Sur Empire overran Bengal in 1532 and built the Grand Trunk Road.
While the Bangladeshi film industry has achieved limited commercial success; the country has produced notable independent filmmakers.
The Portuguese referred to the region as ''Bengala'' in the 16th century.
On 11 January 2007, the Bangladesh Armed Forces intervened to support both a state of emergency and a continuing but neutral caretaker government under a newly appointed Chief Advisor Fakhruddin Ahmed, the former governor of the Bangladesh Bank.
According to the World Bank, poor governance, corruption and weak public institutions are major challenges for Bangladesh's development.
Mujib briefly declared a state of emergency to maintain law and order.
Mujib's government faced growing political agitation from left-wing groups, especially the National Socialist Party.
In 1991, Bangladesh reverted to parliamentary democracy.
Numerous lyric based musical traditions exist including Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya, varying from one region to the next.
Halwa is served during religious festivities.
Bangladeshi cricketer Sakib Al Hasan is no.1 on the ICC's all-rounder rankings in all three formats of the cricket.
Axis-allied Subhash Chandra Bose also had a significant following in East Bengal.
Bangladesh asserted itself in regards to many international issues, including those affecting decolonized and developing countries.
Dissatisfaction with the central government increased over economic and cultural issues.
Secondly, the Himalayas shed off an equally unusually high amount of melt water that year.
Fish eggs are a gourmet delicacy.
Other animals include the black giant squirrel, capped langur, Bengal fox, sambar deer, jungle cat, king cobra, wild boar, mongooses, pangolins, pythons and water monitors.
The northeast and southeast are home to evergreen hill ranges.
The Bangladeshi flag was hoisted for the first time on 23 March 1971, Pakistan's Republic Day.
The United Nations has said that it was deeply concerned by the government's "measures that restrict freedom of expression and democratic space".
Firstly, there were unusually high monsoon rains.
The world's 7th most populous nation at the time was ravaged by wartime devastation and widespread poverty, receiving massive international aid as a result.
Several animals became extinct in Bangladesh during the last century, including the one horned and two horned rhinoceros and common peafowl.
The war-induced Bengal famine of 1943 claimed the lives of over a million people.
A 2007 study of 1000 households in rural Bangladesh found that direct costs (payment to formal and informal health care providers) and indirect costs (loss of earnings associated with workdays lost because of illness) associated with illness were important deterrents to accessing health care from qualified healthcare providers.
The southeastern Port of Chittagong is its busiest seaport, handling over US$60 billion in annual trade.
The General government expenditure on healthcare as a percentage of total government expenditure was only 7.9%  and the citizens pay most of their health care bills as the out-of-pocket expenditure as a percentage of private expenditure on health is 96.5%.
Construction of cross dams has induced a natural accretion of silt, creating new land.
Islamic medieval art was highly influenced by Persian art, particularly in architecture, gardening and miniature painting.
Begum Rokeya was a pioneer of Bengali writing in English, with her early of work of feminist science fiction.
The World Literature Center, founded by Ramon Magsaysay Award winner Abdullah Abu Sayeed, is noted for operating numerous mobile libraries across Bangladesh and was awarded the UNESCO Jon Amos Comenius Medal.
The Awami League won a landslide majority in the 2008 general election.
The southeastern region has received an influx of Rohingya refugees from Burma, particularly during Burmese military crackdowns in 1978 and 1991.
The Bengali ethnic identity further crystallized during this period, and the region's inhabitants were given sufficient autonomy to cultivate their own customs and literature.
It is a member of the Indian Ocean Rim Association.
During the Second World War, the Japanese Air Force conducted air raids in Chittagong in 1942, displacing several thousand people.
Bangladesh is thus the 8th most populous nation in the world.
Matters reached a climax in 1757, when Nawab Siraj-ud-Daulah captured the British base at Fort William, in an effort to stem the rising influence of the East India Company.
The annual Ekushey Book Fair and Dhaka Literature Festival organized by the Bangla Academy are among the largest literary festivals in South Asia.
The Nawabs of Bengal established an independent principality in 1717, with their headquarters in Murshidabad.
The first women's magazine ''Begum'' was published in 1948.
Many people in Bangladesh practice Sufism, which has a long heritage in the region.
With a population of 170 million, it is the world's eighth-most populous country, the fifth-most populous in Asia and the third-most populous Muslim-majority country.
Notably early modern sculptors included Novera Ahmed and Nitun Kundu.
During elections, 300 lawmakers are elected on a first-past-the-post basis.
It has one of the largest inland waterway networks in the world, with 8,046&nbsp;km of navigable waterways.
The northern Bangladesh region is home to aboriginal Santal, Munda and Oraon people.
Kebabs are widely popular across Bangladesh, particularly seekh kebabs, chicken tikka and shashliks.
For example, rickshaw art in Chittagong and Comilla are dominated by floral scenery and Arabic texts.
The Speaker allocates an additional 50 reserved seats for women candidates.
It was described as a seafaring nation of South Asia.
However, the 2011 census estimated 142.3 million, much less than recent (2007–2010) estimates of Bangladesh's population ranging from 150 to 170&nbsp;million.
The Ganges delta is formed by the confluence of the Ganges (local name Padma or ''Pôdda''), Brahmaputra (Jamuna or ''Jomuna''), and Meghna rivers and their respective tributaries.
Agriculture, social services, healthcare and education are also major occupations for Bangladeshi women; while employment in white collar jobs has steadily increased.
Bangladesh is predominately rich fertile flat land.
The term ''Bangla'' is a major name for both the Bengal region and the Bengali language.
The people of the delta developed their own language, script, literature, music, art and architecture.
It is a founding member of the Developing 8, along with Turkey, Malaysia, Egypt, Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan and Indonesia.
The All India Muslim League was formed in Dacca in 1906 and emerged as the standard bearer of Muslims in British India.
Sheikh Hasina has been the Prime Minister of Bangladesh since 2009.
Located at the apex of the Bay of Bengal, the country is bordered by India and Myanmar and is separated from Nepal and Bhutan by the narrow Siliguri Corridor.
Greek and Roman records of the ancient Gangaridai Kingdom, which according to legend deterred the invasion of Alexander the Great, are linked to the fort city in Wari-Bateshwar.
Naan, paratha, luchi and bakarkhani are the main local breads.
The Bangladesh Army was accused of persecuting the area's diverse ethnic minorities.
The Northbrook Hall Public Library was established in Dacca in 1882 in honour of Lord Northbrook, the Governor General.
Nationalism, social reforms and the arts developed under the British Raj in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when the region was a hotbed of the anti-colonial movement in the subcontinent.
An indigenous currency of silver punched marked coins dating between 600 BCE and 400 BCE has been found at the site.
The President is the head of state with key ceremonial duties.
Bangladesh has a rich heritage of ancient Indian and Islamic art, including in painting, sculpture and architecture.
Solar panels are increasingly used to power both urban and off grid rural areas.
The official Bengali language is the seventh-most spoken language in the world, which Bangladesh shares with the neighboring Indian states of West Bengal, Tripura and Assam (Barak Valley).
'''Bangladesh''' (; ; , ,  lit.&thinsp;"The country of Bengal"), officially the '''People's Republic of Bangladesh''' (গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ ''Gônôprôjatôntri Bangladesh''), is a sovereign country in South Asia.
Starting in the 1950s, Bengali nationalists used the term in political rallies in East Pakistan.
The country has a thriving contemporary art scene which has received international acclaim.
Bangladeshi rickshaws are decorated with colorful posters and boards, often depicting movie stars, national monuments or religious icons.
However, it was the first time Bangladesh had advanced to the final of any major cricket tournament.
In 1979, President Zia reinstated multi-party politics and restored civilian rule.
The aviation industry has seen rapid growth and includes the national flag carrier Biman and other privately owned airlines.
''Pohela Boishakh'', the Bengali new year, is the major festival of Bengali culture and sees widespread festivities.
The country ranks among the top producers of rice (4th), fish (5th), jute (2nd), tea (10th) and tropical fruits (5th).
The primary reason behind this is Bangladeshi IT companies are providing high quality services at a much lower cost than its competitors.
Estimates of the Bangladeshi population vary but most recent data suggest 162 to 168 million people (2015).
In southeastern Bangladesh, experiments have been done since the 1960s to 'build with nature'.
The defeat of the last independent Nawab of Bengal at the Battle of Plassey ushered the rule of the British East India Company in 1757.
Cultural discrimination also prevailed, causing the eastern wing to forge a distinct political identity.
In the tertiary education sector, the government funds more than 15 state universities through the University Grants Commission.
Freedom of the media remains a major concern, due to government attempts at censorship and harassment of journalists.
The country is dominated by lush vegetation, with villages often buried in groves of mango, jackfruit, bamboo, betel nut, coconut and date palm.
Historically, laws were written in English and were not translated into Bangla until 1987.
Mughal rule ushered economic prosperity, agrarian reform and flourishing external trade, particularly in muslin and silk textiles.
Rickshaw driving provides employment for many poor Bangladeshis coming from rural areas.
The Adina Mosque of undivided Bengal was the largest mosque built in the Indian subcontinent.
Bangladesh has consistently been the world's largest contributor to UN peacekeeping forces for many years.
The site is also identified with the prosperous trading center of ''Souanagoura'' mentioned in Ptolemy's world map.
It is currently estimated that the volume of IT outsourcing is doubling every year in Bangladesh.
In Sylhet, the ''shatkora'' lemons are used to marinate dishes.
Bengali developed from Sanskrit and Magadhi Prakrit in the 11th century.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) was founded in Dhaka in 1985.
There more than 20 privately owned television networks, including several news channels.
The educational system in Bangladesh is three-tiered and highly subsidized.
Pithas are traditional boiled desserts made with rice or fruits.
Terracotta architecture is a distinct feature of Bengal.
Bangladesh was placed under martial law.
A nationwide famine occurred in 1974.
The Sylhet Division is home to the Bishnupriya Manipuri, Khasi and Jaintia tribes.
The poverty rate has reduced from 57% in 1990 to 25.6% in 2014.
Bangladesh is located in the Indomalaya ecozone.
The Presidency of Bengal became the cradle of modern South Asian political and artistic expression.
