After India's independence in August 1947, Bangalore remained in the newly carved Mysore State of which the Maharaja of Mysore was the ''Rajapramukh'' (appointed governor).
Electricity in Bangalore is regulated through the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM), while water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB).
The highest temperature ever recorded in Bangalore is  (recorded on 24 April 2016) as there was a strong El Nino in 2016  There were also unofficial records of  on that day.
The remaining solid waste collected by the municipality is dumped in open spaces or on roadsides outside the city.
Bangalore has a number of elite clubs, like Century Club, The Bangalore Golf Club, the Bowring Institute and the exclusive Bangalore Club, which counts among its previous members Winston Churchill and the Maharaja of Mysore.
A demographically diverse city, Bangalore is the second fastest-growing major metropolis in India.
With a per capita income of  in 2006–07, the city is the third largest hub for high-net-worth individuals and is home to over 10,000-dollar millionaires and about 60,000 super-rich people who have an investment surplus of  and  respectively.
It is located at  and covers an area of .
In 1638, the Marāthās conquered and ruled Bangalore for almost 50 years, after which the Mughals captured and sold the city to the Mysore Kingdom of the Wadiyar dynasty.
The name "Bangalore" represents an anglicised version of the Kannada language name, "Bengalūru" ಬೆಂಗಳೂರು .
The summer heat is moderated by fairly frequent thunderstorms, which occasionally cause power outages and local flooding.
Direct To Home (DTH) services are also available in Bangalore now.
Winter temperatures rarely drop below , and summer temperatures seldom exceed .
No major rivers run through the city, although the Arkavathi and South Pennar cross paths at the Nandi Hills,  to the north.
On 11 December 2005, the Government of Karnataka announced that it had accepted a proposal by Jnanpith Award winner U. R. Ananthamurthy to rename Bangalore to ''Bengalūru''.
In 1809, the British shifted their cantonment to Bangalore, outside the old city, and a town grew up around it, which was governed as part of British India.
Elections to the council are held once every five years, with results being decided by popular vote.
Bangalore was hit by a plague epidemic in 1898 that claimed nearly 3,500 lives.
Bangalore University, established in 1886, provides affiliation to over 500 colleges, with a total student enrolment exceeding 300,000.
In 1906, Bangalore became one of the first cities in India to have electricity from hydro power, powered by the hydroelectric plant situated in Shivanasamudra.
Roadside vendors, tea stalls, and South Indian, North Indian, Chinese and Western fast food are all very popular in the city.
The M. P. Birla Institute of Fundamental Research has a branch located in Bangalore.,
It was captured by the British after victory in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799), who returned administrative control of the city to the Maharaja of Mysore.
A significant number of national cricketers have come from Bangalore, including former captains Rahul Dravid and Anil Kumble.
The growth of IT has presented the city with unique challenges.
Bangalore's rapid growth has created several problems relating to traffic congestion and infrastructural obsolescence that the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike has found challenging to address.
A discovery of Stone Age artefacts during the 2001 census of India at Jalahalli, Sidhapura and Jadigenahalli, all of which are located on Bangalore's outskirts today, suggest probable human settlement around 4,000 BCE.
Bangalore receives 800 million&nbsp;litres (211 million&nbsp;US gallons) of water a day, more than any other Indian city.
Ideological clashes sometimes occur between the city's IT moguls, who demand an improvement in the city's infrastructure, and the state government, whose electoral base is primarily the people in rural Karnataka.
The migrant communities are  Maharashtrians, Punjabis, Rajasthanis, Gujaratis, Tamilians, Telugus, Sindhis, and Bengalis.
Bangalore generates about 3,000 tonnes of solid waste per day, of which about 1,139 tonnes are collected and sent to composting units such as the Karnataka Composting Development Corporation.
By the end of the 13th century, Bangalore became a source of contention between two warring cousins, the Hoysala ruler Veera Ballala III of Halebidu and Ramanatha, who administered from the Hoysala held territory in Tamil Nadu.
The total number of vehicles as on date are 44 lakh vehicles, with a road length of .
There are currently 1,250 vehicles being registered daily on an average in Bangalore RTOs.
Bangalore was the fastest-growing Indian metropolis after New Delhi between 1991 and 2001, with a growth rate of 38% during the decade.
Bangalore also houses several research and development centres for many firms such as ABB, Airbus, Bosch, Boeing, GE, GM, Google, Microsoft, Mercedes-Benz, Nokia, Oracle, Philips, Shell, Toyota and Tyco.
The IT hub, Whitefield region is the most polluted area in Bangalore.Recently a study found that over 36% of diesel vehicles in the city exceed the national limit for emissions.
Bangalore has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification ''Aw'') with distinct wet and dry seasons.
The airport is third busiest in India after Delhi and Mumbai in terms of passenger traffic and the number of air traffic movements (ATMs).
The grateful king named the place "benda-kaal-uru" (literally, "town of boiled beans"), which eventually evolved into "Bengalūru".
According to the 2001 census of India, 79.4% of Bangalore's population is Hindu, roughly the same as the national average.
In July 1928, there were notable communal disturbances in Bangalore, when a Ganesh idol was removed from a school compound in the Sultanpet area of Bangalore.
Vegetation in the city is primarily in the form of large deciduous canopy and minority coconut trees.
Members contesting elections to the council usually represent one or more of the state's political parties.
On 8 February 1981, a major fire broke out at Venus Circus in Bangalore, where more than 92 lives were lost, the majority of them being children.
The British found Bangalore to be a pleasant and appropriate place to station their garrison and therefore moved their cantonment to Bangalore from Seringapatam in 1809 near Halsur, about  north-east of the city.
Ιn 2012 Bangalore generated 2.1 million tonnes of Municipal Solid Waste (195.4&nbsp;kg/cap/yr).
The Residency of Mysore State was first established in Mysore City in 1799 and later shifted to Bangalore in 1804.
Bangalore is known as the "Garden City of India" because of its gentle climate, broad streets, greenery and the presence of many public parks, such as Lal Bagh and Cubbon Park.
A succession of South Indian dynasties, the Western Gangas, the Cholas and the Hoysalas, ruled the present region of Bangalore until in 1537 CE, Kempé Gowdā&nbsp;– a feudal ruler under the Vijayanagara Empire&nbsp;– established a mud fort considered to be the foundation of modern Bangalore.
Tired and hungry, he came across a poor old woman who served him boiled beans.
The city probably has India's oldest Amateur (Ham) Radio Club&nbsp;– Bangalore Amateur Radio Club (VU2ARC), which was established in 1959.
The headquarters of several public sector undertakings such as Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL), Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML), Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) and HMT (formerly Hindustan Machine Tools) are located in Bangalore.
A random sampling study of the Air Quality Index (AQI) of twenty stations within the city indicated scores that ranged from 76 to 314, suggesting heavy to severe air pollution around areas of traffic concentration.
Most of the rainfall occurs during late afternoon/evening or night and rain before noon is infrequent.
Bangalore was the first city in India to have the 4th Generation Network (4G) for Mobile.
Taxis are metered and are generally more expensive than auto-rickshaws.
The Bangalore High School was started by the Mysore Government in 1858 and Bishop Cotton Boys' School was started in 1865.
Its elevation is the highest among the major cities of India.
The Karnataka Municipality, works to shift 300 families annually to newly constructed buildings.
Other sports personalities from Bangalore include national swimming champion Nisha Millet, world snooker champion Pankaj Advani and former All England Open badminton champion Prakash Padukone.
Following Tipu's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799), the British returned administrative control of the Bangalore "pētē" to the Maharaja of Mysore and was incorporated into the Princely State of Mysore, which existed as a nominally sovereign entity of the British Raj.
In post-independent India, schools for young children (16 months–5 years) are called nursery, kindergarten or play school which are broadly based on Montessori or multiple intelligence methodology of education.
Notable among them particularly for undergraduate degrees are R.V.
A sewerage system, constructed in 1922, covers  of the city and connects with five sewage treatment centres located in the periphery of Bangalore.
Mission established the first English school in 1842, St. Joseph's Indian Institutions.
In the 16th century, Kempe Gowda I constructed many lakes to meet the town's water requirements.
Nationally renowned professional institutes such as the University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore (UASB), National Institute of Design(NID), National Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT), National Law School of India University (NLSIU)
On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) passed a resolution to implement the proposed name change.
The city was earlier served by the HAL Airport at Vimanapura, a residential locality in the eastern part of the city.
Throughout the 19th century, the Cantonment gradually expanded and acquired a distinct cultural and political salience as it was governed directly by the British and was known as the Civil and Military Station of Bangalore.
A vernacular dialect of this, known as Bangalore Kannada is spoken among the youth in Bangalore and the adjoining Mysore regions.
November 2015 (290.4&nbsp;mm) was recorded as one of the wettest months in Bangalore with heavy rains causing severe flooding in some areas, and closure of a number of organisations for over a couple of days.
The cosmopolitan nature of the city has resulted in the migration of people from other states to Bangalore.
Primary and secondary education in Bangalore is offered by various schools which are affiliated to one of the boards of education, such as the Secondary School Leaving Certificate (SSLC), Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE), Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), International Baccalaureate (IB), International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) and National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS).
Other circulated  newspapers are  ''Vijayvani'',''Vishwavani'',''Kannadaprabha'',''Sanjevani'', ''Bangalore Mirror'',''Udayavani'' provide localised news updates.
Bangalore got its first radio station when All India Radio, the official broadcaster for the Indian Government, started broadcasting from its Bangalore station on 2 November 1955.
The Kannada language spoken in Bangalore is a form of Kannada called as 'Old Mysuru Kannada' which is also used in most of the southern part of Karnataka state.
A production centre was established in the Doordarshan's Bangalore office in 1983, thereby allowing the introduction of a news program in Kannada on 19 November 1983.
By 1961, Bangalore had become the sixth largest city in India, with a population of 1,207,000.
University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering was established in the year 1917, by Bharat Ratna Sir M. Visvesvaraya, At present, the UVCE is the only engineering college under the Bangalore University.
The Government of Karnataka later constituted the Bangalore Development Authority in 1976 to co-ordinate the activities of these two bodies.
The Rail Wheel Factory is Asia's second largest manufacturer of wheel and axle for railways and is headquartered in Yelahanka, Bangalore.
The Chinnaswamy Stadium is the home of India's National Cricket Academy.
Bangalore played an important role during the Indian independence movement.
After completing their secondary education, students either attend Pre University (PUC) or continue High School in one of three ''streams''&nbsp;– Arts, Commerce or Science.
Muslims comprise 13.4% of the population.
The diversity of cuisine is reflective of the social and economic diversity of Bangalore.
Modern Bangalore had its beginning in 1537 by a vassal of the Vijayanagara Empire, Kempe Gowda I, who aligned with the Vijayanagara empire to campaign against Gangaraja who he defeated and expelled to Kanchi, and who built a mud-brick fort for the people at the site that would become the central part of modern Bangalore.
The first printing press in Bangalore was established in 1840 in Kannada by the Wesleyan Christian Mission.
Though Bangalore has been classified as a part of the seismic zone II (a stable zone), it has experienced quakes of magnitude as high as 4.5.
Bangalore has a wide and varied mix of restaurant types and cuisines and Bangaloreans deem eating out as an intrinsic part of their culture.
Bangalore's IT industry is divided into three main clusters&nbsp;– Software Technology Parks of India (STPI); International Tech Park, Bangalore (ITPB); and Electronics City.
Indian technological organisations ISRO, Infosys, Wipro and HAL are headquartered in the city.
Bangalore lies in the southeast of the South Indian state of Karnataka.
Hyder and Tipu contributed towards the beautification of the city by building Lal Bagh Botanical Gardens in 1760.
Regulations for building new houses with proper sanitation facilities came into effect.
During this period, the Bangalore region witnessed the migration of many groups&nbsp;— warriors, administrators, traders, artisans, pastorals, cultivators, and religious personnel from Tamil Nadu and other Kannada speaking regions.
It was formerly called Bengaluru International Airport.
Telephone lines were laid to help co-ordinate anti-plague operations.
After Veera Ballala III's death in 1343, the next empire to rule the region was the Vijayanagara Empire, which itself saw the rise of four dynasties, the Sangamas (1336&nbsp;– 1485), the Saluvas (1485&nbsp;– 1491), the Tuluvas (1491&nbsp;– 1565), and the Aravidu (1565&nbsp;– 1646).
Mahatma Gandhi visited the city in 1927 and 1934 and addressed public meetings here.
The new centre had its own municipal and administrative apparatus, though technically it was a British enclave within the territory of the Wodeyar Kings of the Princely State of Mysore.
Bangalore is served by Kempegowda International Airport , located at Devanahalli, about  from the city centre.
The Union government have approved (along with other 12 cities) this request in October 2014 and Bangalore was renamed to "Bengaluru" on 1 November 2014.
A  stretch from Bayappanahalli to MG Road was opened to public on 20 October 2011, while another  stretch from Malleswaram to Peenya was opened on 1 March 2014.
Roughly 10% of Bangalore's population lives in slums.—a relatively low proportion when compared to other cities in the developing world such as Mumbai (50%) and Nairobi (60%).
Buses operated by Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) are an important and reliable means of public transport available in the city.
Performances of Carnatic (South Indian) and Hindustani (North Indian) classical music, and dance forms like Bharat Natyam, Kuchipudi, Kathakali, Kathak, and Odissi are very popular.
With a gross domestic product (GDP) of $83 billion, Bangalore is ranked fourth in India by overall GDP contribution, after only Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata.
The old city ("pētē") developed in the dominions of the Maharaja of Mysore.
The Western Gangas ruled the region initially as a sovereign power (350&nbsp;– 550), and later as feudatories of the Chalukyas of Badami, followed by the Rashtrakutas till the tenth century.
Bangalore is sometimes called as the "Pub Capital of India" and the "Rock/Metal Capital of India" because of its underground music scene and it is one of the premier places to hold international rock concerts.
The Hindustan Aeronautics Limited SC is based in Bangalore.
The region of modern-day Bangalore was part of several successive South Indian kingdoms.
The two urban settlements of Bangalore&nbsp;– city and cantonment&nbsp;– which had developed as independent entities merged into a single urban centre in 1949.
Bangalore receives rainfall from both the northeast and the southwest monsoons and the wettest months are September, October and August, in that order.
In 1117, the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana defeated the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad in south Karnataka, and extended its rule over the region.
Drama companies touring India under the auspicies of the British Council and Max Müller Bhavan also stage performances in the city frequently.
In 1903, motor vehicles came to be introduced in Bangalore.
River Vrishabhavathi, a minor tributary of the Arkavathi, arises within the city at Basavanagudi and flows through the city.
The city also houses the Kannada film industry.
In May 2012, Lonely Planet ranked Bangalore 3rd among the world's top 10 cities to visit.
The headquarters of the Kannada Sahitya Parishat, a nonprofit organisation that promotes the Kannada language, is located in Bangalore.
In the 19th century, Bangalore essentially became a twin city, with the "pētē", whose residents were predominantly Kannadigas and the cantonment created by the British.
Other languages such as English, Hindi, Urdu, Tamil and Telugu are also spoken in a few places mostly by the migrants from northern India and neighbouring states.
While commuters can buy tickets on boarding these buses, BMTC also provides an option of a bus pass to frequent users.
An apocryphal story recounts that the 12th century Hoysala king Veera Ballala II, while on a hunting expedition, lost his way in the forest.
Bangalore suffers from the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast-growing cities in developing countries: rapidly escalating social inequality, mass displacement and dispossession, proliferation of slum settlements, and epidemic public health crisis due to severe water shortage and sewage problems in poor and working-class neighbourhoods.
The old city developed in the dominions of the Maharaja of Mysore and was made capital of the Princely State of Mysore, which existed as a nominally sovereign entity of the British Raj.
The city suffers significantly with dust pollution, hazardous waste disposal, and disorganised, unscientific waste retrievals.
In recent years, a number of FM channels have started broadcasting from Bangalore.
In 1687, the Mughal general Kasim Khan, under orders from Aurangzeb, defeated Ekoji I, son of Shāhji, and sold Bangalore to Chikkadevaraja Wodeyar (1673–1704), the then ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore for three lakh rupees.
The government of Karnataka accepted the proposal, and it was decided to officially implement the name change from 1 November 2006.
Bangalore has its own subgenre of music, "Bangalore Rock", which is an amalgamation of classic rock, hard rock and heavy metal, with a bit of jazz and blues in it.
Though the number of satellite TV channels available for viewing in Bangalore has grown over the years, the cable operators play a major role in the availability of these channels, which has led to occasional conflicts.
The BBMP is run by a city council composed of 250 members, including 198 corporators representing each of the wards of the city and 52 other elected representatives, consisting of members of Parliament and the state legislature.
Bangalore once had a large Anglo-Indian population, the second largest after Calcutta.
42% of the households migrated from different parts of India like Chennai, Hyderabad and most of North India, and 43% of the households had remained in the slums for over 10 years.
Several projects such as the construction of parks, public buildings and hospitals were instituted to improve the city.
Already in the 16th century, Bangalore had speakers of Tamil and Telugu, who spoke Kannada to carry out low profile jobs.
Christians form a sizeable section of Bangalorean society, with migrant Tamil Christians forming the majority of the Christian population, while Kannada Catholics, Mangalorean Catholics, Syro-Malabar Nasranis and others form the rest of the population.
A mayor and deputy mayor are also elected from among the elected members of the council.
Other popular festivals in Bangalore are Ugadi, Ram Navami, Eid ul-Fitr, Ganesh Chaturthi, St. Mary's feast, Dasara, Deepawali and Christmas.
According to a 2012 report submitted to the World Bank by Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, Bangalore has 862 slums from total of around 2000 slums in Karnataka.
BMTC and KSRTC were the first operators in India to introduce Volvo city buses and intracity coaches in India.
Bangalore also has some of the best medical colleges in the country, like St. John's Medical College (SJMC) and Bangalore Medical College and Research Institute (BMCRI).
During the 21st century, Bangalore has suffered terrorist attacks in 2008, 2010, and 2013.
The BBMP works in conjunction with the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) and the Agenda for Bangalore's Infrastructure and Development Task Force (ABIDe) to design and implement civic and infrastructural projects.
As part of their Waste Management Guidelines the Government of Karnataka through the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) has authorised a few well-established companies to manage the bio-medical waste and hazardous waste in the state of Karnataka.
The radio transmission was AM, until in 2001, Radio City became the first private channel in India to start transmitting FM radio from Bangalore.
Bangalore Karaga or "Karaga Shaktyotsava" is one of the most important and oldest festivals of Bangalore dedicated to the Hindu Goddess Draupadi.
Kempe Gowda was restricted by rules placed by Achuta Deva Raya who feared the potential power of Kempe Gowda and did not allow for a formidable stone fort.
Bangalore is also home to many vegan-friendly restaurants and vegan activism groups due it which it has been named as India's most vegan-friendly city by PETA India.
Bangalore is a divisional headquarters in the South Western Railway zone of the Indian Railways.
In 1859, ''Bangalore Herald'' became the first English bi-weekly newspaper to be published in Bangalore and in 1860, ''Mysore Vrittanta Bodhini'' became the first Kannada newspaper to be circulated in Bangalore.
The city has its own literary festival, known as the "Bangalore Literature Festival", which was inaugurated in 2012.
The city has offices of the Consulate General of Germany, France, Japan Israel, British Deputy High Commission, along with honorary consulates of Ireland, Finland, Switzerland, Maldives, Mongolia, Sri Lanka and Peru.
In 1912, the Bangalore torpedo, a defensive explosive weapon widely used in World War I and World War II, was devised in Bangalore by British army officer Captain McClintock of the Madras Sappers and Miners.
As capital of the state of Karnataka, Bangalore houses important state government facilities such as the Karnataka High Court, the Vidhana Soudha (the home of the Karnataka state legislature) and Raj Bhavan (the residence of the Governor of Karnataka).
As a growing metropolitan city in a developing country, Bangalore confronts substantial pollution and other logistical and socio-economic problems.
The Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP, ''Greater Bangalore Municipal Corporation'') is in charge of the civic administration of the city.
Due to its high elevation, Bangalore usually enjoys a more moderate climate throughout the year, although occasional heat waves can make summer somewhat uncomfortable.
The earliest reference to the name "Bengalūru" was found in a ninth-century Western Ganga Dynasty stone inscription on a "''vīra gallu''" () (literally, "hero stone", a rock edict extolling the virtues of a warrior).
Around 1,000 BCE (Iron Age), burial grounds were established at Koramangala and Chikkajala on the outskirts of Bangalore.
Taxis, commonly called ''City Taxis'', are usually available too, but they are only available on call or by online based services.
In June 1972 the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) was established under the Department of Space and headquartered in the city.
Bangalore experienced rapid growth in the decades 1941–51 and 1971–81, which saw the arrival of many immigrants from northern Karnataka.
Bangalore has many parks and gardens that provide excellent pitches for impromptu games.
During the Vijayanagara rule, many saints and poets referred to Bangalore as "Devarāyanagara" and "Kalyānapura" or "Kalyānapuri" ("Auspicious City").
It began operation on 24 January 2014.
New extensions in Malleswaram and Basavanagudi were developed in the north and south of the pētē.
Kempe Gowda referred to the new town as his "gandubhūmi" or "Land of Heroes".
Other information technology companies followed suit and by the end of the 20th century, Bangalore had established itself as the ''Silicon Valley of India''.
The Indian Premier League franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore and the I League club Bengaluru FC are based in the city.
The topology of Bangalore is generally flat, though the western parts of the city are hilly.
The city hosts the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Bangalore Open tournament annually.
Karnataka Rajyotsava is widely celebrated on 1 November and is a public holiday in the city, to mark the formation of Karnataka state on 1 November 1956.
The rivers Arkavathi and Vrishabhavathi together carry much of Bangalore's sewage.
Kannada literature appears to have flourished in Bangalore even before Kempe Gowda laid the foundations of the city.
This much delayed project is the city's primary response to the worsening city transport infrastructure which has become a major deterrent to continued business growth.
A town grew up around the cantonment, by absorbing several villages in the area.
Today, Bangalore is India's third most populous city.
Though both classical and contemporary music are played in Bangalore, the dominant music genre in urban Bangalore is rock music.
It also has a trade office of Canada and a virtual Consulate of the United States.
The town had two main streets—Chikkapeté Street, which ran east-west, and Doddapeté Street, which ran north-south.
Located in southern India on the Deccan Plateau, at a height of over  above sea level, Bangalore is known for its pleasant climate throughout the year.
A 2003 ''Battelle Environmental Evaluation System'' (BEES) evaluation of Bangalore's physical, biological and socioeconomic parameters indicated that Bangalore's water quality and terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems were close to ''ideal'', while the city's socioeconomic parameters (traffic, quality of life) aire quality and noise pollution scored poorly.
Victoria Hospital was inaugurated in 1900 by Lord Curzon, the then Governor-General of British India.
During the reign of the Vijayanagara Empire, Achyuta Deva Raya of the Tuluva Dynasty raised the Shivasamudra Dam across the Arkavati river at Hesaraghatta, whose reservoir is the present city's supply of regular piped water.
The airport started operations from 24 May 2008 and is a private airport managed by a consortium led by the GVK Group.
In 2008, Bangalore produced around 2,500&nbsp;metric tonnes of solid waste, and increased to 5000 metric tonnes in 2012, which is transported from collection units located near Hesaraghatta Lake, to the garbage dumping sites.
It has a population of about  and a metropolitan population of about , making it the third most populous city and fifth most populous urban agglomeration in India.
Some of the flyovers and one-ways mitigated the traffic situation moderately but were unable to adequately address the disproportionate growth of city traffic.
Public sector employment and education provided opportunities for Kannadigas from the rest of the state to migrate to the city.
The service is operated by D-VoiS and is paid for by the State Government.
A health officer was appointed and the city divided into four wards for better co-ordination.
Some of the KSRTC buses to Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh ply from Shantinagar Bus Station, Satellite Bus Station at Mysore road and Baiyappanahalli satellite bus station.
The city has a literacy rate of 89%.
Infosys and Wipro, India's third and fourth largest software companies are headquartered in Bangalore, as are many of the global ''SEI-CMM Level 5 Companies''.
