Whether a person qualifies for Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 is in part determined by income.
Debts that are derived from being subjected to a ban on business operations (issued by court, commonly for tax fraud and/or fraudulent business practices) or owed to a crime victim as compensation for damages, are exempted from this and like before this process was introduced in 2006 will remain lifelong.
If a plan is confirmed the debtor will continue to operate and pay its debts under the terms of the confirmed plan.
23 (April 20, 2005) ("BAPCPA"), substantially amended the Bankruptcy Code.
UK residents now need to apply online for bankruptcy - there is an upront fee of £655.
In exchange, the debtor is entitled to a discharge of some debt; however, the debtor will not be granted a discharge if he or she is guilty of certain types of inappropriate behavior (e.g., concealing records relating to financial condition) and certain debts (e.g., spousal and child support, most student loans).
It has been stressed that debt advice, a supervised rehabilitation period, financial education and social help to find sources of income and to improve the management of household expenditures need to be equally provided during this period of rehabilitation (Refiner ''et al.
Bankruptcy in the United Kingdom (in a strict legal sense) relates only to individuals (including sole proprietors) and partnerships.
Some of the duties of the trustee in bankruptcy are to:
A Proposal Administrator is almost always a licensed trustee in bankruptcy, although the Superintendent of Bankruptcy may appoint other people to serve as administrators.
Bankruptcy is a court-ordered liquidation procedure for an insolvent business.
Failure to do so may result in the bankrupt being stopped at the airport by the Australian Federal Police.
Some taxes will not be discharged even though the debtor is generally discharged from his or her debt.
In Sweden, bankruptcy (Swedish: konkurs) is a formal process that may involve a company or individual.
Even though most proposals call for payments of less than the full amount of the debt owing, in most cases, the creditors will accept the deal, because if they do not, the next alternative may be personal bankruptcy, where the creditors will get even less money.
'', 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010).
The realisation of funds usually comes from two main sources: the bankrupt's assets and the bankrupt's wages.
If the bankrupt does not comply with the Trustee's request to provide details of income, the trustee may have grounds to lodge an Objection to Discharge, which has the effect of extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.
The Government have updated legislation (2016) to streamline the application process for UK bankruptcy.
* Distribute funds to creditors
In Chapter 11, the debtor retains ownership and control of assets and is re-termed a ''debtor in possession'' (DIP).
If a man owed and he could not pay, he and his wife, children or servants were forced into "debt slavery", until the creditor recouped losses through their physical labour.
While bankruptcy cases are always filed in United States Bankruptcy Court (an adjunct to the U.S. District Courts), bankruptcy cases, particularly with respect to the validity of claims and exemptions, are often dependent upon State law.
Chapter 7 relief is available only once in any eight-year period.
* Chapter 15: ancillary and other international cases; provides a mechanism for dealing with bankruptcy debtors and helps foreign debtors to clear debts.
However, if the debtor fails to make the agreed upon payments or fails to seek or gain court approval of a modified plan, a bankruptcy court will often dismiss the case on the motion of the trustee.
If that is not possible, the Trustee may lodge an Objection to Discharge, effectively extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.
Companies and other corporations enter into differently named legal insolvency procedures: liquidation and administration (administration order and administrative receivership).
During the bankruptcy trustee in bankruptcy (insolvency officer) has a decisive influence on the movement of assets (property) of the debtor - the debtor and has a key influence on the economic and legal aspects of its operations.
The Other Member States do not provide the option of a debt discharge.
Unpaid debts remain after bankruptcy for individuals.
There is a time delay between financial difficulties and bankruptcy.
In the United States, ''bankruptcy'' is applied more broadly to formal insolvency proceedings.
In 2011, the Superintendent of bankruptcy reported that trustees in Canada filed 127,774 insolvent estates.
A bankruptcy cannot be annulled until this document has been lodged.
Sometimes a bankrupt may be able to raise enough funds to make an Offer of Composition to creditors, which would have the effect of paying the creditors some of the money they are owed.
• The economic recovery (finansovoe ozdorovleniye);
It's a court procedure required by the debtor which has been in business for more than two years and requires approval by a judge.
Insolvency Provisions Act, credit organizations used in conjunction with the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act.
As much as 65% of all U.S. consumer bankruptcy filings are Chapter 7 cases.
Certain real and personal property can be exempted on "Schedule C" of a debtor's bankruptcy forms, and effectively be taken outside the debtor's bankruptcy estate.
All assets must be disclosed in bankruptcy schedules whether or not the debtor believes the asset has a net value.
Agreements refer specifically to arrangements between creditors and debtors, whereas Part IV relates to full bankruptcy and is generally synonymous with "bankruptcy".
Bankruptcy fraud is a federal crime in the United States.
;Consumer proposals:
There are certain assets that are protected, referred to as "protected assets".
Certain limited information on Bankruptcy Law in Australia can be found at the AFSA web site.
After the bankruptcy is annulled or the bankrupt has been automatically discharged, the bankrupt's credit report status will be shown as "discharged bankrupt" for some years.
While difficult to generalize across jurisdictions, common criminal acts under bankruptcy statutes typically involve concealment of assets, concealment or destruction of documents, conflicts of interest, fraudulent claims, false statements or declarations, and fee fixing or redistribution arrangements.
Debtors may now retain occupational pensions while in bankruptcy, except in rare cases.
Bankruptcies can be annulled prior to the expiration of the normal three-year period if all debts are paid out in full.
• Comprehensive Agreement (mirovoye soglasheniye).
A plan cannot exceed the five-year limitation.
Once the proposal is accepted by both the creditors and the Court, the debtor makes the payments to the Proposal Administrator each month (or as otherwise stipulated in their proposal), and the general creditors are prevented from taking any further legal or collection action.
An Administrator is required in the Consumer Proposal, and a Trustee in the Division I Proposal (these are virtually the same although the terms are not interchangeable).
In a bankruptcy, all assets of the debtor are liquidated under the administration of the creditors, although the law provides for debt restructuring options similar to those under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy code.
Part IV (Full Bankruptcy), Part IX Debt Agreements and Part X Personal Insolvency Agreements.
* To give such directions to the trustee as the creditors may see fit with reference to the administration of the estate.
* Chapter 7: basic liquidation for individuals and businesses; also known as straight bankruptcy; it is the simplest and quickest form of bankruptcy available
Spain, for example, passed a bankruptcy law (''ley concurs'') in 2003 which provides for debt settlement plans that can result in a reduction of the debt (maximally half of the amount) or an extension of the payment period of maximally five years (Gerhardt, 2009), but it does not foresee debt discharge.
After BAPCPA passed, although credit card company losses decreased, prices charged to customers increased, and credit card company profits soared.
There are two alternative systems that can be used to "exempt" property from a bankruptcy estate, Federal Exemptions (available in some states but not all), and State Exemptions (which vary widely between states).
The enactment of BAPCPA followed nearly eight years of debate in Congress.
* Chapter 9: municipal bankruptcy; a federal mechanism for the resolution of municipal debts
Advocates of BAPCPA claimed that its passage would reduce losses to creditors such as credit card companies, and that those creditors would then pass on the savings to other borrowers in the form of lower interest rates.
For comparison: In France, more than 40,000 insolvency proceedings were opened in 2004, but under 600 were opened in Spain.
* Object to the bankrupt's discharge
If the bankrupt does not do this, the interest vests in the estate and the trustee is able to take possession of the asset and sell it.
* Review the file for any fraudulent preferences or reviewable transactions
An individual who fails the means test will have his or her chapter 7 case dismissed or may have to convert his or her case to a case under chapter 13.
Multiple filings are not in and of themselves criminal, but they may violate provisions of bankruptcy law.
The income contributions liability is calculated by halving the amount of income that exceeds the threshold.
;Duties of trustees:
The current law in force was enacted in 1920 called the Provincial Insolvency Act.
The goal is to overcome the business crisis situation of the debtor in order to allow the continuation of the producer, the employment of workers and the interests of creditors, leading, thus, to preserving company, its corporate function and develop economic activity.
Unlike most other debtors, the individual with student debt must give a series of reasons and tests (with steps) to prove that the debtor could not pay the debt.
People who are deeply in debt can obtain a debt arrangement procedure (Swedish: skuldsanering).
A Chapter 13 plan often does not require repayment to general unsecured debts, such as credit cards or medical bills.
A consumer proposal can only be made by a debtor with debts to a maximum of $250,000 (not including the mortgage on their principal residence).
Individuals filing bankruptcy that claim exemptions must have all exemptions agreed upon by their bankruptcy judge (and/or courts) and by their creditors.
Ninety-one percent of U.S. individuals who enter bankruptcy hire an attorney to file their Chapter 7 petitions.
* Chair meetings of creditors
A Bankruptcy Exemption defines the property a debtor may retain and preserve through bankruptcy.
The Trustee's job includes notifying creditors of the estate and dealing with creditor inquiries; ensuring that the bankrupt complies with his or her obligations under the Bankruptcy Act; investigating the bankrupt's financial affairs; realising funds to which the estate is entitled under the Bankruptcy Act and distributing dividends to creditors if sufficient funds become available.
If the bankrupt fails to pay the contributions due, the trustee can issue a notice to garnishee the bankrupt's wages.
The debtor in possession runs the day-to-day operations of the business while creditors and the debtor work with the Bankruptcy Court in order to negotiate and complete a plan.
All bankrupts are required to lodge a Statement of Affairs document with AFSA, which includes important information about their assets and liabilities.
In most EU Member States, debt discharge is conditioned by a partial payment obligation and by a number of requirements concerning the debtor's behavior.
It was expected that the UK Government's liberalisation of the UK bankruptcy regime would increase the number of bankruptcy cases; initially cases increased, as the Insolvency Service statistics appear to bear out.
At various stages of bankruptcy, he has to be determined: the temporary officer, external control, the receiver or administrative officer.
The most common reasons for personal insolvency in Sweden are illness, unemployment, divorce or company bankruptcy.
This amount is the first $6,000 in property or cash in Maryland, but only the first $5,000 in Virginia.
Most of the law's provisions became effective on October 17, 2005.
Generally, a trustee will sell most of the debtor's assets to pay off creditors.
If the monthly income is less than the state's median income, the plan will be for three years unless the court finds "just cause" to extend the plan for a longer period.
In the case of a debtor's petition, the Statement of Affairs is filed with the petition and the three-year period commences immediately.
Irish bankruptcy law has been the subject of significant comment, from both government sources and the media, as being in need of reform.
Generally, when a debtor files a voluntary petition, his or her bankruptcy case commences.
The Parliament of India in the first week of May,2016 swiftly passed Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 (New Code).
• External control (vneshneye upravleniye);
Bankruptcy fraud should be distinguished from ''strategic bankruptcy'', which is not a criminal act since it is creates a real not a fake bankruptcy state.
Alternatives to filing with an attorney are: filing pro se (that is, without an attorney, which requires an individual to fill out at least sixteen separate forms), hiring a non-lawyer petition preparer, or using online software to generate the petition.
Secured creditors may be entitled to greater payment than unsecured creditors.
The chapters which almost always apply to consumer debtors are chapter 7, known as a "straight bankruptcy", and chapter 13, which involves an affordable plan of repayment.
Bankruptcy is not the only legal status that an insolvent person or other entity may have, and the term ''bankruptcy'' is therefore not a synonym for insolvency.
In Chapter 7, a debtor surrenders his or her non-exempt property to a bankruptcy trustee who then liquidates the property and distributes the proceeds to the debtor's unsecured creditors.
However, the term 'bankruptcy' is often used when referring to companies in the media and in general conversation.
The UK bankruptcy law was changed in May 2000, effective May 29, 2000.
The Bankruptcy Act 1966 (Commonwealth) is the legislation that governs bankruptcy in Australia.
Upon meeting certain requirements (e.g., fairness among creditors, priority of certain creditors) creditors are permitted to vote on the proposed plan.
The 2005 amendments to the Bankruptcy Code introduced the "means test" for eligibility for chapter 7.
Critics have argued that these claims turned out to be false.
* In Austria, more than half of all potential bankruptcy proceedings in 2004 were not opened, due to insufficient funding.
Bankruptcy in Scotland is referred to as sequestration.
Bankruptcy fraud is a white-collar crime.
This is because once a bankruptcy petition is filed, it is for the creditors, not the debtor, to decide whether a particular asset has value.
If the individual must "take" the "means test", their average monthly income over this 180-day period is reduced by a series of allowances for living expenses and secured debt payments in a very complex calculation that may or may not accurately reflect that individual's actual monthly budget.
In the U.S., bankruptcy fraud statutes are particularly focused on the mental state of particular actions.
An external bankruptcy manager will take over the company or the assets of the person, trying to sell as much as possible.
At the same time the average bad debt write-off rate in France was 1.3% compared to Spain with 2.6%.
Debts that have not been claimed during a 3-10 year period will be cancelled.
In France, company insolvencies rose by more than 4%, in Austria by more than 10%, and in Greece by more than 20%.
In Canada, a person can file a consumer proposal as an alternative to bankruptcy.
Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 are the efficient bankruptcy chapters often used by most individuals.
The "means test" is employed in cases where an individual with primarily consumer debts has more than the average annual income for a household of equivalent size, computed over a 180-day period prior to filing.
The formal bankruptcy process is rarely carried out for individuals.
The trustee may then seize the asset and liquidate it for the benefit of the (formerly discharged) creditors.
Philip II of Spain had to declare four state bankruptcies in 1557, 1560, 1575 and 1596.
If the plan appears feasible and if the debtor complies with all the other requirements, the bankruptcy court will typically confirm the plan and the debtor and creditors will be bound by its terms.
In most cases, several months or even years pass between the financial problems and the start of bankruptcy proceedings.
Bankruptcy is also documented in East Asia.
The main face of the bankruptcy process is the  insolvency officer (trustee in bankruptcy).
Part 7 of the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 has started this process and the government has committed to further reform.
Only individuals can become bankrupt; insolvent companies go into liquidation or administration.
State law therefore plays a major role in many bankruptcy cases, and it is often not possible to generalize bankruptcy law across state lines.
* Sell any non-exempt assets
All other assets of value will be sold.
Current law covers three legal proceedings.
The process for residents of Northern Ireland differs - applicants must follow the older process of applying through the courts.
Creditors have no say in the formulation of the plan other than to object to the plan, if appropriate, on the grounds that it does not comply with one of the Code's statutory requirements.
Many city-states  in ancient Greece limited debt slavery to a period of five years; debt slaves had protection of life and limb, which regular slaves did not enjoy.
That said, new software providers are beginning to develop products letting consumers operate without an attorney.
One example: two states, Maryland and Virginia, which are adjoining states, have different personal exemption amounts that cannot be seized for payment of debts.
Many provisions of BAPCPA were forcefully advocated by consumer lenders and were just as forcefully opposed by many consumer advocates, bankruptcy academics, bankruptcy judges, and bankruptcy lawyers.
Bankruptcy statistics are also a trailing indicator.
If a house or car is above a certain value, the bankrupt can buy the interest back from the estate in order to keep the asset.
Debtors filing for Chapter 11 protection a second time are known informally as "Chapter 22" filers.
The first one is bankruptcy itself ("Falência").
The amount of payment and the period of the repayment plan depend upon a variety of factors, including the value of the debtor's property and the amount of a debtor's income and expenses.
The Congress has enacted statutes governing bankruptcy, primarily in the form of the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code.
However, in the case of a creditor's petition, the Statement of Affairs will rarely be filed on the same day the court order is made.
Often crime victims stop their claims after a few years since criminals often do not have job incomes and might be hard to locate, while banks make sure the claims are not cancelled.
On the other hand, supervisory restructuring at the behest of the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is generally undertaken using receivership by a public entity.
The Extrajudicial Restructuring (''Recuperação Extrajudicial'') is a private negotiation that involves creditors and debtors and, as with court-ordered restructuring, also has to be approved by courts.
A trustee in bankruptcy must be either an Official Receiver (a civil servant) or a licensed insolvency practitioner.
In the United States (US), discharge is conditioned to a lesser extent.
In Ancient Greece, bankruptcy did not exist.
;Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act:
* Chapter 12: rehabilitation for family farmers and fishermen;
To apply for bankruptcy in Scotland, an individual must have more than £1500 of debt.
According to the book, ''The Unwinding'', Joe Biden, Chris Dodd, and Hillary Clinton helped pass this bill.
There are six types of bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code:
Bankruptcy law provides for the following stages of insolvency proceedings:
If debts are greater than $250,000, the proposal must be filed under Division 1 of Part III of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act.
Additionally, a bankrupt is required to provide his or her trustee with details of income and assets.
* To affirm the appointment of the trustee or substitute another in place thereof
Legal, tax, and cultural issues may further distort bankruptcy figures, especially when comparing on an international basis.
The bankrupt will have to pay income contributions if his or her income is above a certain threshold.
Relief under Chapter 13 is available only to individuals with regular income whose debts do not exceed prescribed limits.
;Creditors' meetings:
Consumer estates were the vast majority, with 122 999 estates.
There is no regulation or statute legislated upon bankruptcy which denotes a condition of inability to meet a demand of a creditor as is common in many other jurisdictions.
In Chapter 13, the debtor retains ownership and possession of all of his or her assets, but must devote some portion of his or her future income to repaying creditors, generally over a period of three to five years.
• Liquidation (konkursnoye proizvodstvo) and
Earlier a clear law on corporate bankruptcy did not exist  even though individual bankruptcy laws have been in existence since 1874.
Under this chapter, the debtor can propose a repayment plan in which to pay creditors over three to five years.
* To appoint inspectors
In some countries, including the United Kingdom, bankruptcy is limited to individuals, and other forms of insolvency proceedings (such as liquidation and administration) are applied to companies.
* In Spain, it is not economically profitable to open insolvency/bankruptcy proceedings against certain types of businesses, and therefore the number of insolvencies is quite low.
The future ramifications of omitting assets from schedules can be quite serious for the offending debtor.
A person or debtor can declare himself or herself bankrupt by lodging a debtor's petition with the Official Receiver, which is the Australian Financial Security Authority (AFSA).
Among its many changes to consumer bankruptcy law, BAPCPA includes a "means test", which was intended to make it more difficult for a significant number of financially distressed individual debtors whose debts are primarily consumer debts to qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.
To declare bankruptcy or for a creditors petition to be lodged, a minimum debt of $5,000 is required.
It is important to assess the underlying problems and to minimize the risk of financial distress to re-occur.
For the duration of their bankruptcy, all bankrupts have certain restrictions placed upon them under the Act.
These include household furniture and appliances, tools of the trade and vehicles up to a certain value.
Creditors become involved by attending creditors' meetings.
40-FZ "On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)" dated 25 February 1999 (as amended) (the "Insolvency Law of Credit Institutions") contains special provisions in relation to the opening of insolvency proceedings in relation to the credit company.
The spectrum is broad in the EU, with the UK coming closest to the US system (Reifner et al., 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010).
The second one is Court-ordered Restructuring (''Recuperação Judicial'').
The increase in the number of insolvencies, however, does not indicate the total financial impact of insolvencies in each country because there is no indication of the size of each case.
Some studies of the operation of the credit counseling requirement suggest that it provides little benefit to debtors who receive the counseling because the only realistic option for many is to seek relief under the Bankruptcy Code.
It is almost impossible to discharge student loan debt by filing bankruptcy.
Whether or not a concealment of such an asset should also be considered for prosecution as fraud and/or perjury would then be at the discretion of the judge and/or U.S.
The trustee calls the first meeting of creditors for the following purposes:
Typically, the only bills that survive a Chapter 7 are student loans, child support obligations, some tax bills and criminal fines.
Winding up of companies is in the jurisdiction of the courts which can take a decade even after the company has actually been declared insolvent.
However, these exemptions vary from state to state.
The threshold is indexed biannually in March and September, and varies according to the number of dependants the bankrupt has.
Only a fraction of heavily indebted households will decide to file for insolvency.
