The Catechism of the Catholic Church also states: "Since Baptism signifies liberation from sin and from its instigator the devil, one or more exorcisms are pronounced over the candidate".
By sprinkling, pouring, immersion or submersion.
The discipline of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East is similar to that of the Eastern Catholic Churches.
It is only effective if somebody believes the true gospel message before they are baptized.
Baptism has also given its name to the Baptist churches and denominations, they being called Baptism as a whole.
They also teach that Peter's gospel message was not the same as Paul's.
Baptism does not accomplish anything in itself, but is an outward personal sign or testimony that the person's sins have already been washed away by the blood of Christ's cross.
Baptism is the initiator the salvation experience and for the remissions of sins and is the actual supernatural transformation
Catholics of the Latin Church, Anglicans and Methodists use the form "I baptize you...." Eastern Orthodox and some Eastern Catholics use a passive voice form "The Servant/(Handmaiden) of God is baptized in the name of...." or "This person is baptized by my hands...."
The canonical Gospels report that Jesus was baptized—a historical event to which a high degree of certainty can be assigned.
Orthodox likewise believe that baptism removes what they call the ancestral sin of Adam.
Baptism is necessary for salvation as part of the entire baptismal arrangement: as an expression of obedience to Jesus' command (Matthew 28:19–20), as a public symbol of the saving faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ (Romans 10:10), and as an indication of repentance from dead works and the dedication of one's life to Jehovah.
It is only possible to be baptized once, thus people with valid baptisms from other denominations may not be baptized again upon conversion or transfer.
A baptism in which some liquid that would not usually be called water, such as wine, milk, soup or fruit juice was used would not be considered valid.
"The requisite intention" is, at the minimum level, the intention "to do what the Church does" through the rite of baptism.
Jehovah's Witnesses
According to the Catholic Church, baptism imparts an indelible "seal" upon the soul of the baptized and therefore a person who has already been baptized cannot be validly baptized again.
*The great commission and its baptism is directed to early Jewish believers, not the Gentile believers of mid-Acts or later.
It is an act of obedience to Christ that follows one's acceptance of salvation by God's grace.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
We pray for this child: set him (her) free from original sin, make him (her) a temple of your glory, and send your Holy Spirit to dwell with him (her).
According to evidence which can be traced back to at latest about the year 200, sponsors or godparents are present at baptism and vow to uphold the Christian education and life of the baptized.
Baptism regenerates / gives spiritual life
Yes; because of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation, some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration.
The Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, or Gnostic Catholic Church (the ecclesiastical arm of Ordo Templi Orientis), offers its Rite of Baptism to any person at least 11&nbsp;years old.
Yes, the outward means by which the Holy Spirit inwardly accomplishes regeneration and remission of sins
He also taught the spiritual significance of the submerging in baptism and how one contacts the atoning death of Christ in such.
De corona militis 3; De baptismo 17).
Yes (in most provinces)
On the next two days, dressed in the robes of his consecration, he participated in feasting.
Many Protestant churches see no specific prohibition in the biblical examples and permit any believer to baptize another.
Use of the Trinitarian formula "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" is also considered essential; thus these churches do not accept as valid baptisms of non-Trinitarian churches such as Oneness Pentecostals.
Simply stated, it is an outward sign of an inward change.
Baptizers and candidates wear swimsuits or other informal clothing for baptism, but are directed to avoid clothing that is considered undignified or revealing.
Some conditions expressly do not affect validity—for example, whether submersion, immersion, affusion or aspersion is used.
By submersion only; typical candidates are baptized at district and circuit conventions.
Some groups today allow any suitable clothes to be worn, such as trousers and a T-shirt—practical considerations include how easily the clothes will dry (denim is discouraged), and whether they will become see-through when wet.
By immersion performed by a person holding proper priesthood authority.
The ritual does not cleanse the participant of original sin, as Latter-day Saints do not believe the doctrine of original sin.
For Roman Catholics, baptism by water is a sacrament of initiation into the life of the children of God (''Catechism of the Catholic Church'', 1212–13).
The individual receives the pledge of the forgiveness of sins and admission through God's covenant through the blood of Jesus Christ
By submersion, immersion or pouring.
Methodists and Wesleyans
Jehovah's Witnesses do not recognise any other baptism occurring after 1914 as valid, as they believe that they are now the one true church of Christ, and that the rest of "Christendom" is false religion.
The Salvation Army does not practice water baptism, or indeed other outward sacraments.
In the Roman Rite of the baptism of a child, the wording of the prayer of exorcism is: "Almighty and ever-living God, you sent your only Son into the world to cast out the power of Satan, spirit of evil, to rescue man from the kingdom of darkness and bring him into the splendour of your kingdom of light.
Jesus' omission of this action is similar to that of his disciples: "Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders?
Being baptized is an ordinance directed and established by Jesus and the Apostles.
They consider baptism to constitute ordination as a minister.
They also state that only submersion reflects the symbolic significance of being "buried" and "raised" with Christ.
Finally, Cyprian (ca.
However, it is a common practice for both infants and adults.
Baptism is a symbolization of Christ's death, burial, and resurrection.
Denomination (continued)
In v. 16, Matthew will speak of Jesus 'coming up out of the water'.
In circumstances of extended isolation, a qualified candidate's dedication and stated intention to become baptized may serve to identify him as a member of Jehovah's Witnesses, even if immersion itself must be delayed.
A person who knowingly, willfully and unrepentantly rejects baptism has no hope of salvation.
Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus' death, burial and resurrection and is also symbolic of the baptized individual discarding their "natural" self and donning a new identity as a disciple of Jesus.
Its importance is related to their interpretation of the meaning of the "Mystical Body of Christ" as found in the New Testament.
This, in turn, is followed by eating and drinking God's food, by participation in the life of the community—the royal priesthood, the new temple, the people of God—and by further moral formation.
Any supposed baptism not performed using the Trinitarian formula is considered invalid.
Baptism is required as a public commitment to Christ's role as Redeemer and King
McGary's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th century, but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared.
The Latin Catholic Church does not insist on this condition, considering that the effect of the sacrament, such as membership of the Church, is not produced by the person who baptizes, but by the Holy Spirit.
sprinkling, pouring, or immersion
However, they do not believe that baptism is necessary for salvation; but rather that it is an act of Christian obedience.
William Booth and Catherine Booth, the founders of the Salvation Army, believed that many Christians had come to rely on the outward signs of spiritual grace rather than on grace itself.
Jehovah's Witnesses believe that baptism should be performed by complete immersion (submersion) only when an individual is old enough to understand its significance.
Among those that do, differences can be found in the manner and mode of baptizing and in the understanding of the significance of the rite.
One of the criteria for validity is use of the correct form of words.
Some "Full Gospel" charismatic churches such as Oneness Pentecostals baptize only in the name of Jesus Christ, citing Peter's preaching baptism in the name of Jesus as their authority.
Some Christian groups assert baptism is a requirement for salvation and a sacrament, and speak of "baptismal regeneration".
Latter-day Saints believe that baptism must be by full immersion, and by a precise ritualized ordinance: if some part of the participant is not fully immersed, or the ordinance was not recited verbatim, the ritual must be repeated.
The other Gospel passage pointed to is: "The Pharisees...do not eat unless they wash ('''', the ordinary word for washing) their hands thoroughly, observing the tradition of the elders; and when they come from the market place, they do not eat unless they wash themselves (literally, "baptize themselves"—''βαπτίσωνται'', passive or middle voice of ''βαπτίζω'')" ().
Baptism is an ordinance performed upon adults in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
More recently, the rise of the International Churches of Christ (who "saw themselves as the only true Christians and insisted on reimmersing all who come into their fellowship, even those previously immersed 'for remission of sins' in a Church of Christ") has caused some to reexamine the issue.
Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion was the mode used in the 1st century, and that pouring and sprinkling later emerged as secondary modes when immersion was not possible.
The exact procedure is dependent on local canons and is the subject of some controversy.
Churches of Christ have historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various branches of the Restoration Movement, understanding baptism by immersion to be a necessary part of conversion.
So baptism into Christ is seen as baptism into the Spirit.
It also symbolizes a person's cleansing of sin and gives a person a chance to openly profess their faith in front of the church, friends, and family.
Beliefs about baptism
If the person to be baptized is at least fourteen years old, that person's baptism is to be referred to the bishop, so that he can decide whether to confer the baptism himself.
Baptism has similarities to Tvilah, a Jewish purification ritual of immersing in water, which is required for, among other things, conversion to Judaism, but which differs in being repeatable, while baptism is to be performed only once.
Baptism regenerates / gives spiritual life
Roman Catholic Church
Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance, rather than a "work" that earns salvation.
Pictorial and archaeological evidence of Christian baptism from the 3rd century onward indicates that a normal form was to have the candidate stand in water while water was poured over the upper body.
As has been stated, "it is not sufficient for the water to merely touch the candidate; it must also flow, otherwise there would seem to be no real ablution.
Current canonical law requires the Trinitarian formula and water for validity.
The Catholic Church holds that those who are ignorant of Christ's Gospel and of the Church, but who seek the truth and do God's will as they understand it, may be supposed to have an implicit desire for baptism and can be saved: "'Since Christ died for all, and since all men are in fact called to one and the same destiny, which is divine, we must hold that the Holy Spirit offers to all the possibility of being made partakers, in a way known to God, of the Paschal mystery.'
Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do."
They see the power of baptism coming from God, who chose to use baptism as a vehicle, rather than from the water or the act itself, and understand baptism to be an integral part of the conversion process, rather than just a symbol of conversion.
Individuals who had been baptized in the 1930s and 1940s by female Witnesses, such as in concentration camps, were later re-baptized but recognized their original baptism dates.
Administration of the sacrament is reserved to the Parish Priest or to another priest to whom he or the local hierarch grants permission, a permission that can be presumed if in accordance with canon law.
Every man who is ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church, but seeks the truth and does the will of God in accordance with his understanding of it, can be saved.
'''Baptism''' (from the Greek noun βάπτισμα ''baptisma''; see below) is a Christian sacrament of admission and adoption, almost invariably with the use of water, into the Christian Church generally.
In rare instances, unbaptized males who had stated such an intention have reciprocally baptized each other, with both baptisms accepted as valid.
The Roman Catholic Church teaches that the use of the verb "baptize" is essential.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes these two forms:
Two passages in the Gospels indicate that the verb ''baptizein'' did not always indicate submersion.
If a convert has not received the sacrament (mysterion) of baptism, he or she must be baptised in the name of the Holy Trinity before they may enter into communion with the Orthodox Church.
At the beginning of 1 Peter the writer sets this baptism in the context of obedience to Christ and sanctification by the Spirit.
Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance, rather than a "work" that earns salvation.
In these denominations, baptism is immediately followed by Chrismation and Communion at the next Divine Liturgy, regardless of age.
for they wash ('''') not their hands when they eat bread" ().
A sacrament and means of grace.
Through Christ our Lord."
Then anyone may baptize, provided, in the view of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the person who does the baptizing is a member of that Church, or, in the view of the Catholic Church, that the person, even if not baptized, intends to do what the Church does in administering the rite.
In the second of the two passages, it is actually the hands that are specifically identified as "washed" (Mark 7:3), not the entire person, for whom the verb used is ''baptizomai'', literally "be baptized", "be immersed" (Mark 7:4), a fact obscured by English versions that use "wash" as a translation of both verbs.
Reformed theologians believe the Holy Spirit brings into effect the promises signified in baptism.
A recent trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism: instead of describing it as just a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in the past, it is seen as "the event that places the believer 'into Christ' where God does the ongoing work of transformation."
The removal of clothing represented the "image of putting off the old man with his deeds" (as per Cyril, above), so the stripping of the body before for baptism represented taking off the trappings of sinful self, so that the "new man", which is given by Jesus, can be put on.
Unlike Jesus' first Apostles, Paul, his Apostle to the Gentiles, was sent to preach rather than to baptize but did occasionally baptize, for instance in Corinth and in Philippi, in the same manner as they.cf.
Usually by pouring in the West, by submersion or immersion in the East; sprinkling admitted only if the water then flows on the head.
Adults can also be baptized through the Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults.
Another requirement is that the celebrant intends to perform baptism.
The grace received in baptism is believed to operate ''ex opere operato'' and is therefore considered valid even if administered in heretical or schismatic groups.
Most Disciples believe that believer's baptism and the practice of immersion were used in the New Testament.
Baptism is considered by the majority of Anabaptist Churches (anabaptist means to baptize again) to be essential to Christian faith but not to salvation.
though other modes may have also been used.
Foursquare Gospel Church
Reformed churches, while rejecting the baptismal ceremonies of the Roman Catholic church, accept the validity of baptisms performed with them and do not rebaptize.
A possible additional use of the verb ''baptizein'' to relate to ritual washing is suggested by Peter Leithart (2007) who suggests that Paul's phrase "Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead?"
John the Baptist, who is considered a forerunner to Christianity, used baptism as the central sacrament of his messianic movement.
It also signifies new birth, cleansing from sin, individual's response to God's grace, and acceptance into the faith community.
This occurs in Latter-day Saint temples.
Baptism is a symbolization of cleansing of the spirit through God's divine forgiveness and a new life through Christ's death, burial, and resurrection.
Baptism is conducted in the order of worship.
Baptism of blood is that undergone by unbaptized individuals who are martyred for their faith, while baptism of desire generally applies to catechumens who die before they can be baptized.
In the Latin Church of the Catholic Church, baptism by submersion is used in the Ambrosian Rite and is one of the methods provided in the Roman Rite of the baptism of infants.
This is the passage that Liddell and Scott cites as an instance of the use of '''' to mean ''perform ablutions''.
These robes are most often white, symbolizing purity.
Other Hyperdispensationalists believe that baptism was necessary only for a short period between Christ's ascension and mid-Acts.
Over time these secondary modes came to replace immersion.
However, generally baptisms performed in the name of the Holy Trinity are accepted by the Orthodox Christian Church.
However, submersion is gaining in popularity within the Latin Catholic Church.
This offer is believed to be intact even when it is not received in faith by the person baptized.
Latter-day Saint theology also teaches baptism for the dead in which deceased ancestors are baptized vicariously by the living, and believe that their practice is what Paul wrote of in .
On these three meanings of the word "immersion", see Immersion baptism.
Beliefs about baptism
Baptism is a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it "is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God."
For many communions, validity is not affected if a single submersion or pouring is performed rather than a triple, but in Orthodoxy this is controversial.
Grace Communion International
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (although members of the United Church of God doctrinally believe in Binitarianism believing that the Holy Spirit is a power of God and Jesus Christ rather than a separate person)
The usual form of baptism among the earliest Christians was for the candidate to be immersed, either totally (submerged completely under the water) or partially (standing or kneeling in water while water was poured on him or her).
Through the laying on hands with prayer, the baptized believer receives the Holy Spirit and becomes a part of the spiritual body of Jesus Christ.
Mostly immersion; others pouring.
The candidate then fasted for ten days from meat and wine, after which he was dressed in linen and led at night into the innermost part of the sanctuary, where the actual initiation, the details of which were secret, took place.
Reformed (includes Presbyterian churches)
Oneness Pentecostals
While sharing in the one divine essence, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are distinct, not simply three "masks" or manifestations of one divine being.
An outward expression of an individual's inward faith to God's grace.
Others, of the Anabaptist belief, use "immersion" to mean exclusively plunging someone entirely under the surface of the water.
However, although the Salvation Army does not practice baptism, they are not opposed to baptism within other Christian denominations.
Elders approve candidates for baptism if the candidates are considered to understand what is expected of members of the religion and to demonstrate sincere dedication to the faith.
A Jehovah's Witnesses baptism is performed by a "dedicated male" adherent.
Only ordained ministers are permitted to administer baptism in Reformed churches, with no allowance for emergency baptism, though baptisms performed by non-ministers are generally considered valid.
This teaching is based on Jesus' words in the Gospel according to John: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God."
Submersion is practiced in the Orthodox and several other Eastern Churches.
Not stated as the prerequisite to salvation, but a prerequisite for becoming a member of the church, although nonmembers are still accepted in the church.
Most Methodists and Anglicans agree that it also cleanses the taint of what in the West is called original sin, in the East ancestral sin.
The English word ''baptism'' is derived indirectly through Latin from the neuter Greek concept noun ''baptisma'' (Greek , "washing-ism"), which is a neologism in the New Testament derived from the masculine Greek noun ''baptismos'' (), a term for ritual washing in Greek language texts of Hellenistic Judaism during the Second Temple period, such as the Septuagint.
As St. Cyril again asserts above, as Adam and Eve in scripture were naked, innocent and unashamed in the Garden of Eden, nakedness during baptism was seen as a renewal of that innocence and state of original sinlessness.
Reformed Christians believe that immersion is not necessary for baptism to be properly performed, but that pouring or sprinkling are acceptable.
Some also recognise baptisms performed by Catholic Churches.
Both of these nouns are derived from the verb ''baptizō'' (, "I wash" transitive verb), which is used in Jewish texts for ritual washing, and in the New Testament both for ritual washing and also for the apparently new rite of ''baptisma''.
The one baptism for today, it is asserted, is the "baptism of the Holy Spirit".
Eastern Orthodox Christians usually insist on complete threefold immersion as both a symbol of death and rebirth into Christ, and as a washing away of sin.
Likewise, Tertullian (AD 196-212) allowed for varying approaches to baptism even if those practices did not conform to biblical or traditional mandates (cf.
While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a "sacrament", their view of it can legitimately be described as "sacramental."
A sign and a seal of the remission of sins, regeneration, admission into the visible church, and the covenant of grace.
Beliefs about baptism
In the eyes of the Catholic Church, all Orthodox Churches, Anglican and Lutheran Churches, the baptism conferred by the LDS Church is invalid.
In some denominations, baptism is also called christening, but for others the word "christening" is reserved for the baptism of infants.
It is a testimony to the believer's faith in the final resurrection of the dead.
Mormonism rejects infant baptism and baptism must occur after the age of accountability, defined in Latter-day Saint scripture as eight years old.
Also stress the necessity of a baptism of the Holy Spirit (Acts 2:38; 8:14–17, 35–38).
Baptism memorializes the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus.
Eastern Orthodox Church
References to the cleaning of vessels which use βαπτίζω also refer to immersion.
Baptism has been called a holy sacrament and an ordinance of Jesus Christ.
Thus, baptism is literally and symbolically not only cleansing, but also dying and rising again with Christ.
For the majority of Baptists, Christian baptism is the immersion of a believer in water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
The great commission  and its baptism was directed to early Jewish believers, not the Gentile believers of mid-Acts or later.
Catholics believe that baptism is necessary for the cleansing of the taint of original sin, and for that reason infant baptism is a common practice.
It configures the person to Christ (CCC 1272), and obliges the Christian to share in the Church's apostolic and missionary activity (CCC 1270).
It dates back to the teachings and practices of 1st-century Christians, and the connection between salvation and baptism was not, on the whole, an item of major dispute until Huldrych Zwingli denied the necessity of baptism, which he saw as merely a sign granting admission to the Christian community.
Do not believe in Baptism of water, but only in an inward, ongoing purification of the human spirit in a life of discipline led by the Holy Spirit.
The entry sacrament into the Church by which a person receives forgiveness of sins and eternal salvation.
sprinkling, pour,  or immersion
By the third and fourth centuries, baptism involved catechetical instruction as well as chrismation, exorcisms, laying on of hands, and recitation of a creed.
Also stress the necessity of a "second" Baptism of a special outpouring from the Holy Spirit.
Generally, candidates are individually immersed by a single baptizer, unless a candidate has special circumstances such as a physical disability.
Churches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God "by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom.
Hyperdispensationalists assert:
By submersion, immersion or pouring.
In Reformed baptismal theology, baptism is seen as primarily God's offer of union with Christ and all his benefits to the baptized.
Reformed and Methodist Protestants maintain a link between baptism and regeneration, but insist that it is not automatic or mechanical, and that regeneration may occur at a different time than baptism.
"It affirms joining the family of God and sets on apart for a life of ministry."
