On September 29, 2009, Streisand and Columbia Records released her newest studio album, ''Love is the Answer'', produced by Diana Krall.
She set the third-place record for her October 9, 2006 show at Madison Square Garden, the first- and second-place records of which are held by her two shows in September 2000.
Ticket prices ranged from US$50 to US$1,500 – making Streisand the highest-paid concert performer in history.
Her first film was a reprise of her Broadway hit, ''Funny Girl'' (1968), an artistic and commercial success directed by Hollywood veteran William Wyler.
In 1968, she received the Israel Freedom Medal, the highest civilian award of Israel, and she was awarded Pied Piper Award by ASCAP and Prix De L'Academie Charles Cros in 1969, Crystal Apple by her hometown City of New York, Woman of Achievement in the Arts by Anti-Defamation League in 1978.
A tour was suggested, though Streisand would not immediately commit to it, citing her well-known stage fright as well as security concerns.
Streisand recalls that her mother had a "great voice" and sang semi-professionally on occasion, in her operatic soprano voice.
In February 2008, ''Forbes'' listed Streisand as the No.-2-earning female musician, between June 2006 and June 2007, with earnings of about $60&nbsp;million.
In November 2015, President Barack Obama announced that Streisand would receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award of the United States.
Streisand's 20-concert tour set box-office records.
Although the director felt she was not right for the part, he encouraged her to begin including her talent as a singer on her résumé when looking for other work.
In 2011, the British tabloid ''The Sun'' ranked Streisand as "The 50 female singers who will never be forgotten".
In advance of four concerts (two each in Los Angeles and New York) in September 2000, Streisand announced that she was retiring from playing public concerts.
She received Breakthrough Awards for "making films that portray women with serious complexity" at the Women, Men and Media symposium in 1991.
As the 1970s ended, Streisand was named the most successful female singer in the U.S. — only Elvis Presley and The Beatles had sold more albums.
She was also awarded Filmmaker of the Year Award  for "lifetime achievement in filmmaking" by ShowEast and Peabody Award in 1996, Christopher Award in 1998.
The tour was one of the biggest all-media merchandise parlays in history.
She started a relationship with hairdresser/producer Jon Peters in 1974.
After releasing the live album ''One Voice'' in 1986, Streisand was set to release another album of Broadway songs in 1988.
She is known for her ability to hold relatively high notes, both loud and soft, with great intensity, as well as for her ability to make slight but unobtrusive embellishments on a melodic line.
The song was nominated for an Oscar as it was part of the soundtrack of Streisand's self-directed movie ''The Mirror Has Two Faces''.
She sang Harold Arlen's "A Sleepin' Bee".
There was controversy when ''Yentl'' received five Academy Award nominations, but none for the major categories of Best Picture, Actress, or Director.
The sumptuous volume, which she not only wrote but provided the principal photography for, was released in a coffee table hardback format.
Tickets for the London dates cost between £100.00 and £1,500.00 and for the Ireland date between €118 and €500.
Although she knew her voice was good and she liked the attention, becoming an actress was her main objective.
April 13, 1966 – July 16, 1966 at the Prince of Wales Theatre, London.
Her performance "stopped the show cold," writes Nickens, and she became Broadway's most exciting and youngest new star.
Her second husband is actor James Brolin, whom she married on July 1, 1998.
According to biographer Christopher Nickens, hearing other great female singers benefited her style, as she began creating different emotional characters when performing, which gave her singing a greater range.
In 1980, she released her best-selling effort to date, the Barry Gibb-produced ''Guilty''.
As a gay icon, Streisand was named by ''The Advocate'' as one of the "25 Coolest Women" and the "9 Coolest Women Appealing to Both Lesbians and Gay Men", and was also placed among the "12 Greatest Female Gay Icons of All Time" by Out magazine.
Myers also appeared as the Linda Richman character on stage with Streisand at her 1994 MGM Grand concert, as well as a few of the 1994 Streisand tour shows.
During her appearance, Phyllis Diller, also a guest on the show, called her "one of the great singing talents in the world."
With the release of ''Yentl'' in 1983, Streisand became the first woman to write, produce, direct, and star in a major studio film.
She also joined the Freshman Chorus and Choral Club, where she sang with another choir member and classmate, Neil Diamond.
To help achieve that goal, Streisand began spending her spare time in the library, studying the biographies of various stage actresses such as Eleanora Duse and Sarah Bernhardt.
She recorded several cuts for the album under the direction of Rupert Holmes, including "On My Own" (from ''Les Misérables''), a medley of "How Are Things in Glocca Morra?"
In the summer of 2007, Streisand gave concerts for the first time in continental Europe.
Streisand performed versions of the ''Timeless'' concert in Sydney and Melbourne, Australia, in early 2000.
"Barbra Streisand" is a disco house song by American-Canadian DJ duo Duck Sauce (Armand Van Helden & A-Trak).
In 2007, French President Nicolas Sarkozy presented Streisand with Legion of Honour, the highest decoration in France, and President George W. Bush presented her Kennedy Center Honors, the highest recognition of cultural achievement.
That session was the first time Streisand ever asserted herself as an artist, which also became her "first moment of inspiration" as an artist.
In September 2006, the pair filmed a live performance of the song for a special directed by Rob Marshall entitled ''Tony Bennett: An American Classic''.
She was also featured on VH1's 100 Greatest Women of Rock N Roll, the Top 100 Singers of all time by ''Mojo'' magazine, named the century's best female singer in a Reuters/Zogby poll and "Top Female Artist of the Century" by Recording Industry Association of America in 1999.
Writing about the relationship in his 2009 autobiography, Agassi said: "We agree that we're good for each other, and so what if she's twenty-eight years older?
At the age of 64, well past the prime of most performers, she grossed $92,457,062 and set house gross records in 14 of the 16 arenas played on the tour.
The show opened on March 22, 1962, at the Shubert Theater, and received rave reviews.
In September 1993, Streisand announced her first public concert appearances in 27 years (if one does not count her Las Vegas nightclub performances between 1969 and 1972).
At sixteen, then living on her own, Streisand's youth and ambition worked in her favor, but she lacked a mature woman's physical features which were needed for serious female roles.
Streisand produced a number of her own films, setting up Barwood Films in 1972.
With her career and popularity rising so quickly, she saw her marriage to Gould as a "stabilizing influence."
Streisand also scripted ''Yentl'', something for which she is not always given credit.
'''Barbara Joan "Barbra" Streisand''' (; born April 24, 1942) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and filmmaker.
are considered classic renditions of theatre and cabaret standards, including her pensive version of the normally uptempo "Happy Days Are Here Again".
Streisand, however, never lost her desire to be a stage actress, and accepted her first role on the New York stage in ''Another Evening with Harry Stoones'', a satirical comedy play in which she acted and sang two solos.
After four days of rehearsal at the Sovereign Bank Arena in Trenton, New Jersey, the tour began on October 4 at the Wachovia Center in Philadelphia, continued with a featured stop in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, (this was the concert Streisand chose to film for a TV special), and concluded at Staples Center in Los Angeles on November 20, 2006.
On January 28, 2011, ''The Hollywood Reporter'' announced that Paramount Pictures had given the green light to begin shooting the road-trip comedy ''My Mother's Curse'', with Seth Rogen playing Streisand's character's son.
This led many people to openly criticize Streisand for price gouging, as many tickets sold for upwards of $1,000.
Streisand became known by others in the neighborhood for her voice.
In 2006, Streisand was one of honorees at Oprah Winfrey's white-tie Legends Ball.
When she was a senior, she rehearsed for a small part in ''Driftwood'', a play staged in a midtown attic space.
She was invited back and sang at the club for several weeks.
In 2013, Victoria Beckham revealed that Streisand was her own style icon.
The special aired on NBC November 21, 2006, and was released on DVD the same day.
Streisand has stated that she is writing her autobiography, but has stopped and started at various points.
She got the part of secretary to the lead actor businessman, played by then unknown Elliott Gould.
A two-disc live album of the concert entitled ''Timeless: Live in Concert'' was released in 2000.
On December 7, 2008, she visited the White House as part of the ceremonies.
During the first decade of the 21st century, the American Film Institute celebrated 100 years of the greatest films in American cinema.
She has acted in only eight films since.
In May 2015, Viking Press announced it had bought Streisand's memoirs, which will cover her entire life and career, and would publish it in 2017.
Only "Warm All Over" and a reworked, lite FM-friendly version of "All I Ask of You" were ever released, the latter appearing on Streisand's 1988 effort, ''Till I Loved You''.
It's confirmed that Streisand has been set to star in a new feature film adaptation of the musical ''Gypsy'' featuring music by Jules Styne, a book by Arthur Laurents and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim with Richard LaGravenese reportedly attached to the project as screenwriter.
She also performed at two other concerts in Tel Aviv that same week, part of her first concert tour of Israel.
Her mother tried to pay their bills but could not give her daughter the attention she craved: "When I wanted love from my mother, she gave me food," Streisand says.
From 1965 to 1967 she appeared in her first four solo television specials.
Her other films include ''The Owl and the Pussycat'', ''The Way We Were'', and ''A Star Is Born'', for which she received her second Academy Award, composing music for the love theme "Evergreen", the first woman to be honored as a composer.
Streisand's family was Jewish; her paternal grandparents emigrated from Galicia (Poland–Ukraine) and her maternal grandparents from Russia, where her grandfather had been a cantor.
During one show she joked with Groucho Marx, who liked her style of humor.
"He wasn't afraid of anything."
A 1967 biography with a concert program said, "the spelling of her first name is an instance of partial rebellion: she was advised to change her last name and retaliated by dropping an "a" from the first instead."
In 1993, ''New York Times'' music critic Stephen Holden wrote that Streisand "enjoys a cultural status that only one other American entertainer, Frank Sinatra, has achieved in the last half century".
The show introduced two of her signature songs, "People" and "Don't Rain on My Parade."
Streisand was joined onstage by trumpeter Chris Botti, Italian operatic trio Il Volo, and her son Jason Gould.
In February 2006, Streisand recorded the song "Smile" alongside Tony Bennett at Streisand's Malibu home.
After years of largely ignoring Broadway and traditional pop music in favor of more contemporary material, Streisand returned to her musical-theatre roots with 1985's ''The Broadway Album'', which was unexpectedly successful, holding the coveted No.
This album topped the ''Billboard'' 200 with sales of 196,000 copies in the first week, making Streisand the only recording artist to have a number-one album in each of the last six decades.
''Guilty Pleasures'' (called ''Guilty Too'' in the UK), a collaboration with Barry Gibb and a sequel to their ''Guilty'', was released worldwide in 2005.
The 2013 comedy play ''Buyer & Cellar'', written by Jonathan Tolins, is set in Streisand's Malibu house cellar.
The song peaked at number one in Poland, Belgium, the Netherlands, Finland, Switzerland and Austria.
In December 2010, Streisand appeared in ''Little Fockers'', the third film from the ''Meet the Parents'' trilogy.
Her vocal talents prevailed, and she gained newfound success with the pop and ballad-oriented Richard Perry-produced album ''Stoney End'' in 1971.
Streisand received an honorary "Star of the Decade" Tony Award in 1970.
She was recognized as one of the top gay icons of the past three decades by Gay Times.
In September 2014, she released ''Partners'', a new album of duets that features collaborations with Elvis Presley, Andrea Bocelli, Stevie Wonder, Lionel Richie, Billy Joel, Babyface, Michael Bublé, Josh Groban, John Mayer, John Legend, Blake Shelton and Jason Gould.
She looked magnificent.
On October 2, 2009, Streisand made her British television performance debut with an interview on ''Friday Night with Jonathan Ross'' to promote the album.
In 2005, Streisand's Barwood Films, Gary Smith, and Sonny Murray purchased the rights to Simon Mawer's book ''Mendel's Dwarf''.
Streisand was inducted into and Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1976, Goldmine Hall of Fama in 2002, Long Island Music Hall of Fame in 2007, the Hit Parade Hall of Fame in 2009, National Museum of American Jewish History and California Hall of Fame in 2010.
She was seen during an April 1961 episode on which Orson Bean substituted for Paar.
In December 1962 she made the first of a number of appearances on the Ed Sullivan Show, was later a cohost on the Mike Douglas Show, and made an impact on a number of Bob Hope specials.
Her first husband was actor Elliott Gould, to whom she was married from 1963 until 1971.
She set the second-place record at the MGM Grand Garden Arena, with her December 31, 1999 show being the house record and the highest-grossing concert of all time.
According to ''Billboard'', Streisand holds the record for the female with the most number one albums (11).
Upon completion of the film, its screenwriter, Pat Conroy, who also authored the novel, called Streisand "a goddess who walks upon the earth."
*2017: Untitled Autobiography
Quincy Jones and Lionel Richie planned to release the new version to mark the 25th anniversary of its original recording.
In 1970, she received a Special Tony Award named Star of the Decade,and selected as Star of the Decade by the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO) in 1980, Star of Decade by NATO/ShowWest and President's Award by NARM in 1988.
The Ireland date was marred by problems, with serious parking and seating problems leading to the event's being dubbed a fiasco by ''Hot Press''.
For ''Yentl'' (1983), she was producer, director, and star, an experience she repeated for ''The Prince of Tides'' (1991) and ''The Mirror Has Two Faces'' (1996).
The following September, during her ongoing shows at Harrah's Hotel in Lake Tahoe, she and Elliott Gould took time off to get married in Carson City, Nevada.
The picture had at that point been downloaded a total of six times, two of which were by Streisand's lawyers.
Streisand has recorded 50 studio albums, almost all with Columbia Records.
In that year, she was also recipient of the Charlie Chaplin Award for Lifetime Achievement by the Film Society of Lincoln Center as the only female artist to direct, write, produce and star in the same major studio film, ''Yentl,'' along with a Lifetime Achievement Glamour Awards.
Aired on Logo, premiered August 30, 2016
During the summer of 1957 she got her first stage experience as a walk-on at the Playhouse in Malden Bridge, New York.
The program was officially named the Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center.
She was honored with the Harry Chapin Humanitarian Award from the ASCAP in 1994 and the Peabody Award in 1995, the same year she was accorded an Honorary Doctorate In Arts and Humanities by Brandeis University.
On September 26, 2009, Streisand performed a one-night-only show at the Village Vanguard in New York City's Greenwich Village.
Her next two movies were also based on musicals, Jerry Herman's ''Hello, Dolly!
The concert included musical tributes by Streisand to Donna Summer and Marvin Hamlisch, both of whom had died earlier in 2012.
In 1966, she repeated her success with ''Funny Girl'' in London's West End at the Prince of Wales Theatre.
One of her most famous roles during this period was in the drama ''The Way We Were'' (1973) with Robert Redford, for which she received an Academy Award nomination as Best Actress.
His effort made a difference in her developing style, as she gained new respect for the art of popular singing.
The album was not as universally lauded as its predecessor, but it did debut at No.
He described her as an "exciting new singer."
Nevertheless, he agreed and found a guitarist to accompany her:
Streisand has defended her choice in using teleprompters to display lyrics and, sometimes, banter.
Tickets for the tour were sold out in under one hour.
She returned to school in Brooklyn but never took dramatic arts classes, preferring instead to gain some real-world stage experience.
That summer she also released ''The Second Barbra Streisand Album'', which established her as the "most exciting new personality since Elvis Presley."
In celebrating Streisand's 72nd birthday in 2014, Marie Claire wrote, "She is an icon in every sense of the world.
She attended Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn in 1955 where she became an honor student in modern history, English, and Spanish.
In 1964 Streisand was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical but lost to Carol Channing in ''Hello, Dolly!''
The RIAA and ''Billboard'' recognize Streisand as holding the record for the most top 10 albums of any female recording artist: a total of 34 since 1963.
That small part was followed by a role as the kid sister in ''Picnic'' and one as a vamp in ''Desk Set.''
The album received generally favorable reviews and, remarkably, once again debuted at No.
Streisand began her education at the Jewish Orthodox Yeshiva of Brooklyn when she was five.
These plans changed, however, in view of the devastating earthquake that hit Haiti on January 12, 2010, and on February 12, the song, now called "We Are the World 25 for Haiti", made its debut as a charity single to support relief aid for the beleaguered island nation.
On the sketch comedy show ''Saturday Night Live'', in the recurring skit "Coffee Talk", character Linda Richman, played by Mike Myers, hosts a talk show dedicated to, among other things, the adoration of Streisand.
She ended that breakthrough year of 1963 by performing one-night concerts in Indianapolis, San Jose, Chicago, Sacramento, and Los Angeles.
Barbra Streisand is set to direct the historical drama  Catherine the Great, a feature biopic about the 18th-century Russian empress, based on the top 2014 Black List script, produced by  Gil Netter.
However, she has been identified by Whitney Balliett of ''The New Yorker ''as "a contralto with a couple of octaves at her command, and she wows her listeners with her shrewd dynamics (in-your-ear soft here, elbowing-loud there), her bravura climbs, her rolling vibrato, and the singular Streisand-from-Brooklyn nasal quality of her voice — a voice as immediately recognizable in its way as Louis Armstrong's."
While they have no children together, Brolin has two children from his first marriage, including actor Josh Brolin, and one child from his second marriage.
At the end of the millennium, she was the number one female singer in the U.S., with at least two No.
Streisand received a Tony nomination and a New York Drama Critic's prize for Best Supporting Actress.
''Billboard'' also recognizes Streisand as the greatest female of all time on its ''Billboard'' 200 chart and one of the greatest artists of all time on its Hot 100 chart.
She has an older brother, Sheldon, and a half-sister, the singer Roslyn Kind, from her mother's remarriage to Louis Kind in 1949.
Her performance of the song "People" was broadcast on the Internet via America Online.
Dennen had acted with her briefly in an off-Broadway play, but had no reason to think she had any talent as a singer, and she never mentioned it.
A&E's ''Biography'' magazine ranked Streisand as one of their favorite leading actress of all time, she was also featured on the Voices of the Century list by BBC, the "100 Greatest Movie Stars of  Time" list compiled by ''People'', VH1's list of the "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time", the "100 Greatest Entertainers of All Time"（ranked at #13） and the "Greatest Movie Star of all time list" by Entertainment Weekly, "The 50 Greatest Actresses of All Tim" by AMC, and Billboard Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists.
During the 1970s, Streisand starred in several screwball comedies, including ''What's Up, Doc?''
Liberace is credited with introducing Barbara to Western American audiences.
The show received terrible reviews and closed the next day.
The following year, Streisand's concert fundraising events helped propel former Pres.
In May 2016, Streisand announced the upcoming album ''Encore: Movie Partners Sing Broadway'' to be released in August following a nine-city concert tour, ''Barbra: The Music, The Mem'ries, The Magic'', including performances in Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Philadelphia, and a return to her hometown of Brooklyn.
Her mother had been a soprano singer in her youth and considered a career in music, but later became a school secretary.
Dating Barbra Streisand is like wearing Hot Lava."
When desperate, she would return to her mother's flat in Brooklyn for a home-cooked meal.
1 on the pop charts.
''The Daily Telegraph'' ranked Streisand as the 10 top female singer-songwriters of all time.
She took a job as an usher at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater for ''The Sound of Music'', early in 1960.
A special slip-cased, signed and numbered version with accompanying 15 minute DVD, limited to 500 copies, sold out during pre-order in advance of publication.
The film won an Oscar for Best Score and a Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture Musical; Streisand received the Golden Globe Award for Best Director, the first (and to date only) woman to win that award.
As an adult, Streisand remembered those early years as always feeling like an "outcast," explaining, "Everybody else's father came home from work at the end of the day.
She was accorded an Honorary Doctorate of Philosophy by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 2013.
Streisand was next asked to audition at the Bon Soir nightclub, after which she was signed up at $125 a week.
Streisand later introduced Clinton at his inauguration in 1993.
The suit had the unintended consequence of drawing attention to the photograph, which suddenly became wildly popular and was rapidly copied to multiple mirror sites outside the immediate reach of US law.
She had this gorgeous hair.
A struggling actor finds a job there and one day meets the star.
In 1984, Streisand was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry.
''Barbra Streisand: The Concert'' went on to be the top-grossing concert of the year and earned five Emmy Awards and the Peabody Award, while the taped broadcast on HBO is, to date, the highest-rated concert special in HBO's 30-year history.
Watching the glamorous stars on the screen, she was soon entranced by acting and now hoped someday to become an actress, partly as a means of escape: "I always wanted to be somebody, to be famous .
The album made her the best-selling female vocalist in the country.
In 2011, she was given Board of Governors Humanitarian Award for her efforts on behalf of women's heart health and her many other philanthropic activities."
She starred in the critically acclaimed ''Funny Girl'', for which she won the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Actress.
Starting in 1969, she began attempting more contemporary material, but like many talented singers of the day, she found herself out of her element with rock.
Streisand is one of the recipients of the 2008 Kennedy Center Honors.
The school was near an art-movie house, and he recalls that she was always aware of the films they were showing, while he wasn't as interested.
Items included a costume from ''Funny Lady'' and a vintage dental cabinet purchased by the performer at 18 years old.
Erlichman then booked her at an even more upscale nightclub in Manhattan, the Blue Angel, where she became an even bigger hit during the period of 1961 to 1962.
Theater critic Leonard Harris, in one of his reviews, could already envision her future success: "She's twenty; by the time she's thirty she will have rewritten the record books."
In April 2016, it was reported that Streisand was in advanced negotiations to star in and produce the film, which will be directed by Barry Levinson and distributed by STX Entertainment.
Her father earned a master's degree from City College of New York in 1928 and was considered athletic and handsome.
(My middle name is Joan.)
Roslyn is nine years younger than Streisand.
She was just beautiful.
The sale's most valuable lot was a painting by Kees van Dongen.
He went on to be her manager and producer.
The star in the play was Susan Strasberg, whose acting she wanted to emulate if ever given the chance.
Dennen now wanted to expose Streisand to his vast record collection of female singers, including Billie Holiday, Mabel Mercer, Ethel Waters, and Édith Piaf.
While she is predominantly a pop singer, Streisand's voice has been described as "semi-operatic" due to its strength and quality of tone.
AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions highlighted the top 100 greatest love stories in American cinema and placed ''The Way We Were'' at #8, ''Funny Girl'' at #41, and ''What's Up, Doc?''
Later in 1961, before she was cast in ''Another Evening With Harry Stoones'', she became a semi-regular on ''PM East/PM West'', a talk/variety series hosted by Mike Wallace and Joyce Davidson.
It is a one-man show starring Michael Urie that premiered at Rattlestick Playwrights Theatre in April 2013.
It became a top ten hit in Australia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Ireland, and Italy.
making her the best-selling female artist among the top-selling artists recognized by the Recording Industry Association of America,
In 1969 and 1970, Streisand dated Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau.
