Also, within the city lies Tibidabo Amusement Park, a smaller amusement park in Plaza del Tibidabo, with the Muntanya Russa amusement ride.
After merging with the Kingdom of Aragon, Barcelona continued to be an important city in the Crown of Aragon as an economic and administrative centre of this Crown and the capital of the Principality of Catalonia.
Barcelona has a well-developed higher education system of public universities.
As one of the two biggest cities in Spain, Barcelona is subject to a special law articulated through the ''Carta Municipal'' (Municipal Law).
Estadi Olímpic Lluís Companys
It is the main component of an administrative area of Greater Barcelona, with a population of 3,218,071 in an area of  (density 5,060 hab/km²).
The ''Comissió de Govern'' (Government Commission) is the executive branch, formed by 24 councillors, led by the Mayor, with 5 lieutenant-mayors and 17 city councillors, each in charge of an area of government, and 5 non-elected councillors.
The region's leading industries are textiles, chemical, pharmaceutical, motor, electronic, printing, logistics, publishing, telecommunications and information technology services.
The city borders on the municipalities of Santa Coloma de Gramenet and Sant Adrià de Besòs to the north; the Mediterranean Sea to the east; El Prat de Llobregat and L'Hospitalet de Llobregat to the south; and Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Sant Just Desvern, Esplugues de Llobregat, Sant Cugat del Vallès, and Montcada i Reixac to the west.
The Barcelona harbour is the leading European cruiser port and a most important Mediterranean turnaround base.
The six ''Commissions del Consell Municipal'' (City council commissions) have executive and controlling functions in the field of their jurisdiction.
The city council has jurisdiction in the fields of city planning, transportation, municipal taxes, public highways security through the ''Guàrdia Urbana'' (the municipal police), city maintenance, gardens, parks and environment, facilities (like schools, nurseries, sports centres, libraries, and so on), culture, sports, youth and social welfare.
Despite its high crime rate  Barcelona remains a popular holiday destination while its pick-pocket industry continues to thrive on careless and unwitting tourists.
Both these lines serve Barcelona Sants terminal station.
It has 69 of national (likewise 45 runners-up) and 17 continental (likewise 10 runners-up) trophies, including five of the UEFA Champions League (likewise 3 runners-up) and three of the FIFA Club World Cup (likewise 1 runners-up).
This was the first time that more than half of respondents did not identify themselves as Catholic.
The port is undergoing an enlargement that will double its size thanks to diverting the mouth of the Llobregat river  (1¼&nbsp;mi) to the south.
It also has several congress halls, notably Fira de Barcelona – the second largest trade fair and exhibition centre in Europe, that host a quickly growing number of national and international events each year (at present above 50).
'''Barcelona''' (, , ) is the capital city of the autonomous community of Catalonia in the Kingdom of Spain, as well as the country's second most populous municipality, with a population of 1.6 million within city limits.
Sabadell Airport is a smaller airport in the nearby town of Sabadell, devoted to pilot training, aerotaxi and private flights.
It is followed by Parc de la Ciutadella (which occupies the site of the old military citadel and which houses the Parliament building, the Barcelona Zoo and several museums);  including the zoo), the Guinardó Park (), Park Güell (designed by Antoni Gaudí; ), Oreneta Castle Park (also ), Diagonal Mar Park (, inaugurated in 2002), Nou Barris Central Park (), Can Dragó Sports Park and Poblenou Park (both ), the Labyrinth Park (), named after the garden maze it contains.
A new terminal (T1) has been built, and entered service on 17 June 2009.
In the same year the city was ranked Europe's fourth best city for business and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year, but it has since been in a full recession with declines in both employment and GDP per capita, with some recent signs of the beginning of an economic recovery.
In 1999, the OBC inaugurated its new venue in the brand-new Auditorium (''l'Auditori'').
The historic tram line, the Tramvia Blau, connects the metro (L7, operated by FGC) to the Funicular del Tibidabo (operated by TMB).
Of Barcelona's parks, Montjuïc is the largest, with 203&nbsp;ha located on the mountain of the same name.
The factory of Derbi, a large manufacturer of motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, also lies near the city.
+ '''Top sport clubs in Barcelona:'''
Barcelona has many venues for live music and theatre, including the world-renowned Gran Teatre del Liceu opera house, the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya, the Teatre Lliure and the Palau de la Música Catalana concert hall.
According to this law, Barcelona's city council is organized in two levels: a political one, with elected city councillors, and one executive, which administrates the programs and executes the decisions taken on the political level.
Some of these competencies are not exclusive, but shared with the Generalitat de Catalunya or the central Spanish government.
The cathedral, also known as the Basilica ''La Seu'', is said to have been founded in 343.
Barcelona is located on the northeast coast of the Iberian Peninsula, facing the Mediterranean Sea, on a plain approximately  wide limited by the mountain range of Collserola, the Llobregat river to the southwest and the Besòs river to the north.
FC Barcelona Handbol
Barcelona is served by a comprehensive local public transport network that includes a metro, a bus network, two separate modern tram networks, a separate historic tram line, and several funiculars and aerial cable cars.
While most of the population state they are Roman Catholic (208&nbsp;churches), a number of Muslims due to immigration (169&nbsp;locations, mostly professed by Moroccans in Spain), there are also a number of other groups, including Evangelical (71&nbsp;locations, mostly professed by Roma), Jehovah's Witnesses (21&nbsp;Kingdom Halls), Buddhists (13&nbsp;locations), and Eastern Orthodox.
Half of the municipality or 50.2&nbsp;km2, all of it located on the municipal edge is made up of the ten least densely populated neighbourhoods containing less than 10% of the city's population, the uninhabited Zona Franca industrial area and Montjuïc forest park.
The city also has the largest Jewish community in Spain, with an estimated 3,500 Jews living in the city.
The city has two aerial cable cars: the Montjuïc Cable Car (to the Montjuïc castle) and the Port Vell Aerial Tramway that runs via Torre Jaume I and Torre Sant Sebastià over the port.
The city's main Inter-city rail station is Barcelona Sants railway station, whilst Estació de França terminus serves a secondary role handling suburban, regional and medium distance services.
The forging of a dynastic link between the Crowns of Aragon and Castile marked the beginning of Barcelona's decline.
Since then, manufacturing has played a large role in its history.
Barcelona has a great number of museums, which cover different areas and eras.
Barcelona has a metered taxi fleet governed by the Institut Metropolità del Taxi (Metropolitan Taxi Institute), composed of more than 10,000 cars.
After the May 2007 election, the ERC did not renew the coalition agreement and the PSC governed in a minority coalition with ICV as the junior partner.
Wind direction in Barcelona from 2002 to 2012 (average values)
The city is known for hosting the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as world-class conferences and expositions and also many international sport tournaments.
It expands the powers of the city council in areas like telecommunications, city traffic, road safety and public safety.
The headquarters of Televisió de Catalunya, Catalonia's public network, are located in Sant Joan Despí, in Barcelona's metropolitan area.
File:Cathedral of Santa Eulalia.jpg|Cathedral of Santa Eulalia
62% of the inhabitants were born in Catalonia, with a 23.5% coming from the rest of Spain.
Barcelona is governed by a city council formed by 41 city councillors, elected for a four-year term by universal suffrage.
Twice a season, FC Barcelona and cross-town rivals RCD Espanyol contest in the local derby in La Liga, while its basketball section has its own local derby in Liga ACB with nearby Joventut Badalona.
The numbers reflect a broader trend in Spain whereby the numbers of self-identified Catholics have declined.
Furthermore, Barcelona was Europe's fourth best business city and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year .
Particularly renowned are the architectural works of Antoni Gaudí and Lluís Domènech i Montaner, which have been designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
The Barcelona metropolitan area comprises over 66% of the people in one of the richest regions in Europe – Catalonia, with a GDP per capita amounting to €28,400 (16% more than the EU average).
Most local services are operated by the TMB, although some other services are operated by a number of private companies, albeit still within the ATM fare structure.
For this reason, most international governments advise precautions to be taken by visitors to the city in order to ensure their personal safety and that of their possessions.
The port is managed by the Port Authority of Barcelona.
In the city and the metropolitan area, there are tens of km of bicycle paths.
Also, each Christmas, a swimming race across the port is organized.
Borsa de Barcelona (''Barcelona Stock Exchange'') is the main stock exchange in the northeastern part of the Iberian Peninsula.
The largely underground Barcelona Metro network comprises eleven lines, identified by an "L" followed by the line number as well as by individual colours.
The Port Vell area also houses the Maremagnum (a commercial mall), a multiplex cinema, the IMAX Port Vell and one of Europe's largest aquariums – Aquarium Barcelona, containing 8,000 fish and 11 sharks contained in 22 basins filled with 4 million litres of sea water.
Most of these networks and lines form a coordinated fare system, administered by the Autoritat del Transport Metropolità (ATM), although they are operated by a number of different bodies.
Designed in 1929 for the International Exposition for Germany, it is an iconic building that came to symbolize modern architecture as the embodiment of van der Rohe's aphorisms "less is more" and "God is in the details."
Spanish is the most spoken language in Barcelona (according to the linguistic census held by the Government of Catalonia in 2013) and it is understood almost universally.
Since the coming of the Spanish democracy, Barcelona had been governed by the PSC, first with an absolute majority and later in coalition with ERC and ICV.
The FGC operates largely commuter rail services, but also carries freight to the Port of Barcelona, as well as a number of rack railways and funiculars and three of the lines of the Barcelona Metro (see ''local public transport'' below).
Barcelona was the 20th-most-visited city in the world by international visitors and the fifth most visited city in Europe after London, Paris, Istanbul and Rome, with 5.5 million international visitors in 2011.
With its Rambles, Barcelona is ranked the most popular city to visit in Spain.
Today, the fortress is a museum and Montjuïc is home to several sporting and cultural venues, as well as Barcelona's biggest park and gardens.
Barcelona is served by Barcelona-El Prat Airport, about  from the centre of Barcelona.
Once the user has their user card, they can take a bicycle from any of the more than 400 stations spread around the city and use it anywhere the urban area of the city, and then leave it at another station.
Also, it is the only men's club in the world to accomplish a sextuple.
The population density of Barcelona was , with Eixample being the most populated district.
Barcelona was also the host city for the 2013 World Aquatics Championships, which were held at the Palau San Jordi.
It performs around 75 concerts per season and its current director is Eiji Oue.
Similarly, according to Innovation Analysts 2thinknow, Barcelona occupies 13th place in the world on ''Innovation Cities™ Global Index''.
Since the arrival of democracy, the Catalan language (very much repressed during the dictatorship of Franco) has been promoted, both by recovering works from the past and by stimulating the creation of new works.
There are also several smaller parks, for example, the Parc de Les Aigües ().
The Barcelona metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $177 billion, equivalent to $34,821 in per capita terms (44% more than the EU average) making it the 4th most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world in 2009.
Its average annual temperature is  during the day and  at night.
It is a main hub for Vueling Airlines and Ryanair, and also a focus for Iberia and Air Europa.
Toulouse Business School and the Open University of Catalonia (a private Internet-centred open university) are also based in Barcelona.
The population of the urban area was 4,223,000.
In a 2011 survey conducted by InfoCatólica, 49.5% of Barcelona residents of all ages identified themselves as Catholic.
It is  south of the Pyrenees and the Catalan border with France.
Buses in Barcelona are a major form of public transport, with extensive local, interurban and night bus networks.
''Source:  world-weather.ru''
It originated from necessities of the state, as did the Bank of Venice (1402) and the Bank of Genoa (1407).
Besieged several times during its history, Barcelona has a rich cultural heritage and is today an important cultural centre and a major tourist destination.
Two months – April and November – are transitional; sometimes the temperature exceeds , with an average temperature of  during the day and  at night.
The seat of the city council is on the Plaça de Sant Jaume, opposite the seat of Generalitat de Catalunya.
There's also Collserola Ultratrail which passes over Collserola forest during 85 km (52 miles).
FC Barcelona Ice Hockey
Since 2009, ''The Brandery'', an urban fashion show, has been held in Barcelona twice a year.
The total park surface grows about  per year, with a proportion of  of park area per inhabitant.
Barcelona is peppered with small hills, most of them urbanized, that gave their name to the neighbourhoods built upon them, such as Carmel (), Putget () and Rovira ().
Barcelona beach was listed as number one in a list of the top ten city beaches in the world according to ''National Geographic'' and ''Discovery Channel''.
In 2008 it was the fourth most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world with GDP amounting to €177 billion.
A first version of this law was passed in 1960 and amended later, but the current version was approved in March 2006.
Less well known is that the region was one of the earliest to begin industrialization in continental Europe, beginning with textile-related works from the mid-1780s but really gathering momentum in the mid-19th century, when it became a major centre for the production of textiles and machinery.
Barcelona is also home to the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, and the newer Pompeu Fabra University, and, in the private sector the EADA Business School founded in 1957, became the first Barcelona institution to run manager training programmes for the business community.
The club's museum is the second most visited in Catalonia.
The city has a network of public schools, from nurseries to high schools, under the responsibility of a consortium led by city council (though the curriculum is the responsibility of the Generalitat de Catalunya).
Skateboarding and bicycling are also very popular in Barcelona.
Rainfall totals are highest in autumn and lowest in early summer.
A modern re-creation by Spanish architects now stands in Barcelona, however, constructed in 1986.
At present, the beach sand is artificially replenished given that storms regularly remove large quantities of material.
The origin of the earliest settlement at the site of present-day Barcelona is unclear.
In the coldest month – January, the temperature typically ranges from  during the day,  at night and the average sea temperature is .
His best-known work is the immense but still unfinished church of the Sagrada Família, which has been under construction since 1882, and is still financed by private donations.
Barcelona won the 1999 RIBA Royal Gold Medal for its architecture, the first (and , only) time that the winner has been a city, and not an individual architect.
In 2012, Barcelona was named as the third most important fashion capital according to the Global Language Monitor’s annual ranking of the world's top fifty fashion capitals.
This integrated public transport is divided into different zones (1 to 6) and depending on usage various Integrated Travel Cards are available.
Large fluctuations in temperature are rare, particularly in the summer months.
They range from vest-pocket parks to large recreation areas.
Each district has its own council led by a city councillor.
Besides RENFE's services, other rail services in the Barcelona area are operated by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya (FGC), owned by the Catalonian government.
After being conquered by the Arabs in the early 8th century, it was conquered in 801 by Charlemagne's son Louis, who made Barcelona the seat of the Carolingian "Hispanic March" (''Marca Hispanica''), a buffer zone ruled by the Count of Barcelona.
The marriage of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in 1469 united the two royal lines.
FC Barcelona Futsal
Eight of these lines are operated on dedicated track by the Transports Metropolitans de Barcelona (TMB), whilst three lines are operated by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya (FGC) and share tracks with that company's commuter lines.
With their black and yellow livery, Barcelona's taxis are easily spotted, and can be caught from one of many taxi ranks, hailed on street, or called by telephone.
The founding of Barcelona is the subject of two different legends.
There is also a Nissan factory in the logistics and industrial area of the city.
The fall of the city on 26 January 1939, caused a mass exodus of civilians who fled to the French border.
The airport is connected to the city by highway, metro (Airport T1 and Airport T2 stations), commuter train (Barcelona Airport railway station) and scheduled bus service.
An important business centre, the World Trade Center Barcelona, is located in Barcelona's Port Vell harbour.
They are composed by a number of councillors proportional to the number of councillors each political party has in the plenary.
There is a Japanese community clustered in Bonanova, Les Tres Torres, Pedralbes, and other northern neighborhoods, and a Japanese international school serves that community.
The city gained vitality in 1992 when it hosted the Summer Olympics.
The municipality includes two small sparsely-inhabited exclaves to the north-west.
This plain covers an area of , of which  are occupied by the city itself.
Sunshine duration is 2,524&nbsp;hours per year, from 138 (average 4.5&nbsp;hours of sunshine a day) in December to 310 (average 10&nbsp;hours of sunshine a day) in July.
, completion is planned for 2026.
Urban planner Ildefons Cerdà designed the large Eixample district in the 1850s when the medieval city walls around Barcelona's old town were torn down.
PortAventura, one of the largest amusement parks in Europe with 3,000,000 visitors per year, is located one hour's drive from Barcelona.
The Counts of Barcelona became increasingly independent and expanded their territory to include all of Catalonia, although on 6 July 985, Barcelona was sacked by the army of Almanzor.
Barcelona is a transport hub with the Port of Barcelona being one of Europe's principal seaports and busiest European passenger port, an international airport, Barcelona–El Prat Airport, which handles above 40 million passengers per year, an extensive motorway network and a high-speed rail line with a link to France and the rest of Europe.
Most such schools receive a public subsidy on a per-student basis, are subject to inspection by the public authorities, and are required to follow the same curricular guidelines as public schools, though they charge tuition.
Another company, TRAMMET, operates the city's two modern tram networks, known as Trambaix and Trambesòs.
In 1794, this fortress was used by the French astronomer Pierre François André Méchain for observations relating to a survey stretching to Dunkirk that provided the official basis of the measurement of a metre.
The FC Barcelona Museum has been  the most visited museum in the city of Barcelona with 1506022 of visitors in 2013.
In 1137, Aragon and the County of Barcelona merged in dynastic union by the marriage of Ramon Berenguer IV and Petronilla of Aragon, their titles finally borne by only one person when their son Alfonso II of Aragon ascended to the throne in 1162.
Barcelona's population peaked in 1979 with 1,906,998 people, and fell throughout the 1980s and 1990s as more people sought a higher quality of life in outlying cities in the Barcelona Metropolitan Area.
The language of instruction at public schools and ''escoles concertades'' is Catalan, as stipulated by the 2009 Catalan Education Act.
Important Roman vestiges are displayed in Plaça del Rei underground, as a part of the Barcelona City History Museum MUHBA; the typically Roman grid plan is still visible today in the layout of the historical centre, the ''Barri Gòtic'' (Gothic Quarter).
As in other modern cities, the manufacturing sector has long since been overtaken by the services sector, though it remains very important.
The province has the largest Muslim community in Spain, 322,698 people in Barcelona province are of Muslim faith.
Barcelona as internationally renowned a tourist destination, with numerous recreational areas, one of the best beaches in the world, mild and warm climate, historical monuments, including eight UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 519 hotels as of March 2016 including 35 five star hotels, and developed tourist infrastructure.
The Barcelona pavilion was intended as a temporary structure, and was torn down in 1930 less than a year after it was constructed.
It is made up of departments which are legally part of the city council and by separate legal entities of two types: autonomous public departments and public enterprises.
Barcelona also has a local TV stations, BTV, owned by city council.
After Spanish, Catalan language is the second most spoken one in the city, and it is understood by 95% of the population, while 72.3% can speak it, 79% can read it, and 53% can write it, thanks to the language immersion educational system.
The escarpment of Montjuïc (), situated to the southeast, overlooks the harbour and is topped by Montjuïc castle, a fortress built in the 17–18th centuries to control the city as a replacement for the Ciutadella.
The second legend attributes the foundation of the city directly to the historical Carthaginian general, Hamilcar Barca, father of Hannibal, who supposedly named the city ''Barcino'' after his family in the 3rd century BC, but there is no historical or linguistic evidence that this is true.
Its  are divided into three zones: Port Vell (the old port), the commercial port and the logistics port (Barcelona Free Port).
Its urban area extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 4.7 million people, being the sixth-most populous urban area in the European Union after Paris, London, Madrid, the Ruhr area and Milan.
According to Barcelona's City Council, Barcelona's population as of 1 June 2006 was 1,673,075&nbsp;people, on a land area of .
Barcelona was a centre of Catalan separatism, including the Catalan Revolt (1640–52) against Philip IV of Spain.
A part of the Collserolla Park is also within the city limits.
Several road running competitions are organized year-round in Barcelona: the Barcelona Marathon every March with over 10,000 participants in 2010, the Cursa de Bombers in April, the Cursa de El Corte Inglés in May (with about 60,000 participants each year), the Cursa de la Mercè, the Cursa Jean Bouin, the Milla Sagrada Família and the San Silvestre.
Much of Barcelona was negatively affected by the Napoleonic wars, but the start of industrialization saw the fortunes of the province improve.
The sack was so traumatic that most of Barcelona's population was either killed or enslaved.
It is Europe's ninth largest container port, with a trade volume of 1.72 million TEU's in 2013.
The airport mainly serves domestic and European destinations, although some airlines offer destinations in Latin America, Asia and the United States.
Several museums cover the fields of history and archeology, like the Barcelona City History Museum (MUHBA), the Museum of the History of Catalonia, the Archeology Museum of Catalonia, the Barcelona Maritime Museum and the private-owned Egyptian Museum.
The ruins of an early settlement have been excavated in the El Raval neighborhood, including different tombs and dwellings dating to earlier than 5000 BC.
In fact, only 1 day in the last 30 years was recorded with a temperature under the freezing mark.
Snow is infrequent, but it snows lightly once or twice in a decade.
Yearly two major pop music festivals take place in the city, the Sónar Festival and the Primavera Sound Festival.
It also gives a special economic regime to the city's treasury and it gives the council a veto in matters that will be decided by the central government, but that will need a favourable report from the council.
Barcelona is a major hub for RENFE, the Spanish state railway network.
In 1900, Barcelona had a population of 533,000 people, which grew steadily but slowly until 1950, when it started absorbing a high number of people from other less-industrialized parts of Spain.
In 2014, 322,698 out of 5.5 million people in the province of Barcelona identified themselves as Muslim.
The Funicular de Tibidabo climbs the Tibidabo hill, as does the Funicular de Vallvidrera (FGC).
The result was a large-scale immigration from poorer regions of Spain (particularly Andalusia, Murcia and Galicia), which in turn led to rapid urbanization.
On 22 March 2007, Barcelona's City Council started the Bicing service, a bicycle service understood as a public transport.
Barcelona contains sixty municipal parks, of which twelve are historic parks, five are thematic (botanical) parks, forty-five are urban parks and six are forest parks.
The autonomous institutions of Catalonia were abolished, and the use of the Catalan language in public life was suppressed.
The Bank of Barcelona, probably the oldest public bank in Europe, was established by the city magistrates in 1401.
The Autonomous University of Barcelona, another public university, is located in Bellaterra, a town in the Metropolitan Area.
Drawing upon its tradition of creative art and craftsmanship, Barcelona is known for its award-winning industrial design.
Barcelona also has other clubs in lower categories, like CE Europa and UE Sant Andreu.
FC Barcelona Bàsquet
The districts are based mostly on historical divisions, and several are former towns annexed by the city of Barcelona in the 18th and 19th centuries that still maintain their own distinct character.
However, the Eurozone crisis and deep cuts in business travel affected the Council's positioning of the city as a convention center.
The 2004 Universal Forum of Cultures left the city a large concrete bathing zone on the eastmost part of the city's coastline.
The city is also referred to as the ''Ciutat Comtal'' in Catalan, and ''Ciudad Condal'' in Spanish, owing to its past as the seat of the Count of Barcelona.
Several of these buildings are World Heritage Sites.
The resistance of Barcelona to Franco's coup d'état was to have lasting effects after the defeat of the Republican government.
A separate private bus line, known as Aerobús, links the airport with the city centre, with its own fare structure.
Spanish may be used as a language of instruction by teachers of Spanish literature or language, and foreign languages by teachers of those languages.
A shared RENFE-SNCF high-speed rail connecting Barcelona and France (Paris, Marseilles and Toulouse, through Perpignan–Barcelona high-speed rail line) was launched in 2013.
Near Barcelona, in Montmeló, the 107,000 capacity Circuit de Catalunya / Circuit de Barcelona racetrack hosts the Formula One World Championship, Formula One Spanish Grand Prix, Catalan motorcycle Grand Prix, Spanish GT Championship and GP2 Series.
Barcelona is designated as a world-class city by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network.
The city was conquered by the Visigoths in the early 5th century, becoming for a few years the capital of all Hispania.
