Others may do so to provide a more relaxing atmosphere and to calm them down.
The fungus is known to only affect around 0.75% of habitually barefoot people in one study and can be prevented by reducing shoe use and keeping the feet dry, particularly after walking through a damp environment where people communally walk barefoot as the fungus only develops under the right conditions, such as when people fail to properly dry their feet after swimming or showering and then put on shoes.
A 2006 study found that shoes may increase stress on the knee and ankle, and suggested that adults who walked barefoot may have a lower rate of osteoarthritis, although more study is required to elucidate the factors that distribute loads in shod and barefoot walking.
In contrast to this convention, ''slave codes'' often decreed that slaves go barefoot.
In South African shopping malls, stores and events, it is normal and a common sight to see barefoot adults, kids and especially teenagers and young adults.
As shoes have been considered badges of freedom since biblical times ''"But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet ()"'' this aspect has been an informal law wherever slavery existed.
There are several clubs throughout North America practicing regular barefoot hikes, including the Barefoot Hikers of Minnesota, Seattle Barefoot Hikers, East Bay Barefoot Hikers, the Barefoot Hikers and Grass Walkers of Greater Kansas City, and the Barefoot Hikers of Connecticut.
The fastest person to run 100 meters (325&nbsp;feet) on ice while barefoot is Nico Surings of Eindhoven, Netherlands, who ran that distance in 17.35 seconds on December 8, 2006.
It is often used as a rite of passage, as a test of an individual's strength and courage, or, in religion, as a test of one's faith.
During the era of the catholic inquisition it was commonly believed that women who were indicted of practicing witchcraft had their ability to use their putative powers largely diminished if they were rendered barefoot.
In very cold weather, shoes can provide thermal insulation, protecting against frostbite.
Being seen barefoot was therefore socially proscribed for free citizens and avoided.
Early skateboarders rode barefoot, preferring foot-to-board contact and emulating surfing moves.
As bastinado causes substantial suffering for the victim while physical evidence remains largely undetectable after some time, it is frequently used for interrogation and torture in rogue regimes as well.
Besides the indicatory aspect going in bare feet restricts the freedom of action in many situations.
There are many references to shoes being worn in the Bible.
She anticipated the modern women's liberation movement by urging women to rid themselves of corsets and matrimony.
People of all ages all over the world can participate in barefoot hiking, gathering for walks through forest and hiking trails sans footwear.
Specifically, the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration requires employers to "ensure that each affected employee uses protective footwear" when there is a danger of foot injuries due to falling or rolling objects, objects piercing the sole of an employee's foot, and where an employee's feet may be exposed to electrical hazards.
Barefoot running encourages the runner to switch to forefoot strike and may reduce the risk of knee damage.
In most religions, the exposure of bare feet is regarded as a sign of humility and subjection.
This concept was first developed in the 19th century by Sebastian Kneipp, one of the founders of the Naturopathic medicine movement.
Two sisters, Lucy and Susan Letcher, hiked approximately two-thirds of the  Appalachian Trail barefoot from June 21, 2000, to October 3, 2001.
Additionally, the book ''Dancing Barefoot'' by ''Star Trek: The Next Generation'' actor Wil Wheaton features five short stories that chronicle his journey from childhood and youth through to maturity and self-acceptance.
be permitted to attend without shoes in hot weather".
In some rural and remote areas, such as the Northern Territory, Western NSW, regional Queensland and many islands, students often attend school barefoot.
It has been normal in cold climates since early antiquity, and has since become a convention in most cultures.
Drastically more severe injuries can be sustained especially by a kicking person outfitted with footwear in contrast to a person in bare feet.
Firewalking is the practice of walking barefoot over hot coals.
Walking barefoot enables a more natural gait, eliminating the hard heel strike and instead, allowing for a rocking motion of the foot from heel to toe.
Detainees are often discouraged from attempting escape by this measure alone.
During the Imperial Japanese period, removing one's shoes in the presence of a person of higher status was a sign of showing one's own humility, subordination and respect towards their status.
In the United States, there have been myths that regulations require the wearing of footwear.
There are health benefits and risks associated with going barefoot.
Anyone entering a mosque or a Hindu temple, including a visitor, is expected to remove his or her shoes; racks for the storage of shoes are usually provided at the entrance.
Incidentally the traditional visual appearance of civilized societies was established, including footwear as an obligatory feature.
On Lord Howe Island the Lord Howe Island Board has described the fact pupils at the government-run Lord Howe Island Central School are allowed to attend school barefoot as a part of the "island lifestyle" and a "community asset".
Duncan divorced the bare foot from perceptions of obscenity and made a conscious effort to link barefoot dancing to ideals such as "nudity, childhood, the idyllic past, flowing lines, health, nobility, ease, freedom, simplicity, order, and harmony".
During weddings of this period, a father would give his son-in-law a pair of shoes to symbolize the transfer of authority.
Barefoot hikers claim that they feel a sense of communion with the earth and enjoy the sheer pleasure of feeling more of the world with their feet.
Barefoot skateboarding has been witnessing a revival in recent times.
In European nations, including Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, there are barefoot parks or walks.
There were no apparent security motives for this unequal treatment; it was however practiced to point out the evident hierarchy between male and female detainees.
State and local laws may dictate when and where an employee must wear shoes.
They concluded that, before the invention of shoes, humans overall had healthier feet.
She was cast in a movie by writer and director Harry Dawes (portrayed by Humphrey Bogart) and became a major star.
Laboratory studies suggest that, due to the lack of extra weight on the feet, the energy cost of running barefoot is reduced by 4%, resulting in lower oxygen consumption.
The phrase ''barefoot and pregnant'' is now used to illustrate a woman's traditional role as a homemaker and thus her lack of opportunities to socialize or to have a career outside of the home.
American football is not traditionally a barefoot sport, though several placekickers have preferred to kick barefoot, including Tony Franklin of the Philadelphia Eagles and Rich Karlis of the Denver Broncos.
This was a prime mark of distinction between the free and the bonded and no exceptions were permitted."
It was then common practice by penal institutions particularly in Texas to exclude female prisoners from being issued with any kind of footwear, by this means keeping them barefoot throughout.
Among others it was commonly used in German territories, where it was employed until the end of the Nazi-era mainly within the reformatory and detention system.
Therefore, they were often conducted walking backwards when facing the prosecution.
He logged , or 413 laps on the South Medford High School track, barefoot.
Some modern shoe manufacturers have recently designed footwear to maintain optimum flexibility while providing a minimum amount of protection.
Bare feet on the other hand present an opportune and vulnerable target for the application of force.
Feet that have never worn shoes rarely exhibit problems such as bunions, corns, and 'fallen arches', aren't prone to more than ordinary foot eversion on standing and walking due to the associated weakness or stiffness of the joints of the foot and weakness of the muscles controlling them, as well as having a much reduced incidence of problems such as callouses.
Since ancient times, it is a common practice in civil societies to wear footwear as a standard feature.
Some people speculate that driving barefoot increases the risk of an accident if bare feet slip off the pedals.
However, shoes can limit the flexibility and mobility of the foot and can lead to higher incidences of flexible flat foot, bunions, hammer toe and Morton's neuroma.
The official position on barefoot running by the American Podiatric Medical Association states that there is not enough research on the immediate- and long-term benefits of the practice and that individuals should consult a podiatrist with a strong background in sports medicine to make an informed decision on all aspects of their running and training programs.
The earmarking of captives by forcing them to go in bare feet was also practiced specifically on imprisoned women in parts of the United States until the early 20th century.
A forced exclusion from the conveniences and also appearance of footwear typically creates an frequent awareness of being vulnerable, therefore it can have an intimidating effect on a person.
On the other hand, taking off the shoes of one's own will and voluntarily exposing one's bare feet is regarded as a token of submission and humility by the bible.
In people who are not habitually barefoot, Athlete's foot is spread by fungal spores coming into contact with skin that has been weakened and made moist.
Barefoot skiing originated in Winter Haven, Florida, in 1947, when slalom skier A.G. Hancock tried to step off his ski.
The American Diabetes Association recommends that diabetics wear shoes and socks at all times.
Todd Ragsdale, of Talent, Oregon, set the world record (pending confirmation by ''Guinness World Records'') for the longest distance run barefoot on June 5, 2010, as part of the Relay for Life fundraiser for the American Cancer Society.
The vaults are highly touch-sensitive and therefore susceptible to pain due to the tight clustering of nerve endings.
Barefoot parks usually include a lot of adventure stations, allowing visitors to experience the feeling of soil textures underfoot; to wade through rivers, mud, brooks, or ponds; and to exercise foot gymnastics, balancing and climbing.
Roman clothing explicitly including footwear was seen as a sign of power and as a necessity of living in a civilized world; accordingly slaves usually were to remain barefoot.
Contrary to occasional belief it is not formally prohibited to operate a motor vehicle barefoot, as long as the apparatus can be operated with adequate safety not putting other people in danger.
The connection to childhood and innocence, as well as the simple joys of country life, are embodied in the poem "The Barefoot Boy" by John Greenleaf Whittier, published in 1855.
Walking barefoot results in a more natural gait.
Seoul, South Korea, has 158 barefoot parks, allowing people to relax in a natural environment.
Therefore, it became a standard inquisition routine to firstly remove any footwear from an accused witch and make sure that she would remain barefoot at all times.
Children who habitually go barefoot were found to have stronger feet, with better flexibility and mobility, fewer deformities like flat feet or toes that curve inwards, and fewer complaints.
Foot washing, or ceremonial washing of others' feet, is associated with humility in Christianity, and Jesus Christ is recorded in the New Testament as washing the feet of his disciples to serve them during the Last Supper.
Christian congregations of men and women that go entirely barefoot or wear sandals include the Discalced, like the Discalced Carmelites (1568), the Feuillants (Cistercians, 1575), the Trinitarians (1594), the Mercedarians (1604), and the Passionists.
In many religions, it is common to remove shoes when entering a place considered holy.
In Thailand, Master Jinshen, a Buddhist monk, walks  per day barefoot as a reminder to others who pursue a material life to protect and be concerned for Mother Nature.
A barefoot person experiences certain discomfort in daily life situations.
The Hookworm parasite, found only in warm, moist climates where human feces contaminated with Hookworm larvae has been left in places where it might come into contact with human skin, can burrow through a bare human foot (or any part of the body that comes into contact with it).
At this contemporary depictions about inquisition proceedings or similar situations portray women who were on trial for witchcraft barefooted in almost every case.
Wearing footwear is an exclusively human characteristic.
Many injuries are possible, such as injuries to the Achilles tendon or plantar fascia, or stress fractures in the metatarsal bones or lower leg.
Issues that can develop as a result of someone who has always worn shoes going barefoot include calf pain or Achilles tendinitis or plantar fasciitis due to shortening of the Achilles tendon and the foot being underdeveloped, due to regular use of shoes.
People in ancient times, such as the Egyptians, Hindus and Greeks often went barefoot, as the inhabited terrain mostly mandated no practical necessity for footwear.
Walking barefoot results in a more natural gait, allowing for a more rocking motion of the foot, eliminating the hard heel strike and therefore generating less collision force in the foot and lower leg.
While private business owners are free to set their own policies, many cite different health regulations, though these typically are occupational safety requirements that pertain to employees only.
Many stores, restaurants and other public venues in the United States employ dress codes prohibiting bare feet.
It was also part of the then prevalent practice in Nazi-Germany to victimize prisoners.
The enforcement of bare feet often creates a consciousness of being powerless and degraded notably on prisoners, as they typically cannot relieve this situation on their own.
Without the protection of the feet that shoes standardly provide, the locomotion of an unshod person is more difficult in the majority of exterior environments, so a potential fugitive is easier to retrieve in many cases.
Some British schools also allow children to attend school barefoot in warmer months, and encourage it for indoor and outdoor physical education lessons.
There are risks and benefits associated with going barefoot.
Sales of minimalist running shoes have grown into a $1.7 billion industry.
She believed her utopian dance vision and program would ameliorate the perceived ills of modern life and restore the world to the imagined perfection of Ancient Greece.
On November 12, 2010, 2,500 people in Mahabubnagar, India, participated in a barefoot walk, which was recognized by ''Guinness World Records'' as the world's largest.
It was first used in the early 20th century, possibly by Dr. Arthur E. Hertzler (also known as the "Kansas Horse-and-Buggy Doctor"), promoting a hypothesis that:
These parks are kept clean and maintained on a regular basis, so that barefoot hiking can be done in an environment suitable for people who are habitually shod.
She liked the name because it went well with her simple and elegant cooking style.
Going barefoot was seen as a marker of poverty and the lowest social class, as well as being the mark of a prisoner (see below).
Modern physics has largely debunked this, showing that the amount of time the foot is in contact with the ground is not enough to induce a burn, combined with the fact that coal is not a very good conductor of heat.
Some religious practitioners have taken a vow of Gospel poverty, while there are certain convents where going barefoot is obligatory (Convent of Las Descalzas Reales, Poor Clares, Colettine Poor Clares).
Even the gods and heroes were primarily depicted barefoot, the hoplite warriors fought battles in bare feet, and Alexander the Great operated barefoot armies.
Barefoot running can be dangerous, especially to runners who do not adequately prepare or give their feet time to adapt to the new style.
A 1991 study found that children who wore shoes were three times more likely to have flat feet than those who did not, and suggested that wearing shoes in early childhood can be detrimental to the longitudinal arch of the foot.
One of the first singers to become well known for singing barefoot on stage was Sandie Shaw, who became known as the "Barefoot Pop Princess of the 1960s."
In particular camps the women also had to perform forced labor in their bare feet, at times even under adverse weather conditions.
In the bible there are multiple passages stating that a potent way to inflict humiliation on another human being lies in taking away his or her shoes and forcing the individual to go barefoot.
Footwear provides protection from cuts, abrasions, bruises and impacts from objects on the ground or the ground texture itself, as well as from frostbite and parasites like hookworm in extreme situations.
The risk of personal injury is therefore notably reduced and the situation can often be resolved more efficiently.
As going shoeless is placed under a more of less strict social taboo in most regions of the US (see above), being forced to go entirely barefoot determined the degradation to the lowest social rank for the incarcerated women.
Barefoot runners who do not prepare their bodies could provide, "a stimulus plan for podiatrists, orthopedists, and physical therapists."
The practice of foot whipping is still officially employed in several middle eastern nations where the term "falaka" is customary.
In a similar manner, Hindus show love and respect to a guru by touching his bare feet (called pranam).
In many branches of Romani culture across the world, it is traditional for women to dance barefoot.
By 1580, even men wore them, and a person with authority or wealth was often referred to as "well-heeled".
During the 16th century royalty, such as Catherine de Medici and Mary I of England, started wearing high-heeled shoes to make them look taller or larger than life.
Bare feet have come to symbolize innocence or childhood in a glorifying perception of freedom from real-life requirements.
Since there is no artificial protection of the bare foot, some of the possible issues include cuts, abrasions, bruises, or puncture wounds from glass, nails, rocks, or thorns, as well as poisonous plants, animals, or parasites that can enter the body through the cuts on an injured bare foot.
Due to interpretations of the malleus maleficarum it was widely believed that in case a witch was not constantly kept in her bare feet she could still bewitch other people only by looking at them.
The first barefoot skiing competition was held three years later, at the 1950 Cypress Gardens Dixie Championships.
Within women's penitentiaries in socialist East Germany (German Democratic Republic) especially political prisoners who were regarded as opponents of the regime could have their footwear seized and be detained barefoot as an aggravation of their penalty.
Some South African schools have sport uniforms where bare feet are compulsory, such as primary school rugby.
These effects are usually desired by correctional or police officers primarily in confrontational situations with antagonistic individuals.
Some Christian churches practice barefoot pilgrimage traditions, such as the ascent of Croagh Patrick in Ireland at night while barefoot (although the nighttime part is no longer encouraged).
For this reason shoes are considered deadly weapons by penal laws of most countries.
This aspect is often used to exercise physical control over individuals in captivity.
However, those regulations that exist apply only to employees and not customers.
Many leisure and competitive runners have been known to run barefoot, including well-known athletes Zola Budd of South Africa and Abebe Bikila of Ethiopia.
One alternative to barefoot running is to wear thin-soled shoes with minimal padding, such as moccasins, plimsolls, or huaraches, which result in similar gait to going barefoot but protect the skin and keep dirt and water off.
Tony Meléndez and Mark Goffeney have played the guitar on stage barefoot, with their feet, since they were born with no arms.
In certain societies this rule is valid to this day, as with the Tuareg slavery is still unofficially practiced and their slaves have to go barefoot.
They have also posted social media posts encouraging barefoot riding, particularly in summer.
Sales of Vibram FiveFingers alone grew from $450,000 in 2006 to $50 million in 2011.
For decades, the bare foot had been perceived as obscene, and no matter how determined barefoot dancers were to validate their art with reference to spiritual, artistic, historic, and organic concepts, barefoot dancing was inextricably linked in the public mind with indecency and sexual taboo.
In 1978, skiers from ten nations competed in the first World Barefoot Championships in Canberra, Australia.
The Egyptians and Hindus made some use of ornamental footwear, such as a soleless sandal known as a ''Cleopatra'', which did not provide any practical protection for the foot.
Wrestling can be done barefoot.
Many singers and dancers perform on stage barefoot.
While footwear is generally worn for functional, fashion, and societal reasons, many people do not wear shoes at home.
This resulted in the individual being defamed as a "barefooter" culminating in the loss of social standing.
In the latter half of the 20th century, many singers have performed barefoot.
He states that he does this to follow Buddhist rules, to lead the people to the path of virtue, and to develop his Buddhist spirit.
The according structure of subordination of the female prisoners also towards the male convicts was therefore showcased in an evident and palpable way.
People who are used to walking barefoot tend to land with the forefoot or mid-foot, eliminating the hard heel strike and generating much less collision force in the foot and lower leg.
Similarly, in 2008, Jessica Cox became the first person with no arms to use her bare feet to fly an airplane.
With regard to the use of footwear as a display of status, the religious and common art of many cultures throughout the world shows a person without shoes symbolizing either extreme poverty or the state of captivity and unfree servitude.
It is legal throughout the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom to drive barefoot.
In the United States, during the period of the counterculture movement of the 1960s, business establishments would deny admittance to barefoot hippies arguing that health regulations required that shoes be worn.
In 1908, Maud Allan shocked and fascinated London theatre-goers with her barefoot dance of desire in ''Salome'', and scandalous tributes positioned her as the embodiment of lust.
When the land was invaded by the Thai, the dancers were taken to the Thai court, where their art was adapted and continued to flourish.
This is particularly the case in most urban situations, where going barefoot is unusual.
Firewalking implies the belief that the feat requires the aid of a supernatural force, strong faith, or on an individual's ability to focus on "mind over matter".
Another sport where bare feet for kids are compulsory is "tou trek" or tug of war.
Such shoes include the shoes made by Vibram FiveFingers, Vivobarefoot, and Nike's Nike Free shoes.
In the 15th century, chopines were created in Turkey and were usually 7-8&nbsp;inches (17.7-20.3&nbsp;cm) high.
The Hookworm parasite is relatively mild, has few symptoms, and can pass completely unnoticed when the infestation level is low enough.
It is customary to show one's respect by walking barefoot around Raj Ghat, the monument to Mahatma Gandhi.
The unimpeded movement of the foot was essential to the art.
This led to a belief by many in nonexistent OSHA or local health department regulations preventing people from going to stores, restaurants, and other establishments without shoes.
The barefoot dance movement of the early 20th century challenged the received laws of classical dance and the broader laws of social decorum.
The parasite may spread through contaminated material coming into contact with any part of the body, such as through flecks of mud splashing on an ankle or leg.
Accordingly, the women were only allowed to look at the prosecutors when they would stand on the predefined spot within the courtroom.
The Romans, who eventually conquered the Greeks and adopted many aspects of their culture, did not adopt the Greek perception of footwear and clothing.
Cambodian dancers were well-born women of the king's harem and danced barefoot, with the feet turned outwards and the legs slightly bent at the knee to cushion the movements of the upper body.
A barefoot person is usually disadvantaged in a physical confrontation against shod individuals.
Other common activities performed barefoot include yoga, hiking, running, driving, water skiing, touch rugby, soccer, beach volleyball, surfing, tubing, gymnastics, Slacklining, and martial arts.
Christians who practice foot washing today do so to bring them closer to Jesus and to fill them with a sense of humility and service.
To quote Brother Riemer (1779): "the slaves are, even in their most beautiful suit, obliged to go barefoot.
The ''Barfußpfad'' (barefoot trail) at Bad Sobernheim in Germany attracts over 100,000 visitors annually and has seen approximately 1 million visitors since its inception in 1999.
A barefooted person is therefore disadvantaged opposite a shod person in many practical respects.
The classical dance of Cambodia had its roots in the holy dances of the legendary seductresses (''apsaras'') of ancient Cambodia and attained its high point during the Angkor period in its interpretations of the Indian epics, especially the ''Ramayana''.
The desire to be protected from the common inconveniences of the ground, mostly due to coarse textures or adverse temperatures, prompted humans to make use of footwear in ancient history.
Additionally, employee footwear, where required by OSHA, must comply with one of the standards described in OSHA's regulations.
Many modern skateboarders skate barefoot, especially in summer and in warmer countries like Australia, South Africa and parts of South America.
The second theory is that shoes and socks absorbed kinetic energy, and kicking flesh-to-leather created more torque.
These shoes became popular in Venice and throughout Europe as a status symbol revealing wealth and social standing.
The two schools of thought involved in barefoot placekicking were that the lack of a shoe provided the kicker with a better "feel" for the ball and greater control over its trajectory.
Similarly, barefoot running usually involves an initial forefoot strike, instead of on the rear of the foot, generating smaller collision forces.
It is customary in Judaism and some Christian denominations to go barefoot while mourning.
The plastic penny board is intended to be ridden barefoot, and Penny Skateboards have promoted the riding of the board barefoot by selling T-shirts and stickers.
The Hamboard, a surfboard style board, is also intended to be ridden barefoot.
In history bastinado was frequently practiced in western countries as well.
Athletes in the Ancient Olympic Games participated barefoot and generally unclothed.
The beatings usually aim at the muscular tissue within the vaults of the foot (longitudinal arch of the foot), omitting the bone structure of the ball and the heel.
However, in some US jurisdictions, police officers may ticket a driver for other things if the fact that they were driving barefoot or in flip-flops/high heeled shoes hindered their driving and/or resulted in an accident.
Since the hookworm infection is very cheap and easy to treat, and since it requires infected feces to come into contact with human skin within a particular time period, eradicating hookworm is mainly a matter of hygiene (including the building of proper toilet and waste-disposal facilities) and mass-treatment.
In this an analogy to the social state of former slaves was established, who were regularly forced to remain barefoot as well (see above).
Most children attend school barefoot.
He believed that applying your feet to a range of natural stimuli would have therapeutic benefits.
Californian Isadora Duncan revolutionized dance in the Western world by jettisoning the tutu and the pointe shoe of classical ballet and scandalized audiences by performing works of her own choreography in flowing draperies and bare feet.
A 2007 study examined 180 modern humans and compared their feet with 2,000-year-old skeletons.
This is related to the ancient practice of reflexology, practiced in China for thousands of years for relaxation and to promote longevity.
Fijian wrestler Jimmy "Superfly" Snuka of the WWE has wrestled barefoot as well.
Renowned Scottish percussionist Evelyn Glennie, who is almost completely deaf, always performs her concerts barefoot in order to feel the vibrations of her instruments and the orchestra accompanying her.
Being barefoot in public is more common during warmer months, and often accepted as a social norm, however this does not extend to metropolitan cities such as London, but more for rural areas and more common for young children and teenagers.
As such, the fungus is very unlikely to develop on a person who goes barefoot all the time.
