d. crassirostris'' and ''T.
'''Boang barn owl''' –  Endemic to the Tanga Islands.
Meanwhile, the male roosts nearby and may cache any prey that is surplus to their requirements.
Most prey is terrestrial but bats and birds are also taken, as well as lizards, amphibians and insects.
a. alba'' (Scopoli, 1769) -Sudan border.
Roosting sites include holes in trees, fissures in cliffs, disused buildings, chimneys and haysheds and are often small in comparison to nesting sites.
In northern and upland areas, there is some correlation between mortality in older birds and adverse weather, deep-lying snow and prolonged low temperatures.
As more species of owl were described, the genus name ''Strix'' came to be used solely for the wood owls in the typical owl family Strigidae, and the barn owl became ''Tyto alba'' in the barn owl family Tytonidae.
Due to their assignment to the nominate subspecies, which is common in mainland Spain, the western Canary Islands population is not classified as threatened.
There is some indication that female birds with more and larger spots have a greater resistance to external parasites.
Trees tend to be in open habitats rather than in the middle of woodland and nest holes tend to be higher in North America than in Europe because of possible predation by raccoons (''Procyon lotor'').
'''Australian barn owl''' – Includes ''bellonae, everetti, kuehni, lifuensis'' and ''lulu''.
Some subspecies with restricted ranges are more threatened.
Feathers become abraded over time and all birds need to replace them at intervals.
The ashy-faced owl (''T.
In temperate areas, the male owl moults rather later in the year than the female, at a time when there is an abundance of food, the female has recommenced hunting and the demands of the chicks are lessening.
The secondary and tail feathers are lost and replaced over a similar timescale, again starting while incubation is taking place.
However, the largest bodied race of barn owl, ''T.
In  Europe, although less dangerous than the eagle owl, the chief diurnal predators are  the northern goshawk (''Accipiter gentilis'') and the common buzzard (''Buteo buteo'').
Molecular analysis of mitochondrial DNA shows a separation of the species into two clades, an Old World ''alba'' and a New World ''furcata'', but this study did not include ''T.
A defensive attitude involves lying flat on the ground or crouching with wings spread out.
'''Cape Verde barn owl''' – Sometimes considered a distinct species.
The female starts to moult while incubating the eggs and brooding the chicks, a time when the male feeds her so she does not need to fly much.
About a dozen other large diurnal raptors and owls have also been reported as predators of barn owls, ranging from the scarcely larger tawny owl to the golden eagle.
For males in Scotland this has a radius of about  from the nest site and an average size of about 300 hectares.
In colder climates, in harsh weather and where winter food supplies may be scarce, they may roost in farm buildings and in barns between hay bales, but they then run the risk that their selected nesting hole may be taken over by some other, earlier-nesting species.
The male is the main provider of food until all the chicks are at least four weeks old at which time the female begins to leave the nest and starts to roost elsewhere.
The pale face with its heart shape and black eyes give the flying bird a distinctive appearance, like a flat mask with oversized, oblique black eye-slits, the ridge of feathers above the beak somewhat resembling a nose.
By two weeks old they are already half their adult weight and look naked as the amount of down is insufficient to cover their growing bodies.
The barn owl is a bird of open country such as farmland or grassland with some interspersed woodland, usually at altitudes below  but occasionally as high as  in the tropics.
Initially these make a "chittering" sound but this soon changes into a food-demanding "snore".
a. poensis'' (Fraser, 1842)
Outside the breeding season, males and females usually roost separately, each one having about three favoured sites in which to conceal themselves by day, and which are also visited for short periods during the night.
Barn owls range in colour from the almost beige-and-white nominate subspecies, ''erlangeri'' and ''niveicauda'', to the nearly black-and-brown ''contempta''.
The '''barn owl''' (''Tyto alba'') is the most widely distributed species of owl, and one of the most widespread of all birds.
Adult body mass is also variable with male owls from the Galapagos (''T.
Similar to ''schmitzi'' but breast darker, approaching ''guttata''.
Regionally, non-rodent foods are used as per availability.
By contrast, in southern Europe and the tropics, the birds seem to be almost exclusively nocturnal, with the few birds that hunt by day being severely mobbed.
The barn owl is the most widespread landbird species in the world, occurring in every continent except Antarctica.
Almost black with some dark grey above, the white part of the spotting showing prominently.
Unmated males without family responsibilities often start losing feathers earlier in the year.
Endemic to Corsica and Sardinia in the Mediterranean.
The diet of the barn owl has been much studied; the items consumed can be ascertained from identifying the prey fragments in the pellets of indigestible matter that the bird regurgitates.
Large, particularly the bill.
Where a female has lost her mate but maintained her breeding site, she usually seems to manage to attract a new spouse.
Like most owls, the barn owl flies silently; tiny serrations on the leading edges of its flight feathers and a hairlike fringe to the trailing edges help to break up the flow of air over the wings, thereby reducing turbulence and the noise that accompanies it.
Includes ''rhenana''.
The barn owl was one of several species of bird first described in 1769 by the Tyrolean physician and naturalist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in his '' Anni Historico-Naturales''.
At later stages of courtship, the male emerges at dusk, climbs high into the sky and then swoops back to the vicinity of the female at speed.
On Lanzarote a somewhat larger number of these birds still seem to exist, but altogether this particular subspecies is precariously rare: Probably less than three hundred and perhaps fewer than two hundred individuals still remain.
Similar to ''alba''; breast region always pure unspotted white.
Single males may establish feeding territories, patrolling the hunting areas, occasionally stopping to hover, and perching on lofty eminences where they screech to attract a mate.
a. hellmayri'' (Griscom & Greenway, 1937)
a. guttata'' (C. L. Brehm, 1831) .
The name literally means "white owl", from the onomatopoeic Ancient Greek ''tyto'' (τυτώ) for an owl – compare English "hooter" – and Latin ''alba'', "white".
Buildings are preferred to trees in wetter climates in the British Isles and provide better protection for fledglings from inclement weather.
a. punctatissima'' (G. R. Grey, 1838) .
Even when they are plentiful and other prey scarce, earthworms do not seem to be consumed.
But occasionally, a wild bird reaches an advanced age.
a. crassirostris'' (Mayr, 1935)
Intensification of agricultural practices often means that the rough grassland that provides the best foraging habitat is lost.
Collision with road vehicles is another cause of mortality, and may result when birds forage on mown verges.
Reports of blackish barn-owls on Fiji require investigation.
Some authorities further split the group, recognising up to five species, and further research needs to be done to clarify the position.
Movements in the African continent include  from Senegambia to Sierra Leone and up to  within South Africa.
d. sumbaensis'', ''T.
In May 2012, it was revealed that farmers in Israel and Jordan had, over a period of ten years, replaced pesticides with barn owls in a joint conservation venture called "Project Barn Owl".
Similarly, providing nesting boxes has increased the number of barn owls in rice-growing areas of Malaysia where the rodents do much damage to the crop.
In continental Europe the distance travelled is greater, commonly somewhere between  but exceptionally , with ringed birds from the Netherlands ending up in Spain and in Ukraine.
Endemic to  Roatán and Guanaja in the Bay Islands.
Barn owls are usually more specialist feeders in productive areas and generalists in drier areas.
a. bondi'' (Parks & Phillips, 1978)
Endemic to Isla de la Juventud.
The actual dates of egg-laying vary by year and by location, being correlated with the amount of prey-rich foraging habitat around the nest site and often with the phase of the rodent abundance cycle.
Intergrades with ''alba'' around the Egypt-Sudan border.
Phylogenetic evidence shows that there are at least three major lineages of barn owl, one in Eurasia and Africa, one in Australasia and one in the Americas, and some highly divergent taxa on islands.
Contrary to what is sometimes assumed, the barn owl does not eat domestic animals on any sort of regular basis.
This makes the barn owl one of the most economically valuable wildlife animals for agriculture.
These gut parasites are acquired when the birds feed on infected prey which provide intermediate hosts for the parasites.
The bird's head and upper body typically vary between pale brown and some shade of grey (especially on the forehead and back) in most subspecies.
Barn owls are cavity nesters.
a. thomensis''  (Hartlaub, 1852)
It has been found that at least in the continental European populations, females with more spotting are healthier than plainer birds.
Santa Cruz Islands and Banks Islands south to Efate Island (Vanuatu).
Some island subspecies are occasionally treated as distinct species, a move which should await further research into barn owl phylogeography.
Excess food is often cached at roosting sites and can be used when food is scarce.
Similar to ''ernesti''; upperparts lighter and yellower.
alba'' of a large subspecies weighing over 550&nbsp;g (19.4&nbsp;oz), while males are typically about 10% lighter.
'''São tomé barn owl''' – Sometimes considered a distinct species.
Collisions with power-lines kill some birds and shooting accounts for others, especially in Mediterranean regions.
On bird-rich islands, a barn owl might include some fifteen to twenty percent of birds in its diet, while in grassland it will gorge itself on swarming termites, or on Orthoptera such as Copiphorinae katydids, Jerusalem crickets (Stenopelmatidae) or true crickets (Gryllidae).
Taking into account such extremely long-lived individuals, the average lifespan of the barn owl is about four years, and statistically two-thirds to three-quarters of all adults survive from one year to the next.
The chicks are at first covered with greyish-white down and develop rapidly.
"Hissing owl" and, particularly in the UK and in India, "screech owl", refers to the piercing calls of these birds.
The talons, like the beak, vary in colour, ranging from pink to dark pinkish-grey and the talons are black.
a. stertens'' and other members of the ''alba'' clade.
a. delicatula'' (Gould, 1837)  but became extinct again.
In general, owls living on small islands are smaller and lighter, perhaps because they have a higher dependence on insect prey and need to be more manoeuvrable.
The facial disc plays a part in this process, as is shown by the fact that with the ruff feathers removed, the bird can still locate the source in azimuth but fails to do so in elevation.
In Australia there is some migration as the birds move towards the northern coast in the dry season and southward in the wet, and also nomadic movements in association with rodent plagues.
Mice and rats form the main foodstuffs in the Mediterranean region, the tropics, sub-tropics and Australia.
Similar to ''furcata''; paler in general.
The latter are also larger with a strong female ''T.
'''Curaçao barn owl''' – Endemic to Curaçao and maybe Bonaire in the West Indies.
a. delicatula'' which the authors seem to have accepted as a separate species.
Reddish brown below.
In North America and most of Europe, voles predominate in the diet and shrews are the second most common food choice.
The female lays eggs on alternate days and the clutch size averages about five eggs (range two to nine).
The beak varies from pale horn to dark buff, corresponding to the general plumage hue, and the iris is blackish brown.
The plumage on head and back is a mottled shade of grey or brown, the underparts vary from white to brown and are sometimes speckled with dark markings.
Within a week they can hold their heads up and shuffle around in the nest.
The bird is known by many common names which refer to its appearance, call, habitat, or its eerie, silent flight: white owl, silver owl, demon owl, ghost owl, death owl, night owl, rat owl, church owl, cave owl, stone owl, monkey-faced owl, hissing owl, hobgoblin or hobby owl, dobby owl, white-breasted owl, golden owl, scritch owl, screech owl, straw owl, barnyard owl, and delicate owl.
a. furcata'' from Cuba and Jamaica, is also an island race, albeit being found on more sizeable islands with larger prey and few larger owls competing for dietary resources.
Similarly, the birds on the western Canary Islands which are usually assigned to the nominate subspecies have declined much, and here wanton destruction seems still to be significant.
Includes ''hypermetra''; doubtfully distinct from ''poensis''.
Hairlike extensions to the barbules of its feathers, which give the plumage a soft feel, also minimise noise produced during wingbeats.
Unusually for such a medium-sized carnivorous animal, the barn owl exhibits ''r''-selection, producing large number of offspring with a high growth rate, many of which have a relatively low probability of surviving to adulthood.
Includes ''stictica''.
A high amount of genetic variation was also found between the Indonesian ''T.
They mate for life unless one of the pair gets killed, when a new pair bond may be formed.
The female tears up the food brought by the male and distributes it to the chicks.
'''American Barn Owl''' – Might include ''niveicauda''.
Guatemala or S Mexico through Central America to Panama or N Colombia; Pearl Islands.
Among the latter, the great horned owl (''Bubo virginianus'') in the Americas and the Eurasian eagle-owl (''B.
Many subspecies have been proposed over the years but several are generally considered to be intergrades between more distinct populations.
They are still dependent on the parent birds until about thirteen weeks and receive training from the female in finding, and eventually catching, prey.
Oftentimes other birds such as jackdaws (''Corvus monedula'') nest in the same hollow tree or building and seem to live harmoniously with the owls.
Both young and old can hiss like a snake to scare away intruders.
However, the mortality is not evenly distributed throughout the bird's life, and only one young in three manages to live to its first breeding attempt.
The male continues to copulate with the female when he brings food which makes the newly hatched chicks vulnerable to injury.
E New Guinea and Manam and Karkar islands.
a. affinis''  (Blyth, 1862).
The barn owl has a wider distribution than any other species of owl.
Males in courtship give a shrill twitter.
a. stertens'' (Hartert, 1929)n birds sometimes included in ''javanica''.
The barn owl hunts by flying slowly, quartering the ground and hovering over spots that may conceal prey.
a. contempta'' (Hartert, 1898)
Despite some sources claiming that there is little evidence of predation by great horned owls, one study from Washington found that 10.9% of the local great horned owl's diet was made up of barn owls.
In the United Kingdom, the "Barn Owl Nest Box Scheme" is promoted by the World Owl Trust and has many participants in local areas such as Somerset, where a webcam has been set up inside a nest box in which seven young were reared in 2014.
a. delicatula'' should be split off as a separate species, to be known as the eastern barn owl, which would include the subspecies ''T.
Nestlings are covered in white down, but the heart-shaped facial disk becomes visible soon after hatching.
The barn owl has been successfully introduced into the Hawaiian island of Kauai in an attempt to control rodents, however it has been found to also feed on native birds.
The shape of the tail is a means of distinguishing the barn owl from typical owls when seen in the air.
When large numbers of small prey are readily available, barn owl populations can expand rapidly, and globally the bird is considered to be of least conservation concern.
This is of little importance in the tropics and barn owls here usually moult a complete complement of flight feathers annually.
According to Bruce in the ''Handbook of Birds of the World, Volume 5: Barn-owls to Hummingbirds'', "a review of the whole group is long overdue".
He gave it the scientific name ''Strix alba''.
In Britain, on various Pacific Islands and perhaps elsewhere, it sometimes hunts by day.
a. interposita'' (Mayr, 1935)
Locally superabundant rodent species in the weight class of several grams per individual usually make up the single largest proportion of prey.
In the case of the tail, the two outermost tail feathers are first shed followed by the two central ones, the other tail feathers being moulted the following year.
'''Madagascare red owl''' –  Endemic to Sumba.
Other sounds produced include a purring chirrup denoting pleasure, and a "kee-yak", which resembles one of the vocalisations of the tawny owl.
By three weeks old, quills are starting to push through the skin and the chicks stand, making snoring noises with wings raised and tail stumps waggling, begging for food items which are now given whole.
When captured or cornered, the barn owl throws itself on its back and flails with sharp-taloned feet, making for an effective defence.
Upperparts golden-brown and grey with very bold pattern.
a. detorta'' (Hartert, 1913)
bubo'') are noted predators of barn owls.
alba'', and by some authors its populations from the Lesser Antilles still are.
In Malaysia, large areas of rainforest were felled to make way for oil palm plantations and with few tree cavities for breeding, the barn owl population, with its ability to control rodent pests, diminished.
Similar to ''pratincola''; smaller and paler on average.
Underparts golden brown with extensive speckles.
Similar to ''javanica''; tail whitish with black bars.
a. niveicauda'' (Parks & Phillips, 1978)
a. sumbaensis'' (Hartert, 1897)
Similar to ''tuidara'' but larger.
There is considerable size variation across the subspecies with a typical specimen measuring about  in overall length, with a full range of  across the species.
a. erlangeri'' (W. L. Sclater, 1921)
During the non-breeding season they may roost separately, but as the breeding season approaches they return to their established nesting site, showing considerable site fidelity.
An increase in rodent populations will usually stimulate the local barn owls to begin nesting; thus, even in the cooler parts of its range, two broods are often raised in a good year.
The barn owl is found almost everywhere in the world except polar and desert regions, Asia north of the Himalayas, most of Indonesia, and some Pacific islands.
Consequently, they were often persecuted by farmers who were unaware of the benefit these birds bring.
a. bargei'' (Hartert, 1892)
Compared to other owls of similar size, the barn owl has a much higher metabolic rate, requiring relatively more food.
However, locally severe declines from organochlorine (e.g., DDT) poisoning in the mid-20th century and rodenticides in the late 20th century have affected some populations, particularly in Europe and North America.
The first primary feather to be shed is the central one, number 6, and it has regrown completely by the time the female resumes hunting.
In Africa, the principle predators of barn owls are Verreaux's eagle-owls and cape eagle-owls.
Common names such as "demon owl", "death owl", or "ghost owl" show that traditionally, rural populations in many places considered barn owls to be birds of evil omen.
Predators of the barn owl include large American opossums (''Didelphis''), the common raccoon, and similar carnivorous mammals, as well as eagles, larger hawks and other owls.
The Canary barn owl is particularly at risk, and as late as 1975, hunting by fearful locals was limiting the population on Fuerteventura where only a few dozen pairs remain.
Females are ready to breed at ten to eleven months of age although males sometimes wait till the following year.
They choose holes in trees, fissures in cliff faces, the large nests of other birds such as the hamerkop (''Scopus umbretta'') and, particularly in Europe and North America, old buildings such as farm sheds and church towers.
The eggs are chalky white, somewhat elliptical and about the size of bantam's eggs, and incubation begins as soon as the first egg is laid.
The incubation period is about thirty days, hatching takes place over a prolonged period and the youngest chick may be several weeks younger than its oldest sibling.
Internal parasites include the fluke ''Strigea strigis'', the tape worm ''Paruternia candelabraria'', several species of parasitic round worm and spiny-headed worms in the genus ''Centrorhynchus''.
a. javanica'' (J. F. Gmelin, 1788) n birds are sometimes placed here but seem closer to ''stertens''.
Barn owls are relatively common throughout most of their range and not considered globally threatened.
In Ireland, the accidental introduction of the bank vole in the 1950s led to a major shift in the barn owl's diet: where their ranges overlap, the vole is now by far the largest prey item.
Intergrades with ''alba'' at the western border of its range.
When he is later joined by the female, there is much chasing, turning and twisting in flight, and frequent screeches, the male's being high-pitched and tremulous and the female's lower and harsher.
'''Canary barn owl'''—Endemic to the E Canary Islands (Chinijo Archipelago, Fuerteventura, Lanzarote; perhaps formerly also on Lobos).
Similar to ''guttata'', but less reddish.
Farmers often find these owls more effective than poison in keeping down rodent pests, and they can encourage barn owl habitation by providing nest sites.
By the sixth week the chicks are as big as the adults but have slimmed down somewhat by the ninth week when they are fully fledged and start leaving the nest briefly themselves.
Barn owls are hosts to a wide range of parasites.
alba'' "may need to be revisited".
a. furcata'' (Temminck, 1827) ).
Sometimes considered a distinct species.
Barn owls have a typical wingspan of some , with a full range of .
