By the 1850s, ''Munchausen'' had come into slang use as a verb meaning "to tell extravagantly untruthful pseudo-autobiographical stories".
A second German edition in 1788 included heavily altered material from an expanded Kearsley edition, and an original German sequel, ''Nachtrag zu den wunderbaren Reisen zu Wasser und Lande'', was published in 1789.
''A Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen humbly dedicated to Mr Bruce the Abyssinian Traveller, As the Baron conceives that it may be of some service to him making another expedition into Abyssinia; but if this does not delight Mr Bruce, the Baron is willing to fight him on any terms he pleases
Another rumor, which circulated widely soon after the German translation was published, claimed that it was a competitive collaboration by three University of Göttingen scholars—Bürger, Abraham Gotthelf Kästner, and Georg Christoph Lichtenberg—with each of the three trying to outdo one another by writing the most unbelievable tale.
In the Soviet Union, Soyuzmultfilm released a 16-minute stop-motion animation ''Adventures of Baron Munchausen'' in 1967, directed by Anatoly Karanovich.
In any case, the Baron appears to believe every word of his own stories, no matter how internally inconsistent they become, and he usually appears tolerantly indifferent to any disbelief he encounters in others.
Asher proposed to call the disorder "Munchausen's syndrome", commenting: "Like the famous Baron von Munchausen, the persons affected have always travelled widely; and their stories, like those attributed to him, are both dramatic and untruthful.
Same contents as the Fifth Edition, plus a "Supplement" about a ride on an eagle and a new frontispiece.
London: C. and G. Kearsley, 1793
In the process of revision, Raspe's prose style was heavily modified; instead of his conversational language and sportsmanlike turns of phrase, Kearsley's writers opted for a blander and more formal tone imitating Augustan prose.
''Gulliver ressuscité, ou les voyages, campagnes et aventures extraordinaires du Baron de Munikhouson''
In the first published illustrations, which may have been drawn by Raspe himself, the Baron appears slim and youthful.
Same as the Sixth Edition.
''Nachtrag zu den wunderbaren Reisen zu Wasser und Lande, und lustige Abentheuer des Freyherrn von Münchhausen, wie er dieselben bey der Flasch Wein im Zirkel seiner Freunde selbst zu erzählen pflegt.
This third edition was sold at two shillings, twice the price of the original, as ''Gulliver Revived, or the Singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures of Baron Munikhouson, commonly pronounced Munchausen''.
London actually Göttingen: Johann Christian Dieterich, 1788
Other than the anglicization of Münchhausen to "Munchausen", Raspe this time made no attempt to hide the identity of the man who had inspired him, though he still withheld his own name.
Further alterations to Raspe's text.
On retiring in 1760, he became a minor celebrity within German aristocratic circles for telling outrageous tall tales based on his military career.
The Fifth Edition, considerably enlarged, and ornamented with a variety of explanatory Views, engraved from Original Designs''
His cousin, Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen, was the founder of the University of Göttingen and later the Prime Minister of the Electorate of Hanover.
Born in Bodenwerder, Electorate of Brunswick-Luneburg, the real-life Münchhausen fought for the Russian Empire in the Russo-Turkish War.
The Baron's notoriety is universal, his character proverbial, and his name as familiar as that of Mr. Lemuel Gulliver, or Robinson Crusoe."
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, Kearsley's phenomenally popular version of Raspe's book had spread to abridged chapbook editions for young readers, who soon became the main audience for the stories.
The German version of the stories proved to be even more popular than the English one.
On stage, ''Harlequin Munchausen, or the Fountain of Love'', a pantomime based on the Raspe text, was produced in London in 1818, and Herbert Eulenberg made the Baron the main character of a 1900 play, ''Münchhausen''.
In 1932, the comedy writer Billy Wells adapted Baron Munchausen for a radio comedy routine starring the comedians Jack Pearl and Cliff Hall.
Gulliver Revived: or, the Vice of Lying properly exposed.
In some of his best-known stories, the Baron rides a cannonball, travels to the Moon,  is swallowed by a giant fish in the Mediterranean Sea, saves himself from drowning by pulling on his own hair, fights a forty-foot crocodile, enlists a wolf to pull his sleigh, and uses laurel tree branches to fix his horse when the animal is accidentally cut in two.
Slightly modified translation of the English Fifth Edition.
For the German film studio Ufa's twenty-fifth anniversary in 1943, Joseph Goebbels hired the filmmaker Josef von Báky to direct ''Münchhausen'', a big-budget color film about the Baron.
A second edition released early the following year, retitled ''Singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Sporting Adventures of Baron Munnikhouson, commonly pronounced Munchausen'', added five more stories and four illustrations; though the book was still anonymous, the new text was probably by Raspe, and the illustrations may have been his work as well.
Oleg Yankovsky appeared as the Baron in the 1980 Russian television film ''That Same Munchausen'', directed by Mark Zakharov from Grigori Gorin's play.
In the stories he narrates, the Baron is shown as a calm, rational man, describing what he experiences with simple objectivity; absurd happenings elicit, at most, mild surprise from him, and he shows serious doubt about any unlikely events he has not witnessed himself.
Perhaps fearing a libel suit, Raspe never acknowledged his authorship of the work, which was only established posthumously.
In his 1886 philosophical treatise ''Beyond Good and Evil'', Friedrich Nietzsche uses one of the Baron's adventures, the one in which he rescues himself from a swamp, as a metaphor for belief in complete metaphysical free will; Nietzsche calls this belief an attempt "to pull oneself up into existence by the hair, out of the swamps of nothingness".
Raspe's authorship was finally proven in 1824 by Bürger's biographer, Karl Reinhard.
''Wunderbare Reisen zu Wasser und Lande, feldzüge und lustige Abentheuer des Freyherrn von Münchhausen wie er dieselben bey der Flasche im Zirkel seiner Freunde zu Erzählen pflegt.
Early Munchausen translations and sequels
This English edition, the first version of the text in which Munchausen appeared as a fully developed literary character, had a circuitous publication history.
In 1838–39, Karl Leberecht Immermann published the long novel ''Münchhausen: Eine Geschichte in Arabesken'' (''Münchhausen: A History of Arabesques'') as an homage to the character, and Adolf Ellissen's ''Munchausens Lügenabenteur'', an elaborate expansion of the stories, appeared in 1846.
Four illustrations from the English Second Edition and three new ones.
Same contents as the Fourth Edition, plus the trips to Ceylon (added at the beginning) and Mount Etna (at the end), and a new frontispiece.
Raspe's name did not appear at all.
Notable later translations include Gautier's French rendering and Korney Chukovsky's popular Russian adaptation.
By Baron Munchausen''
Illustrators of the Baron stories have included Thomas Rowlandson, Alfred Crowquill, George Cruikshank, Ernst Ludwig Riepenhausen, Theodor Hosemann, Adolf Schrödter, Gustave Doré, William Strang, W. Heath Robinson, and Ronald Searle.
Over the ensuing thirty years, his storytelling abilities gained such renown that he frequently received visits from travelling nobles wanting to hear his stories.
Gulliver Revived: or, the Vice of Lying properly exposed.
The Italian director Paolo Azzurri filmed ''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen'' in 1914, and the British director F. Martin Thornton made a short silent film featuring the Baron, ''The New Adventures of Baron Munchausen'', the following year.
Another Soviet animated version was produced as a series of short films, ''Munchausen's Adventures'', in 1973 and 1974.
Münchhausen started as a page to Anthony Ulrich&nbsp;II of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, and followed his employer to the Russian Empire during the Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–39).
London: G. Kearsley, 1789
Zweite vermehrte Ausgabe''
Eighteen engravings, though only sixteen are mentioned on the title page.
Raspe, probably for fear of a libel suit from the real-life Baron von Münchhausen, never admitted his authorship of the book.
Subclass ATU1889 of the Aarne–Thompson–Uther classification system, a standard index of folklore, was named "Münchhausen Tales" in tribute to the stories.
The relationship between the real and fictional Barons is complex.
Roger Ebert, in his review of the film, described Neville's Baron as a man who "seems sensible and matter-of-fact, as anyone would if they had spent a lifetime growing accustomed to the incredible".
The early French filmmaker Georges Méliès, who greatly admired the Baron Munchausen stories, filmed ''Baron Munchausen's Dream'' in 1911.
In January 1794, Münchhausen married Bernardine von Brunn, fifty-seven years his junior.
The book was soon translated into other European languages, including a German version expanded by the poet Gottfried August Bürger.
The same story also inspired the mathematical term "Munchausen number", coined by Daan van Berkel in 2009 to describe numbers whose digits, when raised to their own powers, can be added together to form the number itself (for example, 3435&nbsp;=&nbsp;33&nbsp;+&nbsp;44&nbsp;+&nbsp;33&nbsp;+&nbsp;55).
''Wunderbare Reisen zu Wasser und Lande, feldzüge und lustige Abentheuer des Freyherrn von Münchhausen, wie er dieselben bey der Flasche im Zirkel seiner Freunde zu Erzählen pflegt.
Münchhausen filed an official complaint that the child was not his, and spent the last years of his life in divorce proceedings and alimony litigation.
London: G. Kearsley, July 1786
When Charlie had had enough and expressed disbelief, the Baron would invariably retort: "Vass ''you'' dere, Sharlie?"
Von Brunn gave birth to a daughter, Maria Wilhemina, on 16 February 1795, nine months after her summer trip.
Méliès may also have used the Baron's journey to the moon as an inspiration for his well-known 1902 film ''A Trip to the Moon''.
W. L. George described the fictional Baron as a "comic giant" of literature, describing his boasts as "splendid, purposeless lies born of the joy of life".
''The Eighth Edition, Considerably enlarged, and ornamented with Twenty Explanatory Engravings, from Original Designs.
In the late nineteenth century, the Baron appeared as a character in John Kendrick Bangs's comic novels ''A House-Boat on the Styx'', ''Pursuit of the House-Boat'', and ''The Enchanted Type-Writer''.
In 1744 he married Jacobine von Dunten, and in 1750 he was promoted to ''Rittmeister'' (cavalry captain).
On 27 November 1740, he was promoted to lieutenant.
In 1968, Hans Albert coined the term "Münchhausen Trilemma" to describe the philosophical problem inherent in having to derive conclusions from premises; those premises have to be derived from still other premises, and so on forever, leading to an infinite regress interruptible only by circular logic or dogmatism.
Aus dem Englischen nach der neuesten Ausgabe übersetzt, hier und da erweitert und mit noch mehr Küpfern gezieret''
For a 1972 Caedmon Records recording of some of the stories, Peter Ustinov voiced the Baron.
Munchausen'', a collection of new Munchausen stories, closely following the style and humor of the original tales.
Also, An Account of a Voyage into the Moon and Dog-Star; with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking Animal in those Planets, which are there called the Human Species.
After these publications, the English and Continental versions of the Raspe text continued to diverge, following increasingly different traditions of included material.
Thomas Seccombe commented that "Munchausen has undoubtedly achieved a permanent place in literature&nbsp;...
On the one hand, the fictional Baron Munchausen can be easily distinguished from the historical figure Hieronymus von Münchhausen; the character is so separate from his namesake that at least one critic, the writer W. L. George, concluded that the namesake's identity was irrelevant to the general reader, and Richard Asher named Munchausen syndrome using the anglicized spelling so that the disorder would reference the character rather than the real person.
In addition to his fearlessness when hunting and fighting, he is suggested to be a debonair, polite gentleman given to moments of gallantry, with a scholarly penchant for knowledge, a tendency to be pedantically accurate about details in his stories, and a deep appreciation for food and drink of all kinds.
In 1785, while supervising mines at Dolcoath in Cornwall, Raspe adapted the ''Vade mecum'' anecdotes into a short English-language book, this time identifying the narrator of the book as "Baron Munchausen".
In 1739, he was appointed a cornet in the Russian cavalry regiment, the Brunswick-Cuirassiers.
Though the Baron Munchausen stories are no longer well-known in English-speaking countries, they are still popular in continental Europe.
Pierre Henri Cami's character Baron de Crac, a French soldier and courtier under Louis XV, is an imitation of the Baron Munchausen stories.
Though Raspe's book is no longer widely read by English speakers, the Munchausen stories remain popular in Europe, especially in Germany and in Russia.
The French animator Jean Image filmed ''The Fabulous Adventures of the Legendary Baron Munchausen'' in 1979, and followed it with a 1984 sequel, ''Moon Madness''.
In 1994, a main belt asteroid was named 14014 Münchhausen in honor of both the real and the fictional Baron.
Original English sequel, satirizing the travels of James Bruce.
In 1760 Münchhausen retired to live as a ''Freiherr'' at his estates in Bodenwerder, where he remained until his death in 1797.
In the routine, Pearl's Baron would relate his unbelievable experiences in a thick German accent to Hall's "straight man" character, Charlie.
Bürger's text is a close translation of Smith's second edition, but also includes an interpolated story, based on a German legend called "The Six Wonderful Servants".
The hero and narrator of these stories was identified only as "M-h-s-n", keeping Raspe's inspiration partly obscured while still allowing knowledgeable German readers to make the connection to Münchhausen.
Same stories as the Third Edition, plus new material not by Raspe, including the cannonball ride, the journey with Captain Hamilton, and the Baron's second trip to the Moon.
The line became a popular and much-quoted catchphrase, and by early 1933 ''The Jack Pearl Show'' was the second most popular series on American radio (after Eddie Cantor's program).
Méliès's short silent film, which has little in common with the Raspe text, follows a sleeping Baron through a surrealistic succession of intoxication-induced dreams.
Containing singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures in Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean and through the Centre of Mount Aetna, into the South Sea.
Versions of the fictional Baron have appeared on stage, screen, radio, and television, as well as in other literary works.
Shortly after, in 1901, Bangs published ''Mr.
Pearl attempted to adapt his portrayal to film in ''Meet the Baron'' in 1933, playing a modern character mistaken for the Baron, but the film was not a success.
The book, especially in its adaptations for children, remained widely popular throughout the century.
Includes twenty-three engravings and an "Elegy on the Death of Herr von Münchhausen" (though the real-life Baron had not yet died).
The German actor Jan Josef Liefers starred in a 2012 two-part television film titled ''Baron Münchhausen''; according to a ''Spiegel Online'' review, his characterization of the Baron strongly resembled Johnny Depp's performance as Jack Sparrow in the ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' film series.
The Baron's stories imply him to be a superhuman figure who spends most of his time either getting out of absurd predicaments or indulging in equally absurd moments of gentle mischief.
Robert Chambers, in an 1863 almanac, cited the iconic 1792 illustration of the Baron by asking rhetorically:
David Stewart Hull describes Hans Albers's Baron as "jovial but somewhat sinister", while Tobias Nagle writes that Albers imparts "a male and muscular zest for action and testosterone-driven adventure".
In the late 1930s, he planned to collaborate with the Dada artist Hans Richter on a new film version of the Baron stories, but the project was left unfinished at his death in 1938.
London: G. Kearsley, 1787
''Gulliver Revived, containing singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures in Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean and through the Centre of Mount Etna into the South Sea: Also an Account of a Voyage to the Moon and Dog Star, with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking Animal in those Planets, which are here called the Human Species, by Baron Munchausen.
The resulting narrative effect is an ironic tone, encouraging skepticism in the reader and marked by a running undercurrent of subtle social satire.
The folklore writer Alvin Schwartz cited the Baron stories as one of the most important influences on the American tall tale tradition.
In 1940, the Czech director Martin Frič filmed ''Baron Prášil'', starring the comic actor Vlasta Burian as a twentieth-century descendant of the Baron.
The scholar Johann Georg Meusel correctly credited Raspe for the core text, but mistakenly asserted that Raspe had written it in German and that an anonymous translator was responsible for the English version.
Richter attempted to complete it the following year, taking on Jacques Prévert, Jacques Brunius, and Maurice Henry as screenwriters, but the beginning of the Second World War put a permanent halt to the production.
''Gulliver Revived or the Vice of Lying properly exposed; containing singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures in Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean and through the Centre of Mount Etna into the South Sea: also an Account of a Voyage into the Moon and Dog-Star with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking Animal in those Planets, which are there called the Human Species by Baron Munchausen.
"M-h-s-nsche Geschichten" appeared as a feature in the eighth issue of the ''Vade mecum für lustige Leute'' (''Handbook for Fun-loving People''), a Berlin humor magazine, in 1781.
According to an interview, Jules Verne relished reading the Baron stories as a child, and used them as inspiration for his own adventure novels.
The real-life Münchhausen was deeply upset at the development of a fictional character bearing his name, and threatened legal proceedings against the book's publisher.
On the other hand, Münchhausen remains strongly connected to the character he inspired, and is still nicknamed the ''Lügenbaron'' ("Baron of Lies") in German.
Considerably enlarged, and ornamented with Sixteen explanatory Views, engraved from Original Designs''
Most ensuing English-language editions, including even the major editions produced by Thomas Seccombe in 1895 and F. J. Harvey Darton in 1930, reproduce one of the rewritten Kearsley versions rather than Raspe's original text.
Rather than being considered a liar, Münchhausen was seen as an honest man.
Raspe probably met Hieronymus von Münchhausen while studying at the University of Göttingen, and may even have been invited to dine with him at the mansion at Bodenwerder.
In the first few years after publication, German readers widely assumed that the real-life Baron von Münchhausen was responsible for the stories.
In 1951, the British physician Richard Asher published an article in ''The Lancet'' describing patients whose factitious disorders led them to lie about their own states of health.
Because the feats the Baron describes are overtly implausible, they are easily recognizable as fiction, with a strong implication that the Baron is a liar.
The character has inspired numerous memorials and museums, and several medical conditions and other concepts are named after him, including Munchausen syndrome, the Münchhausen trilemma, and Munchausen numbers.
As another contemporary put it, Münchhausen's unbelievable narratives were designed not to deceive, but "to ridicule the disposition for the marvellous which he observed in some of his acquaintances".
At least ten editions or translations of the book appeared before Raspe's death in 1794.
Raspe's book was a major international success, becoming the core text for numerous English, continental European, and American editions that were expanded and rewritten by other writers.
Intentionally comedic, the stories play on the absurdity and inconsistency of Munchausen's claims, containing an undercurrent of social satire.
Whether he expects his audience to believe him varies from version to version; in Raspe's original 1785 text, he simply narrates his stories without further comment, but in the later extended versions he is insistent that he is telling the truth.
It was often credited to Bürger, sometimes with an accompanying rumor that the real-life Baron von Münchhausen had met Bürger in Pyrmont and dictated the entire work to him.
Also, An Account of a Voyage into the Moon and Dog-Star; with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking Animal in those Planets, which are there called the Human Species.
The first German translation, ''Wunderbare Reisen zu Wasser und Lande'', was made by the German Romantic poet Gottfried August Bürger.
He was a younger son of the "Black Line" of Rinteln-Bodenwerder, an aristocratic family in the Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg.
In 1988, Terry Gilliam adapted the Raspe stories into a lavish Hollywood film, ''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen'', with the Canadian stage actor John Neville in the lead.
He was stationed in Riga, but participated in two campaigns against the Turks in 1740 and 1741.
The following year, the National Black Light Theatre of Prague toured the United Kingdom with a nonmusical production of ''The Adventures of Baron Munchausen''.
The fictionalized character was created by a German writer, scientist, and con artist, Rudolf Erich Raspe.
The fictional Baron's exploits, narrated in the first-person, focus on his impossible achievements as a sportsman, soldier, and traveller, for instance riding on a cannonball, fighting a forty-foot crocodile, and travelling to the Moon.
London: H. D. Symonds, 1792 a second edition was published 1796
Von Brunn reportedly took ill soon after the marriage and spent the summer of 1794 in the spa town of Bad Pyrmont, although contemporary gossip claimed that she spent her time dancing and flirting.
Münchhausen became a recluse, refusing to host parties or tell any more stories, and he attempted without success to bring legal proceedings against Bürger and the publisher of the translation.
On 18 June 2005, to celebrate the 750th anniversary of Kaliningrad, a monument to the Baron was unveiled as a gift from Bodenwerder, portraying the Baron's cannonball ride.
The problem is named after the similarly paradoxical story in which the Baron saves himself from being drowned in a swamp by pulling on his own hair.
Original German sequel, sharply satirizing the Baron.
Münchhausen died childless on 22 February 1797.
Two new engravings were added to illustrate the interpolated material.
In 1998, the British game designer James Wallis used the Baron character to create a multi-player storytelling game, ''The Extraordinary Adventures of Baron Munchausen'', in which players improvise Munchausen-like first-person stories while overcoming objections and other interruptions from opponents.
Includes twenty engravings.
A German musical comedy, ''Münchhausen in Afrika'', made as a vehicle for the Austrian singing star Peter Alexander, appeared in 1957.
The Fourth Edition.
''The Seventh Edition, Considerably enlarged, and ornamented with Twenty Explanatory Engravings, from Original Designs.
The French animator Emile Cohl produced a version of the stories using silhouette cutout animation in 1913; other animated versions were produced by Richard Felgenauer in Germany in 1920, and by Paul Peroff in the United States in 1929.
The disease is now usually referred to as Munchausen syndrome.
It remains unclear how much of Raspe's material comes directly from the Baron, but the majority of the stories are derived from older sources, including Heinrich Bebel's ''Facetiæ'' (1508) and Samuel Gotthold Lange's ''Deliciæ Academicæ'' (1765).
In 2005, to mark the real-life Baron's 285th birthday, the National Bank of Latvia issued a commemorative silver coin.
Translations of the book into French, Spanish, and German were published in 1786.
London: C. and G. Kearsley, 1799
Bodenwerder sports a Munchausen monument in front of its Town Hall, as well a Munchausen museum including a large collection of illustrated editions of the stories.
Münchhausen's wife Jacobine von Dunten died in 1790.
By Baron Munchausen''
Pearl's popularity gradually declined between 1933 and 1937, though he attempted to revive the Baron character several times before ending his last radio series in 1951.
Doré, illustrating a Théophile Gautier ''fils'' translation in 1862, retained the sharply beaked nose and twirled moustache from the 1792 portrait, but gave the Baron a healthier and more affable appearance; the Doré Baron became the definitive visual representation for the character.
Grigori Gorin used the Baron as the hero of his 1976 play ''That Very Munchausen''; a film version was made in 1980.
The text reached the United States in 1805, expanded to include American topical satire by an anonymous Federalist writer, probably Thomas Green Fessenden.
Hieronymus Karl Friedrich von Münchhausen was born on 11 May 1720 in Bodenwerder, Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg.
The book in its various revised forms remained widely read throughout the nineteenth century, especially in editions for young readers.
As well as the many augmented and adapted editions of Raspe's text, the fictional Baron has occasionally appeared in other standalone works.
Containing singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures in Russia, the Caspian Sea, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, on the Atlantic Ocean and through the Centre of Mount Aetna, into the South Sea.
Considerably enlarged and ornamented with a variety of explanatory Views engraved from Original Designs''
In his native German language, Raspe wrote a collection of anecdotes inspired by Münchhausen's tales, calling the collection "M-h-s-nsche Geschichten" ("M-h-s-n Stories").
By May 1786, Raspe no longer had control over the book, which was taken over by a different publisher, G. Kearsley.
As the Munchausen researcher Bernhard Wiebel has said, "These two barons are the same and they are not the same."
Colonel Heeza Liar, the protagonist of the first animated cartoon series in cinema history, was created by John Randolph Bray in 1913 as an amalgamation of the Baron and Teddy Roosevelt.
According to witnesses, Münchhausen was deeply angry that the book had dragged his name into public consciousness and insulted his honor as a nobleman.
The film, a commentary on Soviet censorship and social mores, imagines an ostracized Baron attempting to prove the truth of his adventures in a disbelieving and conformity-driven world.
Kearsley's version was a marked popular success.
Over the next few years, the publishing house issued further editions in quick succession, adding still more non-Raspe material along the way; even the full-length ''Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen'', again not by Raspe and originally published in 1792 by a rival printer, was quickly subsumed into the body of stories.
Kearsley, intending the book for a higher-class audience than the original editions had been, commissioned extensive additions and revisions from other hands, including new stories, twelve new engravings, and much rewriting of Raspe's prose.
The name has spawned two other coinages: Munchausen syndrome by proxy, in which illness is feigned by caretakers rather than patients, and Munchausen by internet, in which illness is feigned online.
After hearing some of Münchhausen's stories, Raspe adapted them anonymously into literary form, first in German as ephemeral magazine pieces and then in English as the 1785 book, which was first published in Oxford by a bookseller named Smith.
Another Munchausen Museum (''Minhauzena Muzejs'') exists in Duntes Muiža, Latvia, home of the real Baron's first wife; the couple had lived in the town for six years, before moving back to the baronial estate in Hanover.
Aus dem Englischen nach der neuesten Ausgabe übersetzt, hier und da erweitert und mit noch mehr Küpfern gezieret.
It was translated into nearly all languages spoken in Europe; Robert Southey referred to it as "a book which everybody knows, because all boys read it".
''Gulliver Revived containing singular Travels, Campaigns, Voyages, and Adventures in Russia, Iceland, Turkey, Egypt, Gibraltar, up the Mediterranean, and on the Atlantic Ocean: Also an Account of a Voyage into the Moon, with many extraordinary Particulars relative to the Cooking Animal in that Planet, which are here called the Human Species, by Baron Munchausen.
Raspe published a sequel, "Noch zwei M-Lügen" ("Two more M-Fibs"), in the tenth issue of the same magazine in 1783.
Hugo Gernsback's second novel, ''Baron Münchhausen's New Scientific Adventures'', put the Baron character in a science fiction setting; the novel was serialized in ''The Electrical Experimenter'' from May 1915 to February 1917.
This ''Sequel'' was often printed alongside the Raspe text as "Volume Two of the Baron's Travels".
The Expressionist writer Walter Hasenclever turned the stories into a comedy, ''Münchhausen'', in 1934.
For the 1792 ''Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen'', an anonymous artist drew the Baron as a dignified but tired old soldier whose face is marred by injuries from his adventures; this illustration remained the standard portrait of the Baron for about seventy years, and its imagery was echoed in Cruikshank's depictions of the character.
London actually Göttingen: Johann Christian Dieterich, 1786
The earliest illustrations of the character, perhaps created by Raspe himself, depict Munchausen as slim and youthful, although later illustrators have depicted him as an older man, and have added the sharply beaked nose and twirled moustache that have become part of the character's definitive visual representation.
Same as previous German edition, plus a translation of the new material from the English Fifth Edition, greatly revised.
The Baron also provides a solid geographical and social context for his narratives, peppering them with topical allusions and satire about recent events; indeed, many of the references in Raspe's original text are to historical incidents in the real-life Münchhausen's military career.
Gottfried August Bürger's free translation of the English Second Edition, plus new material added by Bürger.
In a 2012 study of the Baron, the literary scholar Sarah Tindal Kareem noted that "Munchausen embodies, in his deadpan presentation of absurdities, the novelty of fictionality and the sophistication of aesthetic illusion", adding that the additions to Raspe's text made by Kearsley and others tend to mask these ironic literary qualities by emphasizing that the Baron is lying.
