As government investment increased in other Colombian cities, Barranquilla's national position was eclipsed.
Built in 1893 by the Barranquilla Railway & Pier Company under the direction of Cuban engineer Francisco Javier Cisneros, the pier in the neighboring municipality of Puerto Colombia was once one of the longest in the world.
Socio-economically, this was the most important area until the 80's, when the centre's deterioration led to the displacement of formal trade and banking to the north of the city.
Barranquilla is also known as ''La Arenosa'' (meaning ''The Sandy''), so named by the president of New Granada, Tomás Cipriano de Mosquera, during his stay in Barranquilla in 1849.
However, in 1908, Atlántico department was changed to the Department of Barranquilla by Act 1.
Through its headquarters in Barranquilla he also performs functions such as issuing passports and participation in projects like the revitalization of the historic center of Barranquilla by restoring the old buildings of the Interior, in order to launch a multipurpose cultural center in the Historic Center in January 2010 and other cultural restoration works.
This name was probably derived from an alteration of Aragon.
Estadio Tomás Arrieta
Museo Aeronáutico (Aeronautical Museum) is located at the Naval Officers' School ARC, founded in 1989 in tribute to the momentum that took place in Barranquilla with commercial aviation in the early twentieth century.
47.5% of the population is male and the remaining 52.5% female.
In June of the same year, "The Barranquillazo" coup was attempted by followers of General Ramón González Valencia against the General Jorge Holguín who was designated the rank of president of the republic after the resignation of the incumbent, General Reyes.
On October 10, 1821, the last royalist stronghold at Cartagena was defeated.
Occasionally trips are organized on river barges that depart from Las Flores to Bocas de Ceniza.
On January 12, 1919, amid great excitement in the Costa Caribe against Bogota, Barranquilla joined the League Costeña.
Calle 98 is an exclusive area located north of Barranquilla, the axis of the expansion of the city with new shopping centres, sports complexes and residential complexes.
After the death of Barros, the estate began to accommodate others, such as people who for reasons of health, age or cronyism with the hacienda owner were allowed to stay.
The route was opened on November 10, 1825.
Its importance was not appreciated until the mid-19th century, due to the introduction of steamships that navigated the Magdalena River by the German Juan Bernardo Elbers on behalf of Simón Bolívar at the founding of Gran Colombia in 1823.
In Barranquilla there are 4 SENA centres: the Centre for Trade and Services, Aviation and Industry, the Colombo-German National Centre and the Cedagro Centre for Agroecology Development and Agribusiness.
Plaza Mario Santo Domingo is an important public space that is part of the Caribbean Cultural Park and Plaza de la Locomotora, was built in 2002, as part of the Cultural Complex of the former Customs.
The city has a large number of temples of worship, demonstrating the city's multicultural nature with various architectural styles, beautifying the landscape and offering visitors exquisite interior.
The music and lyrics of  Himno de Barranquilla were chosen in competition by the Sociedad de Mejoras Públicas and officially adopted as the anthem of the city by the Municipal Council in a meeting on October 19, 1942.
Because of its importance in the sector of national economy, the municipality of Barranquilla passed to the category of Special Industrial District and Port in 1993.
On April 7, 1813, which was later celebrated as "Barranquilla Day" ("el Día de Barranquilla"), the President-Governor of the Free and Independent State of Cartagena de Indias, Manuel Rodríguez Torices, granted the title of "villa" to the town, thereby allowing it to benefit from certain privileges, and making it the capital of the department of Barlovento (or Tierradentro), in recognition for the valor and patriotism displayed by the town for its defense of the pro-independence city of Cartagena de Indias against the royalist stronghold of Santa Marta.
It grew into an important port, serving as a haven for immigrants from Europe, especially during and immediately following World War I and World War II, when waves of additional immigrants from the Middle East and Asia arrived.
The waterborne terminal is managed, operated and marketed by the private Sociedad Portuaria Regional de Barranquilla.
Barranquilla's name refers to the canyons that existed in the area adjacent to the Magdalena, where the city arose.
The infant mortality rate of 17.7 for every thousand children born is well below the national average (26).
Empresa de Desarrollo Urbano de Barranquilla – Edubar
Museo del Carnaval (Carnival Museum) is another new museum established pm April 7, 2011 by the Fundación Carnaval de Barranquilla in partnership with the Parque Cultural del Caribe and the Museo del Caribe, located in the Casa del Carnaval in the ''barrio'' of Abajo.
On February 11, the head of government, General Vicente Carlos Urueta, attacked an area defended by General Nicolás Jimeno Collante.
In the city a network of buses and minibuses routes are where fares vary depending on model (old) and amenities like air conditioning.
ln February 4, 1925, Scadta acquired the planes large enough to make the first international flights, which took place in August of that year between Barranquilla and Key West, Florida, with stops in Central America, Mexico and Cuba.
Science and research are mainly in the universities at the request of state policies defined by the National Science and Technology, the National Innovation System and Colciencias.
Barranquilla has a major sea and river port, third largest by cargo volume in the country.
It is the location of promising new developments in infrastructure and urban architectural projects of great importance in the city.
The municipality covers an area of 154&nbsp;km2, equivalent to 4.5% of the area of the Atlántico Department.
When the Spanish forces under Colonel Valentín Capmani approached Barranquilla, its inhabitants resisted Capmani but were defeated on April 25, 1815.
Other noteworthy buildings are the Hotel El Prado (Spanish late Baroque), the Faculty of Fine Arts at the  Universidad del Atlántico  and the Intendencia Fluvial.
The government aims to lower it to 15, and in children under five years from 20.7 to 18.
26.7% of the population of the city was born in another municipality and 0.4% in another country.
Barranquilla has always been famous for its chaotic urban planning, understandable given its spontaneous origin as a port and the reality of high administrative corruption which has hampered the channeling of resources for building an urban centre of greater structure and dimensions.
Museo de Arte Moderno  (Museum of Modern Art)., established in 1996, brings together an important selection of works by several of the most important artists of the second half of the twentieth century.
Other traditional dances are Congo, Mapalé, Son de Negro, Diablos, Gusano and Farotas.
The "la Bella" part was assigned by fellow journalist Roger Araújo as a counterweight to the word Curramba, which is seen as derogatory, derived from adjective "currambero".
Some of the notable public hospitals of the city are Hospital General de Barranquilla, Hospital Pediátrico de Barranquilla, Hospital Nazareth, Hospital La Manga, Hospital Universitario Metropolitano.
At the establishment of the United States of Colombia, the growing commercial importance of Barranquilla led to the construction, between 1869 and 1871, of the Bolívar Railway (''Ferrocarril de Bolívar''), the first railway of the present-day Republic of Colombia.
Several private companies provide taxi service in the city, which can be ordered by telephone for safety.
The original property area was .
On March 20, 1852, a law was passed by the Congress of New Granada that separated the province of Cartagena from the cantons of Barranquilla, Soledad, and Sabanalarga, which became part of the province of Sabanilla, with Barranquilla as the capital.
During evening and through the night, temperature can change due to the strong winds it receives.
Barranquilla became the capital of a province of the same name by law on December 26, 1862, and the Sovereign State of Bolívar was divided into 12 provinces.
Of these immigrants, the Arab and Jewish from the Midde East immigrants were prominent, referred to wrongly as "Turks" by the Colombian people.
Under economic dynamism, the city's business strength grew.
To help remedy this problem, several state enterprises and private sector have supported a project to convert liquid fuel vehicles to natural gas.
La Playa (Eduardo Santos) 2.
A major inflow of Jewish immigrants, as well as foreigners from Syria, Palestine, Lebanon, France, Germany, the United States, Italy, China and Japan, invigorated the industry and helped to make Barranquilla a modern city.
File:Barranquilla - Población por sexo.png|Gender proportion
The thinker Agustín Nieto Caballero called Barranquilla "Ciudad de los Brazos Abiertos" ("City of the Open Arms") and Enrique Ancízar, president of the Colombian Society of Agriculture, called it "Faro de América" ("Beacon/Lighthouse of America.
The city has 188 ''barrios'' or wards and approximately 7,611 blocks.
Barranquilla lies strategically next to the delta of the Magdalena River,  (originally  before rapid urban growth) from its mouth at the Caribbean Sea, serving as port for river and maritime transportation within Colombia.
With the growing expansion and demand for coal, the authorities are considering developing a Deep Water Port of Barranquilla,  "''Superpuerto''", as it is called locally, with an initial investment of $170 million.
Of particular note is Radio Libertad.
They proclaimed Colonel Ramón Antigüedad as their leader.
Despacho del Alcalde
The National Constituent Assembly of 1910 enacted Law 21 on July 14, which definitively established the Department of Barranquilla Atlántico again as capital.
A maximum one hour by road are several tourist attractions in the surrounding area.
Another type of crime in Barranquilla also showed a growth trend over the past two years is theft, commercial entities (713 in 2007, 630 in 2006, mainly in the north and centre), residences (528 in 2007, 467 in, 2006 mainly in the north), financial institutions (20 in 2006 21 in 2007 mainly in the north) and people (2,692 in 2007, 2,146 in 2006, mainly in centre, north and south).
Barranquilla was legally established as a town on April 7, 1813, although it dated from at least 1629.
Among the public libraries in the city include the Barranquilla Departmental Library, the Biblioteca Piloto del Caribe and Julio Hoenigsberg.
The City of Barranquilla is today under a new administration of Mayor Alejandro Char,who made a lot of changes in the whole metropolitan area,with the construction of Trans Millennium, modernizing the city and promoting the industry and commerce taken the city to have the lowest unemployment of the whole nation, Barranquilla has today only 5.6% unemployment,while the nation is over 12%.
Barranquilla became one of the 34 new departments, comprising the provinces of Barranquilla and Sabanalarga.
Barranquilla is the fourth biggest atmospheric polluter from industry.
Northwest of the department, bordering the Caribbean Sea, there are a number of resorts like Pradomar, Salgar, Sabanilla, Puerto Colombia, Santa Verónica, Caño Dulce, Playa Mendoza, Puerto Velero, Puerto Mocho, Cisne Lake, where visitors can enjoy a variety of water sports, camping, fishing and excursions.
The city is operating the emergency telephone system of the National Police, through the toll free number 112.
Some administrative and technical departments are responsible for advising the mayor, the control of urban and administrative aspects and the development of different urban projects.
The State National Training Service has an important work in the technical and technological training.
85.23% of homicides are by firearm; Barranquilla and Cali in 2007 recorded the highest percentage of homicides involving firearms in Colombia.
The governor of Atlántico from January 1, 2008, Eduardo Verano de la Rosa, also influences the management of the city.
The population of the town was attacked and taken prisoner by the royalist troops, which also defeated Vallejo’s pro-independence battalion.
It also provides services as a newspaper library, reading room and exhibition hall.
On September 7, 1909, a bill was passed by Congress recognizing the opening of Bocas de Ceniza as a national necessity.
It pays tribute to the composer Esthercita Forero, who has a statue and floor plates with the names of his songs.
In 1925, the first public companies based in the country were established in Barranquilla.
Barranquilla is the largest city and port in the northern Caribbean Coast region of Colombia, with a population of 2,370,753  in its metropolitan area, which makes it Colombia's fourth most populous city after Bogotá, Medellín and Cali.
Rapid urban growth, including the mass migration of peasants to the main cities, attracted by economic development, has led to the demand of numerous proposals to accommodate such growth.
The most important are Catedral María Reina, late-modern architecture;  Iglesia de San Nicolás de Tolentino, eclectic style; Iglesia San Roque de Montpellier Iglesia Inmaculada Concepción; Iglesia Nuestra Señora del Perpetuo Socorro; Iglesia de San José; Iglesia de Nuestra Señora del Carmen, Iglesia del Sagrado Corazón, Iglesia de Nuestra Señora del Rosario, Iglesia de Nuestra Señora de Chiquinquirá; Iglesia de Nuestra Señora de la Torcoroma, Iglesia de San Francisco, Iglesia de la Sagrada Familia, Iglesia Bautista Central, Capilla del Liceo de Cervantes, Iglesia Nuestra Señora de la Caridad del Cobre,   Bet-El Synagogue and many others.
Secretaría de Hacienda
The collection includes works by renowned authors such as  Fernando Botero, Alejandro Obregón, Enrique Grau and Luis Caballero.
The initial effect of the aqueduct that was built in 1929 was the arrival of piped water to 80% of the homes, while water supply coverage in Bogota was 59%, and decreasing to 57.3% in Medellín, 74.8%  in Cali, 21.4% in Cartagena, and 36.2% in Santa Marta.
In 1812, General Pierre Labatut attacked and defeated royalist forces at Sitioviejo and Sitionuevo.
Thousands of immigrants came into the country in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries at this port.
On May 2, 1854, Tomás Cipriano de Mosquera arrived at Barranquilla, and the inhabitants supported him in his fight against the revolutionary José María Melo in Bogotá.
; Contemporary architecture
Streets were named to the those that progress from east to west and starting at the Maritime Terminal and those moving from south to north, from Avenue Circunvalar, in the field of the Metropolitan Stadium.
Área Metropolitana de Barranquilla
Pedro Vasquez Buezo expanded the property to .
24.8% of rural homes were occupied in farming.
Other important musical rhythms are pulled, the jalao, puya, garabato, cumbión, chandé, porro, gaita, bullerengue, merecumbé, vallenato and pajarito.
In the 21st century, the city has been working on new projects to restore itself as the strategic capital within the country.
Citizen Support Network is made up of School Safety, Security Fronts, the Road Information Community Networks, the network of informants and collaborators and the Support Network and Communications.
These parks will have community services such as library, auditorium, computer rooms, sports facilities and classrooms.
Secretaría de Planeación
There were also Indians from Malambo and Galapa.
The Postmodern Movement appears briefly trying to enhance the historical styles left behind by the modern movement.
This is a period in which the system ''Unidad de Poder Adquisitivo Constante'' (|UPAC) resulted in the commercialization of architecture at the expense of spatial quality and aesthetics.
Barranquilla is located at latitude 10° 59 '16 "north of the Equator and longitude 74° 47' 20" west of Greenwich, with reference to the ''Plaza de la Paz'', ground zero of the city.
The city is located in the northeastern corner of the department of the Atlantic, on the west bank of the Magdalena River,  (originally  before rapid urban growth) from its mouth in the Caribbean.
It was at this time that the city became important for its booming business and its strategic geographic location, becoming the first port on a river of Colombia.
Barranquilla is located near the Caribbean Sea.
Departamento Técnico Administrativo del Medio Ambiente de Barranquilla – Damab
Norte-Centro Histórico 3.
File:Tipo de vivienda en Barranquilla - Angélica.png|Type of housing
The first flight of a Colombian airplane occurred in Barranquilla in December 1912, the plane being flown by the Canadian pilot George Schmitt.
It presents a comprehensive collection of pieces from the indigenous cultures that inhabited the region.
Museo Antropológico y Etnológico (Anthropological and Ethnological Museum.)
Barranquilla has a complete road layout, where the roads are twisted in a perpendicular way forming blocks.
One was led by Policarpo Martínez, Antonio Pantoja, Lorenzo Hernández, Crispín Luque, Esteban Márquez y Santos de la Hoz against the dictatorship of Rafael Urdaneta.
The presentation of a new infrastructure, changes in local and regional administration, decentralization since 1991, international pressure to open markets, and competition between the other major Colombian cities will bring about considerable development in Barranquilla into the 21st century.
Barranquilla also has an Olympic swimming pool (replica of Berlin's Olympic swimming pool), a shooting and skating rink, "Rafael Naranjo Pertuz" (1992) which has inside a roller hockey court, tennis courts, a BMX track, bowling alley, and sports centres in the neighborhoods Lipaya, La Magdalena and San Felipe, among others.
With the fall of General Reyes in 1909, the Department of Barranquilla was abolished by Act 65 of that year, with Barranquilla again integrating into the department of Bolivar.
The geological composition of the region is the Tertiary period (''Miocene and Pliocene'') in western hills and Quaternary (''Pleistocene and Holocene'') in the more flat, like the sole of river.
Terminal Metropolitana de Transportes de Barranquilla S.A.
The main source of air pollution is from the vehicles at 34% and then industry with 18%.
Despite having been declared a National Monument in 1998, no restoration work has ever been given.
In terms of hotels, the city has an adequate infrastructure.
It contains the sculpture "El Policía Amigo".
Carrera 53 lies in the exclusive neighborhood of El Country and Alto Prado, centered on Washington Park, where there are fine restaurants, bars and nightclubs.
The pollutants emitted by vehicles are carbon monoxide (89.12%), sulfur dioxide (0.23%), hydrocarbons (6.46%), oxides of nitrogen (3.82%) and other particles (0.
In 2011 it host the opening match of the U20 World Cup to be held in Colombia from July 29 to August 20.
It is an important site of mass social, political and cultural demonstrations.
Its importance lies in accessing the port of Barranquilla.
In 2015 Uber started offering rides in the city in the midst of a debated arrival of this new transportation mode in Colombia.
It was home of the XIV National Games in 1992, co-host of the Central American and Caribbean Games in 2006 and will be host the 23 edition of the Games in 2018; host of the 5th Central American and Caribbean Games in 1946, home of the Bolivarian Games IV in 1961 and hosted the games in Group A in the Copa América 2001.
In Barranquilla are the most important regional headquarters of many Colombian state entities, which are intended to develop programs and strategies defined by national guidelines.
Health in Colombia is governed by legislation (Act 100 of 1993) and is regulated by the Ministry of Social Protection.
To cover distance races over the minimum, the fee is negotiated directly with the driver and can reach up to COP 20,000 (USD $11.4) depending on the distance covered.
At that time, Cartagena was capital of the Sovereign State of Bolivar, to which Barranquilla belonged.
Some animal species can be found in the city such as birds like owls, wrens, and parrots; fish such as mullet in the marshes; insects such as butterflies, flies, mosquitoes, gnats, cockroaches and termites; mammals such as feral dogs and cats, monkeys, rodents and possums (zorrochuchos); reptiles such as iguanas, snakes and tortoises.
Barranquilla is home to many cultural events like art shows, exhibitions, literary workshops, talks philosophy, plays, poetry workshops, dances, exhibitions, concerts and festivals like the Festival de Orquestas under the Carnival and  ''Barranquijazz''.
Also represented is the Marimondas, the Monocucos and the Toritos and those associated with the famous  Carnaval de Barranquilla.
Most homicides are concentrated in the centre and south of the city.
There is an intense commercial activity at the public market.
It has over 500 animals of 140 species, from chickens to elephants or lions, to many different mammals, fish, birds, reptiles, amphibians and primates.
In the same year, Barranquilla was governed by its very first mayor, Agustín Del Valle, who carried out his duties from his own home, which later was converted in a military headquarters.
This architectural splendor is testament to the influence of the people arriving in the port for much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries from North America, Europe, the Middle East and Asia, many of whom settled in Barranquilla and imported architectural styles.
The north of Barranquilla, from 11° N, corresponded to a region "with good chances of rain water infiltration, " while the southern part appears as "low infiltration, poor soil and possible flooding from rain."
The current mayor Alejandro Char was elected on January 1, 2008 by popular vote.
The Canal Universitario Nacional Jerusalem TV (Channel LUZ) is also transmitted from Barranquilla.
Estadio de Baloncesto Elías Chegwin opened in 1992, with a capacity for 4,000 spectators.
In 2008 it was partially closed due to its progressive degradation.
One can find everything from residences to inns and 5 star national and international hotel chains.
Promotora del Desarrollo del Distrito Central de Barranquilla S.A. – Promocentro
Among the industrial products are vegetable fats and oils, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, industrial footwear, dairy products, meats, beverages, soap, building materials, furniture, plastics, cement, metalworking parts, garments clothing, buses and boats, and petroleum products.
9.2% for difficulty in finding a job, 13.3% for other reasons and 2% to avoid life-threatening situations.
Among the plazas of the city are ''Plaza de Bolívar'', located at the north end of the promenade of the same name which is the center of the city and the spearhead of restoration of the historic centre, rebuilt in 2003.
With the establishment of the new nation of the Republic of New Granada in 1831, two revolutions began in Barranquilla.
During the 19th century, an ''encomienda'' of captain Domingo de Santa Cruz was established, granted by the Spanish crown for his notable military performance.
It was the headquarters of the Colombia national football team during World Cup qualifiers for 1990, 1994, 1998 and 2006.
94.1% of the population 5 years and over are literate.
The farm was established on the banks of the river channel.
In 1811, the patriots who won the Independence of the Cartagenas adopted the current flag.
In 2007, three historic cannons that were used in the cause of independence were restored: the famous Cañón Verde, Boliche and Rebolo The first two were located in the corners of the south side of the Plaza de Bolívar and the last in the first floor of City Hall.
''Corregimientos'': 1.
On this estate, Barros allowed his workers to build their homes and support their families, which helped further develop his field operations.
Among the most important styles are neoclassical and art deco and interesting examples of neo-colonial architecture, modern, contemporary, eclectic, Mudejar, Spanish late Baroque, Mozarabic and Netherlands Antilles style Caribbean architecture.
Universidad del Norte offers a significant number of master's degrees in various branches of learning such as engineering, health sciences, education, environment, and administration.
On January 25, 1861, General Juan José Nieto Gil, president of the State of Bolívar, launched a rebellion from Barranquilla.
The population density is 6918.71 inhabitants per square kilometre.
Central administration
The maximum noise allowed is 64 decibels for residential areas, and 70 to 75 for commercial and industrial areas.
As for the judiciary branch, the Judicial District of Barranquilla is formed by the Superior Court of the Judicial District of Barranquilla, the Judicial Circle of Barranquilla, the Judicial Circle of Soledad and the Judicial Circle of Sabanalarga.
Barranquilla is a major industrial centre and its economic activity is dynamic, concentrated mainly in industry, commerce, finance, services and fishing.
Legislative Act 01 of 1993 established that the district of Barranquilla also includes the neighborhood Las Flores, the village of La Playa (formerly belonging to the municipality of Puerto Colombia), and the western breakwater of Bocas de Ceniza in the Magdalena River Swamp area of Mallorquín/ The local authority also includes the village of Juan Mina
Ernesto Cortissoz International Airport, built in Barranquilla in 1919, was the first airport in South America.
Their prominent presence in the community known as "cosmopolitan bourgeoisie" as social and political elites, which has enabled them to diversify their activities.
The second was led by General Ignacio Luque, who had crushed the first revolution.
In Barranquilla, in 2007 there were 348 homicides compared to 391 in 2006, a decrease of 11% over the previous year.
Politically, Barranquilla is limited to the east by the department of Magdalena (''in between the Magdalena River''), north to the town of Puerto Colombia and the Caribbean Sea, west with the municipalities of Puerto Colombia, Galapa and Tubará and south with the municipality of Soledad.
The Court is formed by the Civil-Family Chamber (six judges), the Laboral Chamber (five judges) and the Penal Chamber (three judges).
However, the Kamash Indians were known to occupy the area and the settlement itself was established in about 1629.
The lush vegetation and clear water springs have allowed a suitable habitat for rare native plant and animal species found within the city.
Since 2008, the city has embarked upon an ambitious plan to reduce the deficit in school places by building educational parks in the neighborhoods of Las Américas, Lipaya, 7 de abril and Rebolo through property integration.
They had two canoes full of dried shrimp as merchandise and went to the Magdalena River to trade with this commodity, salt and other things.
In addition to the National Police, the Fire Department, Civil Defense and Red Cross assist in the maintenance of public safety.
The Estadio Romelio Martínez stadium was recognized in 1995 as a national monument by the Ministry of Culture, the first Art Deco building in Barranquilla to obtain this declaration.
In 1920, archaeologists revealed that Barranquilla is located on a vast historic necropolis.
Museo Romántico (Romantic Museum) is located in a Republican mansion inEl Prado district, showing objects from the history of the city.
In the early twentieth century it was located at the north end of Columbus statue, so it was called Paseo de Colón.
In Barranquilla, the Governor is responsible in entities such as the  Universidad del Atlántico, Atlantic University, the Library Department and the Regional Autonomous Corporation of the Atlántico, involving environmental management.
; Religious buildings
Furthermore, the city has installed more than 12 service stations catering to natural gas vehicles.
The Centro histórico of Barranquilla is a nationally protected site by the Ministry of Culture through resolution 1614 of 1999.
Nevertheless, the home location of the Kamash indios (hispanized to ''Camacho'' or ''Camach'') is known as the first permanent human settlement of Barranquilla.
Most households simultaneously have 2 or 3 types of activities to make a living.
Puerto Colombia became one of the longest piers in the world and the principal port of Colombia, nicknamed the "Golden Gate of Colombia".
Other sources say the slopes accidental heights of up to 120 meters outside the city.
Costumes can be seen from the Carnival Queens to a replica of the old Abello ridge on the Paseo de Bolívar, through to the typewriter that  Gabriel García Márquez wrote his first novel on, ''La Hojarasca''.
It was built for the 2001 Copa América.
The culture is promoted in the city by the Institute of Culture and Tourism of Barranquilla, assigned to the Mayor, and entities such as the Centro Cultural Cayena of the Universidad del Norte, the Faculty of Fine Arts at the Universidad del Atlántico, Centro Cultural de Comfamiliar, Combarranquilla, Fundación Carnaval de Barranquilla, Banco de la República, Alianza Colombo-Francesa, Centro Cultural Colombo-Americano, Salón Cultural de Avianca, Corporación Luis Eduardo Nieto Arteta,  Complejo Cultural de la Antigua Aduana, Biblioteca Piloto del Caribe, lBiblioteca Infantil Piloto del Caribe, File Histórico del Atlántico and the Centro de Documentación Musical Hans Federico Neuman; among many others.
