there were 96,640 apartments in the municipality.
Natural History Museum of Basel and the Museum of Cultures Basel, Museum of Modern Art Basel with the E. Hoffmann collection, Museum Jean Tinguely Basel, Music Museum, Pharmacy Historical Museum of the University of Basel, Poster Collection of the School for Design (''Schule für Gestaltung''), Swiss Business Archives, Sculpture Hall, Sports Museum of Switzerland, Archives of the Canton of Basel-Stadt, UBS AG Corporate Archives, University Library with manuscripts and music collection, Zoological Garden (''Zoologischer Garten'').
Economics, Social Services, and Environment (''Departement für Wirtschaft, Soziales und Umwelt (WSD)'', 2009)
Basel features a large football stadium that has been awarded four stars by UEFA, a modern ice hockey hall, and an admitted sports hall.
In 2010 already 51.1% of all pupils spoke another language than German as their first language.
On 16 November 1938, the psychedelic drug LSD was first synthesized by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann at Sandoz Laboratories in Basel.
*Kunstmuseum Basel Upper Rhenish and Flemish paintings, drawings from 1400 to 1600 and 19th- to 21st-century art
At the same time the new craft of printing was introduced to Basel by apprentices of Johann Gutenberg.
*Foundation Fernet Branca () in Saint-Louis, Haut-Rhin near Basel.
Basel has often been the site of peace negotiations and other international meetings.
Under bishop Haito, the first cathedral was built on the site of the Roman castle, later replaced by a Romanesque structure consecrated in 1019.
The political structure and agencies of the city and the canton are identical.
, there were 18 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 9 businesses involved in this sector.
The greatest number of single family homes (3,474) were built between 1919 and 1945.
Basel is located at the meeting point of France, Germany and Switzerland; because it is so near other countries and is beyond the Jura Mountains, many within the Swiss military reportedly believe that the city is indefensible during wartime.
The championships were jointly hosted by Switzerland and Austria.
Basel was incorporated into Germania Superior in AD 83.
The average rate for a one-room apartment was 602.27 CHF (US$480, £270, €390), a two-room apartment was about 846.52 CHF (US$680, £380, €540), a three-room apartment was about 1054.14 CHF (US$840, £470, €670) and a six or more room apartment cost an average of 2185.24 CHF (US$1750, £980, €1400).
The average amount of study in primary school in Basel is 816 teaching hours per year.
**Hiltalingerstrasse (Zollstraße, Weil am Rhein).
The last election was held on 28 October 2012 for the mandate period (''Legislatur'') of 2013–2017.
The local TV Station is called ''telebasel''.
Through its history, Zoo Basel has had several breeding successes, such as the first worldwide Indian rhinoceros birth and Greater flamingo hatch in a zoo.
The wettest month is May during which time Basel receives an average of  of rain.
, there were 70,502 people who were single and never married in the municipality.
Construction and Transportation (''Bau- und Verkehrsdepartement (BVD)'', 2009)
'''Germany-Switzerland''' (clockwise, from north to south)
*Botanical Garden Basel  One of the oldest botanical gardens in the world
*Schaulager Modern and contemporary art museum
The Peace of Basel in 1795 between the French Republic and Prussia and Spain ended the First Coalition against France during the French Revolutionary Wars.
*Pharmazie-Historisches Museum der Universität Basel
Because of the Balkan Wars, the Second International held an extraordinary congress at Basel in 1912.
*Museum of Cultures Basel () Large collections on European and non-Europeancultural life
Of the single family homes 1090 were built before 1919, while 65 were built between 1990 and 2000.
Since the late 1980s, various private collections have been made accessible to the public in new purpose-built structures that have been recognized as acclaimed examples of avant-garde museum architecture.
The new highspeed ICE railway line from Karlsruhe to Basel was completed in 2008 while phase I of the TGV Rhin-Rhône line, opened in December 2011, has reduced travel time from Basel to Paris to about 3 hours.
34,645 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 1,176 businesses in this sector.
Basel hosts Switzerland's oldest university, the University of Basel, dating from 1460.
While football and ice hockey are by far the most popular team sports, basketball has a small but faithful fan base, with strongholds around Lake Geneva, Fribourg, and the Ticino region.
Of the population in the municipality 58,560 or about 35.2% were born in Basel and lived there in 2000.
The Treaty of Basel (1499) ended the Swabian War.
There were 7,642 multi-family buildings (41.0%), along with 4,093 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (22.0%) and 1,149 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (6.2%).
The first edition of ''Christianae religionis institutio'' (''Institutes of the Christian Religion'' – John Calvin's great exposition of Calvinist doctrine) was published at Basel in March 1536.
the average number of residents per living room was 0.59 which is about equal to the cantonal average of 0.58 per room.
An independent, neutral country, Switzerland offered the BIS less exposure to undue influence from any of the major powers.
*Museum of Contemporary Art Art from the 1960s up to the present
**Grenzacherstrasse (Hörnle, Grenzach-Wyhlen)
**Kohlenstrasse (Avenue de Bâle, Huningue).
The bank enjoys immunity from criminal and administrative jurisdiction, as well as setting recommendations which become standard for the world's commercial banking system.
**Elsässerstrasse (Avenue de Bâle, Saint-Louis)
In 1529, the city became Protestant under Oecolampadius and the bishop's seat was moved to Porrentruy.
From this time, Basel has been an Alemannic settlement.
*Caricature & Cartoon Museum Basel ()
Constituting an essential component of Basel culture and cultural policy, the museums are the result of closely interwoven private and public collecting activities and promotion of arts and culture going back to the 16th century.
The Swiss chemical industry operates largely from Basel, and Basel also has a large pharmaceutical industry.
EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg is operated jointly by two countries, France and Switzerland, although the airport is located completely on French soil.
Additionally the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute is located in Basel too.
*Beyeler Foundation (Foundation Beyeler)  Beyeler Museum (Fondation Beyeler)
Established in 1874, Zoo Basel is the oldest zoo in Switzerland and, by number of animals, the largest.
The Basel Regional S-Bahn, the commuter rail network connecting to suburbs surrounding the city, is jointly operated by SBB, SNCF and DB.
Currently, the Grand Council consist of 33 members of the Social Democratic Party (SP), 15 members of the Swiss People's Party (SVP), 13 ''Grünes Bündnis (GB)'' (a collaboration of the Green Party (GPS) and Basels starke Alternative (BastA!
After three years of political agitation and a short civil war in 1833 the disadvantaged countryside seceded from the Canton of Basel, forming the half canton of Basel-Landschaft.
*Augusta Raurica Roman open-air museum
*'''Road crossings''' (with German road name continuation)
A memorial to Erasmus lies inside the Münster.
*Jewish Museum of Switzerland
The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0.74%.
A hot dry rock geothermal energy project was cancelled in 2009 since it caused induced seismicity in Basel.
Justice and Security (''Justiz- und Sicherheitsdepartement (JSD)'', 2013)
*Tinguely Museum Life and work of the major Swiss iron sculptor Jean Tinguely
The bridge was largely funded by Basel's Jewish community which had settled there a century earlier.
Of the agricultural land, 2.5% is used for growing crops and 1.3% is pastures.
*Swiss Architecture Museum ()
, Basel had an unemployment rate of 4.6%.
These and other achievements led Forbes Travel to rank Zoo Basel as one of the fifteen best zoos in the world in 2008.
Basel has a reputation in Switzerland as a successful sporting city.
The average apartment price in Basel was 100.2% of the national average of 1116 CHF.
However, Switzerland did not join the European Union Customs Union (though it did join the EU Single Market) and customs checks are still conducted at or near the crossings.
Most of the population () speaks German (129,592 or 77.8%), with Italian being second most common (9,049 or 5.4%) and French being third (4,280 or 2.6%).
The few survivors - young orphans - were forcibly converted to Christianity.
The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 33,171 of which 24,848 or (74.9%) were in manufacturing, 10 were in mining and 7,313 (22.0%) were in construction.
Councilor (''Regierungsrat/ -rätin'')
Erasmus, Paracelsus, Daniel Bernoulli, Leonhard Euler, Jacob Burckhardt, Friedrich Nietzsche, Tadeusz Reichstein, Karl Jaspers, Carl Gustav Jung and Karl Barth worked here.
In Roman Gaul,  Augusta Raurica was established some 20&nbsp;km from Basel as the regional administrative centre, and a castle was built on the site of the oppidum.
Eventually about 15 guilds were established in the 13th century.
BSC Old Boys and Concordia Basel are the other football teams in Basel.
Basel has an area, , of .
During the Basel massacre, 600 Jews were murdered.
Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 834 while the foreign population increased by 446.
They increased the town's, and hence the bishop's, reputation, influence, and income from the taxes and duties on goods in Basel's expanding market.
Three railway stations — those of the German, French and Swiss networks — lie within the city (although the Swiss (Basel SBB) and French (Bâle SNCF) stations are actually in the same complex, separated by Customs and Immigration facilities).
In 2006 6162 students studied at one of the nine academies of the FHNW (51% female).
The bank exercises supervision and police power over its premises.
The city received the Wakker Prize in 1996.
A large indoor tennis event takes place in Basel every October.
Among others the Universitätsspital Basel as well as the Universitätskinderspital Basel.
:According to the BIS, "The choice of Switzerland for the seat of the BIS was a compromise by those countries that established the BIS: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The Starwings Basel are the only first division basketball team in German-speaking Switzerland.
The city offered courts to nobles as an alternative to rebuilding their castles, in exchange for the nobles' military protection of the city.
Of the working population, 49.2% used public transportation to get to work, and 18.7% used a private car.
Trading firms are traditionally well represented in the Basel Region.
The Schola Cantorum and the Basler Kammerorchester were both founded by the conductor Paul Sacher who went on to commission works by many leading composers.
Swiss International Air Lines, the national airline of Switzerland, is headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg in Saint-Louis, Haut-Rhin, France, near Basel.
the average price to rent an average apartment in Basel was 1118.60 Swiss francs (CHF) per month (US$890, £500, €720 approx.
:Created in May 1930, the BIS is owned by its member central banks, which are private entities.
The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 97,804.
**Lörracherstrasse, Riehen (Baslerstraße, Stetten, Lörrach)
They are elected by any inhabitant valid to vote on the same day as the parliament and operates as a collegiate authority.
The airport itself is split into two architecturally independent sectors, one half serving the French side and the other half serving the Swiss side; prior to Schengen there was an immigration inspection point at the middle of the airport so that people could "emigrate" to the other side of the airport.
Basel is home to the largest orchestra in Switzerland, the Sinfonieorchester Basel.
Despite its international fame, Basel's population remains attached to Zoo Basel, which is entirely surrounded by the city of Basel.
, Basel's Executive Council is made up of three representatives of the SP (Social Democratic Party), and one member each of Green Party (who is the president), FDP (Free Democratic Party), LDP (Liberal-Demokratische Partei of Basel), and CVP (Christian Democratic Party), giving the left parties a combined four out of seven seats.
These include the Beyeler Foundation by Renzo Piano, or the Vitra complex in nearby Weil am Rhein, composed of buildings by architects such as Zaha Hadid (fire station), Frank Gehry (Design Museum), Álvaro Siza Vieira (factory building) and Tadao Ando (conference centre).
exchange rate from 2003).
In  there were 898 live births to Swiss citizens and 621 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 1,732 deaths of Swiss citizens and 175 non-Swiss citizen deaths.
She has been a member of it since 2003.
As in most European countries, and contrary to the U.S., we have a club-based rather than a school-based competition system.
The yellow-colored buses and trams are operated by the Baselland Transport (BLT), and connect areas in the nearby half-canton of Baselland to central Basel.
Basel has also Switzerland's third tallest building (Basler Messeturm, ) and Switzerland's tallest tower (St. Chrischona TV tower, .
**Autobahn A3 (A35 autoroute, Saint-Louis)
Basel German  belongs to the Low Alemannic group, linking it with Alsatian and Swabian dialects more closely than with the other
In 2010 65% of the youth finished their upper secondary education with a vocational training and education, 18% finished their upper secondary education with a Federal Matura at one of the five gymnasiums, 5% completed a ''Fachmaturität'' at the ''FMS'', 5% completed a ''Berufsmaturität'' synchronosly to their vocational training, and 7% other kind of upper secondary maturity.
The annual Basel Rhine Swim draws several thousand visitors to the city to swim in or float on the Rhine river.
At the same time, there were 1756 non-Swiss men and 1655 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland.
In May 2004, the fifth European Festival of Youth Choirs (Europäisches Jugendchorfestival, or EJCF) choir festival opened: this Basel tradition started in 1992.
Any resident of Basel allowed to vote can be elected as a member of the parliament.
The name of Basel is derived from the Roman-era toponym ''Basilia'', first recorded in the 3rd century.
Some of the best ATP-Professionals play every year at the Swiss Indoors, including Switzerland's biggest sporting hero and frequent participant Roger Federer, a Basel native who describes the city as "one of the most beautiful cities in the world".
Each is attached by a cable to a block that rides along another cable spanning the river at a height of 20 or 30 metres.
Basel is also host to an array of buildings by internationally renowned architects.
The Old French form ''Basle'' was adopted into English, and developed into the modern French ''Bâle''.
About 10.5% of the total households were owner occupied, or in other words did not pay rent (though they may have a mortgage or a rent-to-own agreement).
The unfortified settlement was abandoned in the 1st century BC in favour of an Oppidum on the site of Basel Minster, probably in reaction to the   Roman invasion of Gaul.
Pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals have become the modern focus of the city's industrial production.
, the construction rate of new housing units was 2.6 new units per 1000 residents.
The municipality is a net importer of workers, with about 6.3 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving.
As the biggest town in the Northwest of Switzerland numerous public and private health centres are located in Basel.
, there were 86,371 private households in the municipality, and an average of 1.8 persons per household.
''Basler Zeitung'' ("BaZ"), ''TagesWoche'' and ''bz Basel'' are the local newspapers.
Prior to the formation of Swiss International Air Lines, the regional airline Crossair was headquartered near Basel.
It has the oldest university of the Swiss Confederation (1460).
The football club FC Basel continues to be successful and in recognition of this the city was one of the Swiss venues for the 2008 European Championships, as well as Geneva, Zürich and Bern.
There were 11,957 single room apartments and 9,702 apartments with five or more rooms.
In 2007, the ETH Zürich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zürich) established the Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering (D-BSSE) in Basel.
Basel has a population () of .
There were 746 individuals who were Buddhist, 947 individuals who were Hindu and 485 individuals who belonged to another church.
Health (''Gesundheitsdepartement (GD)'', June 2014)
**Freiburgerstrasse (Baslerstraße, Weil am Rhein)
In 1543, ''De humani corporis fabrica'', the first book on human anatomy, was published and printed in Basel by Andreas Vesalius (1514–1564).
14.1% of all students at public gymnasiums were foreign nationals.
Host of this festival is the local Basel Boys Choir.
52,321 (or about 31.41% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 8,780 individuals (or about 5.27% of the population) did not answer the question.
Unlike the member of the Executive Council, the members of the Grand Council are not politicians by profession, but they are paid a fee based on their attendance.
Of these apartments, a total of 84,675 apartments (87.6% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 7,916 apartments (8.2%) were seasonally occupied and 4,049 apartments (4.2%) were empty.
Johann Froben also operated his printing house in Basel and was notable for publishing works by Erasmus.
There were 1,396 or 0.8% who were born in the same canton, while 44,874 or 26.9% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 53,774 or 32.3% were born outside of Switzerland.
In 2009 3.1% of the pupils visited special classes for pupils with particular needs.
Immigration and customs checks are conducted at the platform exit tunnel for passengers leaving trains here.
In 1500 the construction of the Basel Münster was finished.
It was the only canton that had been asked to join, not the other way round.
, there were 5,820 students in Basel who came from another municipality, while 1,116 residents attended schools outside the municipality.
Tram 8 goes along this road to Weil am Rhein.
A provision of the Charter accepting Basel required that in conflicts among the other cantons it was to stay neutral and offer its services for mediation.
The Schwabe publishing house was founded in 1488 by Johannes Petri and is the oldest publishing house still in business.
Others are even located in France and Germany.
Basel is Switzerland's third-most-populous city (behind Zürich and Geneva) with about 195,000 inhabitants.
*Monteverdi Automuseum
The top division, called NLA, is a semi-professional league and has one team from the Basel region, the "Birstal Starwings".
About 23.9% of the workforce coming into Basel are coming from outside Switzerland, while 1.0% of the locals commute out of Switzerland for work.
Basel has Switzerland's only cargo port, through which goods pass along the navigable stretches of the Rhine and connect to ocean-going ships at the port of Rotterdam.
In 1897 the first World Zionist Congress was held in Basel.
As a city with a percentage of foreigners of more than thirty percent and as one of the most important  centres in the chemical and pharmaceutical field in the world, Basel counts several International Schools including: ''Academia International School'', ''École Française de Bâle'', ''Freies Gymnasium Basel'' (private), ''Gymnasium am Münsterplatz'' (public), ''Schweizerisch-italienische Primarschule Sandro Pertini'', and ''Swiss International School (Basel)''.
There are 202 people who speak Romansh.
The public museum collection was first created back in 1661 and represents the oldest public collection in continuous existence.
With Switzerland joining the Schengen Area on 12 December 2008, immigration checks were no longer carried out at the crossings.
*Music Museum () of the Basel Historic Museum
Finance (''Finanzdepartement (FD)'', 2005)
The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 278 and the non-Swiss population increased by 1138 people.
The carnival is the biggest in Switzerland and attracts large crowds every year, despite the fact that it starts at exactly four in the morning (''Morgestraich'') on a winter Monday.
*Kunsthalle Basel Modern and contemporary art museum
There are four ferries, each situated approximately midway between two bridges.
The Bishop also allowed the furriers to found a guild in 1226.
Dr. Christoph Eymann
On 3 July 1874, Switzerland's first zoo (the Zoo Basel) opened its doors in the south of the city towards Binningen.
The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 35,958.
Altogether the World Zionist Congress took place in Basel for ten times, more than in any other city in the world.
An annual Federal Swiss trade fair (Mustermesse) takes place in Kleinbasel on the right bank of the Rhine.
One of the most important fairs for contemporary art worldwide is the Art Basel which was founded in 1970 by Ernst Beyeler and takes place in June each year.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Basel features an Oceanic climate.
Barbara Schüpbach-Guggenbühlis is State Chronicler (''Staatsschreiberin'') since 2009, and Marco Greiner is Head of Communication (''Regierungssprecher'') and Vice State Chronicler (''Vizestaatsschreiber'') since 2007 for the Executive Council.
The Icelandic name ''Buslaraborg'' goes back to the 12th century ''Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan''.
In the tertiary sector; 12,880 or 13.2% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 11,959 or 12.2% were in the movement and storage of goods, 6,120 or 6.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, 4,186 or 4.3% were in the information industry, 10,752 or 11.0% were the insurance or financial industry, 13,695 or 14.0% were technical professionals or scientists, 6,983 or 7.1% were in education and 16,060 or 16.4% were in health care.
There were 82,449 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 46.2% of the workforce.
In 2014, the Basel agglomeration was the third largest in Switzerland with a population of 537,100 in 74 municipalities in Switzerland and an additional 53 in neighboring countries (municipal count as of 2000).
In 1495, Basel was incorporated in the Upper Rhenish Imperial Circle; the Bishop of Basel was added to the Bench of the Ecclesiastical Princes.
Private health centres include the Bethesda Spital and the Merian Iselin Klinik.
Within Switzerland, Basel was chosen largely because of its location, with excellent railway connections in all directions, especially important at a time when most international travel was by train."
Out of a total of 88,646 households that answered this question, 50.2% were households made up of just one person and there were 451 adults who lived with their parents.
The carnival of the city of Basel (''Basler Fasnacht'') is a major cultural event in the year.
On 18 October 2015, in the federal election State Councilor () Anita Fetz, member of the Social Democratic Party   (SP), was re-elected in the first round as single representative of the canton of Basel-Stadt in the national Council of States (German: ''Ständerat'') with an absolute majority of 35'842 votes.
