* The bat is a hitting tool, traditionally made of a single, solid piece of wood.
In general, the strict rules of baseball contracts and the reserve clause, which bound players to their teams even when their contracts had ended, tended to keep the players in check.
On the playing field, major league pitchers were becoming increasingly dominant again.
The manager will sometimes signal a batter who is ahead in the count (i.e., has more balls than strikes) to take, or not swing at, the next pitch.
Thus a foul fly ball may be entirely out of play in a park with little space between the foul lines and the stands, but a foulout in a park with more expansive foul ground.
While football and soccer players deal with similar variations of field surface and stadium covering, the size and shape of their fields are much more standardized.
The hit and run is sometimes employed with a skillful contact hitter: the runner takes off with the pitch drawing the shortstop or second baseman over to second base, creating a gap in the infield for the batter to poke the ball through.
* two backup outfielders
The Irish Catholics dominated in the late 19th century, comprising a third or more of the players and many of the top stars and managers.
The tournaments are known, respectively, as Spring Koshien and Summer Koshien after the 55,000-capacity stadium where they are played.
Attendance at games held under the Minor League Baseball umbrella also set a record in 2007, with 42.8 million; this figure does not include attendance at games of the several independent minor leagues.
Pitchers have different repertoires of pitches they are skillful at throwing.
There are no rules at all that address the height of fences or other structures at the edge of the outfield.
Roster, or squad, sizes differ between different leagues and different levels of organized play.
* Slugging percentage measures a batter's ability to hit for power.
In 1905, the Giants were National League champions again and team management relented, leading to the establishment of the World Series as the major leagues' annual championship event.
With the rise in popularity of other team sports with much higher average ticket prices—football, basketball, and hockey—professional baseball had become among the most blue-collar-oriented of leading American spectator sports.
The World Series, pitting the two major league champions against each other, was inaugurated that fall, albeit without express major league sanction: The Boston Americans of the American League defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates of the National League.
Strict new regulations governing the ball's size, shape and composition along with a new rule officially banning the spitball, along with other pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign substances after the death of Ray Chapman who was hit by a pitch in August 1920, coupled with superior materials available after World War I, resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit.
The tactical decision that precedes almost every play in a baseball game involves pitch selection.
By 1796, a version of the game was well-known enough to earn a mention in a German scholar's book on popular pastimes.
Each play is discrete and has a relatively small number of possible outcomes.
A game is played between two teams, each composed of nine players, that take turns playing offense (batting and baserunning) and defense (pitching and fielding).
A neutral umpire sets up behind the catcher.
Dozens of English-language idioms have been derived from baseball; in particular, the game is the source of a number of widely used sexual euphemisms.
The basic batting statistics include:
* On-base percentage measures a batter's ability to get on base.
Block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually regional variants of each other, and that the game's most direct antecedents are the English games of stoolball and "tut-ball."
This is the most desirable result for the batter.
The first crack in the unwritten agreement barring blacks from white-controlled professional ball occurred the previous year: Jackie Robinson was signed by the National League's Brooklyn Dodgers—where Branch Rickey had become general manager—and began playing for their minor league team in Montreal.
Baseball cards were introduced in the late 19th century as trade cards.
If a ball hit into play rolls foul before passing through the infield, it becomes dead and any runners must return to the base they were at when the play began.
Baseball's literary canon also includes the beat reportage of Damon Runyon; the columns of Grantland Rice, Red Smith, Dick Young, and Peter Gammons; and the essays of Roger Angell.
By the mid-1880s these young Irish men dominated the sport and popularized a style of play that was termed heady, daring, and spontaneous.... Ed Delahanty personified the flamboyant, exciting spectator-favorite, the Casey-at-the-bat, Irish slugger.
David Block discovered that the first recorded game of "Bass-Ball" took place in 1749 in Surrey, and featured the Prince of Wales as a player.
The basic outfield positions are left fielder, center fielder, and right fielder.
It is impossible to isolate and objectively assess the contribution each football team member makes to the outcome of the play&nbsp;... Every basketball player is interacting with all of his teammates all the time.
Managers are typically assisted by two or more coaches; they may have specialized responsibilities, such as working with players on hitting, fielding, pitching, or strength and conditioning.
A runner on first base ''must'' attempt to advance if a ball lands in play.
There are three basic tools of baseball: the ball, the bat, and the glove or mitt:
While their identities were maintained for scheduling purposes (and the designated hitter distinction), the regulations and other functions—such as player discipline and umpire supervision—they had administered separately were consolidated under the rubric of Major League Baseball (MLB).
Thus, even with the DH, each team still has a batting order of nine players and a fielding arrangement of nine players.
Baseball offers no such reward for conservative batting.
The evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace with precision.
It is calculated exactly as its name suggests.
By 1856, local journals were referring to baseball as the "national pastime" or "national game."
The catcher catches pitches that the batter does not hit—as a result of either electing not to swing or failing to connect—and returns them to the pitcher.
Professional Negro leagues formed, but quickly folded.
A batter with this sort of incomplete plate appearance starts off the team's next turn batting; any balls or strikes recorded against the batter the previous inning are erased.
The 90-degree area within the foul lines is referred to as fair territory; the 270-degree area outside them is foul territory.
In the Western Hemisphere, baseball is also one of the leading sports in Canada, Colombia, Mexico, the Netherlands Antilles, Nicaragua, Panama, and Venezuela.
As described by Johann Gutsmuths, "''englische Base-ball''" involved a contest between two teams, in which "the batter has three attempts to hit the ball while at the home plate."
Six decades later, ''Time'' named it the best comedy routine of the 20th century.
In 1977, the expansion Toronto Blue Jays joined the American League.
When three outs are recorded, the teams switch roles for the next half-inning.
Modern fantasy sports began in 1980 with the invention of Rotisserie League Baseball by New York writer Daniel Okrent and several friends.
The first known American reference to baseball appears in a 1791 Pittsfield, Massachusetts, town bylaw prohibiting the playing of the game near the town's new meeting house.
Participants in a Rotisserie league draft notional teams from the list of active Major League Baseball players and play out an entire imaginary season with game outcomes based on the players' latest real-world statistics.
* Assists: times a putout by another fielder was recorded following the fielder touching the ball
The Baseball World Cup was discontinued after its 2011 edition in favor of an expanded World Baseball Classic.
* The flyout: as described above, recorded against a batter who hits a ball in the air that is caught by a fielder, whether in fair territory or foul territory, before it lands, whether or not the batter has run.
Major League Baseball teams maintain 25-player active rosters.
While the image to the left shows a traditional field surfacing arrangement (and the one used by virtually all MLB teams with naturally surfaced fields), teams are free to decide what areas will be grassed or bare.
A strike is called when one of the following happens:
Four years later, it barred participation by African Americans.
* Wins: credited to pitcher on winning team who last pitched before the team took a lead that it never relinquished (a starting pitcher must pitch at least five innings to qualify for a win)
* Fielding average: successful chances (putouts plus assists) divided by total chances
Among the various ways a member of the batting team may be put out, five are most common:
For example, hitting a fly ball  into right field might result in an easy catch on the warning track at one park, and a home run at another.
Its high altitude— above sea level—is responsible for giving it the strongest hitter's park effect in the major leagues.
* Home runs: hits on which the batter successfully touched all four bases, without the contribution of a fielding error
There is no statistical equivalent in cricket for the fielding error and thus less emphasis on personal responsibility in this area of play.
In 1845, Alexander Cartwright, a member of New York City's Knickerbocker Club, led the codification of the so-called Knickerbocker Rules.
In 2007, Bonds became MLB's all-time home run leader, surpassing Hank Aaron, as total major league and minor league attendance both reached all-time highs.
In 1977, two more expansion teams joined the American League.
The club with which Ruth set most of his slugging records, the New York Yankees, built a reputation as the majors' premier team.
These variations can make the difference between a double and a triple or inside-the-park home run.
During the major leagues' early decades, players on various teams occasionally attempted strikes, which routinely failed when their jobs were sufficiently threatened.
Any runners already on base may attempt to advance on batted balls that land, or contact the ground, in fair territory, before or after the ball lands.
These physical variations create a distinctive set of playing conditions at each ballpark.
A runner may circle the bases only once per plate appearance and thus can score at most a single run per batting turn.
Compared with the present, professional baseball in the early 20th century was lower-scoring and pitchers, the likes of Walter Johnson and Christy Mathewson, were more dominant.
Today, high school baseball in particular is immensely popular there.
The batting order is set before the game begins, and may not be altered except for substitutions.
The once widely accepted story that Abner Doubleday invented baseball in Cooperstown, New York, in 1839 has been conclusively debunked by sports historians.
The manager, or head coach of a team, oversees the team's major strategic decisions, such as establishing the starting rotation, setting the lineup, or batting order, before each game, and making substitutions during games—in particular, bringing in relief pitchers.
For part of the 1920s, it was joined by the Eastern Colored League.
Runners may also attempt to advance to the next base while the pitcher is in the process of delivering the ball to home plate—a successful effort is a stolen base.
A year later, sixteen area clubs formed the sport's first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players.
The rest of the team faces home plate, typically arranged as four infielders—who set up along or within a few yards outside the imaginary lines between first, second, and third base—and three outfielders.
As early as 1877, a professional league, the International Association, featured teams from both countries.
Wrigley Field, home of the Chicago Cubs, is known for its fickle disposition: a hitter's park when the strong winds off Lake Michigan are blowing out, it becomes more of a pitcher's park when they are blowing in.
In 2008, nearly half a million high schoolers and over 35,000 collegians played on their schools' baseball teams.
In 2000, the National and American leagues were dissolved as legal entities.
It is a hard round stick, about 2.5&nbsp;inches (6.4 centimeters) in diameter at the hitting end, tapering to a narrower handle and culminating in a knob.
Many European countries have professional leagues as well, the most successful, other than the Dutch league, being the Italian league founded in 1948.
In Asia, South Korea (1982), Taiwan (1990), and China (2003) all have professional leagues.
Once a player has been removed for a substitute, that player may not reenter the game.
A ball is called when the pitcher throws a pitch that is outside the strike zone, provided the batter has not swung at it.
Talented children as young as seven are sent to special district schools for more intensive training—the first step on a ladder whose acme is the national baseball team.
Protective helmets are also standard equipment for all batters.
In 1985, the respective figures were pro football 24%, baseball 23%.
The players on the team at bat attempt to score runs by circling or completing a tour of the four bases set at the corners of the square-shaped baseball diamond.
Revenue figures are not released for the country's amateur system.
In 1887, softball, under the name of indoor baseball or indoor-outdoor, was invented as a winter version of the parent game.
While the majors rebounded by the mid-1950s, the minor leagues were gutted and hundreds of semipro and amateur teams dissolved.
A game is composed of nine innings, and the team with the greater number of runs at the end of the game wins.
Attendance had been growing steadily since the mid-1970s and in 1994, before the stoppage, the majors were setting their all-time record for per-game attendance.
Since the early 1980s, the Dominican Republic, in particular the city of San Pedro de Macorís, has been the major leagues' primary source of foreign talent.
Chicago Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley led the formation of a new professional league with women players to help keep the game in the public eye – the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League existed from 1943 to 1954.
The outer boundary of the outfield is typically demarcated by a raised fence, which may be of any material and height (many amateur games are played on unfenced fields).
During the late innings of a game, as relief pitchers and pinch hitters are brought in, the opposing managers will often go back and forth trying to create favorable matchups with their substitutions: the manager of the fielding team trying to arrange same-handed pitcher-batter matchups, the manager of the batting team trying to arrange opposite-handed matchups.
* Stolen bases: times advancing to the next base entirely due to the runner's own efforts, generally while the pitcher is preparing to deliver or delivering the ball
These games were often referred to locally as "town ball", though other names such as "round-ball" and "base-ball" were also used.
The sacrifice bunt calls for the batter to focus on making contact with the ball so that it rolls a short distance into the infield, allowing the runner to advance into scoring position even at the expense of the batter being thrown out at first—a batter who succeeds is credited with a sacrifice.
The playoff expansion resulted in the addition of annual one-game playoffs between the wild card teams in each league.
Baseball has also inspired the creation of new cultural forms.
The score report is the official basis for both the box score of the game and the relevant statistical records.
* Hits: times reached base because of a batted, fair ball without fielding error or fielder's choice
There have been many baseball movies, including the Academy Award–winning ''The Pride of the Yankees'' (1942) and the Oscar nominees ''The Natural'' (1984) and ''Field of Dreams'' (1989).
In 2008, Nippon Professional Baseball took steps aimed at shortening games by 12 minutes from the preceding decade's average of 3:18.
In 2008, Major League Baseball set a revenue record of $6.5&nbsp;billion, matching the NFL's revenue for the first time in decades.
By gripping and then releasing the baseball in a certain manner, and by throwing it at a certain speed, pitchers can cause the baseball to break to either side, or downward, as it approaches the batter.
Facing a batter with a strong tendency to hit to one side of the field, the fielding team may employ a shift, with most or all of the fielders moving to the left or right of their usual positions.
A pitch that is not hit into the field of play is called either a strike or a ball.
A batter against whom three strikes are recorded strikes out.
Consensus once held that today's baseball is a North American development from the older game rounders, popular in Great Britain and Ireland.
Compared to those in Asia and Latin America, the various European leagues and the one in Australia historically have had no more than niche appeal.
A given stadium may acquire a reputation as a pitcher's park or a hitter's park, if one or the other discipline notably benefits from its unique mix of elements.
The part of the field enclosed by the bases and several yards beyond them is the infield; the area farther beyond the infield is the outfield.
Motivated by dislike for particularly stingy owner Charles Comiskey and gamblers' payoffs, real and promised, members of the Chicago White Sox conspired to throw the 1919 World Series.
Many amateur games, particularly unorganized ones, involve different numbers of players and innings.
While baseball is widely played in Canada and many minor league teams have been based in the country, the American major leagues did not include a Canadian club until 1969, when the Montreal Expos joined the National League as an expansion team.
Any baseball game involves one or more umpires, who make rulings on the outcome of each play.
In contrast to many other team sports, baseball managers and coaches generally wear their team's uniforms; coaches must be in uniform in order to be allowed on the playing field during a game.
A modicum of peace was eventually established, leading to the National Agreement of 1903.
''Sabermetrics'' refers to the field of baseball statistical study and the development of new statistics and analytical tools.
In Cuba, baseball is a mandatory part of the state system of physical education, which begins at age six.
The major leagues' first general players' strike took place in 1972.
In the early 1900s they were produced widely as promotional items by tobacco and confectionery companies.
If the designated hitter (DH) rule is in effect, each team has a tenth player whose sole responsibility is to bat (and run).
While the team at bat is trying to score runs, the team in the field is attempting to record outs.
In Cuba, where baseball is by every reckoning the national sport, the national team overshadows the city and provincial teams that play in the top-level domestic leagues.
Regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997 and the second-highest attendance mark for a full season was set.
Major league teams often skirt even this rule.
(A batter, particularly one who is a fast runner, may also attempt to bunt for a hit.)
Only one out was required to retire a side.
A typical 25-man roster in a league without the DH rule, such as MLB's National League, features:
Major League Baseball initiated the World Baseball Classic, scheduled to precede the major league season, partly as a replacement, high-profile international tournament.
In the late 19th century, a former cricket player, English-born Henry Chadwick of Brooklyn, New York, was responsible for the "development of the box score, tabular standings, the annual baseball guide, the batting average, and most of the common statistics and tables used to describe baseball."
If the ball is hit in the air within the foul lines over the entire outfield (and outfield fence, if there is one), it is a home run: the batter and any runners on base may all freely circle the bases, each scoring a run.
In 2008, total attendance at major league games was the second-highest in history: 78.6 million, 0.7% off the record set the previous year.
A typical example would feature an image of a baseball player on one side and advertising for a business on the other.
If a player makes it to second base safely as a direct result of a hit, it is a double; third base, a triple.
The Israel Baseball League, launched in 2007, folded after one season.
There had long been suspicions that the dramatic increase in power hitting was fueled in large part by the abuse of illegal steroids (as well as by the dilution of pitching talent due to expansion), but the issue only began attracting significant media attention in 2002 and there was no penalty for the use of performance-enhancing drugs before 2004.
The two leagues, each with eight teams, were rivals that fought for the best players, often disregarding each other's contracts and engaging in bitter legal disputes.
In the playoffs, six umpires are used: one at each base and two in the outfield along the foul lines.
Now known more generically as fantasy baseball, it has inspired similar games based on an array of different sports.
In Japan, where baseball is inarguably the leading spectator team sport, combined revenue for the twelve teams in Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB), the body that oversees both the Central and Pacific leagues, was estimated at $1&nbsp;billion in 2007.
With America's entry into World War II, many professional players had left to serve in the armed forces.
Pickoff attempts, however, are subject to rules that severely restrict the pitcher's movements before and during the pickoff attempt.
The final rounds of the two annual tournaments—the National High School Baseball Invitational Tournament in the spring, and the even more important National High School Baseball Championship in the summer—are broadcast around the country.
* Walks plus hits per inning pitched (WHIP) measures a pitcher's ability at preventing hitters from reaching base.
The baseball cap has become a ubiquitous fashion item not only in the United States and Japan, but also in countries where the sport itself is not particularly popular, such as the United Kingdom.
In 2004, Major League Baseball declared that its goal was an average game of merely 2:45.
The so-called dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were advantageous to hitters.
Latin American players, largely overlooked before, also started entering the majors in greater numbers.
In 2001, Barry Bonds established the current record of 73 home runs in a single season.
While the sport's lack of a following in much of the world was a factor, more important was Major League Baseball's reluctance to have a break during the Games to allow its players to participate, as the National Hockey League now does during the Winter Olympic Games.
* five starting pitchers who constitute the team's pitching rotation or starting rotation
Surface variations can have a significant effect on how ground balls behave and are fielded as well as on baserunning.
Among the many other statistics that are kept are those collectively known as ''situational statistics''.
If there are already two strikes on the batter, a foul ball is not counted as a third strike; thus, a foul ball cannot result in the immediate strikeout of the batter.
In clock-limited sports, games often end with a team that holds the lead killing the clock rather than competing aggressively against the opposing team.
Among the earliest examples to receive a detailed description—albeit five decades after the fact, in a letter from an attendee to ''Sporting Life'' magazine—took place in Beachville, Ontario, in 1838.
* The batter hits a foul ball—one that either initially lands in foul territory or initially lands within the diamond but moves into foul territory before passing first or third base.
A sacrifice bunt employed with a runner on third base, aimed at bringing that runner home, is known as a squeeze play.
This program soon became another important organizing body for children's baseball.
Baseball is therefore a realm of complete transparency and total responsibility.
In contrast, baseball has no clock; a team cannot win without getting the last batter out and rallies are not constrained by time.
With more rigorous testing and penalties for performance-enhancing drug use a possible factor, the balance between bat and ball swung markedly in 2010, which became known as the "Year of the Pitcher".
* The batter swings at any ball (even one outside the strike zone) and misses, or foul tips it directly into the catcher's hands.
The next year, Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa both surpassed Maris's decades-old single season home run record and two more expansion franchises were added.
A game consists of nine innings (seven innings at the high school level and in doubleheaders in college and minor leagues).
* Losses: charged to pitcher on losing team who was pitching when the opposing team took a lead that it never relinquished
In contrast, again, the clock comes into play even in the case of multi-day Test and first-class cricket: the possibility of a draw often encourages a team that is batting last and well behind to bat defensively, giving up any faint chance at a win to avoid a loss.
Baseball has had a broad impact on popular culture, both in the United States and elsewhere.
A player who reaches first base safely on a hit is credited with a single.
:Baseball for Irish kids was a shortcut to the American dream and to self-indulgent glory and fortune.
The DH takes the place of another player—almost invariably the pitcher—in the batting order, but does not field.
If there is disagreement on the selection, the pitcher may shake off the sign and the catcher will call for a different pitch.
(A batter may also freely advance to first base if the batter's body or uniform is struck by a pitch outside the strike zone, provided the batter does not swing and attempts to avoid being hit.)
In the mid-1850s, a baseball craze hit the New York metropolitan area.
Players put out or retired must leave the field, returning to their team's dugout or bench.
While there are reports that the New York Knickerbockers played games in 1845, the contest long recognized as the first officially recorded baseball game in U.S. history took place on June 19, 1846, in Hoboken, New Jersey: the "New York Nine" defeated the Knickerbockers, 23–1, in four innings (three earlier games have recently been discovered).
* Runs batted in (RBIs): number of runners who scored due to a batter's action (including the batter, in the case of a home run), except when batter grounded into double play or reached on an error
Players on the batting team take turns hitting against the pitcher of the fielding team, which tries to prevent runs by getting hitters out in any of several ways.
In the United States and Canada, professional Major League Baseball (MLB) teams are divided into the National League (NL) and American League (AL), each with three divisions: East, West, and Central.
By the late 1940s, it was the organizing body for children's baseball leagues across the United States.
