Points are scored by playing the ball through the net, as in basketball, though the point-scoring rules are modified.
Basketball teams generally have player positions, the tallest and strongest members of a team are called a center or power forward, while slightly shorter and more agile players are called small forward, and the shortest players or those who possess the best ball handling skills are called a point guard or shooting guard.
These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable.
The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film ''Hoosiers'' shows high school basketball's depth of meaning to these communities.
The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended.
In 1910, that body would change its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
The International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's basketball competition.
Center (the "'''5'''"): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound.
Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana's Franklin Wonder Five, which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition.
The rules also permit some physical contact between the members of the four-player teams.
While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths.
Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support.
But it is a black man's game, and it will be forever.
Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, his team would gain a point.
Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement.
Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA Americas Championship.
Shortly after she was hired at Smith, she went to Naismith to learn more about the game.
Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league's first season that opened on April 9, 1975.
The 1998–99 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October–April).
And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women's basketball championship, complete with men's rules.
The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use.
For both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back.
Power forward (the "'''4'''"): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense).
It is a violation to lift, or drag, one's pivot foot without dribbling the ball, to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling.
The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute.
Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim.
In contrast with modern basketball nets, this peach basket retained its bottom, and balls had to be retrieved manually after each "basket" or point scored; this proved inefficient, however, so the bottom of the basket was removed, allowing the balls to be poked out with a long dowel each time.
By 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.
These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time.
Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for Women, now known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, was held in Chile.
Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dražen Petrović and Toni Kukoč, Serbian Vlade Divac, Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis and German Detlef Schrempf.
The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard.
In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup, was held in Argentina.
The United States' dominance continued with the introduction of their Dream Team.
Other sports websites provided the same format keeping the game interesting with participants actually owning specific players.
The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at the YMCA in Kingston, Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill University visited Queen's University.
These rules are designed to promote more offense.
Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League to form the National Basketball Association (NBA).
These round balls from "association football" were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball's cover had been flipped outside-in.
Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she organized the first women's collegiate basketball game on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another.
The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016.
The first men's national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament, was organized in 1937.
In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the NBA Development League (also known as the D-League).
At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly  above the court and  inside the baseline.
The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball.
In early December 1891, Canadian Dr. James Naismith, a physical education professor and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training School (YMCA) (today, Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day.
The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mureșan, who were both  tall.
This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender.
The ball can be advanced on the court by throwing it to a teammate, or by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling).
The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver.
If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play.
15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools.
It is also illegal under NBA and Men's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim.
Such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball stealing skills over shooting and team play.
A team can also score via free throws, which are worth one point, after the other team is assessed with certain fouls.
The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when ''Brown v. Board of Education'' began an integration of schools.
Beach basketball is played in a circular court with no backboard on the goal, no out-of-bounds rule with the ball movement to be done via passes or 2½ steps, as dribbling is next to impossible on a soft surface.
The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the ''slam dunk'', in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it.
A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick.
At , Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA.
Basketball's popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation.
In the US college men's game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made.
Many cities also host their own weekend-long streetball tournaments.
Most centers are over  tall.
Other variations include children's games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills.
Teams exchange baskets for the second half.
Typically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket.
The Grads' players were unpaid, and had to remain single.
Naismith replied, "We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it."
The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm.
There are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well, for example, a player must have at least one foot on a pedal when in-bounding the ball.
Beach basketball has grown to a very popular, widespread competitive sport.
However, the league has recently taken steps forward.
The Grads' style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players.
Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking.
A staple pass is the ''chest pass''.
Shooting guard (the "'''2'''") : creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent's best perimeter player on defense.
We're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams.
Small forward (the "'''3'''") : often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively.
The next pass after the rebound is the ''outlet pass''.
;: Unicycle basketball is played using a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules, for example, one must dribble the ball while riding.
A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a ''cut''.
In either case possession of the ball is turned over to the defensive team.
A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed.
We're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year."
In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as ''goaltending''.
FIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland.
Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball.
A good turnout of spectators watched the game.
Games are played in four quarters of 10 (FIBA) or 12 minutes (NBA).
Most courts have wood flooring, usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension.
The same year, Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer) women began playing basketball.
Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.
The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at .
;Slamball: Slamball is full-contact basketball, with trampolines.
The game was popularized by ESPN Fantasy Sports, NBA.com, and Yahoo!
A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA).
Five players from each team may be on the court at one time.
Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.
Another advanced style of passing is the ''behind-the-back pass'', which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer's back to a teammate.
The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA.
Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players.
The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees.
In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, site of the first game.
The first non-white player entered the league in 1947.
In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS).
The number of participants in a game, or a ''run'', may range from one defender and one person on offense (known as ''one on one'') to two full teams of five each.
In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski is towards positionless basketball, where big guys are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it.
Other short players have thrived at the pro level.
The sport is like a combination of polo, rugby, and basketball.
The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most popular and widely considered to be the highest level of professional basketball in the world and NBA players are the world's best paid sportsmen, by average annual salary per player.
The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active.
Mahan suggested that it be called "Naismith ball", at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game.
This league only lasted five years.
Men's basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics, although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904.
Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels.
If an offensive player commits the infraction, the basket is cancelled.
Along with this deal, came the first ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league.
The latter variation is gradually gaining official recognition as '''3x3''', originally known as FIBA 33.
The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own.
Point guard (often called the "'''1'''") : usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time.
The point guard directs the on court action of the team, implementing the coach's game plan, and managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning).
However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.
After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto a  elevated track.
The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each teams scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow, and the shot clock.
There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball, but that version has come under attack from animal rights groups.
Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball.
Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school, which is four minutes in length.
By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.
The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup features the top national women's basketball teams from continental championships.
The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany, New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players.
The ''outlet pass'' occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound.
If women are playing, the official basketball size is  in circumference (size 6, or a "285 ball") with a weight of 20 oz (567 grams).
The tallest current NBA player is Sim Bhullar, who stands at .
The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful.
Often only one half of the court is used, but otherwise the rules of the game are very similar to those of basketball.
On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.
The world governing body of wheelchair basketball is the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation (IWBF), and is a full medal sport in the Summer Paralympic Games.
Some variations are only superficial rules changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of basketball influences.
This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles.
During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements.
Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams.
Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA.
For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called '''the wings''', as do the power forward and center, who are often called '''post players.'''
;Wheelchair basketball: Wheelchair basketball, created by disabled World War II veterans, is played on specially designed wheelchairs for the physically impaired.
If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point.
Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions.
Women's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years.
Dribbling only became a major part of the game around the 1950s, as manufacturing improved the ball shape.
A field goal scores three points for the shooting team if the player shoots from behind the three-point line, and two points if shot from in front of the line.
The composition of race and ethnicity in the National Basketball Association (NBA) has changed throughout the league's history.
The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top.
Although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball.
The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams.
The two plays are combined in the ''pick and roll'', in which a player sets a pick and then "rolls" away from the pick towards the basket.
Spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include:
The ''overhead pass'' is used to pass the ball over a defender.
Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the Euroleague and FIBA Americas League.
;Half-court: Perhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the '''half-court''' game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules.
Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls.
In the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association's first game was played on April 9, 1975 at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City.
Teams abounded throughout the 1920s.
The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016.
A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball.
The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University, Georgetown and George Mason.
The NBL is Australia's pre-eminent men's professional basketball league.
Anthony "Spud" Webb was just  tall, but had a  vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping.
The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools.
This is called a crossover, which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling.
A few players including Luc Longley, Andrew Gaze, Shane Heal, Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia.
For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds.
The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle.
In a zone defense, each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court.
The School of Agriculture won in a 9–3 game.
The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots.
There are principal basketball sports with variations on basketball including Wheelchair basketball, Water basketball, Beach basketball, Slamball, Streetball and Unicycle basketball.
A regulation basketball court in international games is  long and 49.2 feet (15 meters) wide.
Popular descriptions of positions include:
Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players (Lisa Leslie, Diana Taurasi, and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league's popularity and level of competition.
The referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy.
By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr.
The ball is released while over the passer's head.
However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void.
The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics, 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics.
The basket is a steel rim  diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures  and one basket is at each end of the court.
A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location.
At the professional level, most male players are above  and most women above .
The white outlined box on the backboard is  high and  wide.
In 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed teams).
Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped.
Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five ("Rens") and the (still existing) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours.
Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball.
A team can score a field goal by shooting the ball through the basket being defended by the opposition team during regular play.
If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot.
The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game.
Nor may a player stop his dribble and then resume dribbling.
The WNBA gets more viewers on national television broadcasts (413,000) than both Major League Soccer (253,000) and the NHL (310,732).
There are many techniques for ball-handling—shooting, passing, dribbling, and rebounding.
Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m×1.5m).
The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept.
