These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.
Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence.
Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on ''bhar-s-'', meaning "summit", "point" or "leaves", according to which ''barscunes'' may have meant "the mountain people", "the tall ones" or "the proud ones", while others have posited a relationship to a proto-Indo-European root ''*bar-'' meaning "border", "frontier", "march".
The great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: ''pelota'').
There is no conflict, I am proud of both.
As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family.
The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups.
Therefore, the neologism ''euskotar'', plural ''euskotarrak'', was coined in the 19th century to mean a culturally Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not.
There are broadly speaking two views.
*Basque sheepdog trials competitions.
The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious.
Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish.
After Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism to become king of France, Protestantism almost disappeared.
Some Basques, especially in Spain, are strongly nationalist, identifying far more firmly as Basques than as citizens of any existing state.
For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:I am French and Basque.
An idea of the central place of the cultural terms in Basque nationalist politicians is given by the fact that, in Basque, Basques identify themselves by the term ''euskaldun'' and their country as ''Euskal Herria'', literally "Basque speaker" and "Country of the Basque Language" respectively.
Thus ''euskara'' would literally mean "way of saying", "way of speaking".
The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico's north-eastern "frontera", including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande River from South Texas to West Texas.
The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French.
*''sokatira'': tug-of-war.
It is thought that Basques are a remnant of the early inhabitants of Western Europe, specifically those of the Franco-Cantabrian region.
Under Spain's present constitution, Navarre (''Nafarroa'' in present-day Basque, ''Navarra'' historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque ''Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa'', in Spanish ''Comunidad Foral de Navarra'' (the autonomous community of Navarre).
In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples.
At the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably.
The authors concluded that there is "discontinuity" between ancient and modern Basques.
Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.
Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.
Don Diego de Gardoqui Arriquibar (1735-1798) was Spain's first Ambassador to the United States.
In addition to Chile in Latin America, they settled in Argentina, Colombia, Cuba, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela.
In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing.
He regarded it as a fourth subrace of the Caucasian race, along with the ''Aryan'', ''Semitic'', and ''Hamitic'' subraces.
However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spanish (87%).
The largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years.
I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me.
Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.
Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.
The ''jentilak'' ('Giants'), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of the iron.
They notably regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours.
A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives has waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque département, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.
**''idi probak'' with teams of oxen.
Rugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14).
Some Basque surnames were adapted from old ''baserri'' or habitation names.
However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain.
In 2015, a new scientific study of Basque DNA was published which seems to indicate that Basques are descendants of Neolithic farmers who mixed with local hunters before becoming genetically isolated from the rest of Europe for millennia.
It is sometimes referred to simply as "the Basque Country" (or ''Euskadi'') by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context.
Biarritz regularly play Heineken Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian.
Basques have a close attachment to their home (''etxe(a)'' 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or ''baserri(a)''.
There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California.
However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.
Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.
A number of place-names contain her name and would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as ''Anbotoko Mari'' who appears to have been related to the weather.
Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.
* homogeneity amongst both their Spanish and French populations, according to high-density SNP genotyping study done in May 2010, and;
Others are not, feeling as much Basque as Spanish.
In Mexico most Basques are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and Coahuila.
The encierro (bull run) in Pamplona's fiestas ''Sanfermines'' started as a transport of bulls to the ring.
Large numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons.
Mattias Jakobsson from Uppsala University in Sweden analysed genetic material from eight Stone Age human skeletons found in El Portalón Cavern in Atapuerca, northern Spain.
Legends also speak of many and abundant genies, like ''jentilak'' (equivalent to giants), ''lamiak'' (equivalent to nymphs), ''mairuak'' (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), ''iratxoak'' (imps), ''sorginak'' (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on.
They gave name to several toponyms, as ''Jentilbaratza''.
Basque tribes were already mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, the Aquitani, and others.
Combined with the issue of lingering pagan beliefs, this enraged the leaders of the Spanish Inquisition, perhaps leading to one of the largest witch hunts in the Basque town of Logroño in 1610".
Although the kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe.
Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the "outlandish" character of Basque.
Mari's consort is Sugaar.
The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garicoïts.
More recent studies instead propose that R1b spread through Europe from southwest Asia in the Neolithic period or later, between 4,000 and 8,000 years ago.
*''harri-jasotzea'': stone-lifting, from quarry works.
In modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.
Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as ''Iparralde'' (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as ''Hegoalde'' (South).
Elko, Nevada sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.
"Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches.
Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.
In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.
As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one.
Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century.
It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters).
The Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subjected to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours.
In Basque, the people call themselves the ''euskaldunak'', singular ''euskaldun'', formed from ''euskal-'' (i.e.
The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre.
Such surnames provide even those Basque whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: ''Bengoetxea'' "the house of further down", ''Goikoetxea'' "the house above", ''Landaburu'' "top of the field", ''Errekondo'' "next to the stream", ''Elizalde'' "by the church", ''Mendizabal'' "wide hill", ''Usetxe'' "house of birds" ''Ibarretxe'' "house in the valley", ''Etxeberria'' "the new house", and so on.
They have a high rate of O blood group but this is probably due to isolation.
As such, Basque populations were used as proxy representatives for the "Palaeolithic component" in admixture studies that tried to quantify the extent of Neolithic diffusions.
Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as "the three provinces", up to 1978 referred to as "Provincias Vascongadas" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region.
One item of evidence in favour of this hypothesis is found in the Spanish book ''Compendio Historial'', written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay.
Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512-1524).
Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has been spoken continuously ''in situ'', in and around its present territorial location, for longer than other modern European languages, which have all been introduced in historical or prehistorical times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.
According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries.
Nevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839/1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants.
The results show that these early Iberian farmers are the closest ancestors to present-day Basques.
Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.
Substantial numbers also settled in North America.
It may, however, be a writing mistake.
The strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic.
Basque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and the excellent produce from the sea and the land.
The official findings were published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States America.
Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans.
Italy or Britain) show that their populations appear to derive from the Basque ones.
So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.
Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in Álava, one in Navarre) were in use from the 6th century onwards.
Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.
The BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories.
A widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures.
6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal.
*''txinga eramatea'': carrying of weights, one in each hand, representing milk canisters.
It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango.
Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European.
The collection of mtDNA haplogroups sampled there differed significantly compared to their modern frequencies.
(2000) and propagated by subsequent scholars without further analysis.
The place where they were minted is not certain, but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the ''Vascones''.
Even though they were provided for in some way siblings had to make their livings by other means.
According to one tradition, she traveled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Aloña, or Supelegor, or Gorbea.
The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes.
It is juxtaposed with an equally strong sense of national identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques.
This character is probably an anthropomorphism of the bear.
The identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or ''Euskara'', spoken today by 25%-30% of the region's population.
The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents.
This theory encountered inconsistencies even prior to most recent chronological re-evaluations.
In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists.
Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation.
Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law.
For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times.
"one who has"); ''euskaldun'' literally means a Basque speaker.
A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called ''txoko'' in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food.
Several coins from the 2nd and 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription ''barscunes''.
Many of the historic ''hidalgos'', or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land.
Basque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.
*''estropadak'' rowing regattas: from fishermen activities.
Thus, while Basques harbour some very archaic lineages (such as mtDNA Hg U8a), they are not of "undiluted Palaeolithic ancestry", nor are they ancestral to large parts of western Europe.
Home in this context is synonymous with family roots.
Bayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions.
They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture.
It is unclear whether neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds.
In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe.
Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them.
Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are ''Baiona'', ''Angelu'' and ''Miarritze'').
Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.
The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families.
The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla.
Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at mount Txindoki.
Traditionally Basques have been mostly Roman Catholics.
Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no.
Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the ''juntas'' and ''Juntas Generales'' (such as the ''Juntas Generales de Vizcaya'' or ''Guipúzcoa'') which administered much larger areas.
Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.
These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven.
This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not exist in isolation.
Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.
Nowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist.
That R1b should be a Palaeolithic marker was an ''ad hoc'' assumption suggested by Semino ''et al.''
Additionally, the Basque population has virtually no B blood type, nor the related AB type.
Each April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside.
In the Early Middle Ages the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined cultural area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Muslim rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north.
Not all Basques are Basque-speakers.
...matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century.
There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border.
Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque.
A sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga.
Thus Basque contrasts with other European languages, almost all of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family.
The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebastián (in Gipuzkoa) and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in Álava).
However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family.
Even before the development of modern genetics based on DNA sequencing, Basques were already noted for distinctive genetic patterns, such as possessing the highest global apportion of the Rh- blood type (35% phenotypically, 60% genetically).
Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of December 6 of that year.
Texas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain.
While there are other clubs within the Basque Country, such as Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alavés and CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name — ''osasuna'' means "health"), Bilbao's cantera policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players.
As a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French).
At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshiped Christian icons in Basque territories.
* a genomic distinctiveness, relative to other European populations.
They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus.
These individuals lived between 3,500 and 5,500 years ago, after the transition to farming in southwest Europe.
They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features.
*''harri zulaketa'' competitions: drilling stone blocks with a metal bar, only in the former mining areas of West Biscay.
This chthonic couple seem to bear the superior ethical power and also the power of creation and destruction.
They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico.
Over 2.5&nbsp;million Basque descendants live in Chile; the Basque have been a major influence in the country's cultural and economic development.
Lasuén was the successor to Franciscan Padre Junípero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.
Although they are genetically distinctive in some ways, the Basques are still very typically European in terms of their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in terms of some other genetic loci.
Initially Haplogroup R1b was theorised to be that a Palaeolithic marker, introduced when Europe was repopulated after the Last Glacial Maximum, about 25,000 years ago.
There are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa).
The French Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region.
California has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield.
*''ahari topaketa: ram fights.
In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies.
There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).
* close genetic ties to other Europeans, especially with Spaniards, who have a common genetic identity of over 70% with Basques.
Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year.
Navarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the ''Amejoramiento'', an 'upgrade' of its previous status during dictatorship).
On the basis of this putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories.
California Franciscan Fermín Lasuén was born in Vitoria.
Since its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence.
These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as ''Californios''.
Note that in historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) ''Nafarroa'', while the term "High Navarre" (''Nafarroa Garaia'' in Basque, ''Alta Navarra'' in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.
modern Basque ''esan'') and the suffix ''-(k)ara'' ("way (of doing something)").
The smallest degree of both Basque and Near Eastern admixture is found in Finland, whereas the highest values are, respectively, 70% "Basque" in Spain and roughly 60% "Near Eastern" in the Balkans.
My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.
In Navarre, Basque has been declared an endangered language, since the anti-Basque and conservative government of Navarrese People's Union opposes the symbols of Basqueness, highlighting a Spanish identity for Navarre.
In 1994, in his book ''The History and Geography of Human Genes'', population geneticist L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza stated that "there is support from many sides" for the hypothesis that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons.
The English word ''Basque'' may be pronounced  or  and derives from the French ''Basque'' (pronounced ), which is derived from Gascon ''Basco'' (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish ''Vasco ''(pronounced ).
**''zaldi probak'' with horses.
Basques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.
Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre.
