It is possible to play while standing up if the player uses a neck strap or similar harness, or if the seat strap is tied to the belt.
Similar to other woodwind instruments, the length of the bassoon can be increased to lower pitch or decreased to raise pitch.
Kruspe implemented a latecomer attempt in 1893 to reform the fingering system, but it failed to catch on.
The rock band Better Than Ezra took their name from a passage in Ernest Hemingway's ''A Moveable Feast'' in which the author comments that listening to an annoyingly talkative person is still “better than Ezra learning how to play the bassoon,” referring to Ezra Pound.
Listeners often compare its warm, dark, reedy timbre to that of a male baritone voice.
The bassoon's wide range and variety of tone colors make it well suited to grouping in a like-instrument ensemble.
The alternative method is "venting", which requires that the register key be used as part of the full fingering as opposed to being open momentarily at the start of the note.
A reed quintet is made up of an oboe, clarinet, saxophone, bass clarinet, and bassoon.
The reed opening may also need to be adjusted by squeezing either the first or second wire with the pliers.
The lower, mostly cylindrical portion will be reamed out with a special tool called a reamer, allowing the reed to fit on the bocal.
It first began appearing in the 1920s, including specific calls for its use in Paul Whiteman's group, the unusual octets of Alec Wilder, and a few other session appearances.
It is a key with a small hole drilled into it.
Other adjustments with the reed knife may be necessary, depending on the hardness, the profile of the cane, and the requirements of the player.
However, several 1960s pop music hits feature the bassoon, including "The Tears of a Clown" by Smokey Robinson and the Miracles (the bassoonist was Charles R. Sirard), "Jennifer Juniper" by Donovan, "The Turtles" "Happy Together"(third verse,overdub),   "59th Street Bridge Song" by Harpers Bizarre, and the oompah bassoon underlying The New Vaudeville Band's "Winchester Cathedral".
The four fingers on left hand all have at least two assignments each.
This can be done by hand with a file; more frequently it is done with a machine or tool designed for the purpose.
Compared to the Heckel bassoon, Buffet system bassoons have a narrower bore and simpler mechanism, requiring different fingerings for many notes.
The reed is then placed in the mouth, forming a seal around the reed with the lips and facial muscles.
Katherine Young plays the bassoon in the ensembles of Anthony Braxton.
Though the United Kingdom once favored the French system, Buffet-system instruments are no longer made there and the last prominent British player of the French system retired in the 1980s.
By the mid-18th century, the bassoon's function in the orchestra was still mostly limited to that of a continuo instrument—since scores often made no specific mention of the bassoon, its use was implied, particularly if there were parts for oboes or other winds.
British psychedelic/progressive rock band Knifeworld features the bassoon playing of Chloe Herrington, who also plays for experimental chamber rock orchestra Chrome Hoof.
Scherer (1703–1778), and Prudent Thieriot (1732–1786).
In addition, several factories in the People's Republic of China are producing inexpensive instruments under such labels as Laval, Haydn, and Lark, and these have been available in the West for some time now.
The player can lift the finger completely off the key.
The bassoon is infrequently used as a jazz instrument and rarely seen in a jazz ensemble.
(The steam generated by the heated mandrel causes the cane to permanently assume the shape of the mandrel.)
French woodwind instruments' tone in general exhibits a certain amount of "edge," with more of a vocal quality than is usual elsewhere, and the Buffet bassoon is no exception.
Some works call for four or more players.
Many companies and individuals do offer reeds for sale, but even with store-bought reeds, players must know how to make adjustments to suit their particular playing style.
A1 is possible with a special extension to the instrument—see "Extended techniques" below.
The next few decades saw the instrument used only sporadically, as symphonic jazz fell out of favor, but the 1960s saw artists such as Yusef Lateef and Chick Corea incorporate bassoon into their recordings.
''La Fiesta Mexicana'', by H. Owen Reed, features the instrument prominently, as does the transcription of Malcolm Arnold's ''Four Scottish Dances'', which has become a staple of the concert band repertoire.
Additionally, if the "e" in the bass clef staff is sagging in pitch, it may be necessary to "clip" the reed by removing  from its length using a pair of very sharp scissors or the equivalent.
From the A right below middle C and lower, the whisper key is pressed with the left thumb and held for the duration of the note.
While flicking is used to higher notes, the whisper key is used for lower notes.
This is installed between the instrument and the neck strap, and shifts the point of support closer to the center of gravity, adjusting the distribution of weight between the two hands.
Both bore and tone holes are precision-machined, and each instrument is finished by hand for proper tuning.
Subsequent articles further developed his ideas.
No original French bassoon from this period survives, but if it did, it would most likely resemble the earliest extant bassoons of Johann Christoph Denner and Richard Haka from the 1680s.
A modern beginner's bassoon is generally made of maple, with medium-hardness types such as sycamore maple and sugar maple preferred.
The key is not used after F1 is played.
Almenräder continued publishing and building instruments until his death in 1846, and Ludwig van Beethoven himself requested one of the newly made instruments after hearing of the papers.
The bassoon's distinctive tone suits it for both plaintive, lyrical solos such as Maurice Ravel's ''Boléro'' and more comical ones, such as the grandfather's theme in ''Peter and the Wolf''.
The bassoon is part of the standard wind quintet instrumentation, along with the flute, oboe, clarinet, and horn; it is also frequently combined in various ways with other woodwinds.
The bottom key is used the least often than the other ones.
On the bark portion, the reed maker binds on one, two, or three coils or loops of brass wire to aid in the final forming process.
The bassoon is a non-transposing instrument known for its distinctive tone color, wide range, variety of character and agility.
However, the usual etymology that equates ''fagotto'' with "bundle of sticks" is somewhat misleading, as the latter term did not come into general use until later.
The word bassoon comes from French ''basson'' and from Italian ''bassone'' (''basso'' with the augmentative suffix ''-one'').
The lower part is sealed (a nitrocellulose-based cement such as Duco may be used) and then wrapped with thread to ensure both that no air leaks out through the bottom of the reed and that the reed maintains its shape.
Five additional keys on the front are controlled by the little fingers of each hand.
The tools used for adjusting reeds are very similar to those used to make the reeds themselves.
The smallest finger operates three keys.
Both flicking and using the whisper key is especially important to ensure notes speak properly during slurring between high and low registers.
Eichentopf (c. 1678–1769), J. Poerschmann (1680–1757), Thomas Stanesby, Jr. (1668–1734), G.H.
Bocals come in many different lengths and styles, depending on the desired tuning and playing characteristics.
After the profiled cane has soaked once again it is folded over in the middle.
This was largely due to the spread of the ''hautbois'' to countries outside France.
This is easy to perform with the normal fingering for G4, but with the E1 key (pancake key).
Some historians believe that sometime in the 1650s, Hotteterre conceived the bassoon in four sections (bell, bass joint, boot and wing joint), an arrangement that allowed greater accuracy in machining the bore compared to the one-piece dulcian.
The middle finger typically stays on the centre hole on the tenor joint.
The top lever, which is very thin, is used in creating B2 and 3, and is used in B4, C4, D4, F4, and E4.
Conversely, a poorly played Buffet can sound buzzy and nasal, but good players succeed in producing a warm, expressive sound, different from—but not inferior to—the Heckel.
Because of their superior singing tone quality (an improvement upon one of the main drawbacks of the Almenräder instruments), the Heckel instruments competed for prominence with the reformed Wiener system, a Boehm-style bassoon, and a completely keyed instrument devised by Charles-Joseph Sax, father of Adolphe Sax.
Higher notes are possible but difficult to produce, and rarely called for: orchestral and concert band parts rarely go higher than C5 or D5.
The walls of the bassoon are thicker at various points along the bore; here, the tone holes are drilled at an angle to the axis of the bore, which reduces the distance between the holes on the exterior.
The bulge in the wrapping is sometimes referred to as the "Turk's head"—it serves as a convenient handle when inserting the reed on the bocal.
The upper lip will be further on the reed than the lower lip.
The ''Harmonie'' was an ensemble maintained by German and Austrian noblemen for private music-making, and was a cost-effective alternative to a full orchestra.
Some players, for example the late Gerald Corey in Canada, have learned to play both types and will alternate between them depending on the repertoire.
Assisted by the German acoustic researcher Gottfried Weber, he developed the 17-key bassoon with a range spanning four octaves.
Lindsay Cooper, Paul Hanson, the Brazilian bassoonist Alexandre Silverio, Trent Jacobs and Daniel Smith are also currently using the bassoon in jazz.
The crutch also keeps the right hand from tiring and enables the player to keep the finger pads flat on the finger holes and keys.
The upper assignment is used for alternate fingerings in the alto register.
Some think it may resemble the Roman Fasces, a standard of bound sticks with an ax.
In addition to its solo role, the bassoon is an effective bass to a woodwind choir, a bass line along with the cellos and double basses, and harmonic support along with the French horns.
A fifth key, for the low E, was added during the first half of the 18th century.
The back-most one, closest to the bassoonist, is held down throughout most of the bass register.
This often yields unsatisfactory results, though, as the resultant A can be quite sharp.
In 1831, Almenräder left Schott to start his own factory with a partner, Johann Adam Heckel.
Richard Strauss also calls for the low A in his opera ''Intermezzo''.
Folded upon itself, the bassoon stands  tall, but the total sounding length is .
The modern Buffet system has 22 keys with its range being about the same as the Heckel.
The upper portion of the cavity thus created is called the "throat," and its shape has an influence on the final playing characteristics of the reed.
These may have included additional members of the Hotteterre family, as well as other French makers active around the same time.
In early 2011, American hip-hop artist Kanye West updated his Twitter account to inform followers that he recently added the bassoon to a yet unnamed song.
The range of the bassoon begins at B1 (the first one below the bass staff) and extends upward over three octaves, roughly to the G above the treble staff (G5).
The crutch is secured with a thumb screw, which also allows the distance that it protrudes from the bassoon to be adjusted.
Heckel himself had made over 1,100 instruments by the turn of the 20th century (serial numbers begin at 3,000), and the British makers' instruments were no longer desirable for the changing pitch requirements of the symphony orchestra, remaining primarily in military band use.
A full consort of dulcians was a rarity; its primary function seems to have been to provide the bass in the typical wind band of the time, either loud (shawms) or soft (recorders), indicating a remarkable ability to vary dynamics to suit the need.
Another composer who has required the bassoon to be chromatic down to low A is Gustav Mahler.
Even Stravinsky's famously difficult opening solo in ''The Rite of Spring'' only ascends to D5.
A further discrepancy lies in the fact that the dulcian was carved out of a single block of wood—in other words, a single "stick" and not a bundle.
Cost is another big factor in a person's decision to pursue the bassoon.
The left thumb alone operates nine keys.
Players rest the curve of the right hand where the thumb joins the palm against the crutch.
The dulcian came to be known as ''fagotto'' in Italy.
Bassoonists sometimes use the end bell segment of an English horn or clarinet if one is available instead of a specially made extension.
Its primary use is F#1 and F#2.
The smallest finger operates two side keys on the bass joint.
Heckel bassoons are considered by many to be the best, although a range of Heckel-style instruments is available from several other manufacturers, all with slightly different playing characteristics.
(This is impossible on a normal bassoon using an A extension as the fingering for the B-flat yields the low A.)
The next key assigned to the right thumb is known as the "spatula key".
Additional notes can be created with these keys.
This prevents cracking, as low notes can sometimes crack into a higher octave.
The large, circular key (otherwise known as the "pancake key"), is used in mostly the bass register.
It is written so that the first bassoon does not play; instead, the player's role is to place an extension in the bell of the fourth bassoon so that the note can be played.
A number of other types of bassoons have been constructed by various instrument makers, such as the rare Galandronome.
Some means of additional support is usually required; the most common ones are a seat strap attached to the base of the boot joint, which is laid across the chair seat prior to sitting down, or a neck strap or shoulder harness attached to the top of the boot joint.
Haydn, Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Krommer all wrote considerable amounts of music for the ''Harmonie''.
In the 1960s, Giles Brindley began to develop what he called the "logical bassoon," which aimed to improve intonation and evenness of tone through use of an electrically activated mechanism, making possible key combinations too complex for the human hand to manage.
The player can also slide the finger down, so the key is closed, but the hole is open.
The cane is then trimmed and ''gouged'' to the desired thickness, leaving the bark attached.
The rest use it virtually 100% of the time—it has become in essence part of the fingering.
The middle finger remains stationary over a whole with a ring around.
Flicking is not universal amongst bassoonists; some American players, principally on the East Coast, use it sparingly, if at all.
From B1 to E1, it is held constantly.
The bassoon quartet has also gained favor in recent times.
A side key at the top of the boot is used.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's ''Jupiter'' symphony is a prime example, with its famous bassoon solos in the first movement.
Reeds begin with a length of tube cane that is split into three or four pieces using a tool called a cane splitter.
This eliminates cracking, or brief multiphonics that happens without the use of this technique.
French bassoonists Jean-Jacques Decreux and Alexandre Ouzounoff have both recorded jazz, exploiting the flexibility of the Buffet system instrument to good effect.
The joints between sections consist of a tenon fitting into a socket; the tenons are wrapped in either cork or string as a seal against air leaks.
Recently, more players are choosing the more modern heat-shrink tubing instead of the time-consuming and fiddly thread.
Occasionally a spike similar to those used for the cello or the bass clarinet is attached to the bottom of the boot joint and rests on the floor.
The four fingers of the right hand have at least one assignment each.
Buffet instruments are known for a reedier sound and greater facility in the upper registers, reaching e and f with far greater ease and less air resistance.
The bassoon's role in the concert band is similar to its role in the orchestra, though when scoring is thick it often cannot be heard above the brass instruments also in its range.
An aspect of bassoon technique not found on any other woodwind is called ''flicking''.
Students in America often begin to pursue the study of bassoon performance and technique in the middle years of their music education.
Students are often provided with a school instrument and encouraged to pursue lessons with private instructors.
The '''bassoon''' is a woodwind instrument in the double reed family that typically plays music written in the bass and tenor clefs, and occasionally the treble.
He also extended the compass down to B by adding two keys.
Prior to soaking, the reed maker will have lightly scored the bark with parallel lines with a knife; this ensures that the cane will assume a cylindrical shape during the forming stage.
It involves the left hand thumb momentarily pressing, or 'flicking' the high A, C and D keys at the beginning of certain notes in the middle octave to achieve a clean slur from a lower note.
This ensures coverage by the fingers of the average adult hand.
The bassoons were generally paired, as in current practice, though the famed Mannheim orchestra boasted four.
More recently, Illinois Jacquet, Ray Pizzi, Frank Tiberi, and Marshall Allen have both doubled on bassoon in addition to their saxophone performances.
Some models, like a Polisi Artist bassoon has two assignments.
The ring, with other pads, are lifted when the smallest finger on the right hands pushes a lever.
The right thumb operates four keys.
These bassoons are made with a "Wagner bell" which is an extended bell with a key for both the low A and the low B-flat.
While bassoons are usually critically tuned at the factory, the player nonetheless has a great degree of flexibility of pitch control through the use of breath support, embouchure, and reed profile.
The index fingers has three assignments.
B1, B1, C1, D1, D4, C4 (also B4), two keys when combined create A4, and the whisper pad.
Bassoons with Wagner bells suffer similar intonational deficiencies as a bassoon with an A extension.
The conductor John Foulds lamented in 1934 the dominance of the Heckel-style bassoon, considering them too homogeneous in sound with the horn.
A wind ensemble will usually also include two bassoons and sometimes contrabassoon, each with independent parts; other types of concert wind ensembles will often have larger sections, with many players on each of first or second parts; in simpler arrangements there will be only one bassoon part and no contrabassoon.
Playing is facilitated by doubling the tube back on itself and by closing the distance between the widely spaced holes with a complex system of key work, which extends throughout nearly the entire length of the instrument.
F#2 is created with this key, as well as G4, B4, B4, and C4.
The player can also close the hole with the key pressed down.
The modern symphony orchestra typically calls for two bassoons, often with a third playing the contrabassoon.
The whisper pad is used throughout the instrument's register, as well as in fingerings to create a muted or more piercing sound.
The bassoon disassembles into six main pieces, including the reed.
Bassoons are double reed instruments like the oboe and the English horn.
Meanwhile, composers such as Joseph Bodin de Boismortier, Michel Corrette, Johann Ernst Galliard, Jan Dismas Zelenka, Johann Friedrich Fasch and Telemann wrote demanding solo and ensemble music for the instrument.
Less-expensive models are also made of materials such as polypropylene and ebonite, primarily for student and outdoor use; metal bassoons were made in the past but have not been produced by any major manufacturer since 1889.
Music historians generally consider the dulcian to be the forerunner of the modern bassoon, as the two instruments share many characteristics: a double reed fitted to a metal crook, obliquely drilled tone holes and a conical bore that doubles back on itself.
The Selmer Company stopped fabrication of French system bassoons a few years ago.
Except for a brief 1940s wartime conversion to ball bearing manufacture, the Heckel concern has produced instruments continuously to the present day.
The bassoon is played with both hands in a stationary position, the left above the right, with five main finger holes on the front of the instrument (nearest the audience) plus a sixth that is activated by an open-standing key.
The wrapping itself is often sealed with Duco or clear nail varnish (polish).
Orchestras first used the bassoon to reinforce the bass line, and as the bass of the double reed choir (oboes and taille).
Many extended techniques can be performed on the bassoon, such as multiphonics, flutter-tonguing, circular breathing, double tonguing, and harmonics.
This type of sound can be beneficial in music by French composers, but has drawn criticism for being too intrusive.
Sometime around 1700, a fourth key (G♯) was added, and it was for this type of instrument that composers such as Antonio Vivaldi, Bach, and Georg Philipp Telemann wrote their demanding music.
The upper key is used for E1, E3, F3, F#3, A4, B4, B4, C4, C#4, and D4.
The origins of the dulcian are obscure, but by the mid-16th century it was available in as many as eight different sizes, from soprano to great bass.
It is also used, like the whisper pad, in additional fingerings for muting the sound.
However, with continued use in some regions and its distinctive tone, the Buffet continues to have a place in modern bassoon playing, particularly in France, where it is originated.
Lateef's diverse and eclectic instrumentation saw the bassoon as a natural addition (see, e.g., ''The Centaur and the Phoenix'' (1960) which features bassoon as part of a 6-man horn section, including a few solos) while Corea employed the bassoon in combination with flautist Hubert Laws.
Students typically receive instruction in proper posture, hand position, embouchure, tone production, and reed making.
The modern bassoon exists in two distinct primary forms, the Buffet system and the Heckel system.
However, use of bassoons in concert orchestras was sporadic until the late 17th century when double reeds began to make their way into standard instrumentation.
As with all bassoons, the tone varies considerably, depending on individual instrument and performer.
Little is known about the early construction of the bassoon reed, as few examples survive, and much of what is known is only what can be gathered from artistic representations.
The Buffet system bassoon achieved its basic acoustical properties somewhat earlier than the Heckel.
Wooden instruments are lined with hard rubber along the interior of the wing and boot joints to prevent damage from moisture; wooden instruments are also stained and varnished.
The same bottom tenor-joint key is also used, with additional fingering setup on the instrument, to create E4 and F4.
Circumstantial evidence indicates that the baroque bassoon was a newly invented instrument, rather than a simple modification of the old dulcian.
For example, in Ravel's "Boléro", the bassoon is asked to play the ostinto on G4.
Peter Schickele's "Last Tango in Bayreuth" (after themes from ''Tristan und Isolde'') is a popular work; Schickele's fictional alter ego P. D. Q. Bach exploits the more humorous aspects with his quartet "Lip My Reeds," which at one point calls for players to perform on the reed alone.
It can also move to a lever used for E4 and a rarely-used trill key.
In the case of the bassoon, flutter-tonguing may be accomplished by "gargling" in the back of the throat as well as by the conventional method of rolling Rs.
Also, using certain fingerings, notes may be produced on the instrument that sound lower pitches than the actual range of the instrument.
The index finger stays over one hole, except when E4 is played.
His employment at Schott gave him the freedom to construct and test instruments according to these new designs, and he published the results in ''Caecilia'', Schott's house journal.
Notable makers of the 4-key and 5-key baroque bassoon include J.H.
Heckel and two generations of descendants continued to refine the bassoon, and their instruments became the standard, with other makers following.
There are also short-reach bassoons made for the benefit of young or petite players.
Orchestral works with fully independent parts for the bassoon would not become commonplace until the Classical era.
The exact placement of these loops can vary somewhat depending on the reed maker.
The idea of using low A was begun by Richard Wagner, who wanted to extend the range of the bassoon.
Using a special pair of pliers, the reed maker presses down the cane, making it conform to the shape of the mandrel.
The man most likely responsible for developing the true bassoon was Martin Hotteterre (d.1712), who may also have invented the three-piece ''flûte traversière'' and the ''hautbois'' (baroque oboe).
Its main assignment has three different options.
Both sets of teeth should be covered by the lips in order to protect the reed and control applied pressure.
Prices range from $3,000 up to $250,000 for a good-quality instrument.
