While types of basslines vary widely from one style of music to another, the bassist usually fulfills a similar role: anchoring the harmonic framework and establishing the beat.
Students get private lessons and perform in 40 student ensembles.
* '''Eight''' and '''twelve-string''' models are both built on the same course string concept found on twelve-string guitars, where sets of strings are spaced together in groups of two or three that are primarily played simultaneously.
These low-level signals are then amplified and played through a speaker.
Of all of the genres, jazz and the mainstream commercial genres (rock, R&B, etc.)
* '''"Jazz" pickups''' (referring to the original Fender Jazz Bass), also referred to as "J pickups", are wider eight-pole pickups that lie underneath all four strings.
The bass guitar is a transposing instrument, as it is notated in bass clef an octave higher than it sounds (as is the double bass) to avoid excessive ledger lines.
While less common than four or five-string basses, they appear in Latin, jazz, and other genres, as well as in studio work where a single instrument must be highly versatile.
The earliest five string was created by Fender in 1965.
Typically, one marker is used for the 3rd, 5th, 7th and 9th fret positions and two markers are used for the 12th fret.
3 (1981); Steve Reich's ''Electric Counterpoint'' (1987) and 2x5 (2008), Wolfgang Rihm (''Die Eroberung von Mexico'', 1987–91), Arvo Pärt (''Miserere'', 1989/92), Steve Martland (''Dance works'', 1993; and ''Horses of Instruction'', 1994), Sofia Gubaidulina (''Aus dem Stundenbuch'', 1991), Giya Kancheli (''Wingless'', 1993), John Adams (''I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky'', 1995; and ''Scratchband'', 1996/97), Michael Nyman (various works for the Michael Nyman Band), Mark-Anthony Turnage (''Blood on the Floor'', 1993–1996), numerous works by Art Jarvinen.
The 1935 sales catalog for Tutmarc's electronic musical instrument company, Audiovox, featured his "Model 736 Bass Fiddle", a four-stringed, solid-bodied, fretted electric bass instrument with a  scale length.
The most common are four, five, or six strings:
The use of the thumb was acknowledged by early Fender models, which came with a "thumbrest" or "Tug Bar" attached to the pickguard below the strings.
Queen's bassist, John Deacon, occasionally played bass solos, such as on the song "Liar".
The "Fender Bass" was a revolutionary new instrument, which could be easily transported to a gig, and amplified to just about any volume without feeding back".
In contrast to the upright bass (or double bass), the electric bass guitar is played horizontally across the body, like an electric guitar.
During the 1990s, as five-string basses became more widely available and more affordable, an increasing number of bassists in genres ranging from metal to gospel began using five-string instruments for added lower range—a low "B".
Dual coil pickups come in two main varieties; ceramic or ceramic and steel.
The pick (or plectrum) is used to obtain a more articulate attack, for speed, or just personal preference.
In blues rock bands, the bassist often plays blues scale-based riffs and chugging boogie-style lines.
The "four-in-three" technique is demonstrated in the image below (A bassist performing tapping).
The first bass was a Streamer Bass Bass, which is similar to the Spector NS.
And I play a lot of open strings.
The thumbrest was moved above the strings in 1970s models (as a true thumbrest) and eliminated in the 1980s.
Slap style playing was popularized throughout the 1980s and early 1990s by pop bass players such as Mark King (from Level 42) and rock bassists such as with Pino Palladino (currently a member of the John Mayer Trio and bassist for The Who), Flea (from the Red Hot Chili Peppers) and Alex Katunich (from Incubus).
On the other hand, the sympathetic resonance of harmonically related strings may be desired for some songs, such as ballads.
** A well-known bass humbucker is the pickup used on the Music Man series of basses; it has two coils, each with four large polepieces.
Around 1970, Rick Danko from The Band began to use an Ampeg fretless, which he modified with Fender pickups—as heard on the 1971 ''Cahoots'' studio album and the ''Rock of Ages'' album recorded live in 1971.
In 1974, Anthony Jackson worked with Carl Thompson to create the Contrabass guitar (BEADGC).
Warwick bass guitars are also well known for exotic hardwoods: most of the necks are made of ovangkol, and the fingerboards use wenge or ebony.
Slapping and popping solos were prominent in 1980s pop and R&B, and they are still used by some modern funk and Latin bands.
Like the electric guitar, the electric bass guitar is almost always connected to an amplifier and a speaker with a patch cord for live performances.
Strumming (usually with finger nails) is a less common technique.
have the most established and comprehensive systems of instruction and training for electric bass.
Robert Trujillo of Metallica is known for playing "massive chords"  and "chord-based harmonics"  on the bass.
Bill Black, playing with Elvis Presley, switched from upright bass to the Fender Precision Bass around 1957.
In 1971, Alembic established the template for what became known as "boutique" or "high-end" electric bass guitars.
It was released in 1961, and was favored by Jack Bruce of Cream.
On a fretted bass, the frets divide the fingerboard into semitone divisions (as on a guitar).
Rock and pop bass has a history of pedagogy dating back to the 1950s and 1960s, when method books were developed to help students learn the instrument.
A combination of a J or other single-coil pickup at the neck and a Music Man-style humbucker in the bridge has become popular among boutique builders, giving a very bright, focused tone that is good for jazz, funk and thumbstyle.
Amram is an American composer known for his eclectic use of jazz, ethnic and folk music.
American composers using electric bass in the 1960s included experimental classical music composer Christian Wolff (born 1934) (''Electric Spring 1'', 1966; ''Electric Spring 2'', 1966/70; ''Electric Spring 3'', 1967; and ''Untitled'', 1996); Francis Thorne, a student of Paul Hindemith at Yale University (born 1922), who wrote (''Liebesrock'' 1968–69); and Krzysztof Penderecki (Cello Concerto no.
The addition of frets enabled bassists to play in tune more easily than on acoustic or electric upright basses.
Danko said, "It's a challenge to play fretless because you have to really use your ear."
A rarely used playing technique related to slapping is the use of wooden dowel "funk fingers", an approach popularized by Tony Levin.
The string buzzes against the wood and is somewhat muted because the sounding portion of the string is in direct contact with the flesh of the player's finger.
Contrary to its name, this was not used to rest the thumb, but to provide leverage while using the thumb to pluck the strings.
For fretless basses, the player can use this style of vibrato, or they can alternate between the note and a slightly lower pitch.
To create the opposite effect, a "bend down", the string is pushed to a higher pitch before being plucked or picked and then allowed to fall to the lower, regular pitch after it is sounded.
In genres such as progressive rock, art rock, or progressive metal, the bass guitar player may play melody lines along with the lead guitar (or vocalist) and perform extended guitar solos.
Electric bass students get private lessons and there is a choice of over 270 ensembles to play in.
Bach; "Portrait of Tracy" by Jaco Pastorius; "Twisted" by Wardell Gray and Annie Ross; "What's Going On" by James Jamerson; and the funky Disco hit "Le Freak" by Chic.
The pick is usually held with the index and thumb, with the up-and-down plucking motion supplied by the wrist.
In a funk or funk rock band, a bass solo may showcase the bassist's percussive slap and pop playing.
Types of bass lines vary widely, depending on musical style.
The slapping and popping technique incorporates a large number of muted (or 'ghost' tones) to normal notes to add to the rhythmic effect.
Funk bassists such as Larry Graham began using slapping and popping techniques for their solos, which coupled a percussive thumb-slapping technique of the lower strings with an aggressive finger-snap of the higher strings, often in rhythmic alternation.
This style is known as the '''"MM" pickup''' for this reason, and many aftermarket pickup manufacturers and custom builders incorporate these pickups in their designs.
As such, many players learn by ear, by copying bass lines from records and CDs, and by playing in a number of bands.
John McVie of Fleetwood Mac performed a bass solo on "The Chain" from the 1977 ''Rumours'' album.
In the jazz scene, teens can begin taking private lessons on the instrument and performing in amateur big bands at high schools or run by the community.
While fretless basses are often associated with jazz and jazz fusion, bassists from other genres have used fretless basses,  such as Freebo (country), Rick Danko (rock/blues), Rod Clements (folk), Steve DiGiorgio (metal) and Colin Edwin (modern/progressive rock).
When sitting, right-handed players can balance the instrument on the right thigh or like classical guitar players, the left.
Some fretless basses have "fret line" markers inlaid in the fingerboard as a guide, while others only use guide marks on the side of the neck.
Some basses are built with entirely hollow bodies, which change the tone and resonance of the instrument.
This tuning is also the same as the standard tuning on the lower four strings on a six-string guitar, only an octave lower.
Manowar's bassist Joey DeMaio uses special piccolo bass for his extremely fast bass solos like "Sting of the Bumblebee" and "William's Tale".
Since two hands can be used to play on the fretboard, this makes it possible to play interweaving contrapuntal lines, to simultaneously play a bass line and a simple chord, or play chords and arpeggios.
Pickup shapes on electric basses are often referred to as "P" or "J" pickups in reference to the visual and electrical differences between the Precision Bass and Jazz Bass pickups.
These pickups can often be "tapped", meaning one of the two coils can be essentially turned off, giving a sound similar to a single-coil pickup.
P-style pickups are generally placed in the "neck" or "middle" position, but some luthiers and performers have used P pickups in the bridge position, or in between two jazz pickups.
When considering the spacing between notes, this is a comfortable distance for the average person's hand size.
These instruments typically have one of the strings in each course tuned an octave above the 'standard' string, although a fifth above is also used.
The slap and pop method, or "thumbstyle", most associated with funk, uses tones and percussive sounds achieved by striking, thumping, or "slapping" a string with the thumb and snapping (or "popping") a string or strings with the index or middle fingers.
Many bassists combine a 'J' pickup at the bridge and a 'P' pickup at the neck so they can blend the two sounds.
In other less mainstream genres, such as hardcore punk or metal, the pedagogical systems and training sequences are typically not formalized and institutionalized.
This instrument, commissioned by bassist Garry Goodman, was an early example of a bass with more than six single course strings.
Many styles of music utilise the bass guitar, including rock, heavy metal, pop, punk rock, country, reggae, gospel, blues, symphonic rock, and jazz.
In 2011 Warwick released a new Thumb NT 7 bass for Jeroen Paul Thesseling, featuring a  scale with sub-contra tuning F-B-E-A-D-G-C. Yves Carbonne developed 10 and 12 string fretless sub-bass guitars.
The electric bass was introduced in some bands in the 1950s and it became prominent during the late 1960s and early 1970s, when rock influences were blended with jazz to create jazz-rock fusion.
In addition to pressing down one note at a time, bassists can also press down several notes at one time with their fretting hand to perform a chord.
Traditionally, two of them are used, one of them near the bridge and another closer to the neck.
The late Monk Montgomery (who played in Lionel Hampton's band) and Bruce Palmer (who performed with Buffalo Springfield) use thumb downstrokes.
In 1957 Rickenbacker introduced the model 4000 bass, the first bass to feature a neck-through-body design; the Fender and Gibson versions used bolt-on and glued-on necks.
This "split pickup", introduced in 1957, appears to have been two mandolin pickups (Fender was marketing a four string solid body electric mandolin at the time).
In both published Van Halen concert videos, Michael Anthony performs unique maneuvers and actions during his solos.
The program teaches a range of modern styles, including funk, rock, jazz, Latin, and R&B.
In some styles of metal, a bass break may consist of "shred guitar"-style tapping on the bass.
In the 1950s, Leo Fender, with the help of his employee George Fullerton, developed the first mass-produced electric bass.
* '''"Soapbar" Pickups''' are so-named due to their resemblance to a bar of soap and originally referred to the Gibson P-90 guitar pickup.
The fretting hand can add vibrato to a plucked or picked note, either a gentle, narrow vibrato or a more exaggerated, wide vibrato with bigger pitch variations.
* '''"Precision" pickups''' (which refers to the Fender Precision Bass), also referred to as "P pickups", are two distinct single-coil pickups.
In Chicago blues, the electric bass often performs a walking bassline made up of scales and arpeggios.
To graduate, students must perform pieces and songs from a set list that includes Baroque suite movements that were originally written for cello, 1960s Motown tunes, 1970s fusion jazz solos, and 1980s slap bass tunes.
There are complaints about me from time to time.
The string can be plucked at any point between the bridge and the point where the fretting hand is holding down the string; different timbres are produced depending on where along the string it is plucked.
Specific models became identified with particular styles of music, such as the Rickenbacker 4001 series, which became identified with progressive rock bassists like Chris Squire of Yes, and Geddy Lee of Rush, while the StingRay was used by funk/disco players such Louis Johnson of the funk band The Brothers Johnson and Bernard Edwards of Chic.
The shorter sustain of a muted note on an electric bass can be used to imitate the shorter sustain and character of an upright bass.
Geddy Lee of Rush has made frequent use of bass solos, such as on the instrumental "YYZ".
In the 2000s (decade), some bass manufacturers included digital modelling circuits inside the instrument to recreate tones and sounds from many models of basses (e.g., Line 6's Variax bass).
Bass solos are performed using a range of different techniques, such as plucking or fingerpicking.
The Chapman Stick and Warr Guitars are string instruments specifically designed to be played using two-handed tapping.
The term is also used to describe any pickup with a rectangular shape and no visible pole pieces; most of the pickups falling into this category are humbucking.
Monk Montgomery was the first bass player to tour with the Fender bass guitar, with Lionel Hampton's postwar big band in 1953.
Alternatively, the thumb can be rested loosely on the strings to mute the unused strings.
Bass bodies are typically made of wood, although other materials such as graphite (for example, some of the Steinberger designs) have also been used.
Some bassists, such as Jah Wobble, alternate between standing or seated playing.
When a string is rapidly hammered on, the note can be prolonged into a trill.
Felt and rubber picks are used to emulate a fingerstyle tone.
* ''Dual coil "humbucker"'' pickups, sometimes abbreviated to ''DC pickups'', have two signal producing coils that are reverse wound around opposed polarity magnets (similar in principle to the two individual J-pickups).
This technique involves the use of four fingers in the space of three frets, especially in the lower positions.
Bolt-on neck construction does not necessarily imply a cheaply made instrument; virtually all traditional Fender designs still use bolt-on necks, including its high-end instruments costing thousands of dollars, and many boutique luthiers build bolt-on basses as well as neck-through instruments.
Players noted for this technique include Cliff Burton, Billy Sheehan, Stuart Hamm, John Myung, Victor Wooten, Les Claypool, Mark King, and Michael Manring.
First introduced in 1960, the Fender Jazz Bass was known as the Deluxe Bass and was meant to accompany the Jazzmaster guitar.
The vibrations of the instrument's ferrous metal strings within the magnetic field of the permanent magnets in magnetic pickups produce small variations in the magnetic flux threading the coils of the pickups.
Other tunings such as C-E-A-D-G are used in rare cases.
In the early 1970s, fusion-jazz bassist Jaco Pastorius created his own fretless bass by removing the frets from a Fender Jazz Bass, filling the holes with wood putty, and coating the fretboard with epoxy resin.
James Jamerson, an influential bassist from the Motown era, played intricate bass lines using only his index finger, which he called "The Hook."
The Bass Department has two rooms with bass amps for classes and ten private lesson studios equipped with audio recording gear.
The upright basses that had previously been used in jazz and early rock and roll were hard to amplify and they were prone to causing unwanted audio feedback when plugged into a bass amplifier.
The entire bass is then milled and shaped.
Russian and Soviet composer Alfred Schnittke used the instrument for his Symphony no.
Some players prefer B0-E1-A1-D2-F2-B2, which preserves the intervals of standard guitar tuning and makes the highest and lowest string the same note two octaves apart.
* '''Four strings''' with alternative tunings to obtain an extended lower range.
While vibrato is mostly done on "stopped" notes—that is, notes that are pressed down on the fingerboard—open strings can also be vibratoed by pressing down on the string behind the nut.
Fretless basses have a distinct sound, because the absence of frets means that the string must be pressed down directly onto the wood of the fingerboard as with the double bass.
He originally intended to use his fingers, but could not put his plectrum down quickly enough.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, bassists mostly used flatwound strings with a smooth surface, which had a smooth, damped sound reminiscent of a double bass.
Because of the thinner strings, a new nut may be required to hold the strings.
tunes and rock-infused jazz fusion tunes, the electric bass may play rapid, syncopated rhythmic figures in coordination with the drummer, or lay down a low, heavy groove.
Hipshots typically drop the "E"-string down to "D" on a four string bass.
Wooten popularized the "double thump," in which the string is slapped twice, on the upstroke and a downstroke (for more information, see Classical Thump).
* '''Six strings''' are usually tuned B0-E1-A1-D2-G2-C3—like a four-string bass with an additional low "B" string and a high "C" string.
and Master of Music (M.Mus.)
Some fretless basses have epoxy coated fingerboards to increase the fingerboard's durability, enhance sustain, and give a brighter tone.
While , , and  scale lengths were once only available in "boutique" instruments, in the 2000s (decade), many manufacturers began offering these "extra long" scale lengths.
The sustain of the picked note can be varied for each note or phrase.
In 1982, Hans-Peter Wilfer founded Warwick, to make a European bass in contrast to the Asian and American basses.
U2 includes a bass solo most notably on "Gloria", in which Adam Clayton utilizes several playing techniques.
Instead of plucking or picking the string to create a sound, in this technique, the action of striking the string against the fret or the fretboard creates the sound.
In metal, the bass guitar may perform complex riffs along with the rhythm guitarist or play a low, rumbling pedal point to anchor the group's sound.
The variety of materials used in the strings gives bass players a range of tonal options.
In some cases, when the bass is used with large-scale PA amplification, it is plugged into a "DI" or ''direct box'', which routes the signal to the bass amp while also sending the signal directly into a mixing console, and thence to the main and monitor speakers.
Many basses have just one pickup, typically a "P" or soapbar pickup.
Jazz bassists use a subtle form of fretting hand pizzicato by plucking a very brief open string grace note with the fretting hand right before playing the string with the plucking hand.
The Fender VI, a baritone guitar, was tuned one octave lower than standard guitar tuning.
Roy Johnson, and Shifty Henry with Louis Jordan & His Tympany Five, were other early Fender bass pioneers.
For information on notable jazz bassists, see the List of jazz bassists article.
As with the halves of P-pickups, the J-pickups are reverse-wound with reverse magnetic polarity.
Some basses use more unusual pickup configurations, such as a soapbar and a "P" pickup (found on some Fenders), Stu Hamm's "Urge" basses, which have a "P" pickup sandwiched between two "J" pickups, and some of Bootsy Collins' custom basses, which had as many as 5 J pickups.
Chuck Rainey (electric bassist for Aretha Franklin and Marvin Gaye) was BIT's first director.
Metallica's 1983 debut ''Kill Em All'' includes the song "(Anesthesia) Pulling Teeth," consisting entirely of a bass solo played by Cliff Burton.
In Latin music, double stops with fifths are used.
Berklee offers instruction for the four-, five-, and six-string electric bass, the fretless bass, and double bass.
Tapewound (double bass type) and flatwound strings are sometimes used with the fretless bass so the metal string windings do not wear down the fingerboard.
With the explosion of the popularity of rock music in the 1960s, many more manufacturers began making electric basses.
The Fender Bass V used the E-A-D-G-C tuning, but was unpopular and discontinued in 1970.
Green Day bassist Mike Dirnt played a bass solo on the song "Welcome To Paradise" from the 1994 album ''Dookie'' and on the song "Makeout Party" from the 2012 album ''¡Dos!''.
The four-string bass, by far the most common, is usually tuned the same as the double bass, which corresponds to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest pitched strings of a guitar (E, A, D, and G).
Sting also uses palm-muting; but often does so without a pick, using the thumb and first finger to pluck.
The long scale necks on Leo Fender's basses—with a scale length (distance between nut and bridge) of  — set the standard for electric basses, although  "short scale" instruments, such as the Höfner 500/1 "violin bass" played by Paul McCartney, and the Fender Mustang Bass are also common.
In addition to college and university diplomas and degrees, there are a variety of other training programs such as jazz or funk summer camps and festivals, which give students the opportunity to play a wide range of contemporary music, from 1970s-style jazz-rock fusion to 2000s-style R&B.
The importance of the bass guitarist and the bass line varies in different styles of music.
The fretting hand can be used to change a sounded note, either by fully muting it after it is plucked or picked to shorten its duration or by partially muting it near the bridge to reduce the volume of the note, or make the note die away faster.
When plucked closer to the bridge, the string's harmonics are more pronounced, giving a brighter tone.
The harder the palm presses, or the more string area that is contacted by the palm, the shorter the string's sustain.
Later, Jackson brought his ideas to Fodera in cooperation with Ken Smith to create a wider-spaced Contrabass guitar, which evolved to the modern six-string bass.
Lemmy of Motörhead often played power chords in his bass lines.
This significantly reduces noise from interference compared to single coil pickups.
In Canada, the Humber College Institute of Technology & Advanced Learning offers an Advanced Diploma (a three-year program) in jazz and commercial music.
'J' Style pickups tend to have a lower output and a thinner sound than 'P' Style pickups making it perfect for most rock music.
A variety of tuning options and number of string courses have been used to extend the range of the instrument, or facilitate different modes of playing.
This extra long scale provides a higher string tension, which may yield a more defined tone on the low "B" string of five- and six-stringed instruments (or detuned four-string basses).
Graphite composite is used to make lightweight necks Exotic woods are used on more expensive instruments: for example, Alembic uses cocobolo as a body or top layer material because of its attractive grain.
For fretted basses, vibrato is always an alternation between the pitch of the note and a slightly higher pitch.
When playing bass solos, rock and metal bassists sometimes use effects such as fuzz bass or a  wah-wah pedal to produce a more pronounced sound.
Gibson basses also tended to be smaller, sleeker instruments; Gibson did not produce a  scale bass until 1963 with the release of the Thunderbird, which was also the first Gibson bass to use dual-humbucking pickups in a more traditional position, about halfway between the neck and bridge.
Whereas Fender basses had pickups mounted in positions in between the base of the neck and the top of the bridge, many of Gibson's early basses featured one humbucking pickup mounted directly against the neck pocket.
The fundamental technique used in the fretting hand is known as "a finger per fret", where each finger in the fretting hand plays one fret in a given position.
Michael uses D'Addario EXL 280 piccolo bass strings on his four-string hyperbass, made by Zon Guitars.
While a wide variety of woods are suitable for use in the body, neck, and fretboard of the bass guitar, the most common type of wood used for the body are alder and  ash, for the neck is maple, and for the fretboard is rosewood.
Several companies manufacture piccolo sets that can be put on any regular bass, thereby converting any bass into a piccolo bass.
BIT was one of the earliest professional training program for electric bassists.
There are also variations in how a bassist chooses to rest the right-hand thumb (or left thumb in the case of left-handed players).
Whether a jazz bassist is comping (accompanying) or soloing, they usually aim to create a rhythmic drive and "timefeel" that creates a sense of "swing" and "groove".
Palm-muting is commonly done while using a pick, but can also be done without a pick, as when doing down-strokes with the thumb.
Chords are not used that often by electric bass players.
Less common is the "single-coil P" pickup, used on the original 1951 Fender Precision bass.
No, I play a lot of notes, but I also play a lot of chords.
In some cases, the bass guitar solo is unaccompanied, or accompanied only by the drums.
Usually basses with multiple pickups allow blending of the output from the pickups, with electrical and acoustical interactions between the two pickups (such as partial phase cancellations) allowing a range of tonal effects.
This amounts to an impedance buffering pre-amplifier on board the instrument to lower the output impedance of the bass's pickup circuit, increasing low-end output, and overall frequency response (more lows and highs).
Adler's 11- and 12-string instruments have the same range as a grand piano.
In the mid-1970s, Alembic and other boutique bass manufacturers, such as Tobias, produced four-string and five-string basses with a low "B" string.
Each is offset a small amount along the length of the body so that each half is underneath two strings.
In some pop styles, such as 1980s-era pop and musical theater, the bass sometimes plays a relatively simple part as the music emphasizes vocals and melody instruments.
A seven-string bass (B0-E1-A1-D2-G2-C3-F3) was built by luthier Michael Tobias in 1987.
One notable method book was Carol Kaye's ''How to Play the Electric Bass''.
