The film was a huge success; not only was it the top-grossing film of the year, but at the time was the fifth highest-grossing film in history.
In "'Hush", Batman reveals his true identity to Catwoman.
That story prompted editor Whitney Ellsworth to decree that the character could no longer kill or use a gun.
Grant Morrison notes that both heroes "believe in the same kind of things" despite the day/night contrast their heroic roles display.
The character was created by artist Bob Kane and writer Bill Finger, and first appeared in ''Detective Comics'' #27 (May 1939).
From 1973 until 1986, Batman had a starring role in ABC's ''Super Friends'' series; which was animated by Hanna-Barbera.
In 2010, the storyline ''Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne'' saw Bruce travel through history, eventually returning to the present day.
Batman's primary character traits can be summarized as ''"wealth; physical prowess; deductive abilities and obsession"''.
Few stories were true collaborations between O'Neil, Adams, Schwartz, and inker Dick Giordano, and in actuality these men were mixed and matched with various other creators during the 1970s; nevertheless the influence of their work was "tremendous".
Wayne, being a playboy, was a man of gentry.
The 1994 company-wide crossover storyline "Zero Hour" changes aspects of DC continuity again, including those of Batman.
The character's presence has extended beyond his comic book origins; events such as the release of the 1989 ''Batman'' film and its accompanying merchandising "brought the Batman to the forefront of public consciousness".
Frank Miller's limited series ''The Dark Knight Returns'' (February–June 1986) returned the character to his darker roots, both in atmosphere and tone.
Gordon gets his job back as the commissioner, and the government Batman project is shuttered.
In 2005, ''Batman Begins'' was released by Warner Bros. as a reboot of the film series; directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale as Batman.
Writers of Batman and Superman stories have often compared and contrasted the two.
Batman's butler Alfred was killed off (though his death was quickly reversed) while a new female relative for the Wayne family, Aunt Harriet, came to live with Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson.
To help fill in the revised backstory for Batman following ''Crisis'', DC launched a new Batman title called ''Legends of the Dark Knight'' in 1989 and has published various miniseries and one-shot stories since then that largely take place during the "Year One" period.
As Julius Schwartz noted, "When the television show was a success, I was asked to be campy, and of course when the show faded, so did the comic books."
''Batman Incorporated'' was relaunched in 2012-2013 to complete the "Leviathan" storyline.
The 1993 "Knightfall" story arc introduced a new villain, Bane, who critically injures Batman after pushing him to the limits of his endurance.
He had two stiff wings that were sticking out, looking like bat wings.
A Lego-themed version of Batman was also featured as one of the protagonists in the animated film ''The Lego Movie'' (2014), with Will Arnett providing the voice.
The guardian Phillip Wayne is removed leaving young Bruce to be raised by Alfred Pennyworth.
Batman also becomes a founding member of the Justice Society of America, although he, like Superman, is an honorary member, and thus only participates occasionally.
O'Neil operated under the assumption that he was hired to revamp the character and as a result tried to instill a different tone in the books than had gone before.
The storyline "A Death in the Family" suggests that given Batman's grim nature, he is unlikely to have adopted the "bat" prefix on his own.
The updated acknowledgement for the character appeared as "Batman created by Bob Kane with Bill Finger".
A large assortment of villains make up Batman's rogues gallery, including his archenemy, the Joker.
After the end of "Knightfall", the storylines split in two directions, following both the Azrael-Batman's adventures, and Bruce Wayne's quest to become Batman once more.
Julie and Murray did not want to coordinate their efforts, nor were they asked to do so.
Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne, a wealthy American industrialist.
After the introduction of DC Comics' multiverse in the 1960s, DC established that stories from the Golden Age star the Earth-Two Batman, a character from a parallel world.
The Batman comics garnered major attention in 1988 when DC Comics created a 900 number for readers to call to vote on whether Jason Todd, the second Robin, lived or died.
The first issue of the solo spin-off series ''Batman'' was notable not only for introducing two of his most persistent enemies, the Joker and Catwoman, but for a story in which Batman shoots some monstrous giants to death.
Picking up a gun, Batman nearly shoots Luthor in order to avenge his former sidekick, until Wonder Woman convinces him to not pull the trigger.
Finger said, "Batman was originally written in the style of the pulps", and this influence was evident with Batman showing little remorse over killing or maiming criminals.
Bruce Wayne and Clark Kent belong to different social classes: "Bruce has a butler, Clark has a boss."
In 2015, a new series titled ''We Are Robin'' will focus on a group of teenagers using the Robin persona to fight crime in Gotham City.
In ''Final Crisis'' #7 Wayne is shown witnessing the passing of the first man, Anthro.
During the storyline's first phase, the new villain Bane paralyzes Batman, leading Wayne to ask Azrael to take on the role.
Unlike most superheroes, Batman does not possess any superpowers; rather, he relies on his genius intellect, physical prowess, martial arts abilities, detective skills, science and technology, vast wealth, intimidation, and indomitable will.
Like them, he performed his heroic deeds in secret, averted suspicion by playing the fool in public, and marked his work with a signature symbol.
And how lucky I am to be able to call on him."
Batman has been portrayed in both film and television by Lewis Wilson, Robert Lowery, Adam West, Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer, George Clooney, Christian Bale, and Ben Affleck.
I went to the DC library and read some of the early stories.
Batman's secret identity is '''Bruce Wayne''', an American billionaire, playboy, philanthropist, and owner of Wayne Enterprises.
Batman and Superman are usually depicted as close friends.
In the late 1970s, when Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster began receiving a "created by" credit on the Superman titles, along with William Moulton Marston being given the byline for creating Wonder Woman, Batman stories began saying "Created by Bob Kane" in addition to the other credits.
It was eventually followed by ''The Dark Knight Rises'' (2012), which served as a conclusion to Nolan's film series.
Sales nearly doubled, despite Kane's preference for a solo Batman, and it sparked a proliferation of "kid sidekicks".
Additions include meetings with a future Superman during his youth, his upbringing by his uncle Philip Wayne (introduced in ''Batman'' #208, January/February 1969) after his parents' death, and appearances of his father and himself as prototypical versions of Batman and Robin, respectively.
''Entertainment Weekly'' named Batman as one of ''The 20 All Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture''.
In an article commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the character, ''The Guardian'' wrote, "Batman is a figure blurred by the endless reinvention that is modern mass culture.
Robin, Batman's junior counterpart, has been a widely recognized supporting character for many years.
In Batman's first appearance in ''Detective Comics'' #27, he is already operating as a crime-fighter.
Kane himself also commented on Finger's lack of credit.
The Batcave is Batman's secret headquarters, consisting of a series of subterranean caves beneath his mansion, Wayne Manor.
The film also won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction.
Deprived of many of his technological resources, Batman fights to reclaim the city from legions of gangs during 1999's "No Man's Land".
Dressed as a bat, Batman deliberately cultivates a frightening persona in order to aid him in crime-fighting, a fear that originates from the criminals' own guilty conscience.
However, Finger's contract left him only with his writing page rate and no byline.
In early strips, Batman's career as a vigilante earns him the ire of the police.
Batman's original character was changed in the 1950s when the now-defunct comic book codes went into effect, and DC editor Whitney Ellsworth reinvented Batman as having a stringent moral code which never allowed him to kill.
As these comics state, Bruce Wayne is born to Dr. Thomas Wayne and his wife Martha, two very wealthy and charitable Gotham City socialites.
In the 1980s, Dick Grayson becomes Nightwing.
Only Joel Schumacher might have had an opposing view."
A prequel game titled ''Batman: Arkham Origins'' (2013) was later released by WB Games Montréal.
In pre-Crisis continuity, the two are depicted as close friends; however, in current continuity, they have a mutually respectful but uneasy relationship, with an emphasis on their differing views on crime-fighting and justice.
Batman has been repeatedly described as having a genius-level intellect, being one of the greatest martial artists in the DC Universe, and having peak human physical conditioning.
Batman faces a variety of foes ranging from common criminals to outlandish supervillains.
Grant Morrison said that "Gayness is built into Batman&nbsp;... Obviously as a fictional character he's intended to be heterosexual, but the basis of the whole concept is utterly gay.
Batman is often depicted as carrying a projectile which shoots a retractable grappling hook attached to a cable.
In ''Superman/Batman'' #3 (December 2003), Superman observes, "Sometimes, I admit, I think of Bruce as a man in a costume.
The overall look of the character, particularly the length of the cowl's ears and of the cape, varies greatly depending on the artist.
Wayne trains himself physically and intellectually and crafts a bat-inspired persona to fight crime.
However, if one wants the 'credit', then one has to cease being a 'ghost' or follower and become a leader or innovator."
Morrison explained his intentions for the new characterization of Batman: "Dick Grayson is kind of this consummate superhero.
However, a change in the editorial team brought a swift end to that storyline and, apparently, all that transpired during the story arc.
It also is a storeroom for Batman's memorabilia.
When Batman is needed, the Gotham City police activate a searchlight with a bat-shaped insignia over the lens called the Bat-Signal, which shines into the night sky, creating a bat-symbol on a passing cloud which can be seen from any point in Gotham.
Batman historian Les Daniels credits Gardner Fox with creating the concept of Batman's arsenal with the introduction of the utility belt in ''Detective Comics'' #29 (July 1939) and the first bat-themed weapons the batarang and the "Batgyro" in ''Detective Comics'' #31 and #32 (September; October 1939).
segued into ''Final Crisis'' (also written by Morrison), which saw the apparent death of Batman at the hands of Darkseid.
During this time, Gotham City faces catastrophe in the decade's closing crossover arc.
Dick Grayson returns to the mantle of Nightwing and appears in his own ongoing series.
Lucius Fox, a technology specialist and Bruce Wayne's business manager who is well aware of his employer's clandestine vigilante activities; Dr. Leslie Thompkins, a family friend who like Alfred became a surrogate parental figure to Bruce Wayne after the deaths of his parents, and is also aware of his secret identity; Vicki Vale, an investigative journalist who often reports on Batman's activities for the Gotham Gazette; Ace the Bat-Hound, Batman's canine partner who was predominantly active in the 1950s and 1960s; and Bat-Mite, an extra-dimensional imp predominately active in the 1960s who idolizes Batman.
In the years following World War II, DC Comics "adopted a postwar editorial direction that increasingly de-emphasized social commentary in favor of lighthearted juvenile fantasy".
Though the Earth-Two Batman is erased from history, many stories of Batman's Silver Age/Earth-One career (along with an amount of Golden Age ones) remain canonical in the post-Crisis universe, with his origins remaining the same in essence, despite alteration.
The first adaptation of Batman was as a daily newspaper comic strip which premiered on October 25, 1943.
Lex Luthor arranges for the murder of Batman's on-again, off-again love interest Vesper (introduced in the mid-1990s) during the "Bruce Wayne: Murderer?"
Batman, along with Superman and Wonder Woman, reforms the Justice League in the new ''Justice League of America'' series, and is leading the newest incarnation of the Outsiders.
Continuity was not important in those days."
Andy Medhurst wrote in his 1991 essay "Batman, Deviance, and Camp" that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because "he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality".
The Kinks performed the theme song from the ''Batman'' show on their 1967 album Live at Kelvin Hall.
Batman is portrayed for purposes of spoof as a pretentious French-speaking rich man.
"(F)rom the looks of the artwork, it appears that the three jokers include the original, Jerry Robinson Joker; the Brian Bolland Killing Joke Joker; and the Scott Snyder/Greg Capullo "New 52" Joker."
Batman works solo until the decade's close, when Tim Drake becomes the new Robin.
As the storyline was Jim Lee's first regular comic book work in nearly a decade, the series became #1 on the Diamond Comic Distributors sales chart for the first time since ''Batman'' #500 (October 1993) and Jason Todd's appearance laid the groundwork for writer Judd Winick's subsequent run as writer on ''Batman'', with another multi-issue epic, "Under the Hood", which ran from ''Batman'' #637–650.
While he was unable to prove that Luthor was behind the murder of Vesper, Batman does get his revenge with help from Talia al Ghul in ''Superman/Batman'' #1–6.
In an interview with IGN, Morrison detailed that having Dick Grayson as Batman and Damian Wayne as Robin represented a "reverse" of the normal dynamic between Batman and Robin, with, "a more light-hearted and spontaneous Batman and a scowling, badass Robin".
Then, with some gadget from his utility belt, he reminds me that he has an extraordinarily inventive mind.
In 2013, a new CGI-animated series titled ''Beware the Batman'' made its debut, with Anthony Ruivivar as Batman.
He returns and helps Jim Gordon defeat Mr. Bloom and shut down the reactor.
He assumed the mantle again in a 2009 comic book while Wayne was believed dead, and served as a second Batman even after Wayne returned in 2010.
He served briefly while Wayne recovered from spinal injuries caused by Bane in the 1993 ''Knightfall'' storyline.
Dennis O'Neil said, "We now say that Batman has two hundred suits hanging in the Batcave so they don't have to look the same .
Batman's batsuit aids in his combat against enemies, having the properties of both Kevlar and Nomex.
Although originally in Son of the Demon, Bruce's coupling with Talia was implied to be consensual, this arc ret-conned it into Talia forcing herself on Bruce.
featured Batman being physically and mentally broken by the enigmatic villain Doctor Hurt and attracted news coverage in advance of its highly promoted conclusion, which would speculated to feature the death of Bruce Wayne.
His intimidating and frightening appearance alone is often all that is needed in getting information from suspects.
Inflected with a camp sense of humor, the show became a pop culture phenomenon.
Modern stories tend to portray the extravagant, playboy image of Bruce Wayne as a facade (in counterpoint to the post-Crisis Superman, whose Clark Kent persona is the true identity, while the Superman persona is the facade).
During this time, Alfred Pennyworth arrives at Wayne Manor, and after deducing the Dynamic Duo's secret identities, joins their service as their butler.
Bruce Wayne is the only character to be identified as Batman and is featured in ''Batman'', ''Detective Comics'', ''Batman and Robin'', and ''Batman: The Dark Knight''.
In addition, media outlets have often used the character in trivial and comprehensive surveys — ''Forbes'' magazine estimated Bruce Wayne to be the 8th-richest fictional character with his $6.9&nbsp;billion fortune, several places after Iron Man, who is at 5.
During the Darkseid War Batman acquires the Mobius Chair and asks "What's the Joker's real name?"
The bat-wing-like cape was suggested by Bob Kane, inspired by Leonardo Da Vinci's sketch of an ornithopter flying device as a child.
During this period, Bruce Wayne has a fiancée named Julie Madison.
The relaunch also interrupts the publication of ''Batman, Incorporated'', which resumed its story in 2012-2013 with changes to suit the new status quo.
The impact of this editorial approach was evident in ''Batman'' comics of the postwar period; removed from the "bleak and menacing world" of the strips of the early 1940s, Batman was instead portrayed as a respectable citizen and paternal figure that inhabited a "bright and colorful" environment.
In 1989, Kane revisited Finger's situation, recalling in an interview:
However, the relationship ends when Bruce rejects her advances twice; once as Bruce and once as Batman.
This byline did not originally say "Batman created by Bob Kane"; his name was simply written on the title page of each story.
Interpretations vary depending on the writer, the story, and the timing.
Damian's tenure as ''du jour'' Robin ended when the character was killed off in the pages of ''Batman Incorporated'' in 2013.
Scholars William Uricchio and Roberta E. Pearson noted in the early 1990s, "Unlike some fictional characters, the Batman has no primary urtext set in a specific period, but has rather existed in a plethora of equally valid texts constantly appearing over more than five decades."
By that time, Detective Comics was the top-selling and most influential publisher in the industry; Batman and the company's other major hero, Superman, were the cornerstones of the company's success.
I went over to Kane's, and he had drawn a character who looked very much like Superman with kind of ... reddish tights, I believe, with boots ... no gloves, no gauntlets ... with a small domino mask, swinging on a rope.
On August 16, 2015, Robinson died when a motor vehicle struck him at a stop which caused many people in the Baltimore area such as the Baltimore Ravens's Ray Lewis to express their grief and loss over Robinson's death.
After Stephanie Brown's apparent death, Drake resumed the role of Robin for a time.
He's a lot easier;  a lot looser and more relaxed."
The tendency towards a "sunnier Batman" in the postwar years intensified after the introduction of the Comics Code.
In the pages of ''Final Crisis'' Batman is reduced to a charred skeleton.
Starting with #41, Commissioner James Gordon takes over Bruce's mantle as a new, state-sanctioned, mecha Batman, debuting in the Free Comic Book Day special comic ''Divergence''.
In public, he appears frequently in the company of high-status women, which encourages tabloid gossip.
Batman is at times a member of superhero teams such as the Justice League of America and the Outsiders.
Batman has also been romantically involved with allies, such as Batwoman (Kathy Kane), Sasha Bordeaux, and Wonder Woman, and with villainesses, such as Catwoman, Jezebel Jet, and Talia al Ghul.
The origin of the signal varies, depending on the continuity and medium.
The late 1960s ''Batman'' television series used a camp aesthetic, which continued to be associated with the character for years after the show ended.
Bruce Wayne has been portrayed as being romantically involved with many women throughout his various incarnations.
Morrison's run climaxed with "Batman R.I.P.
Affleck also made a cameo appearance as Batman in David Ayer's film ''Suicide Squad'' (2016).
The storyline ends with Batman and the Joker's supposed deaths.
In an early 1980s storyline, Selina and Bruce develop a relationship, in which the closing panel of the final story shows her referring to Batman as "Bruce".
In his memoir, ''Back to the Batcave'', West notes his dislike for the term 'camp' as it was applied to the 1960s series, opining that the show was instead a farce or lampoon, and a deliberate one, at that.
Batman's primary vehicle is the Batmobile, which is usually depicted as an imposing black car, often with tailfins that suggest a bat's wings.
The lighter tone Batman had taken in the period between the Golden and Silver Ages led to the stories of the late 1950s and early 1960s that often feature many science-fiction elements, and Batman is not significantly updated in the manner of other characters until ''Detective Comics'' #327 (May 1964), in which Batman reverts to his detective roots, with most science-fiction elements jettisoned from the series.
The third Robin in mainstream comics is Tim Drake, who first appeared in 1989.
In both the comic ''Batman: Shadow of the Bat'' (issue #45) and the 2005 film ''Batman Begins'', the cave is said to have been part of the Underground Railroad.
O'Neil and Adams first collaborated on the story "The Secret of the Waiting Graves" (''Detective Comics'' #395, January 1970).
It was followed by the sequel ''Batman: Arkham City'' (2011), which also received widespread acclaim and holds a Metacritic ranking of 94%.
On two occasions former Robin Dick Grayson has served as Batman.
The Batmobile was redesigned in 2011 when DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic books, with the batmobile being given heavier armor and new aesthetics.
Batman uses a large arsenal of specialized, high-tech vehicles and gadgets in his war against crime, the designs of which usually share a bat motif.
The success of Warner Bros.' live-action ''Batman'' feature films have helped maintain the public's interest in the character.
The first Batman story, "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate", was published in ''Detective Comics'' #27 (May 1939).
I tried Adams, Hancock...then I thought of Mad Anthony Wayne."
In 2008, this show was replaced by another animated series, ''Batman: The Brave and the Bold'', featuring Diedrich Bader as Batman.
He doesn't care—he's more interested in hanging out with the old guy and the kid."
A fourth game titled ''Batman: Arkham Knight'' (2015) has also been released by Rocksteady.
During the character's creation, the name "Bruce Wayne" was chosen for certain connotations.
After witnessing the murder of his parents Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne as a child, he swore revenge on criminals, an oath tempered by a sense of justice.
However, though Batman is shown to possibly perish at the end of the arc, the two-issue arc "Last Rites", which leads into the crossover storylines "Final Crisis", shows that Batman survives his helicopter crash into the Gotham City River and returns to the Batcave, only to be summoned to the Hall of Justice by the JLA to help investigate the New God Orion's death.
Bruce decided to take his war on crime globally, which is the central focus of ''Batman Incorporated''.
Kane noted that within six issues he drew the character's jawline more pronounced, and lengthened the ears on the costume.
Kane wrote, "Bill was disheartened by the lack of major accomplishments in his career.
Finger said he devised the name Bruce Wayne for the character's secret identity: "Bruce Wayne's first name came from Robert Bruce, the Scottish patriot.
In 1969, Dick Grayson attends college as part of DC Comics' effort to revise the Batman comics.
For example, Gotham's police are mostly corrupt, setting up further need for Batman's existence.
In 2015, DC Comics released ''The Dark Knight III: The Master Race'', the sequel to Frank Miller's ''The Dark Knight Returns'' and ''The Dark Knight Strikes Again''.
In 1998's "Cataclysm" storyline, Gotham City is devastated by an earthquake and ultimately cut off from the United States.
Meanwhile, Batman's relationship with the Gotham City Police Department changed for the worse with the events of "Batman: Officer Down" and "Batman: War Games/War Crimes"; Batman's long-time law enforcement allies Commissioner Gordon and Harvey Bullock are forced out of the police department in "Officer Down", while "War Games" and "War Crimes" saw Batman become a wanted fugitive after a contingency plan of his to neutralize Gotham City's criminal underworld is accidentally triggered, resulting in a massive gang war that ends with the sadistic Black Mask the undisputed ruler of the city's criminal gangs.
Bob Kane and Bill Finger discussed Batman's background and decided that "there's nothing more traumatic than having your parents murdered before your eyes".
Batman later creates the Brother I satellite surveillance system to watch over and if necessary, kill the other heroes.
The series ran for 120 episodes; ending in 1968.
The follow-up story arc in ''Batman'', ''Batman and Son'', introduces Damian Wayne, who is Batman's son with Talia al Ghul.
An exception to the range of Batman's equipment are guns, which he refuses to use on principle, since a gun was used in his parents' murder.
"For discussion of Wertham's impact see Brooker (2001).
Voters decided in favor of Jason's death by a narrow margin of 28 votes (see ''Batman: A Death in the Family'').
Bob Kane noted that, as a result, DC was "planning to kill Batman off altogether".
A video of Robinson being stopped by the police due to him having a Bat symbol for a license plate propelled his crusade to comfort sick children and attribute solidarity among the parents of those same children.
Finger received credit as a creator of Batman for the first time in a comic in October 2015 with ''Batman and Robin Eternal'' #3 and ''Batman: Arkham Knight Genesis'' #3.
Batman is an expert in interrogation techniques and often uses extreme methods to extract information from suspects, such as hanging a person over the edge of a building.
The story ends with Batman retrieving the god-killing bullet used to kill Orion, setting up its use in "Final Crisis".
Wertham's criticisms raised a public outcry during the 1950s, eventually leading to the establishment of the Comics Code Authority, a code that is no longer in use by the comic book industry.
In proper practice, the "bat" prefix (as in Batmobile or batarang) is rarely used by Batman himself when referring to his equipment, particularly after some portrayals (primarily the 1960s ''Batman'' live-action television show and the ''Super Friends'' animated series) stretched the practice to campy proportions.
I searched for a name that would suggest colonialism.
Among physical and other crime fighting related training, he is also proficient at other types of skills.
Batman proved a hit character, and he received his own solo title in 1940, while continuing to star in ''Detective Comics''.
There's just a sense about him: 'they trust him... and they're never wrong."
Jerry Robinson, who also worked with Finger and Kane on the strip at this time, has criticized Kane for failing to share the credit.
He used the Joker's old persona, the Red Hood, and became an antihero vigilante with no qualms about using firearms or deadly force.
The details of the Batman costume change repeatedly through various decades, stories, media and artists' interpretations, but the most distinctive elements remain consistent: a scallop-hem cape; a cowl covering most of the face; a pair of bat-like ears; a stylized bat emblem on the chest; and the ever-present utility belt.
As a "personification of the irrational", the Joker represents "everything Batman opposes".
''The Dark Knight Returns'' was a financial success and has since become one of the medium's most noted touchstones.
Writer Alan Moore and artist Brian Bolland continued this dark trend with 1988's 48-page one-shot ''Batman: The Killing Joke'', in which the Joker, attempting to drive Commissioner Gordon insane, cripples Gordon's daughter Barbara, and then kidnaps and tortures the commissioner, physically and psychologically.
I tried Adams, Hancock ... then I thought of Mad Anthony Wayne."
Since the beginning of The New 52, Scott Snyder has been the writer of the flagship Batman title.
In ''Batman Unmasked'', a television documentary about the psychology of the character, behavioral scientist Benjamin Karney notes that Batman's personality is driven by Bruce Wayne's inherent humanity; that "Batman, for all its benefits and for all of the time Bruce Wayne devotes to it, is ultimately a tool for Bruce Wayne's efforts to make the world better".
Additionally, Batman also moves from his mansion, Wayne Manor into a penthouse apartment atop the Wayne Foundation building in downtown Gotham City, in order to be closer to Gotham City's crime.
