Leading his two regiments on the left, Col. Nelson A.
They were hit hard by Confederate sharpshooter and artillery fire and provided no effective relief to Sturgis.
He also believed that the Orange and Alexandria Railroad would be an inadequate supply line.
Burnside first requisitioned the pontoon bridging (along with many other provisions) on November 7 when he detailed his plan to Halleck.
File:US VA Falmouth Chatham Manor.jpg|Sumner's headquarters, Chatham Manor, on Stafford Heights.
"Stonewall" Jackson included the divisions of Maj. Gens.
Aware that Lee had blocked the O&A, McClellan considered a route through Fredericksburg and ordered a small group of cavalrymen commanded by Capt.
After about an hour, Pelham's ammunition began to run low and he withdrew.
In addition, the Central Virginia Battlefields Trust (CVBT) committed $1 million toward the Slaughter Pen Farm fundraising campaign.
Gen. Solomon Meredith) was sent out to deal with the Confederate horse artillery.
Feger Jackson attempted to flank a Confederate battery, but after his horse was shot and he began to lead on foot, he was shot in the head by a volley and his brigade fell back, leaderless (Col. Joseph W. Fisher soon replaced Jackson in command).
Eventually some of the Federals reached the crest of the ridge and had some success during hand-to-hand fighting—men on both sides had depleted their ammunition and resorted to bayonets and rifle butts, and even empty rifles with bayonets thrown like javelins—but they were forced to withdraw back across the railroad embankment along with Meade's men to their left.
Edwin V. Sumner and Joseph Hooker to make multiple frontal assaults against Lt. Gen. James Longstreet's position on Marye's Heights, all of which were repulsed with heavy losses.
This was not true, however, as the entire VI Corps and Brig.
He told the president, "It was not a battle, it was a butchery."
Early on December 13, Jackson recalled his divisions under Jubal Early and D.H. Hill from down river positions to join his main defensive lines south of the city.
He sent for Jackson on November 26, but his Second Corps commander had anticipated the need and began forced-marching his troops from Winchester on November 22, covering as many as 20 miles a day.
Some soldiers were able to get as close as 40 yards, but having suffered severe casualties from both the artillery and infantry fire, the survivors clung to the ground.
Maxcy Gregg and T. R. R. Cobb were both mortally wounded.
File:Skinker's Neck Alfred Waud.jpg|''Skinkers Neck on the Rappanhannock below Fredericksburg, VA'', 1862 sketch by Alfred Waud
Burnside selected this plan because he was concerned that if he were to move directly south from Warrenton, he would be exposed to a flanking attack from Lt. Gen. Thomas J.
Gen. Daniel Butterfield, commanding Hooker's V Corps, while waiting for Hooker to return from his conference with Burnside, sent his division under Brig.
* Reserve Artillery under Brig.
The South erupted in jubilation over their great victory.
The whole sky was a ruddy glow as if from an enormous conflagration, but marked by the darting rays peculiar to the Northern light."
The most prominent victim of Pelham's fire was Brig.
The fighting on this southern portion of the battlefield, later named the Slaughter Pen, produced 5,000 casualties and five Medal of Honor recipients.
The Confederates were also struck by the leading brigade of Birney's belated advance, commanded by Brig.
* The Second Corps of Lt. Gen. Thomas J.
His formidable defensive line had an unforeseen flaw.
The charge reached to within 50 yards before being cut down by concentrated rifle fire.
On December 13, the "grand division" of Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin was able to pierce the first defensive line of Confederate Lieutenant General Stonewall Jackson to the south, but was finally repulsed.
The boats and equipment for a single pontoon bridge arrived at Falmouth on November 25, much too late to enable the Army of the Potomac to cross the river without opposition.
The armies remained in position throughout the day on December 14.
Burnside suddenly turned reluctant, lamenting to Hall in front of his men that "the effort meant death to most of those who should undertake the voyage."
His reserve division, under Maj. Gen. Abner Doubleday, was to face south and protect the left flank between the Richmond Road and the river.
Burnside observed the battle primarily from this location.
Gen. Daniel E. Sickles on the right.
Union troops prepared to assault Confederate defensive positions south of the city and on a strongly fortified ridge just west of the city known as Marye's Heights.
The fog lifted from the town around 10 a.m. and Sumner gave his order to advance an hour later.
Now Meade's men were receiving fire from three sides and could not withstand the pressure.
After the battle Meade complained that some of Gibbon's officers had not charged quickly enough.
The plan relied on quick movement and deception.
Also concerned about Sturgis, Couch sent the six guns of Capt.
Gen. David B. Birney, whose division of the III Corps had been designated to support the attack as well.
While the Union Army paused, Longstreet reinforced his line so that there were four ranks of infantrymen behind the stone wall.
He would concentrate his army in a visible fashion near Warrenton, feigning a movement on Culpeper Court House, Orange Court House, or Gordonsville.
The destruction also angered the Confederate troops, many of whom were native Virginians.
The full complement of bridges arrived at the end of the month, but by this time Jackson was present and Longstreet was preparing strong defenses.
Miles suggested to Caldwell that the practice of marching in formation, firing, and stopping to reload, made the Union soldiers easy targets, and that a concerted bayonet charge might be effective in carrying the works.
Pennsylvania Governor Andrew Curtin visited the White House after a trip to the battlefield.
Ulric Dahlgren to investigate the condition of the RF&P.)
Immediately following Taylor was the brigade of Col. Peter Lyle, and the advance of the two brigades ground to a halt before they reached the railroad.
Hall's brigade, and then two regiments of Brig.
The other corps in Sumner's grand division was the IX Corps, and he sent in one of its divisions under Brig.
Sumner's Right Grand Division began crossing at 4:30&nbsp;p.m., but the bulk of his men did not cross until December 12.
American author Louisa May Alcott fictionalized her experience nursing soldiers injured in the Battle of Fredericksburg in her book ''Hospital Sketches'' (1863).
When the Union army was finally able to build its bridges and cross under fire, urban combat in the city resulted on December 11–12.
That afternoon, Burnside asked Lee for a truce to attend to his wounded, which the latter graciously granted.
Rush Hawkins's brigade, followed by Col. Edward Harland's brigade, moved along an unfinished railroad line just north of Hazel Run, approaching close to the Confederate line without detection in the gathering twilight, but they were eventually detected, fired on, and repulsed.
When it arrived, it was not as Franklin expected.
Longstreet later wrote, "The charges had been desperate and bloody, but utterly hopeless."
Birney claimed that his men had been subjected to damaging artillery fire as they formed up, that he had not understood the importance of Meade's attack, and that Reynolds had not ordered his division forward.
General Lee, normally reserved, was described by the Charleston ''Mercury'' as "jubilant, almost off-balance, and seemingly desirous of embracing everyone who calls on him."
General Burnside's orders to Maj. Gen. Edwin V. Sumner, commander of the Right Grand Division, was to send "a division or more" to seize the high ground to the west of the city, assuming that his assault on the southern end of the Confederate line would be the decisive action of the battle.
Testament to the extent of the carnage and suffering during the battle was the story of Richard Rowland Kirkland, a Confederate Army sergeant with Company G, 2nd South Carolina Volunteer Infantry.
File:ACWpontoonsmobile1862.jpg|Union Army pontoon boats mobilized for deployment
On the other side of the Rappahannock, 220 artillery pieces had been located on the ridge known as Stafford Heights to prevent Lee's army from mounting any major counterattacks.
His actual orders on December 13 were vague and confusing to his subordinates.
Burnside's plan quickly went awry—he had ordered pontoon bridges to be sent to the front and assembled for his quick crossing of the Rappahannock, but because of administrative bungling, the bridges did not arrive on time.
Early and William B. Taliaferro.
At 5 p.m. on December 12, he made a cursory inspection of the southern flank, where Franklin and his subordinates pressed him to give definite orders for a morning attack by the grand division, so they would have adequate time to position their forces overnight.
Unknown to Burnside, most of the bridging was still on the upper Potomac.
McClellan's replacement was Maj. Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside, the commander of the IX Corps.
Although the fighting on the southern flank produced roughly equal casualties (about 4,000 Confederate, 5,000 Union), the northern flank was completely lopsided, with about eight Union casualties for each Confederate.
Here comes Meagher's fellows."
The Richmond ''Examiner'' described it as a "stunning defeat to the invader, a splendid victory to the defender of the sacred soil."
At around 10:30, the fog started lifting.
Confederate Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws initially had about 2,000 men on the front line of Marye's Heights and there were an additional 7,000 men in reserve on the crest and behind the ridge.
By coincidence, they attacked the area defended by fellow Irishmen of Col. Robert McMillan's 24th Georgia Infantry.
December 13 began cold and overcast.
Gen. William Barksdale, in command of the town defenses.
Curtin reported that the president was "heart-broken at the recital, and soon reached a state of nervous excitement bordering on insanity."
Burnside's verbal instructions on December 12 outlined a main attack by Franklin, supported by Hooker, on the southern flank, while Sumner made a secondary attack on the northern.
Franklin was ordered at 4 p.m. to cross his entire command, but only a single brigade was sent out before dark.
This action was mainly conducted by the 24th Michigan Infantry, a newly enlisted regiment that had joined the brigade in October.
Jackson arrived at Lee's headquarters on November 29 and his divisions were deployed to prevent Burnside crossing downstream from Fredericksburg: D.H. Hill's division moved to Port Royal, 18 miles down river; Early's 12 miles down river at Skinker's Neck; A.P.
The '''Battle of Fredericksburg''' was fought December 11–15, 1862, in and around Fredericksburg, Virginia, between General Robert E. Lee's Confederate Army of Northern Virginia and the Union Army of the Potomac, commanded by Major General Ambrose Burnside.
Gen. Alfred Sully's brigade.
The Union artillery fire was lifted as Meade's men moved forward around 1 p.m. Jackson's force of about 35,000 remained concealed on the wooded ridge to Meade's front.
Confederate armies had been on the move earlier in the fall, invading Kentucky and Maryland, and although each had been turned back, those armies remained intact and capable of further action.
Pelham started with two cannons—a 12-pounder Napoleon smoothbore and a rifled Blakely—but continued with only one after the latter was disabled by counter-battery fire.
In perfect line of battle, they advanced up the muddy slope until they were cut down at about 125 yards from the stone wall by repeated rifle volleys.
Gen. Feger Jackson) turned left and hit Archer's flank.
The Slaughter Pen Farm was considered to be the largest remaining unprotected part of the Fredericksburg battlefield.
Gen. John Gibbon's division to support Meade's attack.
Miles was struck by a bullet in the throat as he led his men to within 40 yards of the wall, where they were pinned down as their predecessors had been.
Gen. Nathan Kimball began to move around noon.
Burnside's plan was to cross the Rappahannock River at Fredericksburg in mid-November and race to the Confederate capital of Richmond before Lee's army could stop him.
File:Fredericksburg pontoon model.jpg|Model of a portion of the pontoon bridge built for the film ''Gods and Generals'', displayed at the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park
Civilian casualties were unusually sparse in the midst of such widespread violence; George Rable estimates no more than four civilian deaths.
General Longstreet had been assured by his artillery commander, Lt. Col. Edward Porter Alexander, "General, we cover that ground now so well that we will comb it as with a fine-tooth comb.
Birney followed up with the brigades of Brig.
General Lee observed the action and commented about Pelham, age 24, "It is glorious to see such courage in one so young."
The avenue of approach was difficult—mostly open fields, but interrupted by scattered houses, fences, and gardens that would restrict the movement of battle lines.
While Burnside began assembling a supply base at Falmouth, near Fredericksburg, the Lincoln administration entertained a lengthy debate about the wisdom of his plan, which differed from the president's preference of a movement south on the O&A and a direct confrontation with Lee's army instead of the movement focused on the city of Richmond.
It is also the only place on the battlefield where a visitor can still follow the Union assault of December 13 from beginning to end.
Gen. Samuel Sturgis.
Hancock's final brigade was led by Brig.
Neither Franklin nor Reynolds took any personal involvement in the battle, and were unavailable to their subordinates at the critical point.
By 4 p.m., Hooker had returned from his meeting with Burnside, having failed to convince the commanding general to abandon the attacks.
"Stonewall" Jackson, whose corps was at that time in the Shenandoah Valley south of Winchester.
By midafternoon, Burnside had failed on both flanks to make progress against the Confederates.
File:FranklinCrossingFredericksburg1862.jpg|Pontoon bridges at Franklin's Crossing
Union engineers began to assemble six pontoon bridges before dawn on December 11, two just north of the town center, a third on the southern end of town, and three farther south, near the confluence of the Rappahannock and Deep Run.
Gen. Charles Griffin to relieve Sturgis's men.
A visitor to the battlefield described the battle to U.S. President Abraham Lincoln as a "butchery."
He first considered a massive bayonet charge to overwhelm the defenders, but as he surveyed the front, he quickly realized that French's and Hancock's divisions were in no shape to move forward again.
At 3 p.m., the Union artillery began a preparatory bombardment and 135 infantrymen from the 7th Michigan and the 19th Massachusetts crowded into the small boats, and the 20th Massachusetts followed soon after.
Despite suffering enormous casualties the Federal troops under Meade were able to temporarily penetrate the Confederate line and for a time represented the North's best chance of winning the Battle of Fredericksburg.
The event was noted in the diaries and letters of many soldiers at Fredericksburg, such as John W. Thompson, Jr., who wrote "Louisiana sent those famous cosmopolitan Zouaves called the Louisiana Tigers, and there were Florida troops who, undismayed in fire, stampeded the night after Fredericksburg, when the Aurora Borealis snapped and crackled over that field of the frozen dead hard by the Rappahannock ..."
Gen. George Washington Cullum, the chief of staff in Washington (received on November 9).
While he rode prominently in front of his lines, the partially deaf Gregg could not hear the approaching Federals or their bullets flying around him.
That night, Burnside attempted to blame his subordinates for the disastrous attacks, but they argued that it was entirely his fault and no one else's.
He sent orders to Franklin to renew the assault on the left (which, as described earlier, the Left Grand Division commander ignored) and ordered his Center Grand Division, commanded by Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, to cross the Rappahannock into Fredericksburg and continue the attack on Marye's Heights.
But his primary frustration was with Brig.
Franklin's losses were about 5,000 casualties in comparison to Stonewall Jackson's 3,400, demonstrating the ferocity of the fighting.
Gen. Nelson Taylor proposed to Gibbon that they supplement Meade's assault with a bayonet charge against Lane's position.
A canal stood about 200 yards west of the town, crossed by three narrow bridges, which would require the Union troops to funnel themselves into columns before proceeding.
Lee at first anticipated that Burnside would beat him across the Rappahannock and that to protect Richmond, he would assume the next defensible position to the south, the North Anna River.
They moved parallel to the river initially, turning right to face the Richmond Road, where they began to be struck by enfilading fire from the Virginia Horse Artillery under Major John Pelham.
He accepted only when it was made clear to him that McClellan would be replaced in any event and that an alternative choice for command was Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, whom Burnside disliked and distrusted.
Reactions were opposite in the North, and both the Army and President Lincoln came under strong attacks from politicians and the press.
Confederate losses at Marye's Heights totaled around 1,200.
Once again he squandered his opportunity.
On the night of December 14, the Aurora Borealis made an appearance unusual for that latitude, presumably caused by a large solar flare.
But McMillan exhorted his troops: "Give it to them now, boys!
Caldwell himself was soon struck by two bullets and put out of action.
Many of these Confederates had stacked arms while taking cover from Union artillery and were not expecting to be attacked at that moment, so were killed or captured unarmed.
While Humphreys was still attacking, Hooker reluctantly ordered the IX Corps division of Brig.
Reynolds chose his smallest division, about 4,500 men commanded by Maj. Gen. George G. Meade, and assigned Brig.
A fortuitous Union breakthrough had been wasted because Franklin did not reinforce Meade's success with some of the 20,000 men standing in reserve.
General Burnside, who by this time was focused on his attacks on Marye's Heights, was dismayed that his left flank attack had not achieved the success he assumed earlier in the day.
River crossings south of the city by Franklin's Left Grand Division were much less eventful.
Inspired by their attack, regiments from Lane's and Archer's brigades rallied and formed a new defensive line in the gap.
Both bridges were completed by 11 a.m. on December 11 while five batteries of Union artillery suppressed most sniper fire against the engineers.
The $12 million acquisition of the Slaughter Pen Farm at the Fredericksburg battlefield has been called the most ambitious nonprofit battlefield acquisition in American history.
Griffin smashed his three brigades against the Confederate position, one by one.
Miles, realized that the tactics were not working.
In addition to his numerical advantage in troop strength, Burnside also had the advantage of knowing his army could not be attacked effectively.
Over this ground Federal troops under Maj. Gen. George Meade and Brig.
After obtaining permission from his commander, Brig.
Gen. Maxcy Gregg's brigade stood about a quarter mile behind the gap.
By this time, however, it was too late to accomplish any further offensive action.
Gregg at first mistook the Union soldiers for fleeing Confederate troops and ordered his men not to fire on them.
On December 15, Burnside withdrew his army, ending another failed Union campaign in the Eastern Theater.
Burnside ordered the grand divisions of Maj. Gens.
In October 2006, the Department of the Interior awarded a $2 million grant based on the significance of the Slaughter Pen Farm.
When his men responded to Hall's request with three cheers, Burnside relented.
Committing his reserve at 1:45&nbsp;p.m., Gibbon sent forward his brigade under Col. Adrian R. Root, which moved through the survivors of the first two brigades, but they were soon brought to a halt as well.
A dense fog blanketed the ground and made it impossible for the armies to see each other.
As the gap widened with pressure on the flanks, thousands of Meade's men reached the top of the ridge and ran into Gregg's brigade.
File:Jeb stuart.jpg|Maj.
Gen. William H. French's division of the II Corps prepared to move forward, subjected to Confederate artillery fire that was descending on the fog-covered city of Fredericksburg.
Robert E. Lee's '''Army of Northern Virginia''' had nearly 78,000 men, with 72,500 engaged.
The 2nd Brigade (Col. Albert L. Magilton) came up in support and intermixed with the leading brigades.
Gen. Joseph B. Kershaw, Kirkland gathered canteens and in broad daylight, without the benefit of a cease fire or a flag of truce (refused by Kershaw), provided water to numerous Union wounded lying on the field of battle.
On November 14, the 50th New York Engineers reported the pontoons were ready to move, except for a lack of the 270 horses needed to move them.
Gen. John Gibbon launched their assault against Lt. Gen. Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson's Confederates holding the southern portion of the Army of Northern Virginia's line at Fredericksburg.
The commander of the II Corps, Maj. Gen. Darius N. Couch, was dismayed at the carnage wrought upon his two divisions in the hour of fighting and, like Col.
Communications between Burnside's staff engineer Cyrus B. Comstock and the Engineer Brigade commander Daniel P. Woodbury indicate that Burnside had assumed the bridging was en route to Washington based on orders given on November 6.
Burnside was apparently expecting these weak attacks to intimidate Lee, causing him to withdraw.
Seven Union divisions had been sent in, generally one brigade at a time, for a total of fourteen individual charges, all of which failed, costing them from 6,000 to 8,000 casualties.
A chicken could not live on that field when we open on it."
His organization of the army in corps was approved by an act of the Confederate Congress on November 6, 1862 and consisted of:
Burnside assumed command on November 7.
But when he saw how slowly Burnside was moving (and Confederate President Jefferson Davis expressed reservations about planning for a battle so close to Richmond), he directed all of his army toward Fredericksburg.
"Jeb" Stuart sent word to Pelham that he should feel free to withdraw from his dangerous position at any time, to which Pelham responded, "Tell the General I can hold my ground."
Gen. George Sykes was ordered to move forward with his V Corps regular army division to support Humphreys's retreat, but his men were caught in a crossfire and pinned down.
Franklin ordered his I Corps commander, Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds, to select a division for the attack.
In November 2012, during archaeological investigations at the construction site for a new courthouse, remains of Union artifacts were recovered.
During a dinner meeting the evening of December 13, Burnside dramatically announced that he would personally lead his old IX Corps in one final attack on Marye's Heights, but his generals talked him out of it the following morning.
Union artillery attempted to dislodge the sharpshooters, but their positions in the cellars of houses rendered the fire from 150 guns mostly ineffective.
The falling of darkness and the pleas of Burnside's subordinates were enough to put an end to the attacks.
He ordered Franklin to "advance his right and front," but despite repeated entreaties, Franklin refused, claiming that all of his forces had been engaged.
Hiram G. Berry and John C. Robinson, which broke the Rebel advance that had threatened to drive the Union into the river.
The Cincinnati ''Commercial'' wrote, "It can hardly be in human nature for men to show more valor or generals to manifest less judgment, than were perceptible on our side that day."
French's brigade under Brig.
The engineers constructing the bridge directly across from the city came under punishing fire from Confederate sharpshooters, primarily from the Mississippi brigade of Brig.
(Burnside was also influenced by plans McClellan began developing just prior to being relieved.
Despite the unlikeliness of this supposition, the V Corps division of Brig.
Details of this story (first recorded in 1880) conflict with multiple after-action reports and may have been embellished and personalized for effect.
Meade's division began moving out at 8:30&nbsp;a.m., with Gibbon following behind.
However, Burnside demurred and the order did not reach Franklin until 7:15 or 7:45&nbsp;a.m.
Bureaucratic delays prevented Burnside from receiving the necessary pontoon bridges in time and Lee moved his army to block the crossings.
Union gunners sent more than 5,000 shells against the town and the ridges to the west.
However, Gibbon stated that this would violate his orders, so Taylor's brigade did not move forward until 1:30&nbsp;p.m.
Near the crest of the portion of the ridge comprising Marye's Hill and Willis Hill, a narrow lane in a slight cut—the Telegraph Road, known after the battle as the Sunken Road—was protected by a 4-foot stone wall, enhanced in places with log breastworks and abatis, making it a perfect infantry defensive position.
Rather than reconsidering his approach in the face of heavy casualties, he stubbornly decided to continue on the same path.
Gibbon's attack, despite heavy casualties, had failed to support Meade's temporary breakthrough.
