Since morale plays an important role in military victory when other factors are equal, Lee did not want to dampen his army's desire to fight and resisted suggestions, principally by Longstreet, to withdraw from the recently captured Gettysburg to select a ground more favorable to his army.
It is now conceded that all idea of intervention is at an end."
The nature of the result of the Battle of Gettysburg has been the subject of controversy for years.
The following tables summarize casualties by corps for the Union and Confederate forces during the three-day battle.
In addition to Hill's illness, Lee's performance was affected by heart troubles, which would eventually lead to his death in 1870; he had been diagnosed with pericarditis by his staff physicians in March 1863, though modern doctors believe he had in fact suffered a heart attack.
Lee's battle plan for July 2 called for Longstreet's First Corps to position itself to attack the Union left flank, facing northeast astraddle the Emmitsburg Road, and to roll up the U.S.line.
The most controversial assessments of the battle involve the performance of Lee's subordinates.
Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys's division (in position along the Emmitsburg Road) and Maj. Gen. David B. Birney's division (to the south) were subject to attacks from two sides and were spread out over a longer front than their small corps could defend effectively.
Thus, on June 3, Lee's army began to shift northward from Fredericksburg, Virginia.
Gen. J. Johnston Pettigrew, ventured toward Gettysburg.
When Pettigrew told Hill and Heth what he had seen, neither general believed that there was a substantial U.S. force in or near the town, suspecting that it had been only Pennsylvania militia.
It resumed around 2:30&nbsp;p.m., when Heth's entire division engaged, adding the brigades of Pettigrew and Col. John M. Brockenbrough.
Heth's division advanced with two brigades forward, commanded by Brig.
In addition, Lee's 72,000-man army could threaten Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, and possibly strengthen the growing peace movement in the North.
War correspondent Peter W. Alexander wrote that Lee "acted, probably, under the impression that his troops were able to carry any position however formidable.
However, they opened fire on the Confederate infantry during their approach with devastating results.
Law completed his 28-mile march in eleven hours.
The shape of the Union line is popularly described as a "fishhook" formation.
Although his formal instructions from Confederate President Jefferson Davis had limited his powers to negotiate on prisoner exchanges and other procedural matters, historian James M. McPherson speculates that he had informal goals of presenting peace overtures.
Just at dark, two of Jubal Early's brigades attacked the Union XI Corps positions on East Cemetery Hill where Col. Andrew L. Harris of the 2nd Brigade, 1st Division, came under a withering attack, losing half his men; however, Early failed to support his brigades in their attack, and Ewell's remaining division, that of Maj. Gen. Robert E. Rodes, failed to aid Early's attack by moving against Cemetery Hill from the west.
"Stonewall" Jackson, Lee reorganized his two large corps into three new corps, commanded by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet (First Corps), Lt. Gen. Richard S. Ewell (Second), and Lt. Gen. A.P.
Therefore, historians have attempted to explain how Lee's winning streak was interrupted so dramatically at Gettysburg.
However, Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones wrote that the "strategic impact of the Battle of Gettysburg was ... fairly limited."
The Confederates attacked, and the second fight for Culp's Hill ended around 11 a.m. Harry Pfanz judged that, after some seven hours of bitter combat, "the Union line was intact and held more strongly than before."
It was developed by Game Labs and designed by the creator of "''DarthMod''" (a series of mods that improve AI in the ''Total War'' games) and one of the most celebrated modders in the ''Total War'' modding community.
Prodded by President Abraham Lincoln, Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker moved his army in pursuit, but was relieved of command just three days before the battle and replaced by Meade.
Prior to Gettysburg, Robert E. Lee had established a reputation as an almost invincible general, achieving stunning victories against superior numbers—although usually at the cost of high casualties to his army—during the Seven Days, the Northern Virginia Campaign (including the Second Battle of Bull Run), Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville.
Gen. John Buford arriving south of town, and Pettigrew returned to Cashtown without engaging them.
The 26th North Carolina (the largest regiment in the army with 839 men) lost heavily, leaving the first day's fight with around 212 men.
A lengthy mounted battle, including hand-to-hand sabre combat, ensued.
File:Jeb stuart.jpg|Maj.
The U.S. Iron Brigade under Brig.
Davis had hoped that Stephens would reach Washington from the south while Lee's victorious army was marching toward it from the north.
Gen. E. M. Law had begun the march from Guilford.
In fact, the Confederates had lost militarily and also politically.
However, Hill's illness minimized his personal involvement in the remainder of the battle, and Lee took the explicit step of removing troops from Hill's corps and giving them to Longstreet for Pickett's Charge.
Gen. Solomon Meredith enjoyed initial success against Archer, capturing several hundred men, including Archer himself.
Soldiers burned several railroad cars and a covered bridge, and destroyed nearby rails and telegraph lines.
Around 2 p.m., the Confederate Second Corps divisions of Maj. Gens.
When Howard agreed, Hancock concluded the discussion: "Very well, sir, I select this as the battle-field."
A few of them were escaped fugitive slaves, but most were freemen; all were sent south into slavery under guard.
As was typical for the period, mintage was very low, just 26,928.
Many historically significant locations on the battlefield lie outside the boundaries of Gettysburg National Military Park and are vulnerable to residential or commercial development.
* Richard S. Ewell has been universally criticized for failing to seize the high ground on the afternoon of July 1.
* XII Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. Henry W. Slocum, with divisions commanded by Brig.
He was quoted as saying to Maj. John Seddon, brother of the Confederate secretary of war, "Sir, we did whip them at Gettysburg, and it will be seen for the next six months that ''that army'' will be as quiet as a sucking dove."
*Novels: ''Bring the Jubilee'' by Ward Moore; ''If the South Had Won the Civil War'' by Mackinlay Kantor; Civil War Trilogy (''Gettysburg, Grant Comes East, Never Call Retreat'') by Newt Gingrich, William R. Forstchen, and Albert S. Hanser; ''Stonewall Jackson at Gettysburg'' by Douglas Lee Gibboney; ''By Force of Arms'' by Billy Bennett.
Here are some examples which either depict or make significant reference to an alternate Battle of Gettysburg (sometimes simply inserting fantasy or sci-fi elements in an account of the battle):
The defense of Little Round Top with a bayonet charge by the 20th Maine, initiated by Lt. Holman S. Melcher, was one of the most fabled episodes in the Civil War and propelled Col. Joshua L. Chamberlain into prominence after the war.
The first day focused on Buford's cavalry defense, the second day on Chamberlain's defense at Little Round Top, and the third day on Pickett's Charge.
After his success at Chancellorsville in Virginia in May 1863, Lee led his army through the Shenandoah Valley to begin his second invasion of the North—the Gettysburg Campaign.
Lincoln complained to Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles that "Our army held the war in the hollow of their hand and they would not close it!"
Bruce Catton wrote, "The town of Gettysburg looked as if some universal moving day had been interrupted by catastrophe."
7665 (1617/4205/1843)
The news of the Union victory electrified the North.
Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr, and Maj. Gen. Carl Schurz.
They were to turn the demonstration into a full-scale attack if a favorable opportunity presented itself.
But there was only one documented civilian death during the battle: Ginnie Wade (also widely known as Jennie), 20 years old, was hit by a stray bullet that passed through her kitchen in town while she was making bread.
The Confederates successfully stood their ground on July 4 and withdrew only after they realized Meade would not attack them.
Less than half of the over 11,500 acres on the old Gettysburg Battlefield have been preserved for posterity thus far.
Early, Edward "Allegheny" Johnson, and Robert E. Rodes.
By early afternoon, the U.S. line ran in a semicircle west, north, and northeast of Gettysburg.
The immediate reaction of the Southern military and public sectors was that Gettysburg was a setback, not a disaster.
The men knew what they could do under an extremely competent general; one of lesser ability and courage could well have lost the battle."
Early laid the borough under tribute but did not collect any significant supplies.
* III Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. Daniel E. Sickles, with divisions commanded by Maj. Gen. David B. Birney and Maj. Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys.
It is inarguable that Lee's offensive on July 3 was turned back decisively and his campaign in Pennsylvania was terminated prematurely (although the Confederates at the time argued that this was a temporary setback and that the goals of the campaign were largely met).
Anticipating that the Confederates would march on Gettysburg from the west on the morning of July 1, Buford laid out his defenses on three ridges west of the town: '''Herr Ridge''', '''McPherson Ridge''' and '''Seminary Ridge'''.
Note that many other Union units (not part of the Army of the Potomac) were actively involved in the Gettysburg Campaign, but not directly involved in the Battle of Gettysburg.
The two armies suffered between 46,000 and 51,000 casualties.
However, the U.S. did not have enough troops; Cutler, who was deployed north of the Chambersburg Pike, had his right flank in the air.
Gen. Evander M. Law's brigade of Hood's division.
He sent orders to Ewell that Cemetery Hill be taken "if practicable."
In this view, Gettysburg was seen as a great lost opportunity, in which a decisive victory by Lee could have meant the end of the war in the Confederacy's favor.
Gen. Alexander S. Webb wrote to his father on July 17, stating that such Washington politicians as "Chase, Seward and others," disgusted with Meade, "write to me that Lee really won that Battle!"
I thought that it would not do; that the point had been fully tested the day before, by more men, when all were fresh; that the enemy was there looking for us, as we heard him during the night putting up his defences; that the divisions of McLaws and Hood were holding a mile along the right of my line against twenty thousand men, who would follow their withdrawal, strike the flank of the assaulting column, crush it, and get on our rear towards the Potomac River; that thirty thousand men was the minimum of force necessary for the work; that even such force would need close co-operation on other parts of the line; that the column as he proposed to organize it would have only about thirteen thousand men (the divisions having lost a third of their numbers the day before); that the column would have to march a mile under concentrating battery fire, and a thousand yards under long-range musketry; that the conditions were different from those in the days of Napoleon, when field  batteries had a range of six hundred yards and musketry about sixty yards.
Although the issue is tainted by attempts to portray history and Lee's reputation in a manner supporting different partisan goals, the major factors in Lee's loss arguably can be attributed to: (1) his overconfidence in the invincibility of his men; (2) the performance of his subordinates, and his management thereof; (3) his failing health, and (4) the performance of his opponent, George G. Meade, and the Army of the Potomac.
McLaws, coming in on Hood's left, drove multiple attacks into the thinly stretched III Corps in the Wheatfield and overwhelmed them in Sherfy's Peach Orchard.
Stuart and his three best brigades were absent from the army during the crucial phase of the approach to Gettysburg and the first two days of battle.
Wade Hampton, Fitzhugh Lee, Beverly H. Robertson, Albert G. Jenkins, William E. "Grumble" Jones, and John D. Imboden, and Col. John R. Chambliss.
Lee rode over after sunrise and gave his orders.
Opinion was then expressed that the fifteen thousand men who could make successful assault over that field had never been arrayed for battle; but he was impatient of listening, and tired of talking, and nothing was left but to proceed.
He wrote to Jefferson Davis that his physical condition prevented him from offering full supervision in the field, and said, "I am so dull that in making use of the eyes of others I am frequently misled."
However, they claim it also suffered because Robert E. Lee, who up until this time had been almost invincible, was betrayed by the failures of some of his key subordinates at Gettysburg: Ewell, for failing to seize Cemetery Hill on July 1; Stuart, for depriving the army of cavalry intelligence for a key part of the campaign; and especially Longstreet, for failing to attack on July 2 as early and as forcefully as Lee had originally intended.
WATERLOO ECLIPSED!"
Many historians speculate that Stonewall Jackson, if he had survived Chancellorsville, would have aggressively seized Culp's Hill, rendering Cemetery Hill indefensible, and changing the entire complexion of the battle.
Furthermore, when the news reached London, any lingering hopes of European recognition of the Confederacy were finally abandoned.
Much has been made over the years of General Longstreet's objections to General Lee's plan.
The U.S. crossed the Potomac from June 25 to 27.
Two proposals to open a casino at Gettysburg were defeated in 2006 and most recently in 2011, when public pressure forced the Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board to reject the proposed gambling hub at the intersection of Routes 15 and 30, near East Cavalry Field.
* James Longstreet suffered most severely from the wrath of the Lost Cause authors, not the least because he directly criticized Lee in postbellum writings and became a Republican after the war.
Hill—had only recently been promoted and were not fully accustomed to Lee's style of command, in which he provided only general objectives and guidance to their former commander, Stonewall Jackson; Jackson translated these into detailed, specific orders to his division commanders.
North of the pike, Davis gained a temporary success against Brig.
* Artillery Reserve, commanded by Brig.
His critics accuse him of attacking much later than Lee intended on July 2, squandering a chance to hit the Union Army before its defensive positions had firmed up.
The first day at Gettysburg, more significant than simply a prelude to the bloody second and third days, ranks as the 23rd biggest battle of the war by number of troops engaged.
The following morning, Early departed for adjacent York County.
As the fighting to the west proceeded, two divisions of Ewell's Second Corps, marching west toward Cashtown in accordance with Lee's order for the army to concentrate in that vicinity, turned south on the Carlisle and Harrisburg roads toward Gettysburg, while the Union XI Corps (Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard) raced north on the Baltimore Pike and Taneytown Road.
Gen. Alfred Iverson suffered severe losses assaulting the I Corps division of Brig.
Various towns, most notably York, Pennsylvania, were required to pay indemnities in lieu of supplies, under threat of destruction.
The disagreements regarding Stuart's culpability for the situation originate in the relatively vague orders issued by Lee, but most modern historians agree that both generals were responsible to some extent for the failure of the cavalry's mission early in the campaign.
Meade's chief engineer, Brig.
The recently rain-swollen Potomac trapped Lee's army on the north bank of the river for a time, but when the Union troops finally caught up, the Confederates had forded the river.
* Second Corps, commanded by Lt. Gen. Richard S. Ewell, with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens.
Ewell, who had previously served under Stonewall Jackson, a general well known for issuing peremptory orders, determined such an assault was not practicable and, thus, did not attempt it; this decision is considered by historians to be a great missed opportunity.
Hill, with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens.
Hill's and Longstreet's corps followed on June 24 and 25.
The III Corps was virtually destroyed as a combat unit in this battle, and Sickles's leg was amputated after it was shattered by a cannonball.
* Cavalry Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton, with divisions commanded by Brig.
Two of his corps commanders—Richard S. Ewell and A.P.
The Civil War Trust has preserved 815 acres around the site, some of which is now part of the 4,998 acres of Gettysburg National Military Park.
The Civil War Trust also successfully purchased and transferred 95 acres at the former site of the Gettysburg Country Club to the control of the U.S. Department of the Interior in 2011.
All across the battlefield, despite significant losses, the Union defenders held their lines.
Edwin Coddington pointed out the heavy toll on the Army of the Potomac and that "after the battle Meade no longer possessed a truly effective instrument for the accomplishments of his task.
In order to save valuable ammunition for the infantry attack that they knew would follow, the Army of the Potomac's artillery, under the command of Brig.
The film and novel focused primarily on the actions of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain, John Buford, Robert E. Lee, and James Longstreet during the battle.
They also question his lack of motivation to attack strongly on July 2 and 3 because he had argued that the army should have maneuvered to a place where it would force Meade to attack them.
Today, the Gettysburg National Cemetery and Gettysburg National Military Park are maintained by the U.S. National Park Service as two of the nation's most revered historical landmarks.
During the advance on Gettysburg, Maj. Gen. Reynolds was in operational command of the left, or advanced, wing of the Army, consisting of the I, III, and XI Corps.
Stephen Sears wrote, "The fact of the matter is that George G. Meade, unexpectedly and against all odds, thoroughly outgeneraled Robert E. Lee at Gettysburg."
The dominant theme of the Lost Cause writers and many other historians is that Lee's senior generals failed him in crucial ways, directly causing the loss of the battle; the alternative viewpoint is that Lee did not manage his subordinates adequately, and did not thereby compensate for their shortcomings.
The Army of Northern Virginia was critically low on artillery ammunition, and the cannonade did not significantly affect the Union position.
Gen. David McMurtrie Gregg's division and Brig.
The Union had restored to it the belief in certain victory, and the loss dispirited the Confederacy.
In his memoirs, Maj. Gen. Henry Heth, Pettigrew's division commander, claimed that he sent Pettigrew to search for supplies in town—especially shoes.
The army needed a thorough reorganization with new commanders and fresh troops, but these changes were not made until Grant appeared on the scene in March 1864."
Richard H. Anderson, Henry Heth, and W. Dorsey Pender.
These were appropriate terrain for a delaying action by his small cavalry division against superior Confederate infantry forces, meant to buy time awaiting the arrival of Union infantrymen who could occupy the strong defensive positions south of town at Cemetery Hill, Cemetery Ridge, and Culp's Hill.
Despite General Lee's order to avoid a general engagement until his entire army was concentrated, Hill decided to mount a significant reconnaissance in force the following morning to determine the size and strength of the enemy force in his front.
The inconclusive battle, the largest predominantly cavalry engagement of the war, proved for the first time that the Union horse soldier was equal to his Southern counterpart.
When Pettigrew's troops approached Gettysburg on June 30, they noticed Union cavalry under Brig.
The Union line ran from Culp's Hill southeast of the town, northwest to Cemetery Hill just south of town, then south for nearly two miles (3&nbsp;km) along Cemetery Ridge, terminating just north of Little Round Top.
The reverse side of the coin depicts the monument on Cemetery Ridge to the 72nd Pennsylvania Infantry.
In a dispute over the use of the forces defending the Harpers Ferry garrison, Hooker offered his resignation, and Abraham Lincoln and General-in-Chief Henry W. Halleck, who were looking for an excuse to get rid of him, immediately accepted.
The south winning the Battle of Gettysburg is a popular premise for a point of divergence in American Civil War alternate histories.
8495 (1724/4683/2088)
Edwin B. Coddington wrote that the soldiers of the Army of the Potomac received a "sense of triumph which grew into an imperishable faith in themselves.
2187 (365/1611/211)
Hill (Third); both Ewell and Hill, who had formerly reported to Jackson as division commanders, were new to this level of responsibility.
The invasion would allow the Confederates to live off the bounty of the rich Northern farms while giving war-ravaged Virginia a much-needed rest.
Nevertheless, at best the Army of the Potomac had simply preserved the strategic stalemate in the Eastern Theater ..."
The armies stared at one another in a heavy rain across the bloody fields on July 4, the same day that the Vicksburg garrison surrendered to Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant.
* Third Corps, commanded by Lt. Gen. A.P.
Three miles (5&nbsp;km) east of Gettysburg, in what is now called "East Cavalry Field" (not shown on the accompanying map, but between the York and Hanover Roads), Stuart's forces collided with U.S. cavalry: Brig.
Over 3,000 horse carcasses were burned in a series of piles south of town; townsfolk became violently ill from the stench.
Hunt, chief of artillery on Meade's staff.)
The charge was repulsed by Union rifle and artillery fire, at great loss to the Confederate army.
A commemorative half dollar for the battle was produced in 1936.
Gen. Francis C. Barlow, when he advanced his XI Corps division to Blocher's Knoll (directly north of town and now known as Barlow's Knoll); this represented a salient in the corps line, susceptible to attack from multiple sides, and Early's troops overran Barlow's division, which constituted the right flank of the Union Army's position.
On June 30, while part of Hill's Corps was in Cashtown, one of Hill's brigades, North Carolinians under Brig.
Iced Earth's three-part song cycle ''Gettysburg (1863)'', published in 2004, dramatizes the battle.
Most of the XII Corps was on Culp's Hill; the remnants of I and XI Corps defended Cemetery Hill; II Corps covered most of the northern half of Cemetery Ridge; and III Corps was ordered to take up a position to its flank.
Halleck then relayed the contents of Lincoln's letter to Meade in a telegram.
* II Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock, with divisions commanded by Brig.
He said the distance was not more than fourteen hundred yards.
Supporters of his predecessor, Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, lambasted Meade before the U.S. Congress's Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War, where Radical Republicans suspected that Meade was a Copperhead and tried in vain to relieve him from command.
Although new to his army command, Meade deployed his forces relatively effectively; relied on strong subordinates such as Winfield S. Hancock to make decisions where and when they were needed; took great advantage of defensive positions; nimbly shifted defensive resources on interior lines to parry strong threats; and, unlike some of his predecessors, stood his ground throughout the battle in the face of fierce Confederate attacks.
Lee himself had a positive view of the campaign, writing to his wife that the army had returned "rather sooner than I had originally contemplated, but having accomplished what I proposed on leaving the Rappahannock, viz., relieving the Valley of the presence of the enemy and drawing his Army north of the Potomac."
Eventually, Heth's men reached dismounted troopers of Col. William Gamble's cavalry brigade, who raised determined resistance and delaying tactics from behind fence posts with fire from their breechloading carbines.
In 1886 Lt. Jones returned to Gettysburg to mark the spot where he fired the first shot with a monument.
During the final hours of the battle, Confederate Vice President Alexander Stephens was approaching the Union lines at Norfolk, Virginia, under a flag of truce.
Nearly one half of the attackers did not return to their own lines.
Lee himself concurred with this judgment, writing to President Davis, "No blame can be attached to the army for its failure to accomplish what was projected by me, nor should it be censured for the unreasonable expectations of the public—I am alone to blame, in perhaps expecting too much of its prowess and valor."
At the same time, Maj. Gen. Edward "Allegheny" Johnson's and Maj. Gen. Jubal Early's Second Corps divisions were to make a demonstration against Culp's and Cemetery Hills, preventing Meade from shifting troops from his center and right to bolster his left.
Gen. Lysander Cutler's brigade but was repulsed with heavy losses in an action around an unfinished railroad bed cut in the ridge.
South of the pike, Archer's brigade assaulted through Herbst (also known as McPherson's) Woods.
The Confederates remained on the battlefield, hoping that Meade would attack, but the cautious Union commander decided against the risk, a decision for which he would later be criticized.
Hancock told Howard, "I think this the strongest position by nature upon which to fight a battle that I ever saw."
4369 (797/3194/378)
Hunt, all heroes of the battle—defended Meade in print, but Meade was embittered by the overall experience.
Once again the disagreement centers on Lee's orders, which provided general guidance for Ewell to act "if practicable."
Some preservation successes have emerged in recent years.
The Confederate line paralleled the Union line about a mile (1,600&nbsp;m) to the west on Seminary Ridge, ran east through the town, then curved southeast to a point opposite Culp's Hill.
About one quarter of Meade's army (22,000 men) and one third of Lee's army (27,000) were engaged.
Thus, the Union army had interior lines, while the Confederate line was nearly five miles (8&nbsp;km) long.
On November 19, President Lincoln used the dedication ceremony for the Gettysburg National Cemetery to honor the fallen Union soldiers and redefine the purpose of the war in his historic Gettysburg Address.
Early's division profited from a blunder by Brig.
However, the Union enthusiasm soon dissipated as the public realized that Lee's army had escaped destruction and the war would continue.
Gen. John D. Imboden was entrusted to escort the miles-long wagon train of supplies and wounded men that Lee wanted to take back to Virginia with him, using the route through Cashtown and Hagerstown to Williamsport, Maryland.
Still, by 10:20&nbsp;a.m., the Confederates had pushed the Union cavalrymen east to McPherson Ridge, when the vanguard of the I Corps (Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds) finally arrived.
Around 5 a.m. on Wednesday, July 1, two brigades of Heth's division advanced to Gettysburg.
Barlow was wounded and captured in the attack.
The Baltimore Pike corridor attracts development that concerns preservationists.
Lee's plan, however, was based on faulty intelligence, exacerbated by Stuart's continued absence from the battlefield.
I asked the strength of the column.
Both arrived late in the morning.
Although not seen as overwhelmingly significant at the time, particularly since the war continued for almost two years, in retrospect it has often been cited as the "turning point", usually in combination with the fall of Vicksburg the following day.
The attack sequence was to begin with Maj. Gens.
Lee led his army on a torturous retreat back to Virginia.
* XI Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard, with divisions commanded by Brig.
Though Lee personally reconnoitered his left during the morning, he did not visit Longstreet's position on the Confederate right.
Although Gettysburg is one of the best known of all Civil War battlefields, it too faces threats to its preservation and interpretation.
Some Southern publications, such as the ''Charleston Mercury'', criticized Lee's actions in the campaign and on August 8 he offered his resignation to President Davis, who quickly rejected it.
However, two large Confederate corps assaulted them from the northwest and north, collapsing the hastily developed Union lines, sending the defenders retreating through the streets of town to the hills just to the south.
Gen. Henry Jackson Hunt, at first did not return the enemy's fire.
Gen. Lewis A. Armistead's brigade of Maj. Gen. George Pickett's division at the Angle is referred to as the "High-water mark of the Confederacy", arguably representing the closest the South ever came to its goal of achieving independence from the Union via military victory.
Throughout the campaign, Lee was influenced by the belief that his men were invincible; most of Lee's experiences with the Army of Northern Virginia had convinced him of this, including the great victory at Chancellorsville in early May and the rout of the Union troops at Gettysburg on July 1.
Gettysburg became a postbellum focus of the "Lost Cause", a movement by writers such as Edward A. Pollard and Jubal Early to explain the reasons for the Confederate defeat in the war.
Gen. James S. Wadsworth, Brig.
* V Corps, commanded by Maj. Gen. George Sykes (George G. Meade until June 28), with divisions commanded by Brig.
