She was sunk by destroyers during the night phase of the Battle of Jutland.
The subsequent years of the war saw many demonstrations of the maturity of the aircraft carrier as a strategic naval weapon and its potential against battleships.
By 1897, Britain's lead was far smaller due to competition from France, Germany, and Russia, as well as the development of pre-dreadnought fleets in Italy, the United States and Japan.
However, clashes between battleships were of little strategic importance.
Thus each side had one battleship; however, the Republican Navy generally lacked experienced officers.
In 1921, he bombed and sank numerous ships, including the "unsinkable" German World War I battleship  and the American pre-dreadnought .
At the Yellow Sea and Tsushima, pre-dreadnoughts exchanged volleys at ranges of 7,600–12,000 yd (7 to 11&nbsp;km), beyond the range of the secondary batteries.
The U.S. recommissioned all four ''Iowa''-class battleships for the Korean War and the  for the Vietnam War.
The first two years of war saw the Royal Navy's battleships and battlecruisers regularly "sweep" the North Sea making sure that no German ships could get in or out.
Against major ships, it was thought a 'hail of fire' from quick-firing secondary weapons could distract enemy gun crews by inflicting damage to the superstructure, and they would be more effective against smaller ships such as cruisers.
A replica of the Chinese ironclad Dingyuan was built by the Weihai Port Bureau in 2003 and is on display in Weihai, China.
While Fisher may have intended ''Dreadnought'' to be the last Royal Navy battleship, the design was so successful he found little support for his plan to switch to a battlecruiser navy.
From 1794, the alternative term 'line of battle ship' was contracted (informally at first) to 'battle ship' or 'battleship'.
''Gloire'' prompted further innovation from the Royal Navy, anxious to prevent France from gaining a technological lead.
The German strategy was therefore to try to provoke an engagement on their terms: either to induce a part of the Grand Fleet to enter battle alone, or to fight a pitched battle near the German coastline, where friendly minefields, torpedo-boats and submarines could be used to even the odds.
When  fired the last salvo of this battle, the last salvo fired by a battleship against another heavy ship, she was "firing a funeral salute to a finished era of naval warfare."
Pre-dreadnoughts continued the technical innovations of the ironclad.
This was provided by scouting forces; at various stages battlecruisers, cruisers, destroyers, airships, submarines and aircraft were all used.
In 1906, the commissioning of  heralded a revolution in battleship design.
In 1883, the United Kingdom had 38 battleships, twice as many as France and almost as many as the rest of the world put together.
and  were maintained to a standard where they could be rapidly returned to service as fire support vessels, pending the development of a superior fire support vessel.
In spite of the immense resources spent on battleships, there were few pitched battleship clashes.
The Military Balance states the U.S. Navy listed no battleships in the reserve in 2014.
However, in 1888 a war scare with France and the build-up of the Russian navy gave added impetus to naval construction, and the British Naval Defence Act of 1889 laid down a new fleet including eight new battleships.
(With the development of radio, direction finding and traffic analysis would come into play, as well, so even shore stations, broadly speaking, joined the battlegroup.)
Sweden had several small coastal-defense battleships, one of which, , survived until 1970.
Created as a result of pressure from Admiral Sir John ("Jackie") Fisher, HMS ''Dreadnought'' made existing battleships obsolete.
A ship of the line was a large, unarmored wooden sailing ship which mounted a battery of up to 120 smoothbore guns and carronades.
On May 31, 1916, a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on German terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets in the Battle of Jutland.
The adoption of steam power was only one of a number of technological advances which revolutionized warship design in the 19th century.
The remaining battleships met a variety of ends.
Although there were some problems with the ship (the wing turrets had limited arcs of fire and strained the hull when firing a full broadside, and the top of the thickest armor belt lay below the waterline at full load), the Royal Navy promptly commissioned another six ships to a similar design in the  and es.
Naval Vessel Register in the 2000s.
This engagement marked the last time a fleet carrier was sunk by surface gunnery.
The new class of ship prompted an arms race with major strategic consequences.
The value of the battleship has been questioned, even during the period of their prominence.
The threat that German U-boats posed to British dreadnoughts was enough to cause the Royal Navy to change their strategy and tactics in the North Sea to reduce the risk of U-boat attack.
France and the United Kingdom were the only countries to develop fleets of wooden steam screw battleships, although several other navies operated small numbers of screw battleships, including Russia (9), Turkey (3), Sweden (2), Naples (1), Denmark (1) and Austria (1).
The American aircraft carriers were out to sea, however, and evaded detection.
Even with their enormous firepower and protection, battleships were increasingly vulnerable to much smaller, cheaper weapons: initially the torpedo and the naval mine, and later aircraft and the guided missile.
For Alfred Thayer Mahan and his followers, a strong navy was vital to the success of a nation, and control of the seas was vital for the projection of force on land and overseas.
The development of high-explosive shells made the use of iron armor plate on warships necessary.
The Battle of the Atlantic was fought between destroyers and submarines, and most of the decisive fleet clashes of the Pacific war were determined by aircraft carriers.
Subsequent battleship designs, influenced by HMS ''Dreadnought'', were referred to as "dreadnoughts".
In May 1937, ''Jaime I'' was damaged by Nationalist air attacks and a grounding incident.
On several occasions, battleships were support ships in carrier battle groups, or led their own battleship battle group.
These were heavily armored ships, mounting a mixed battery of guns in turrets, and without sails.
The U.S. preferred to spend limited funds on aircraft carriers until the .
The term "battleship" was officially adopted by the Royal Navy in the re-classification of 1892.
Despite losing her bowsprit and her foremast, and being set on fire, she was ready for action again the very next day.
If Tsushima influenced his thinking, it was to persuade him of the need to standardise on  guns.
However, the effective range of the guns was as little as a few hundred yards, so the battle tactics of sailing ships depended in part on the wind.
The German fleet withdrew to port after two short encounters with the British fleet.
The Turkish battlecruiser  (formerly , launched in 1911) was scrapped in 1976 after an offer to sell her back to Germany was refused.
By the end of World War I, aircraft had successfully adopted the torpedo as a weapon.
The slow-firing  main guns were the principal weapons for battleship-to-battleship combat.
The German High Seas Fleet, for their part, were determined not to engage the British without the assistance of submarines; and since the submarines were needed more for raiding commercial traffic, the fleet stayed in port for much of the war.
Britain answered with further shipbuilding, but by the end of the pre-dreadnought era, British supremacy at sea had markedly weakened.
During the First World War and subsequently, battleships were rarely deployed without a protective screen of destroyers.
''Hessen'' was taken over by the Soviet Union and renamed ''Tsel''.
Battleships played a part in major engagements in Atlantic, Pacific and Mediterranean theaters; in the Atlantic, the Germans used their battleships as independent commerce raiders.
Faced with the prospect of a naval arms race against the United Kingdom and Japan, which would in turn have led to a possible Pacific war, the United States was keen to conclude the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922.
The decisive battles of the Yellow Sea (1904) and Tsushima (1905) during the Russo-Japanese War, and the Battle of Jutland (1916) during the First World War.
Technical development continued rapidly through the dreadnought era, with steep changes in armament, armor and propulsion.
In April 1945, during the battle for Okinawa, the world's most powerful battleship, the ''Yamato'', was sent out against a massive U.S. force on a suicide mission and sunk by overwhelming pressure from carrier aircraft with nearly all hands lost.
They thus retained the same broadside, despite having two fewer guns.
The Japanese rebuilt all of their battleships, plus their battlecruisers, with distinctive "pagoda" structures, though the  received a more modern bridge tower that would influence the new s. Bulges were fitted, including steel tube arrays to improve both underwater and vertical protection along the waterline.
The United Kingdom's four surviving  ships were scrapped in 1957, and  followed in 1960.
France intended to build six battleships of the  and es, and the Italians four  ships.
External bulges were added to improve both buoyancy to counteract weight increase and provide underwater protection against mines and torpedoes.
The U.S. Marine Corps believes that the current naval surface fire support gun and missile programs will not be able to provide adequate fire support for an amphibious assault or onshore operations.
The Russo-Japanese War provided operational experience to validate the 'all-big-gun' concept.
The  was taken by the Soviets as reparations and renamed ''Novorossiysk''; she was sunk by a leftover German mine in the Black Sea on October 29, 1955.
''Napoléon'' was armed as a conventional ship-of-the-line, but her steam engines could give her a speed of , regardless of the wind condition.
The results of sweeping actions in the North Sea were battles such as the Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank and German raids on the English coast, all of which were attempts by the Germans to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet in an attempt to defeat the Royal Navy in detail.
Germany, France, Japan, Italy, Austria, and the United States all began dreadnought programmes; while Ottoman Turkey, Argentina, Russia, Brazil, and Chile commissioned dreadnoughts to be built in British and American yards.
In September 1983, when Druze militia in Lebanon's Shouf Mountains fired upon U.S. Marine peacekeepers, the arrival of USS ''New Jersey'' stopped the firing.
Mahan's theory, proposed in ''The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660–1783'' of 1890, dictated the role of the battleship was to sweep the enemy from the seas.
The French Navy introduced steam to the line of battle with the 90-gun  in 1850—the first true steam battleship.
Guns that fired explosive or incendiary shells were a major threat to wooden ships, and these weapons quickly became widespread after the introduction of 8&nbsp;inch shell guns as part of the standard armament of French and American line-of-battle ships in 1841.For the U.S. introduction of 8-inch shell guns into the armament of line-of-battle ships in 1841, see Spencer Tucker, ''Arming the Fleet, US Navy Ordnance in the Muzzle-Loading Era'' (U.S.
In the last years of the 19th century and the first years of the 20th, the escalation in the building of battleships became an arms race between Britain and Germany.
Jutland was the largest naval battle and the only full-scale clash of battleships in the war, and it was the last major battle fought primarily by battleships in world history.
On December 7, 1941, the Japanese launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor.
Steam power was gradually introduced to the navy in the first half of the 19th century, initially for small craft and later for frigates.
A small number of designs, including the American  and es, experimented with all or part of the 8-inch intermediate battery superimposed over the 12-inch primary.
and  were sunk during the testing of nuclear weapons in Operation Crossroads in 1946.
This infuriated the U.S. Navy, but Mitchell was nevertheless allowed to conduct a careful series of bombing tests alongside Navy and Marine bombers.
Naval Institute Pres, 1989), p.149.
Possession of modern battleships was not only vital to naval power, but also, as with nuclear weapons today, represented a nation's standing in the world.
Fisher's concerns were submarines and destroyers equipped with torpedoes, then threatening to outrange battleship guns, making speed imperative for capital ships.
There she was again hit by several aerial bombs.
Unlike the ship of the line, the battleships of the late 19th and early 20th centuries had significant vulnerability to torpedoes and mines, which could be used by relatively small and inexpensive craft.
An American design, , authorized in 1905 and laid down in December 1906, was another of the first dreadnoughts, but she and her sister, , were not launched until 1908.
As part of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman's effort to build a 600-ship Navy in the 1980s, and in response to the commissioning of ''Kirov'' by the Soviet Union, the United States recommissioned all four ''Iowa''-class battleships.
The treaty limitations meant that fewer new battleships were launched in 1919–39 than in 1905–14.
While the victors were not limited by the Treaty of Versailles, many of the major naval powers were crippled after the war.
Indeed, it soon became apparent that they were no longer worth the considerable cost of construction and maintenance and only one new battleship was commissioned after the war, .
The French  was scrapped in 1954,  in 1968, and  in 1970.
As early as 1904, Jackie Fisher had been convinced of the need for fast, powerful ships with an all-big-gun armament.
The word ''battleship'' was coined around 1794 and is a contraction of the phrase ''line-of-battle ship'', the dominant wooden warship during the Age of Sail.
The Royal Navy on the other hand, successfully adopted convoy tactics to combat Germany's submarine blockade and eventually defeated it.
The primary threat to the battleships were Iraqi shore based surface-to-surface missiles; ''Missouri'' was targeted by two Iraqi Silkworm missiles, with one missing and another being intercepted by the British destroyer .
The s gained a new lease of life in the U.S. Navy as fire support ships.
The 1903-4 design also retained traditional triple-expansion steam engines.
The "fleet in being" suggested battleships could simply by their existence tie down superior enemy resources.
The beginning of the pre-dreadnought era coincided with Britain reasserting her naval dominance.
The typical first-class battleship of the pre-dreadnought era displaced 15,000 to 17,000&nbsp;tons, had a speed of , and an armament of four  guns in two turrets fore and aft with a mixed-caliber secondary battery amidships around the superstructure.
By the mid-1870s steel was used as a construction material alongside iron and wood.
The stunt made headlines, and Mitchell declared, "No surface vessels can exist wherever air forces acting from land bases are able to attack them."
and  surprised and sank the aircraft carrier  off western Norway in June 1940.
This concept of "potential threat" can be further generalized to the mere existence (as opposed to presence) of a powerful fleet tying the opposing fleet down.
The North Sea campaign of the First World War illustrates how, despite this support, the threat of mine and torpedo attack, and the failure to integrate or appreciate the capabilities of new techniques, seriously inhibited the operations of the Royal Navy Grand Fleet, the greatest battleship fleet of its time.
In large fleet actions, however, destroyers and torpedo boats were usually unable to get close enough to the battleships to damage them.
It was then decided to tow the battleship to a more secure port, but during the transport she suffered an internal explosion that caused 300 deaths and her total loss.
The Washington treaty was followed by a series of other naval treaties, including the First Geneva Naval Conference (1927), the First London Naval Treaty (1930), the Second Geneva Naval Conference (1932), and finally the Second London Naval Treaty (1936), which all set limits on major warships.
The U.S. has eight battleships on display: , , , , , ,  and .
By the 1890s, there was an increasing similarity between battleship designs, and the type that later became known as the 'pre-dreadnought battleship' emerged.
These treaties became effectively obsolete on September 1, 1939 at the beginning of World War II, but the ship classifications that had been agreed upon still apply.
Rear Admiral William A. Moffett used public relations against Mitchell to make headway toward expansion of the U.S. Navy's nascent aircraft carrier program.
Even though such innovative designs saved weight (a key reason for their inception), they proved too cumbersome in practice.
This in turn was believed to be able to tip the balance of a conflict even without a battle.
A number are preserved as museum ships, either afloat or in drydock.
Argentina kept its two  ships until 1956 and Chile kept  (formerly ) until 1959.
In addition, the Navy of the North Germany Confederacy (which included Prussia) bought  from Britain in 1870 for use as a gunnery training ship.
HMS ''Dreadnought'' rammed and sank the German U-29 on March 18, 1915 off Moray Firth.
''Massachusetts'', which has the distinction of never having lost a man during service, is on display at the Battleship Cove naval museum in Fall River, Massachusetts.
The global arms race in battleship construction began in Europe, following the 1890 publication of Alfred Thayer Mahan's ''The Influence of Sea Power upon History''.
Turrets, armor plate, and steam engines were all improved over the years, and torpedo tubes were introduced.
These were primarily used for shore bombardment, ''New Jersey'' firing nearly 6,000 rounds of 16&nbsp;inch shells and over 14,000 rounds of 5&nbsp;inch projectiles during her tour on the gunline, seven times more rounds against shore targets in Vietnam than she had fired in the Second World War.
Gunfire from ''New Jersey'' later killed militia leaders.
In the attack on Mers-el-Kébir, British battleships opened fire on the French battleships in the harbor near Oran in Algeria with their heavy guns, and later pursued fleeing French ships with planes from aircraft carriers.
Battleships were a symbol of naval dominance and national might, and for decades the battleship was a major factor in both diplomacy and military strategy.
Within two years, Italy, Austria, Spain and Russia had all ordered ironclad warships, and by the time of the famous clash of the  and the  at the Battle of Hampton Roads at least eight navies possessed ironclad ships.
Even during the Cold War, the psychological impact of a battleship was significant.
These last two battleships were finally stricken from the U.S.
The three old German battleships , , and  all met similar ends.
All but one of the American battleships in this confrontation had previously been sunk by the attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequently raised and repaired.
Radar and computer-controlled gunfire could be aimed with pinpoint accuracy to target.
The wreck of the , sunk during the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941, is designated a historical landmark and national gravesite.
The ship was forced to go back to port to be repaired.
Some British ships received a large block superstructure nicknamed the "Queen Anne's castle", such as in the  and , which would be used in the new conning towers of the  fast battleships.
By virtue of geography, the Royal Navy was able to use her imposing battleship and battlecruiser fleet to impose a strict and successful naval blockade of Germany and kept Germany's smaller battleship fleet bottled up in the North Sea: only narrow channels led to the Atlantic Ocean and these were guarded by British forces.
Both battleships proved resistant to nuclear air burst but vulnerable to underwater nuclear explosions.
The principle that Britain's navy should be more powerful than the two next most powerful fleets combined was established.
The ship of the line was overtaken by the ironclad: powered by steam, protected by metal armor, and armed with guns firing high-explosive shells.
The Armistice with Germany required that most of the High Seas Fleet be disarmed and interned in a neutral port; largely because no neutral port could be found, the ships remained in British custody in Scapa Flow, Scotland.
As the French politician Etienne Lamy wrote in 1879, "The construction of battleships is so costly, their effectiveness so uncertain and of such short duration, that the enterprise of creating an armored fleet seems to leave fruitless the perseverance of a people".
''Texas'', the first battleship turned into a museum, is on display at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site, near Houston.
The resulting Action of 19 August 1916 proved inconclusive.
Both warships were under way and en route to attack the Japanese amphibious force that had invaded Malaya when they were caught by Japanese land-based bombers and torpedo bombers on December 10, 1941.
It proposed what would nowadays be termed a sea denial strategy, based on fast, long-ranged cruisers for commerce raiding and torpedo boat flotillas to attack enemy ships attempting to blockade French ports.
Smaller guns (12-pounders and smaller) were reserved for protecting the battleship against the threat of torpedo attack from destroyers and torpedo boats.
In 1906, the Royal Navy owned the field with ''Dreadnought''.
Battleships were the largest and most complex, and hence the most expensive warships of their time; as a result, the value of investment in battleships has always been contested.
In 1921 the Italian general and air theorist Giulio Douhet completed a hugely influential treatise on strategic bombing titled ''The Command of the Air'', which foresaw the dominance of air power over naval units.
The treaties also inhibited development by putting maximum limits on the weights of ships.
''Schlesien'', too, was used as a target ship.
The treaty also limited the German Navy, and prevented Germany from building or possessing any capital ships.
In 1897, before the revolution in design brought about by HMS ''Dreadnought'', the Royal Navy had 62 battleships in commission or building, a lead of 26 over France and 50 over Germany.
The British air attack on the Italian naval base at Taranto sank one Italian battleship and damaged two more.
Navies experimented with the positioning of guns, in turrets (like the USS ''Monitor''), central-batteries or barbettes, or with the ram as the principal weapon.
The most significant naval battles of World War I, such as Jutland (May 31, 1916 – June 1, 1916), were fought by battleships and their battlecruiser cousins.
While far from conclusive, Mitchell's test was significant because it put proponents of the battleship against naval aviation on the back foot.
This concept came to be known as a "fleet in being" – an idle yet mighty fleet forcing others to spend time, resource and effort to actively guard against it.
This reinforced German determination not to engage in a fleet to fleet battle.
Even the largest battleships ever constructed, Japan's , which carried a main battery of nine 18-inch (46&nbsp;cm) guns and were designed as a principal strategic weapon, were never given a chance to show their potential in the decisive battleship action that figured in Japanese pre-war planning.
Both sides were aware that, because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts, a full fleet engagement would be likely to result in a British victory.
Germany's submarines were able to break out and raid commerce, but even though they sank many merchant ships, they could not successfully blockade Great Britain – in contrast to Britain's successful battleship blockade of Germany, which was a major cause of Germany's economic collapse in 1918.
This treaty limited the number and size of battleships that each major nation could possess, and required Britain to accept parity with the U.S. and to abandon the British alliance with Japan.
''Wisconsin'' now serves as a museum ship in Norfolk, Virginia.
The Soviet Union's  was scrapped in 1953,  in 1957 and  (back under her original name, , since 1942) in 1956-7.
The inter-war period saw the battleship subjected to strict international limitations to prevent a costly arms race breaking out.
She carried ten 12-inch guns, had an 11-inch armor belt, and was the first large ship powered by turbines.
The determination of powers such as Germany to build battlefleets with which to confront much stronger rivals has been criticised by historians, who emphasise the futility of investment in a battlefleet that has no chance of matching its opponent in an actual battle.
The British Super-dreadnought HMS ''Audacious'' soon followed suit as she struck a mine laid by a German U-boat in October 1914 and sank.
The Soviets scrapped four large incomplete cruisers in the late 1950s, whilst plans to build a number of new s were abandoned following the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953.
It is often held that these engagements demonstrated the importance of the  gun over its smaller counterparts, though some historians take the view that secondary batteries were just as important as the larger weapons.
Combining an "all-big-gun" armament of ten 12-inch (305&nbsp;mm) guns with unprecedented speed (from steam turbine engines) and protection, she prompted navies worldwide to re-evaluate their battleship building programs.
However, the design had armor which was considered too thin, demanding a substantial redesign.
The Adriatic was in a sense the mirror of the North Sea: the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought fleet remained bottled up by the British and French blockade.
Designs like the projected British , the first American , and the Japanese —all of which continued the trend to larger ships with bigger guns and thicker armor—never got off the drawing board.
Whilst the escape of the German fleet from the superior British firepower at Jutland was effected by the German cruisers and destroyers successfully turning away the British battleships, the German attempt to rely on U-boat attacks on the British fleet failed.
''Iowa'' is on display as an educational attraction at the Los Angeles Waterfront in San Pedro, California.
The sheer number of guns fired broadside meant a sail battleship could wreck any wooden enemy, holing her hull, knocking down masts, wrecking her rigging, and killing her crew.
Mahan went on to say victory could only be achieved by engagements between battleships, which came to be known as the ''decisive battle'' doctrine in some navies, while targeting merchant ships (commerce raiding or ''guerre de course'', as posited by the ''Jeune École'') could never succeed.
The battleship, particularly the dreadnought, was the dominant naval weapon of the World War I era.
The growing range of naval engagements led to the aircraft carrier replacing the battleship as the leading capital ship during World War II, with the last battleship to be launched being  in 1944.
Even some of those that did manage to get out were hunted down by battlecruisers, as in the Battle of the Falklands, December 7, 1914.
The Naval Treaties of the 1920s and 1930s limited the number of battleships, though technical innovation in battleship design continued.
Later in the war, French ironclad floating batteries used similar weapons against the defenses at the Battle of Kinburn.
The sinking of ''Ostfriesland'' was accomplished by violating an agreement that would have allowed Navy engineers to examine the effects of various munitions: Mitchell's airmen disregarded the rules, and sank the ship within minutes in a coordinated attack.
Several Italian and German capital ships participated in the non-intervention blockade.
This was a potentially decisive advantage in a naval engagement.
The crew aboard ''Jaime I'' remained loyal to the Republic, killed their officers, who apparently supported Franco's attempted coup, and joined the Republican Navy.
The only battleship sunk in a fleet action by either torpedo boats or destroyers was the obsolescent German pre-dreadnought .
Among the new features were an increased tower height and stability for the optical rangefinder equipment (for gunnery control), more armor (especially around turrets) to protect against plunging fire and aerial bombing, and additional anti-aircraft weapons.
The U.S. experimented with cage masts and later tripod masts, though after Pearl Harbor some of the most severely damaged ships such as  and  were rebuilt to a similar appearance to their  contemporaries (called tower masts).
In the Baltic Sea, action was largely limited to the raiding of convoys, and the laying of defensive minefields; the only significant clash of battleship squadrons there was the Battle of Moon Sound at which one Russian pre-dreadnought was lost.
HMS ''Audacious'' turned out to have been the only dreadnought sunk by a submarine in WWI.
On May 29, 1937, two Republican aircraft managed to bomb the German pocket battleship  outside Ibiza, causing severe damage and loss of life.
