To the left of the 4th Grenadiers were the two squares of the 1st/ and 2nd/3rd Chasseurs who angled further to the west and had suffered more from artillery fire than the grenadiers.
Had Napoleon succeeded in destroying the existing coalition forces south of Brussels before they were reinforced, he might have been able to drive the British back to the sea, knock the Prussians out of the war, and then turn his armies towards the Austrians and Russians.
Some French troops managed to enter the courtyard.
Suddenly 1,500 British Foot Guards under Maitland who had been lying down to protect themselves from the French artillery rose and devastated them with point-blank volleys.
Only very late on the night of 15 June was Wellington certain that the Charleroi attack was the main French thrust.
In the centre, Donzelot's division had pushed back Bylandt's brigade.
Napoleon's surprisingly dismissive statements should not be taken at face value, given the Emperor's maxim that "in war, morale is everything" and that praising the enemy is always wrong, as it reduces one's morale.
Kellermann, recognising the futility of the attacks, tried to reserve the elite ''carabinier'' brigade from joining in, but eventually Ney spotted them and insisted on their involvement.
A charge from Adam's Brigade and the Hanoverian ''Landwehr'' Osnabrück Battalion, plus Vivian's and Vandeleur's relatively fresh cavalry brigades to their right, threw them into confusion.
There is evidence that Uxbridge gave an order, the morning of the battle, to all cavalry brigade commanders to commit their commands on their own initiative, as direct orders from himself might not always be forthcoming, and to "support movements to their front".
At about 13:30, d'Erlon started to advance his three other divisions, some 14,000&nbsp;men over a front of about , against Wellington's left wing.
Upon Napoleon's return to power in March 1815, many states that had opposed him formed the Seventh Coalition and began to mobilize armies.
The British cavalry were unable, however, to break the French infantry, and fell back with losses from musketry fire.
The Household Brigade crossed the crest of the Allied position and charged downhill.
A cluster of monuments at the Brussels–Charleroi and Braine L'Alleud–Ohain crossroads marks the mass graves of British, Dutch, Hanoverian and King's German Legion troops.
These include the rolling farmland to the east of the Brussels–Charleroi Road as well as the buildings at Hougoumont, La Haye Sainte, and La Belle Alliance.
Along the crest of the ridge ran the Ohain road, a deep sunken lane.
The bombardment forced the cavalry of the Union Brigade (in third line) to move to its left, as did the Scots Greys, to reduce their casualty rate.
The formation was initially effective.
Any attack on his right centre would mean the attackers would have to march between enfilading fire from Hougoumont and La Haye Sainte.
The rest of the brigade was lying down just behind the road.
On the extreme right were the château, garden, and orchard of Hougoumont.
The tide of battle had been turned by the hard-driving Blücher.
The bicentenary of Waterloo has prompted renewed attention to the geopolitical and economic legacy of the battle and the century of relative transatlantic peace which followed.
The remains of a 23-year-old soldier named Friederich Brandt were discovered in 2012.
Sous-Lieutenant Legros, a French officer, broke the gate open with an axe.
At about the same time, the Prussian 5th, 14th, and 16th Brigades were starting to push through Plancenoit, in the third assault of the day.
According to Wellington, the battle was "the nearest-run thing you ever saw in your life".
In the afternoon, Napoleon personally ordered the house to be shelled to set it on fire, resulting in the destruction of all but the chapel.
Napoleon chose to attack them in the hope of destroying them before they could join in a coordinated invasion of France with other members of the coalition.
The result was very heavy losses for the British cavalry.
Vulnerable to artillery or infantry, squares that stood their ground were deadly to cavalry, because they could not be outflanked and because horses would not charge into a hedge of bayonets.
Their Colonel Ompteda obeyed and chased off some French skirmishers until French cuirassiers fell on his open flank, killed him, destroyed his battalion and took its colour.
This staff system ensured that before Ligny, three-quarters of the Prussian army concentrated for battle at 24 hours notice.
Overall Guyot's Guard heavy cavalry division lost 47% of its strength.
The ends of the line were now based on Hougoumont on the left, Plancenoit on the right, and the centre on La Haie.
The King's German Legion resolutely defended the farmhouse.
The 52nd then charged.
Rather than use the usual nine-deep French columns deployed abreast of one another, therefore, each division advanced in closely spaced battalion lines behind one another.
It was during this retreat that some of the Guards were invited to surrender, eliciting the famous, if apocryphal, retort "''La Garde meurt, elle ne se rend pas!''"
Witnesses in the British infantry recorded as many as 12&nbsp;assaults, though this probably includes successive waves of the same general attack; the number of general assaults was undoubtedly far fewer.
I tell you Wellington is a bad general, the English are bad troops, and this affair is nothing more than eating breakfast".
More than 20&nbsp;years of warfare had eroded the numbers of suitable cavalry mounts available on the European continent; this resulted in the British heavy cavalry entering the 1815 campaign with the finest horses of any contemporary cavalry arm.
Ney then moved horse artillery up towards Wellington's centre and began to pulverise the infantry squares at short range with canister.
The 30th and 73rd Regiments suffered such heavy losses that they had to combine to form a viable square.
The length of front of the battlefield was also relatively short at .
The 42nd Black Watch halted at the hedge and the resulting fire-fight drove back the British 92nd Foot while the leading French ''45e Ligne'' burst through the hedge cheering.
While one French battalion engaged the defenders from the front, the following battalions fanned out to either side and, with the support of several squadrons of cuirassiers, succeeded in isolating the farmhouse.
The fighting at Hougoumont has often been characterised as a diversionary attack to draw in Wellington's reserves which escalated into an all-day battle and drew in French reserves instead.
Pack's regiments, all four ranks deep, advanced to attack the French in the road but faltered and began to fire on the French instead of charging.
As his Prussians pushed in Napoleon's flank.
British cavalry troopers also received excellent mounted swordsmanship training.
Wellington's army defended the house and the hollow way running north from it.
At the moment these skirmishers were rejoining their parent battalions, the brigade was ordered to its feet and started to return fire.
In the centre about the road south of the inn ''La Belle Alliance'' were a reserve including Lobau's VI Corps with 6,000 men, the 13,000 infantry of the Imperial Guard, and a cavalry reserve of 2,000.
The site of the battlefield today is dominated by a large monument, the Lion's Mound.
The initial attack by Bauduin's brigade emptied the wood and park, but was driven back by heavy British artillery fire, and cost Bauduin his life.
Moreover, Soult's letter ordering Grouchy to move quickly to join Napoleon and attack Bülow would not actually reach Grouchy until after 20:00.
This assault was directed along much the same route as the previous heavy cavalry attacks (between Hougoumont and La Haye Sainte).
The house and its immediate environs were defended by four light companies of Guards, and the wood and park by Hanoverian ''Jäger'' and the 1/2nd Nassau.
Once he had intelligence of the Prussian defeat, Wellington organised a retreat from Quatre Bras to Waterloo.
Upon learning that the Prussian army was able to support him, Wellington decided to offer battle on the Mont-Saint-Jean escarpment, across the Brussels road.
At approximately the same time as Ney's combined-arms assault on the centre-right of Wellington's line, rallied elements of D'Erlon's I Corps, spearheaded by the 13th ''Légère,'' renewed the attack on La Haye Sainte and this time were successful, partly because the King's German Legion's ammunition ran out.
On the opposite side of the road was a disused sand quarry, where the 95th Rifles were posted as sharpshooters.
After numerous costly but fruitless attacks on the Mont-Saint-Jean ridge, the French cavalry was spent.
A bayonet charge by the Foot Guards then broke the leaderless squares, which fell back onto the following column.
Coalition cavalry harried the fugitives until about 23:00, with Gneisenau pursuing them as far as Genappe before ordering a halt.
The Waterloo position was a strong one.
The Middle Guard formed in battalion squares, each about 550 men strong, with the 1st/3rd Grenadiers, led by Generals Friant and Poret de Morvan, on the right along the road, to their left and rear was General Harlet leading the square of the 4th Grenadiers, then the 1st/3rd Chasseurs under General Michel, next the 2nd/3rd Chasseurs and finally the large single square of two battalions of 800 soldiers of the 4th Chasseurs led by General Henrion.
The Prussians were unable to fire for fear of hitting Wellington's units.
At 10:30 on 19 June General Grouchy, still following his orders, defeated General Thielemann at Wavre and withdrew in good order—though at the cost of 33,000 French troops that never reached the Waterloo battlefield.
He was a slightly hunchbacked infantryman,  tall, and was hit in the chest by a French bullet.
The Lion's Hillock, a giant mound, was constructed here using  of earth taken from the ridge at the centre of the British line, effectively removing the southern bank of Wellington's sunken road.
On the extreme left was the hamlet of Papelotte.
It was lined on both sides by thick hedges, with Bylandt's brigade just across the road while the British brigades had been lying down some 100 yards back from the road, Pack's to Bylandt's left and Kempt's to Bylandt's right.
Wellington ordered his artillery crews to take shelter within the squares as the cavalry approached, and to return to their guns and resume fire as they retreated.
Along the sunken road, the French were forcing the Allies back, the British line was dispersing, and at two o'clock in the afternoon Napoleon was winning the Battle of Waterloo.
With the Prussians breaking through on the French right flank Wellington's Anglo-allied army counter-attacked in the centre, and the French army was routed.
According to Wellington, though they were superior individual horsemen, they were inflexible and lacked tactical ability.
Meanwhile, with Wellington's centre exposed by the fall of La Haye Sainte and the Plancenoit front temporarily stabilised, Napoleon committed his last reserve, the hitherto-undefeated Imperial Guard infantry.
A British eyewitness of the first French cavalry attack, an officer in the Foot Guards, recorded his impressions very lucidly and somewhat poetically:
Hiller's 16th Brigade also pushed forward with six battalions against Plancenoit.
To their left, the Union Brigade suddenly swept through the infantry lines (giving rise to the legend that some of the 92nd Gordon Highland Regiment clung onto their stirrups and accompanied them into the charge).
Some historians, such as Chandler and Weller, assert that the British heavy cavalry were destroyed as a viable force following their first, epic charge.
French skirmishers appeared around the building and fired on the British command as it struggled to get away through the hedgerow along the road.
Papelotte also commanded the road to Wavre that the Prussians would use to send reinforcements to Wellington's position.
Off-setting these handicaps the Prussian Army had excellent and professional leadership in its General Staff organisation.
At the point they aimed for they faced 6,000&nbsp;men: the first line consisted of the Dutch 1st "Brigade van Bylandt" of the 2nd Dutch division, flanked by the British brigades of Kempt and Pack on either side.
By the end of 17 June, Wellington's army had arrived at its position at Waterloo, with the main body of Napoleon's army following.
Napoleon had delayed the start of the battle owing to the sodden ground, which would have made manoeuvring cavalry and artillery difficult.
Meanwhile, Bachelu's and Tissot's men and their cavalry supports were being hard hit by fire from artillery and from Adam's infantry brigade, and they eventually fell back.
Both Hougoumont and Papelotte were fortified and garrisoned, and thus anchored Wellington's flanks securely.
In the final skirmish of the Napoleonic Wars, Marshal Davout, Napoleon's minister of war, was defeated by Blücher at Issy on 3 July 1815.
This attack, mounted at around 19:30, was intended to break through Wellington's centre and roll up his line away from the Prussians.
Napoleon breakfasted off silver plate at ''Le Caillou'', the house where he had spent the night.
As a result, the last part of the corps left at 10:00, six hours after the leading elements had moved out towards Waterloo.
This allowed them to concentrate their fire, but it did not leave room for them to change formation.
Müffling saw this movement away and persuaded Zieten to support Wellington's left flank.
At 10:00, in response to a dispatch he had received from Grouchy six hours earlier, he sent a reply telling Grouchy to "head for Wavre to Grouchy's north in order to draw near to us to the west of Grouchy" and then "push before him" the Prussians to arrive at Waterloo "as soon as possible".
Yet another battery deployed on the flank of Mercer's battery and shot up its horses and limbers and pushed Mercer back.
Wellington was also acutely short of heavy cavalry, having only seven British and three Dutch regiments.
The defeat at Waterloo ended Napoleon's rule as Emperor of the French, and marked the end of his Hundred Days return from exile.
That fire nearly annihilated the 27th Foot, the Inniskillings, who lost two-thirds of their strength within that three or four hours.
Napoleon had used conscription to fill the ranks of the French army throughout his rule, but he did not conscript men for the 1815 campaign.
The 24th Regiment linked up with a Highlander battalion on its far right and along with the 13th ''Landwehr'' regiment and cavalry support threw the French out of these positions.
An additional consideration was that there were many French-speaking sympathisers in Belgium and a French victory might trigger a friendly revolution there.
Later on, being told by his brother, Jerome, of some gossip overheard by a waiter between British officers at lunch at the 'King of Spain' inn in Genappe that the Prussians were to march over from Wavre, Napoleon declared that the Prussians would need at least two days to recover and would be dealt with by Grouchy.
The ''grande batterie'' was too far back to aim accurately, and the only other troops they could see were skirmishers of the regiments of Kempt and Pack, and Perponcher's 2nd Dutch division (the others were employing Wellington's characteristic "reverse slope defence").
Three Old Guard battalions did move forward and formed the attack's second line, though they remained in reserve and did not directly assault the allied line.
On the western side of the main road, and in front of the rest of Wellington's line, was the farmhouse and orchard of La Haye Sainte, which was garrisoned with 400 light infantry of the King's German Legion.
Fighting continued around Hougoumont all afternoon.
A 10 Euro coin, showing Wellington, Blücher, their troops and the silhouette of Napoleon, was also available in silver for 42 Euros.
Though some projectiles buried themselves in the soft soil, most found their marks on the reverse slope of the ridge.
On the right all the now rallied elements of D'Érlon's corps once again ascended the ridge and engaged the allied line.
Close artillery support could disrupt infantry squares and allow cavalry to penetrate; at Waterloo, however, co-operation between the French cavalry and artillery was not impressive.
It was followed by almost four decades of international peace in Europe.
On the rolls the official, or paper strength, for both Brigades is given as 2,651 while Barbero and others estimate the actual strength at around 2,000 and the official recorded losses for the two heavy cavalry brigades during the battle was 1,205 troopers and 1,303 horses.
Napoleon himself oversaw the initial deployment of the Middle and Old Guard.
Napoleon sent two battalions of the Middle/Old Guard into Plancenoit and after ferocious bayonet fighting—they did not deign to fire their muskets—this force recaptured the village.
Every man for himself!")
The 4th Grenadiers, seeing their comrades retreat and having suffered heavy casualties themselves, now wheeled right about and retired.
The bulk of their rearguard units held their positions until about midnight, and some elements did not move out until the following morning, ignored by the French.
A very even fight between British and French infantry was about to occur.
Hougoumont was a part of the battlefield that Napoleon could see clearly, and he continued to direct resources towards it and its surroundings all afternoon (33&nbsp;battalions in all, 14,000&nbsp;troops).
The Prussian defeat made Wellington's position at Quatre Bras untenable, so the next day he withdrew northwards, to a defensive position he had reconnoitred the previous year—the low ridge of Mont-Saint-Jean, south of the village of Waterloo and the Sonian Forest.
At Wavre, the Prussian IV Corps under Bülow was designated to lead the march to Waterloo as it was in the best shape, not having been involved in the Battle of Ligny.
Unable to break square to drive off the French infantry because of the presence of French cavalry and artillery, they had to remain in that formation and endure the fire of the ''tirailleurs''.
This would have pushed Wellington closer to Blücher, but may have cut Wellington's communications with his base at Ostend.
However, there is no support for this incident in Dutch or Belgian sources.
Blücher and Wellington had been exchanging communications since 10:00 and had agreed to this advance on Frichermont if Wellington's centre was under attack.
Kempt's 1,900 men were engaged by Bourgeois' brigade of 1,900 men of Quiot's division.
An alternative view is that towards the end of the battle Wellington's Anglo-allied army faced imminent defeat without Prussian help.
The French army of around 69,000 consisted of 48,000 infantry, 14,000 cavalry, and 7,000 artillery with 250 guns.
The battle definitively ended the series of wars that had convulsed Europe, and involved many other regions of the world, since the French Revolution of the early 1790s.
Wellington rose at around 02:00 or 03:00 on 18 June, and wrote letters until dawn.
Each square was led  by a general and Marshal Ney, mounted on his 5th horse of the day, led the advance.
The French right, left, and centre had all now failed.
The farmhouse was defended by the King's German Legion.
Bülow's men were followed to Waterloo first by I Corps and then by II Corps.
These troops appeared to be withdrawing and Zieten, fearing that his own troops would be caught up in a general retreat, was starting to move away from Wellington's flank and towards the Prussian main body near Plancenoit.
Artillery fire between charges did produce mounting casualties, but most of this fire was at relatively long range and was often indirect, at targets beyond the ridge.
Near the crossroads with the Brussels road was a large elm tree that was roughly in the centre of Wellington's position and served as his command post for much of the day.
Allegedly, Napoleon tried to escape to North America, but the Royal Navy was blockading French ports to forestall such a move.
Napoleon sent Lobau's corps to intercept the rest of Bülow's IV Corps proceeding to Plancenoit.
Surprisingly, Jerome's overheard gossip aside, the French commanders present at the pre-battle conference at ''Le Caillou'' had no information about the alarming proximity of the Prussians and did not suspect that Blücher's men would start erupting onto the field of battle in great numbers just five hours later.
Napoleon left Ney to conduct the assault, however Ney led the Middle Guard on an oblique towards the Allied centre right instead of attacking straight up the centre.
They were nevertheless awarded the title of Grenadier Guards in recognition of their feat and adopted bearskins in the style of the Grenadiers.
At about this time, as the French cavalry attack was in full spate, the 15th Brigade IV Corps was sent to link up with the Nassauers of Wellington's left flank in the Frichermont-La Haie area with the brigade's horse artillery battery and additional brigade artillery deployed to its left in support.
The last cohesive French force consisted of two battalions of the Old Guard stationed around ''La Belle Alliance''; they had been so placed to act as a final reserve and to protect Napoleon in the event of a French retreat.
Apart from the Lion Mound, there are several more conventional but noteworthy monuments throughout the battlefield.
However, historian Peter Hofschröer has written that Wellington and Blücher met at Genappe around 22:00, signifying the end of the battle.
His troops consisted of 67,000 men: 50,000 infantry, 11,000 cavalry, and 6,000 artillery with 150 guns.
The 24th advanced against the new French position, was repulsed, and returned to the attack supported by Silesian ''Schützen'' (riflemen) and the F/1st ''Landwehr''.
Crucially, the Prussians did not retreat to the east, along their own lines of communication.
Having taken casualties, and still trying to reorder themselves, the Scots Greys and the rest of the Union Brigade found themselves before the main French lines.
("The Guard dies, it does not surrender!")
To enable this, Jerome's division would make an initial attack on Hougoumont, which Napoleon expected would draw in Wellington's reserves, since its loss would threaten his communications with the sea.
Command on the battlefield (which was largely hidden from his view) was delegated to Ney.
All figures quoted for the losses of the cavalry brigades as a result of this charge are estimates, as casualties were only noted down after the day of the battle and were for the battle as a whole.
This allowed Wellington to draw up his forces in depth, which he did in the centre and on the right, all the way towards the village of Braine-l'Alleud, in the expectation that the Prussians would reinforce his left during the day.
Napoleon's reaction was to have Marshal Soult send a message to Grouchy telling him to come towards the battlefield and attack the arriving Prussians.
He hoped to rally the French army behind them, but as retreat turned into rout, they too were forced to withdraw, one on either side of ''La Belle Alliance'', in square as protection against Coalition cavalry.
The novelty of fighting armoured foes impressed the British cavalrymen, as was recorded by the commander of the Household Brigade.
In essence this type of massed cavalry attack relied almost entirely on psychological shock for effect.
Durutte's division, finding itself about to be charged by massed squadrons of Zieten's I Corps cavalry reserve, retreated from the battlefield.
The heavy brigades, far from being ineffective, continued to provide valuable services.
The French army formed on the slopes of another ridge to the south.
Zieten had also received a direct order from Blücher to support Bülow, Zieten obeyed and marched to Bülow's aid.
The Prussians rallied on Bülow's IV Corps, which had not been engaged at Ligny and was in a strong position south of Wavre.
The first Prussian corps to arrive in strength was Bülow's IV Corps.
Four days later, the United Kingdom, Russia, Austria, and Prussia mobilised armies to defeat Napoleon.
The Frenchmen trapped in the courtyard were all killed.
Every generation in Europe up to the outbreak of the First World War looked back at Waterloo as the turning point that dictated the course of subsequent world history.
A counterattack by the Nassauers and the remains of Kielmansegge's brigade from the allied second line, led by the Prince of Orange, was also thrown back and the Prince of Orange was seriously wounded.
Similarly, though the house never contained a large number of troops, Wellington devoted 21&nbsp;battalions (12,000&nbsp;troops) over the course of the afternoon in keeping the hollow way open to allow fresh troops and ammunition to reach the buildings.
Steele (2014) writes: "Blücher’s arrival not only diverted vital reinforcements, but also forced Napoleon to accelerate his effort against Wellington.
They were, however, inferior to the French in manoeuvring in large formations, cavalier in attitude, and unlike the infantry some units had scant experience of warfare.
Two batteries of Imperial Guard Horse Artillery accompanied them with sections of two guns between the squares.
Many of the troops in the Coalition armies were inexperienced.
D'Erlon's men ascended the slope and advanced on the sunken road, ''Chemin d'Ohain'', that ran from behind La Haye Sainte and continued east.
France officially protested this issue, while the Belgian government noted that the French mint sells souvenir medals at Waterloo.
The Guards first received fire from some Brunswick battalions, but the return fire of the grenadiers forced them to retire.
Indeed, he had been seen engaging in such pre-battle, morale-boosting harangues on a number of occasions in the past and on the morning of the battle of Waterloo he had to deal with his chief of staff's pessimism and nervousness and had to respond to several persistent and almost defeatist objections from some of his senior generals.
Their casualties cannot easily be estimated.
A Dutch–Belgian cavalry regiment ordered to charge, retreated from the field instead, fired on by their own infantry.
Every shot almost took effect, and I certainly expected we should all be annihilated.
At 6 o'clock in the afternoon the whole Union Brigade could field only 3 squadrons, though these countercharged French cavalry, losing half their number in the process.
Hougoumont held out until the end of the battle.
The French artillery did not get close enough to the Anglo-allied infantry in sufficient numbers to be decisive.
On the right of the French advance was Marcognet's division led by Grenier's brigade consisting of the ''45e Régiment de Ligne'' and followed by the ''25e Régiment de Ligne'', somewhat less than 2,000 men, and behind them, Nogue's brigade of the ''21e'' and ''45e'' regiments.
Using the reverse slope, as he had many times previously, Wellington concealed his strength from the French, with the exception of his skirmishers and artillery.
Pirch's II Corps had arrived with two brigades and reinforced the attack of IV Corps, advancing through the woods.
Waterloo was a decisive battle in more than one sense.
The Prussian I Corps then advanced towards the Brussels road and the only line of retreat available to the French.
On the left of the brigade, where the 7th Dutch Militia stood, a "few files were shot down and an opening in the line thus occurred".
Napoleon abdicated 4 days later, and on 7 July coalition forces entered Paris.
In addition, there were 17,000 Dutch and Belgian troops, 11,000 from Hanover, 6,000 from Brunswick, and 3,000 from Nassau.
The 2nd Life Guards and the King's Dragoon Guards of the Household Brigade also lost heavily (with Colonel Fuller, commander of the King's DG, killed).
When these were repulsed, Kellermann's heavy cavalry corps and Guyot's heavy cavalry of the Guard were added to the massed assault, a total of around 9,000&nbsp;cavalry in 67&nbsp;squadrons.
Milhaud's and Jaquinot's cavalrymen drove the Union Brigade from the valley.
