Edward Curtis, the famed ethnologist and photographer of the Native American Indians, made a detailed personal study of the Battle, interviewing many of those who had fought or taken part in it.
0200.png|thumb|Red Horse pictographic of Lakota casualties
Every soldier in the five companies with Custer was killed (3 Indian scouts and several troopers had left that column before the battle; an Indian scout, Curley, was the only survivor to leave after the battle had begun), although for years rumors persisted of survivors.
Threatened with starvation, the Indians ceded ''Paha Sapa'' to the United States, but the Sioux never accepted the legitimacy of the transaction.
Yates' wing, descending to the Little Bighorn River at Ford D, encountered "light resistance", undetected by the Indian forces ascending the bluffs east of the village.
Troopers had to dismount to help the wounded men back onto their horses.
Archaeological evidence and reassessment of Indian testimony has led to a new interpretation of the battle.
Col. John Gibbon's column of six companies (A, B, E, H, I, and K) of the 7th Infantry and four companies (F, G, H, and L) of the 2nd Cavalry marched east from Fort Ellis in western Montana on March 30, to patrol the Yellowstone River.
Colonel George A. Custer's field strategy was designed to engage noncombatants at the encampments at the Battle of the Little Bighorn, so as to capture women, children, the elderly or disabled to serve as hostages and human shields.
On August 8, 1876, after Terry was further reinforced with the 5th Infantry, the expedition moved up Rosebud Creek in pursuit of the Lakota.
By almost all accounts, the Lakota annihilated Custer's force within an hour of engagement.
Their detachments were reinforced by McDougall's Company B and the pack train.
I'm sorely afraid, Tony, that we will have to class Hayward's story, like that of so many others, as pure, unadulterated B. S. As a clerk at headquarters I had occasion to look over the morning reports of at least the six troops at Lincoln almost daily, and never saw his name there, or among the list of scouts employed from time to time...I am hoping that some day all of these damned fakirs will die and it will be safe for actual participants in the battle to admit and insist that they were there, without being branded and looked upon as a lot of damned liars.
They reviewed Terry's plan calling for Custer's regiment to proceed south along the Rosebud while Terry and Gibbon's united forces would move in a westerly direction toward the Bighorn and Little Bighorn rivers.
Modern archaeology and historical Indian accounts indicate that Custer's force may have been divided into three groups, with the Indians' attempting to prevent them from effectively reuniting.
When the scouts began changing back into their native dress right before the battle, Custer released them from his command.
They were always trying to crawl out and I was always putting them back in, so I didn't sleep much."
File:Red Horse pictographic account of the Battle of the Little Bighorn, 1881.
The Lakota asserted that Crazy Horse personally led one of the large groups of warriors who overwhelmed the cavalrymen in a surprise charge from the northeast, causing a breakdown in the command structure and panic among the troops.
The commissioned work by Native artist Colleen Cutschall is shown in the photograph at right.
The command began its approach to the village at noon and prepared to attack in full daylight.
Custer's remaining companies (E, F, and half of C,) were soon killed.
The Crow scout White Man Runs Him was the first to tell General Terry's officers that Custer's force had "been wiped out."
Some Indian accounts claim that besides wounding one of the leaders of this advance, a soldier carrying a company guidon was also hit.
The other entrenched companies eventually followed Weir by assigned battalions, first Benteen, then Reno, and finally the pack train.
After a night's march, the tired officer who was sent with the scouts could see neither, and when Custer joined them, he was also unable to make the sighting.
His rapid march en route to the Little Big Horn averaged nearly  a day, so his assessment appears to have been accurate.
Jamming caused by black powder residue could lower that rate, raising questions as to their reliability under combat conditions.
Some Native accounts recalled this segment of the fight as a "buffalo run."
The soldiers identified the 7th Cavalry's dead as best as possible and hastily buried them where they fell.
Although the marker for Mitch Bouyer has been accounted for as being accurate through archaeological and forensic testing, it is some 65 yards away from Deep Ravine.
According to some accounts, a small contingent of Indian sharpshooters opposed this crossing.
This was the beginning of their attack on Custer who was forced to turn and head for the hill where he would make his famous 'last stand'.
Gallear addresses the post-battle testimony concerning the copper .45-55 cartridges supplied to the troops in which an officer is said to have cleared the chambers of spent cartridges for a number of Springfield carbines.
The opposing forces, though not equally matched in the number and type of arms, were comparably outfitted, and neither side held a overwhelming advantage in weaponry.
Additionally, Custer was more concerned with preventing the escape of the Lakota and Cheyenne than with fighting them.
However, "the Indians had now discovered him and were gathered closely on the opposite side".
By contrast, each Gatling gun had to be hauled by four horses, and soldiers often had to drag the heavy guns by hand over obstacles.
Unknown to Custer, the group of Native Americans seen on his trail were actually leaving the encampment on the Big Horn and did not alert the village.
News of the defeat arrived in the East as the U.S. was observing its centennial.
There the United States erected a tall memorial obelisk inscribed with the names of the 7th Cavalry's casualties.
The Army began to investigate, although its effectiveness was hampered by a concern for survivors, and the reputation of the officers.
Indian accounts describe warriors (including women) running up from the village to wave blankets in order to scare off the soldiers' horses.
Neither Custer nor Reno had much idea of the length, depth and size of the encampment they were attacking, as the village was hidden by the trees.
In the end, the hilltop was probably too small to accommodate the survivors and wounded.
Rifle volleys were a standard way of telling supporting units to come to another unit's aid.
According to this theory, by the time Custer realized he was badly outnumbered, it was too late to break back to the south where Reno and Benteen could have provided assistance.
On June 22, Terry ordered the 7th Cavalry, composed of 31 officers and 566 enlisted men under Custer, to begin a reconnaissance in force and pursuit along the Rosebud, with the prerogative to "depart" from orders if Custer saw "sufficient reason".
As a result of the defeat in June 1876, Congress responded by attaching what the Sioux call the "sell or starve" rider () to the Indian Appropriations Act of 1876 (enacted August 15, 1876) which cut off all rations for the Sioux until they terminated hostilities and ceded the Black Hills to the United States.
Either wound would have been fatal, though he appeared to have bled from only the chest wound, meaning his head wound may have been delivered post-mortem.
He must have counted upon Reno's success, and fully expected the "scatteration" of the non-combatants with the pony herds.
0100.png|thumb|Red Horse pictographic of Lakota casualties
After their celebrations, many of the Indians slipped back to the reservation.
Other historians have noted that if Custer did attempt to cross the river near Medicine Tail Coulee, he may have believed it was the north end of the Indian camp, although it was only the middle.
Chief Gall's statements were corroborated by other Indians, notably the wife of Spotted Horn Bull.
Many men were veterans of the war, including most of the leading officers.
We stood there a long time."
The route taken by Custer to his "Last Stand" remains a subject of debate.
The US Congress authorized appropriations to expand the Army by 2,500 men to meet the emergency after the defeat of the 7th Cavalry.
Many of these men threw down their weapons while Cheyenne and Sioux warriors rode them down, "counting coup" with lances, coup sticks, and quirts.
The accuracy of their recollections remains controversial, as accounts by battle participants and assessments by historians almost universally discredit Thompson's claim.
However, in Chief Gall's version of events, as recounted to Lt. Edward Settle Godfrey, Custer did not attempt to ford the river and the nearest that he came to the river or village was his final position on the ridge.
However, over 120 men and women would come forward over the course of the next 70 years claiming they were "the lone survivor" of Custer's Last Stand.
Three companies were placed under the command of Major Marcus Reno (A, G, and M), and three were placed under the command of Capt.
By this time, roughly 5:25&nbsp;pm, Custer's battle may have concluded.
In a letter from 21 February 1910, Private William Taylor, Company M, 7th cavalry, wrote: "Reno proved incompetent and Benteen showed his indifference – I will not use the uglier words that have often been in my mind.
Finally, Custer may have assumed that in the event of his encountering Native Americans, his subordinate Benteen with the pack train would quickly come to his aid.
Thus, Custer unknowingly faced thousands of Indians, in addition to the 800 non-reservation "hostiles".
The 12th, Company B under Capt.
The 7th Cavalry was created just after the American Civil War.
Lieutenant William Low, commander of the artillery detachment, was said to have almost wept when he learned he had been excluded from the strike force.
The Gatlings, mounted high on carriages, required the battery crew to stand upright during its operation, making them easy targets for Lakota and Cheyenne sharpshooters.
On Memorial Day 1999, in consultation with tribal representatives, the US added two red granite markers to the battlefield to note where Native American warriors fell.
Hunt, expert in the tactical use of artillery in Civil War, stated that Gatlings "would probably have saved the command", whereas General Nelson A.
Field data showed that possible extractor failures occurred at a rate of approximately 1:30 firings at the Custer Battlefield and at a rate of 1:37 at the Reno-Benteen Battlefield.
Around 5:00&nbsp;pm, Capt.
Benteen's apparent reluctance to reach Custer prompted later criticism that he had failed to follow orders.
You can take a handful of corn and scatter the kernels over the floor, and make just such lines.
The Indians always insisted that they took no prisoners.
(Other Native accounts note several soldiers committing suicide near the end of the battle.)
Some of these survivors held a form of celebrity status in the United States, among them Raymond Hatfield "Arizona Bill" Gardner and Frank Tarbeaux.
Captain Frederick Benteen, Battalion leader, Companies D, H and K, recalled his observations on the Custer Battlefield, June 27, 1876:I went over the battlefield carefully with a view to determine how the battle was fought.
Persistent rain and lack of supplies forced the column to dissolve and return to its varying starting points.
Realizing the full extent of the village's width, Reno quickly suspected what he would later call "a trap" and stopped a few hundred yards short of the encampment.
The fight was an overwhelming victory for the Lakota, Northern Cheyenne, and Arapaho, led by several major war leaders, including Crazy Horse and Chief Gall, inspired by the visions of Sitting Bull (Tȟatȟáŋka Íyotake).
His men were widely scattered and unable to support each other.
Fearing that the village would break up into small bands that he would have to chase, Custer began to prepare for an immediate attack.
Some contemporary historians have suggested that what Weir witnessed was a fight on what is now called Calhoun Hill.
Reno advanced rapidly across the open field towards the northwest, his movements masked by the thick bramble of trees that ran along the southern banks of the Little Bighorn river.
Some historians believe that part of Custer's force descended the coulee, going west to the river and attempting unsuccessfully to cross into the village.
All Army plans were based on the incorrect numbers.
The trees also obscured Reno's view of the Native American village until his force had passed that bend on his right front and was suddenly within arrow shot of the village.
when the copper-cased, inside-primed cartridges were replaced with brass.
Almost as soon as men came forward implying or directly pronouncing their unique role in the battle, there were others who were equally opposed to any such claims.
The location of the north end of the village remains in dispute, however.
After about 20 minutes of long-distance firing, Reno had taken only one casualty, but the odds against him had risen (Reno estimated five to one) and Custer had not reinforced him.
The open circle of the structure is symbolic, as for many tribes, the circle is sacred.
The coordination and planning began to go awry on June 17, 1876 when Crook's column retreated after the Battle of the Rosebud.
Evidence from the 1920s supports the theory that at least one of the companies made a feint attack southeast from Nye-Cartwright Ridge straight down the center of the "V" formed by the intersection at the crossing of Medicine Tail Coulee on the right and Calhoun Coulee on the left.
By dividing his forces, Custer could have caused the defeat of the entire column, had it not been for Benteen's and Reno's linking up to make a desperate yet successful stand on the bluff above the southern end of the camp.
The Lakota and Cheyenne warriors that opposed Custer's forces possessed a wide array of weaponry, from Stone Age war clubs and lances to the most advanced firearms of the day.
One 7th cavalry trooper claimed finding a number of stone ''mallets'' consisting of a round cobble weighing 8-10 pounds (about 4&nbsp;kg) with a rawhide handle, which he believed had been used by the Indian women to finish off the wounded.
File:Red Horse pictographic account of the Battle of the Little Bighorn, 1881.
While the Terry/Gibbon column was marching toward the mouth of the Little Bighorn, on the evening of June 24, Custer's scouts arrived at an overlook known as the Crow's Nest,  east of the Little Bighorn River.
Indians contemplating a battle, either offensive or defensive, are always anxious to have their women and children removed from all danger…For this reason I decided to locate our military camp as close as convenient to Chief Black Kettle's Cheyenne village, knowing that the close proximity of their women and children, and their necessary exposure in case of conflict, would operate as a powerful argument in favor of peace, when the question of peace or war came to be discussed.
Author Evan S. Connell observed that if Custer could occupy the village before widespread resistance developed, the Sioux and Cheyenne warriors "would be obliged to surrender, because if they started to fight, they would be shooting their own families."
Benteen's coincidental arrival on the bluffs was just in time to save Reno's men from possible annihilation.
Towards the end of spring in 1876, the Lakota and the Cheyenne held a Sun Dance attended as well by a number of "Agency Indians" who had slipped away from their reservations.
Miles, participant in the Great Sioux War declared "Gatlings were useless for Indian fighting."
In the last 140 years historians were able to identify multiple Indians names pertaining to the same individual which has greatly reduced previously inflated numbers.
It became apparent that the warriors in the village were either aware of or would soon be aware of his approach.
During the Black Hills Expedition two years earlier, a Gatling gun had turned over, rolled down a mountain, and shattered to pieces.
W. A. Graham claimed that even Mrs. Libby Custer received dozens of letters from men, in shocking detail, about their sole survivor experience.
Although soldiers may have believed captives would be tortured, Indians usually killed men outright and took as captive for adoption only young women and children.
In this account, Custer was allegedly killed by a Lakota called Big-nose.
While no other Indian account supports this claim, if White Bull did shoot a buckskin-clad leader off his horse, some historians have argued that Custer may have been seriously wounded by him.
Ordered to charge, Reno began that phase of the battle.
They immediately realized that the Lakota and Northern Cheyenne were present "in force and not running away."
While stationed in Kansas, the 7th Cavalry had attacked Black Kettle's Southern Cheyenne camp on the Washita River in the Battle of Washita River, an attack which was at the time labeled a "massacre of innocent Indians" by the Indian Bureau.
Soldiers under Custer's direct command were annihilated on the first day of battle.
It was a time for the annual renewal of life's necessities, for making personal vows, and for seeking visions.
However, American views of the fight have largely changed dramatically since that time.
Researchers have further questioned the effectiveness of the guns under the tactics that Custer was likely to face with the Lakota and Cheyenne warriors.
After giving orders to mount, dismount and mount again, Reno told his men, "All those who wish to make their escape follow me," and led a disorderly rout across the river toward the bluffs on the other side.
The battle, and Custer's actions in particular, have been studied extensively by historians.
Less common were surplus .58 caliber rifled muskets of American Civil War vintage such as the Enfield and Springfield.
His body was found near the top of Custer Hill, which also came to be known as "Last Stand Hill."
Custer believed that the Gatling guns would impede his march up the Rosebud and hamper his mobility.
The tepees in that area were occupied by the Hunkpapa Sioux.
This was a correct estimate until several weeks before the battle, when the "reservation Indians" joined Sitting Bull's ranks for the summer buffalo hunt.
The historian Earl Alonzo Brininstool suggested he had collected at least 70 "lone survivor" stories.
Companies C, D, and I of the 6th U.S. Infantry, moved along the Yellowstone River from Fort Buford on the Missouri River to set up a supply depot and joined Terry on May 29 at the mouth of the Powder River.
At the same time, U.S. military officials were conducting a summer campaign to force the Lakota and the Cheyenne back to their reservations, using infantry and cavalry in a so-called "three-pronged approach".
By this time, the Lakota and Cheyenne had already removed most of their dead from the field.
The Battle of the Little Bighorn had far-reaching consequences for the Indians.
presents two judgments from Custer's contemporaries: General Henry J.
One Sioux hunk papa warrior, Moving Robe, noted that "It was a hotly contested battle", while another, Iron Hawk, stated: "The Indians pressed and crowded right in around Custer Hill.
Gallear's analysis minimizes the allegation that rapid depletion of ammunition in lever-action models influenced the decision in favor of the single-shot Springfield.
The first group to attack was Major Reno's second detachment (Companies A, G and M), conducted after receiving orders from Custer written out by Lt. William W. Cooke, as Custer's Crow scouts reported Sioux tribe members were alerting the village.
It was the beginning of the end of the Indian Wars and has even been referred to as "the Indians' last stand" in the area.
According to Cheyenne and Sioux testimony, the command structure rapidly broke down, although smaller "last stands" were apparently made by several groups.
The only remaining doctor was Assistant Surgeon Henry R. Porter.
Custer had wanted to take a day and scout the village before attacking; however, when men went back after supplies dropped by the pack train, they discovered they were being back-trailed by Indians.
The total U.S. casualty count included 268 dead and 55 severely wounded (six died from their injuries later), including four Crow Indian scouts and two Pawnee Indian scouts.
Metal cartridge weapons were prized by native combatants, such as the Henry and the Spencer lever-action rifles, as well as Sharps breechloaders.
Wallace on the morning of the 27th...
File:Red Horse pictographic account of the Battle of the Little Bighorn, 1881.
This practice had become standard during the last year of the American Civil War, with both Union and Confederate troops utilizing knives, eating utensils, mess plates and pans, to dig effective battlefield fortifications.
Actually, there have been times when I have been tempted to deny that I ever heard of the 7th Cavalry, much less participated with it in that engagement...My Medal of Honor and its inscription have served me as proof positive that I was at least in the vicinity at the time in question, otherwise I should be tempted to deny all knowledge of the event.
Among the Plains Tribes, the long-standing tradition known as the Sun Dance was the most important religious event of the year.
As individual troopers were wounded or killed, initial defensive positions would have been abandoned as untenable.
Its walls have some of the names of Indians who died at the site, as well as Native accounts of the battle.
In Custer's book ''My Life on the Plains'', published just two years before the Battle of the Little Bighorn, he asserted:
On the morning of June 25, Custer divided his 12 companies into three battalions in anticipation of the forthcoming engagement.
While the gunfire heard on the bluffs by Reno and Benteen's men was probably from Custer's fight, the soldiers on Reno Hill were unaware of what had happened to Custer until General Terry's arrival on June 27.
He was driven back, retreating toward the hill where his body was found.
As an evidence of this I recall the three charred and burned heads we picked up in the village near the scene of the big war dance, when we visited the village with Capt.
David Humphreys Miller, who between 1935 and 1955 interviewed the last Lakota survivors of the battle, wrote that the Custer fight lasted less than one-half hour.
Of the 45 officers and 718 troopers then assigned to the 7th Cavalry (including a second lieutenant detached from the 20th Infantry and serving in Company L), 14 officers (including the regimental commander, Col. Samuel D. Sturgis) and 152 troopers did not accompany the 7th during the campaign.
One of the regiment's three surgeons had been with Custer's column, while another, Dr. DeWolf, had been killed during Reno's retreat.
Ammunition allotments provided 100 carbine rounds per trooper, carried on an cartridge belt and in saddlebags on their mounts.
Such was their concern that a "feint" by Capt.
Reports from his scouts also revealed fresh pony tracks from ridges overlooking his formation.
Five of the 7th Cavalry's twelve companies were annihilated; Custer was killed, as were two of his brothers, a nephew, and a brother-in-law.
Assuming his presence had been exposed, Custer decided to attack the village without further delay.
Reno and Benteen's wounded troops were given what treatment was available at that time; five later died of their wounds.
The site was first preserved as a United States national cemetery in 1879, to protect the graves of the 7th Cavalry troopers.
Growing Native attacks around Weir Ridge forced all seven companies to return to the bluff before the pack train, with the ammunition, had moved even a quarter mile.
In 1967, Major Marcus Reno was reinterred in the cemetery with honors, including an eleven-gun salute.
Yates' E and F Companies at the mouth of Medicine Tail Coulee (Minneconjou Ford) caused hundreds of warriors to disengage from the Reno valley fight and return to deal with the threat to the village.
Riding north along the bluffs, Custer could have descended into a drainage called Medicine Tail Coulee, which led to the river.
The Sioux refused the money subsequently offered and continue to insist on their right to occupy the land.
In a subsequent official 1879 Army investigation requested by Major Reno, the Reno Board of Inquiry (RCOI), Benteen and Reno's men testified that they heard distinct rifle volleys as late as 4:30&nbsp;pm during the battle.
Thomas Weir and Company D moved out to make contact with Custer.
The probable attack upon the families and capture of the herds were in that event counted upon to strike consternation in the hearts of the warriors, and were elements for success upon which General Custer fully counted.
The intent may have been to relieve pressure on Reno's detachment (according to the Crow scout Curley, possibly viewed by both Mitch Bouyer and Custer) by withdrawing the skirmish line into the timber on the edge of the Little Bighorn River.
Half of the 7th Cavalry's companies had just returned from 18 months of constabulary duty in the Deep South, having been recalled to Fort Abraham Lincoln to reassemble the regiment for the campaign.
Army doctrine would have called for one man in four to be a horseholder behind the skirmish lines and, in extreme cases, one man in eight.
Oglala Sioux Black Elk recounted the exodus this way: "We fled all night, following the Greasy Grass.
Word of Custer's fate reached the 44th United States Congress as a conference committee was attempting to reconcile opposing appropriations bills approved by the House and the Republican Senate.
Frank Finkel, from Dayton, Washington, had such a convincing story that historian Charles Kuhlman believed the alleged survivor, going so far as to write a lengthy defense of Finkel's participation in the battle.
Fire from the southeast made it impossible for Custer's men to secure a defensive position all around Last Stand Hill where the soldiers put up their most dogged defense.
Of those sixty figures only thirty some are portrayed with a conventional Plains Indian method of indicating death.
Other historians claim that Custer never approached the river, but rather continued north across the coulee and up the other side, where he gradually came under attack.
From this position the Indians mounted an attack of more than 500 warriors against the left and rear of Reno's line, turning Reno's exposed left flank.
The destruction of Keogh's battalion may have begun with the collapse of L, I and C Company (half of it) following the combined assaults led by Crazy Horse, White Bull, Hump, Chief Gall and others.
An additional 50 carbine rounds per man were reserved on the pack train that accompanied the regiment to the battlefield.
Some testimony by non-Army officers suggested that he was drunk and a coward.
The Sioux chief Red Horse told Col. W. H. Wood in 1877 that the Native American suffered 136 dead and 160 wounded during the battle.
In May 1877, Sitting Bull escaped to Canada.
This testimony of widespread fusing of the casings offered to the Chief of Ordnance at the Reno Court of Inquiry in 1879 conflicts with the archaeological evidence collected at the battlefield.
As of December 2006, a total of ten warrior markers have been added (three at the Reno-Benteen Defense Site, seven on the Little Bighorn Battlefield).
The 7th Cavalry suffered 52 percent casualties: 16 officers and 242 troopers killed or died of wounds, 1 officer and 51 troopers wounded.
Custer expected to find the squaws and children fleeing to the bluffs on the north, for in no other way do I account for his wide detour.
From his own observation, as reported by his bugler John Martin (Martini), Custer assumed the warriors had been sleeping in on the morning of the battle, to which virtually every native account attested later, giving Custer a false estimate of what he was up against.
The Springfield carbine is praised for its "superior range and stopping power" by historian James Donovan, and author Charles M. Robinson reports that the rifle could be "loaded and fired much more rapidly than its muzzle loading predecessors, and had twice the range of repeating rifles such as the Winchester, Henry and Spencer."
My two younger brothers and I rode in a pony-drag, and my mother put some young pups in with us.
Custer planned "to live and travel like Indians; in this manner the command will be able to go wherever the Indians can", he wrote in his ''Herald'' dispatch.
Its approach was seen by Indians at that end of the village.
General Terry and others claimed that Custer made strategic errors from the start of the campaign.
