Josef František, a Czech regular airman who had flown from the occupation of his own country to join the Polish and then French air forces before arriving in Britain, flew as a guest of 303 Squadron and was ultimately credited with the highest "RAF score" in the Battle of Britain.
In July – September the number of Luftwaffe pilots available fell by 136, but the number of operational pilots had shrunk by 171 by September.
The failure to destroy Britain's air defences to force an armistice (or even outright surrender) is considered by Steven Bungay to be the Nazis' first major defeat in World War II, and a crucial turning point in the conflict.
He doubted if strategic bombing could achieve its aims, but ending the air war would be an open admission of defeat.
The success of these raids was in part because the Germans had few Freya radar stations set up in France, so that air defences of the French harbours were not nearly as good as the air defences over Germany; Bomber Command had directed some 60% of its strength against the Channel ports.
The bombers would fly in at altitudes between  and , closely escorted by fighters.
Sir Keith Park Statue
These ''Störangriffe'' ("nuisance raids") which involved only a few aeroplanes, sometimes just one, were used to train bomber crews in both day and night attacks, to test defences and try out methods, with most flights at night.
Hitler issued a directive that London was not to be bombed save on his sole instruction.
Victoria Embankment, London.JPG|Victoria Embankment, London
Opponents pointed out the big wings would take too long to form up, and the strategy ran a greater risk of fighters being caught on the ground refuelling.
9" as future actions once the coast had been conquered.
The names of these Allied and Commonwealth airmen are inscribed in a memorial book which rests in the Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey.
The Battle of Britain Chapel in Westminster Abbey lists in a roll of honour, 718 Bomber Command crew members, and 280 from Coastal Command who were killed between 10 July and 31 October.
After repeated Stuka attacks that day, six ships were badly damaged, four were sunk and only four reached their destination.
Once formations had fallen apart, stragglers could be picked off one by one.
Overy indicates the number of serviceable and total strength returns reveal an ''increase'' in fighters from 3 August to 7 September, 1,061 on strength and 708 serviceable to 1,161 on strength and 746 serviceable.
Nevertheless, RAF aircraft attacked these aircraft, as some were escorted by Bf 109s.
The raids were intended to carry out precision bombing on military or economic targets, but it was hard to achieve sufficient accuracy with the single bomb.
Total British civilian losses from July to December 1940 were 23,002 dead and 32,138 wounded, with one of the largest single raids on 19 December 1940, in which almost 3,000 civilians died.
These had been held back by Dowding, who mistakenly thought non-English speaking aircrew would have trouble working within his control system: Polish and Czech fliers proved to be especially effective.
The only Sector Station to be shut down operationally was Biggin Hill, and it was non-operational for just two hours.
Keith Park's tactics were to dispatch individual squadrons to intercept raids.
German pilots dubbed the RAF formations ''Idiotenreihen'' ("rows of idiots") because they left squadrons vulnerable to attack.
The RAF's Boulton Paul Defiant had some initial success over Dunkirk because of its resemblance to the Hurricane; Luftwaffe fighters attacking from the rear were surprised by its unusual gun turret.
Luftwaffe losses for August numbered 774 aircraft to all causes, representing 18.5% of all combat aircraft at the beginning of the month.
Westminster Abbey and St James's Church, Paddington both have memorial windows to the battle, replacing windows that were destroyed during the campaign.
Each ''Schwarm'' in a ''Staffel'' flew at staggered heights and with about 200 metres of room between them, making the formation difficult to spot at longer ranges and allowing for a great deal of flexibility.
RAF aircrew were issued with a life jacket, nicknamed the "Mae West," but in 1940 it still required manual inflation, which was almost impossible for someone who was injured or in shock.
Battle of Britain Memorial Window - geograph.org.uk - 355743.jpg|Westminster Abbey
By summer 1940, there were about 9,000 pilots in the RAF to man about 5,000 aircraft, most of which were bombers.
''Luftflotte'' 5 attacked the north of England.
The Germans never had more than between 1,100 and 1,200 pilots, a deficiency of up to one-third.
Front line RAF pilots were acutely aware of the inherent deficiencies of their own tactics.
"The Hardest Day" had sounded the end for the Ju 87 in the campaign.
The day has been observed by many artists over the years, often with works that show the battle itself.
If the attack came from the port side the system was reversed.
He expected air warfare to decisively force Britain to negotiate, as all in the OKW hoped, and the Luftwaffe took little interest to planning to support an invasion.
All units were well below established strength.
Battle of Britain Memorial.jpg|Capel-le-Ferne, Kent
In 1935 Hermann Göring welcomed news that Britain as a potential ally was rearming.
One of the most conspicuous failures of the report was the lack of information on the RAF's RDF network and control systems capabilities; it was assumed that the system was rigid and inflexible, with the RAF fighters being "tied" to their home bases.
The RAF responded to Luftwaffe developments with its 1934 Expansion Plan A rearmament scheme, and in 1936 it was restructured into Bomber Command, Coastal Command, Training Command and Fighter Command.
It was not until Hitler's Directive 21 was issued, on 18 December 1940, that the threat to Britain of invasion finally ended.
In addition, Göring stipulated that as many fighters as possible were to be left free for ''Freie Jagd'' ("Free Hunts": a free-roving fighter sweep preceded a raid to try to sweep defenders out of the raid's path).
The 1935 Luftwaffe doctrine for "Conduct of the Air War" (''Die Luftkriegführung)'' set airpower within the overall military strategy, with critical tasks of attaining (local and temporary) air superiority and providing battlefield support for army and naval forces.
On 15 September, two massive waves of German attacks were decisively repulsed by the RAF by deploying  every aircraft in  11 Group.
Stripped of its fighters, ''Luftflotte 3'' would concentrate on the night bombing campaign.
No proper air-sea rescue service was formed until 1941.
According to Stephen Bungay, Dowding, in a letter to Hugh Trenchard accompanying Park's report on the period 8 August – 10 September 1940, states that the Luftwaffe "achieved very little" in the last week of August and the first week of September.
To achieve this goal, Fighter Command had to be destroyed, either on the ground or in the air, yet the Luftwaffe had to be able to preserve its own strength to be able to support the invasion; this meant that the Luftwaffe had to maintain a high "kill ratio" over the RAF fighters.
After the defeat of France the High Command (OKW) felt they had won the war, and some more pressure would persuade Britain.
The intention was to subject incoming bombers to continual attacks by relatively small numbers of fighters and try to break up the tight German formations.
German escorts, however, were not enough.
By the end of August, after disastrous losses, the aircraft was withdrawn from daylight service.
During the battle, the Dowding system maintained an average rate over 75%, with several examples of 100% rates - every fighter dispatched found and intercepted its target.
Just over that number were in the field by September.
However, for some raids, they were called back, such as on 13 September to attack Tangmere airfield.
In mid August raids were made on targets on the outskirts of London.
The ''Luftwaffe'' faced a more capable opponent than any it had previously met: a sizeable, highly coordinated, well-supplied, modern air force.
Overy asserts only one airfield was temporarily put out of action and "only" 103 pilots were lost.
The Bf 110 usually used a shallow dive to bomb the target and escape at high speed.
Later in the conflict, when night bombing became more frequent, all three were used.
The Ju 87 units, which had suffered heavy casualties, were only to be used under favourable circumstances.
Hermann Göring's operational directive issued the same day ordered destruction of the RAF to clear the way for attacks cutting off seaborne supplies to Britain.
Not only had hundreds of military aircraft been put out of service, but many aircrew were lost.
Initial Luftwaffe estimates were that it would take four days to defeat the RAF Fighter Command in southern England.
The number of pilots in RAF Fighter Command increased during July, August and September.
Three were briefly taken off the air but were back working within six hours.
It was the lack of trained pilots in the fighting squadrons, rather than the lack of aircraft, that became the greatest concern for Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding, Commander of Fighter Command.
A series of "Fighting Area Tactics" were formulated and rigidly adhered to, involving a series of manoeuvres designed to concentrate a squadron's firepower to bring down bombers.
The Bf 110 proved too vulnerable to the nimble single-engined RAF fighters.
The Luftwaffe believed it was weakening Fighter Command at three times the actual attrition rate.
These training flights continued through August and into the first week of September.
On 25 July a coal convoy and escorting destroyers suffered such heavy losses to attacks by Stuka dive bombers that the Admiralty decided convoys should travel at night: the RAF shot down 16 raiders but lost 7 aircraft.
The first official deployment of 12 Group's Leigh-Mallory's Big Wing took twenty minutes to form up, missing its intended target, but encountering another formation of bombers while still climbing.
As the battle progressed, command responsibility shifted, with ''Luftflotte'' 3 taking more responsibility for the night-time ''Blitz'' attacks while the main daylight operations fell upon ''Luftflotte'' 2's shoulders.
The first priority was to eliminate the RAF and gain air supremacy.
A sustained bombing campaign began on 24 August with the largest raid so far, killing 100 in Portsmouth, and that night, several areas of London were bombed; the East End was set ablaze and bombs landed on central London.
The primary objective of the Nazi German forces was to compel Britain to agree to a negotiated peace settlement.
Training manuals discouraged heroism, stressing the importance of attacking only when the odds were in the pilot's favour.
Dowding admitted 11 Group's efficiency was impaired but, despite serious damage to some airfields, only two out of 13 heavily attacked airfields were down for more than a few hours.
The story of the battle was documented in, amongst many others, the 1969 film ''Battle of Britain'', which drew many respected British actors to act key figures of the battle, including Sir Laurence Olivier as Hugh Dowding and Trevor Howard as Keith Park.
An hour after the declaration of war, Bomber Command launched raids on warships and naval ports by day, and in night raids dropped leaflets as it was considered illegal to bomb targets which could affect civilians.
Many of the Fighter Command airfields were never attacked, while raids against supposed fighter airfields fell instead on bomber or coastal defence stations.
On a sighting, other patrols at lower altitude would fly up to join the battle.
They increasingly suffered unsustainable losses in daylight raids, and the last massive daytime attacks were on 15 September.
On 14 September, Hitler chaired a meeting with the OKW staff.
For Luftwaffe aircrews, a bailout over England meant capture – in the critical August period, almost exactly as many Luftwaffe pilots were taken prisoner as were killed – while parachuting into the English Channel often meant drowning or death from exposure.
Serviceability rates in Fighter Command's fighter squadrons, between the 24 August and 7 September, were listed as: 64.8% on 24 August; 64.7% on 31 August and 64.25% on 7 September 1940.
On 24 September, in recognition of the bravery of civilians, King George VI inaugurated the award of the George Cross.
He seemed at times obsessed with maintaining his own power base in the Luftwaffe and indulging his outdated beliefs on air fighting, which would later lead to tactical and strategic errors.
"If Fighter Command were 'the few', the German fighter pilots were fewer".
Strategic bombing of industries and transport could be decisive longer term options, dependent on opportunity or preparations by the army and navy, to overcome a stalemate or used when only destruction of the enemy's economy would be conclusive.
Proponents of this tactic claimed interceptions in large numbers caused greater enemy losses while reducing their own casualties.
The strategy agreed on 6 August was to destroy RAF Fighter Command across the south of England in four days,  then bombing of military and economic targets was to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain, culminating in a major bombing attack on London.
On 16 September, Göring gave the order for this change in strategy, to the first independent strategic bombing campaign.
As the threat mounted, Bomber Command changed targeting priority on 3 June 1940 to attack the German aircraft industry.
As well as the bombing operations, Blenheim-equipped units had been formed to carry out long-range strategic reconnaissance missions over Germany and German-occupied territories.
Escorts were divided into two parts (usually ''Gruppen''), some operating in close contact with the bombers, and others a few hundred yards away and a little above.
In the Battle of Britain, for the first time during the Second World War, the German war machine had set itself a major task which it patently failed to achieve, and so demonstrated that it was not invincible.
Where multiple squadrons reached a raid the procedure was for the slower Hurricanes to tackle the bombers while the more agile Spitfires held up the fighter escort.
On 16 July 1940, ''Abteilung V'', commanded by ''Oberstleutnant'' "Beppo" Schmid, produced a report on the RAF and on Britain's defensive capabilities which was adopted by the frontline commanders as a basis for their operational plans.
In early September, due to increasing complaints from the bomber crews about RAF fighters seemingly able to get through the escort screen, Göring ordered an increase in close escort duties.
Believing Fighter Command strength to be concentrated in the south, raiding forces from Denmark and Norway ran into unexpectedly strong resistance.
Instead, Churchill used his skilful rhetoric to harden public opinion against capitulation and to prepare the British for a long war.
Out of 115 bombers and 35 fighters sent, 16 bombers and 7 fighters were destroyed.
Similar nuisance raids continued throughout the battle, into the winter months of 1940.
Once over Britain, a 109 pilot had to keep an eye on a red "low fuel" light on the instrument panel: once this was illuminated, he was forced to turn back and head for France.
Shortly afterwards in the May 1940 War Cabinet Crisis Halifax argued for negotiations involving the Italians, but this was rejected by Churchill with majority support.
Drawing from a cadre of Spanish Civil War veterans, these pilots already had comprehensive courses in aerial gunnery and instructions in tactics suited for fighter-versus-fighter combat.
While the British were using radar for air defence more effectively than the Germans realised, the Luftwaffe attempted to press its own offensive with advanced radio navigation systems of which the British were initially not aware.
One unit, ''Erprobungsgruppe 210'' – initially formed as the service test unit (''Erprobungskommando'') for the emerging successor to the 110, the Me 210 – proved that the Bf 110 could still be used to good effect in attacking small or "pinpoint" targets.
With hopes fading for the possibility of invasion, on 4 September Hitler authorised a main focus on day and night attacks on tactical targets with London as the main target, in what the British called the Blitz.
By the end of spring 1940, all RAF Spitfire and Hurricane fighter squadrons converted to 100 octane aviation fuel, which allowed their Merlin engines to generate significantly more power and an approximately 30&nbsp;mph increase in speed at low altitudes through the use of an Emergency Boost Override.
With increasing difficulty in defending bombers in day raids, the Lufwaffe shifted to a strategic bombing campaign of night raids aiming to overcome British resistance by damaging infrastructure and food stocks, though intentional terror bombing of civilians was not sanctioned.
Morale began to suffer, and ''Kanalkrankheit'' ("Channel sickness") – a form of combat fatigue – began to appear among the German pilots.
During the battle, 74 Squadron under Squadron Leader Adolph "Sailor" Malan adopted a variation of the German formation called the "fours in line astern", which was a vast improvement on the old three aircraft "vic".
In all some 200 pilots and aircrew were lost at sea during the battle.
When attacked, ''Zerstörergruppen'' increasingly resorted to forming large "defensive circles", where each Bf 110 guarded the tail of the aircraft ahead of it.
Their strategy for blockade was to destroy ports and storage facilities in towns and cities.
These gave crews  practice in navigation and avoiding air defences, and set off air raid alarms which disturbed civilian morale.
The remaining three bomber types differed in their capabilities; the Heinkel 111 was the slowest; the Ju 88 was the fastest once its mainly external bomb load was dropped; and the Do 17 had the smallest bomb load.
The navy said 22 September was the earliest possible date, and proposed postponement until the Spring, but Hitler preferred September.
Its eventual stablemate, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190A, was only flying in prototype form in the summer of 1940; the first 28 Fw 190s were  not delivered until November 1940.
There is also a memorial at the former Croydon Airport, one of the RAF bases during the battle, and a memorial to the pilots at Armadale Castle on the Isle of Skye in Scotland, which is topped by a raven sculpture.
Croydon, Gravesend, Rochford, Hawkinge and Manston were also attacked in strength.
Across the Channel, the Air Intelligence division of the Air Ministry consistently overestimated the size of the German air enemy and the productive capacity of the German aviation industry.
To the RAF figure should be added 376 Bomber Command and 148 Coastal Command aircraft lost conducting bombing, mining, and reconnaissance operations in defence of the country.
This veteran of ''Blitzkrieg'' was too vulnerable to fighters to operate over Britain.
He states that between 8 and 18 August 154 RAF pilots were killed, severely wounded, or missing, while only 63 new pilots were trained.
His counterpart, Kesselring, championed attacking London directly— either to bombard the British government into submission, or to draw RAF fighters into a decisive battle.
The ''Rotte'' allowed the ''Rottenführer'' to concentrate on getting kills, but few wingmen had the chance, leading to some resentment in the lower ranks where it was felt that the high scores came at their expense.
Although the 110 was faster than the Hurricane and almost as fast as the Spitfire, its lack of manoeuvrability and acceleration meant that it was a failure as a long-range escort fighter.
Göring, expressing disappointment with the fighter performance thus far in the campaign, also made sweeping changes in the command structure of the fighter units, replacing many ''Geschwaderkommodore'' with younger, more aggressive pilots like Adolf Galland and Werner Mölders.
After the hard-fought battles of 15 and 18 August, Göring met with his unit leaders.
The first daylight raid was titled ''Vergeltungsangriff'' (revenge attack).
"Altogether in the fighter battles, the bombing raids, and the various patrols flown between 10 July and 31 October 1940 by the Royal Air Force, 1495 aircrew were killed, of whom 449 were fighter pilots, 718 aircrew from Bomber Command, and 280 from Coastal Command.
The Luftwaffe's ''Adlertag'' campaign was to start around 5 August, subject to weather, with the aim of gaining air superiority over southern England as a necessary precondition of invasion, to give credibility to the threat and give Hitler the option of ordering the invasion.
It is described as the first major campaign fought entirely by air forces.
Roosevelt wanted a second opinion, and sent "Wild Bill" Donovan on a brief visit to the UK; he became convinced the UK would survive and should be supported in every possible way.
Overall, by 2 November, the RAF fielded 1,796 pilots, an increase of over 40% from July 1940's count of 1,259 pilots.
Göring met his air fleet commanders, and on 24 July issued "Tasks and Goals" of gaining air supremacy, protecting the army and navy if invasion went ahead, and attacking the Royal Navy's ships as well as continuing the blockade.
By September, standard tactics for raids had become an amalgam of techniques.
Both France and the UK declared war on Germany; on 9 October Hitler's "Directive No.
Fighter Command was never short of pilots, but the problem of finding sufficient numbers of fully trained fighter pilots became acute by mid-August 1940.
This meant the bulk of fighter escort duties fell on the Bf 109.
Throughout the battle, the Luftwaffe had to use numerous reconnaissance sorties to make up for the poor intelligence.
He had to maintain the appearance of concentration on defeating Britain, to conceal from Joseph Stalin his covert aim to invade the Soviet Union.
On 30 June 1940, before starting preliminary planning for a potential invasion of Britain, OKW Chief of Staff General Franz Halder heard from Secretary of State Ernst von Weizsäcker that Hitler had turned his attention to Russia.
Before the end of the year American journalist Ralph Ingersoll, after returning from Britain, published a book concluding that "Adolf Hitler met his first defeat in eight years" in what might "go down in history as a battle as important as Waterloo or Gettysburg".
Bombing of military and economic targets was then to systematically extend up to the Midlands until daylight attacks could proceed unhindered over the whole of Britain.
Attacks on Channel shipping in the ''Kanalkampf'' began on 4 July, and were formalised on 11 July in an order by Hans Jeschonnek which added the arms industry as a target.
15 August was "The Greatest Day" when the Luftwaffe mounted the largest number of sorties of the campaign.
The British victory in the Battle of Britain was achieved at a heavy cost.
17 for air and sea warfare against England, Hitler attributed increased defiance from London to British hopes of intervention by Russia, and decided Germany was to attack the Soviet Union in the spring of 1941.
Most replacements from Operational Training Units (OTUs) had as little as nine hours flying time and no gunnery or air-to-air combat training.
His sombre conclusion was received in silence, but he did not suggest negotiations and this was effectively an ultimatum which was rejected by the British government.
This led the British to the conclusion that another fortnight of attacks on airfields might force Fighter Command to withdraw their squadrons from the south of England.
The Royal Air Force roll of honour for the Battle of Britain recognises 595 non-British pilots (out of 2,936) as flying at least one authorised operational sortie with an eligible unit of the RAF or Fleet Air Arm between 10 July and 31 October 1940.
For various reasons, the Defiant lacked any form of forward-firing armament, and the heavy turret and second crewman meant it could not outrun or outmanoeuvre either the Bf 109 or Bf 110.
Sixty raids on the night of 19/20 August targeted the aircraft industry and harbours, and bombs fell on suburban areas around London: Croydon, Wimbledon and the Maldens.
There is a consensus among historians that the Luftwaffe were unable to crush the RAF.
Poor weather delayed ''Adlertag'' ("Eagle Day") until 13 August 1940.
Continuing RAF raids on Berlin led to Hitler withdrawing his directive on 30 August, and giving the go-ahead to the planned bombing offensive.
Clouds prevented accurate identification and the bombs fell across the city, causing some casualties among the civilian population as well as damage to residential areas.
A July ''Fliegercorps I'' paper asserted that Germany was by definition an air power: "Its chief weapon against England is the Air Force, then the Navy, followed by the landing forces and the Army."
In the euphoric atmosphere of perceived victory, the Luftwaffe leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality.
On 11 July Hitler agreed with Raeder that invasion would be a last resort, and the Luftwaffe advised that gaining air superiority would take 14 to 28 days.
On the night of 23/24 August over 200 bombers attacked the Fort Dunlop tyre factory in Birmingham, with a significant effect on production.
British fighters coming from the rear were engaged by the rear section and the two outside sections similarly moving to the rear.
Luftwaffe tactics were influenced by their fighters.
The Luftwaffe also tried using small formations of bombers as bait, covering them with large numbers of escorts.
Armadale Castle - Battle of Britain pilot memorial 1.jpg|Armadale Castle
On 2 July, the day the armed forces were asked to start preliminary planning for an invasion, Hitler got von Ribbentrop to draft a speech offering peace negotiations.
A British radar system was well known to the Luftwaffe from intelligence gathered before the war, but the highly developed "Dowding system" linked with fighter control had been a well-kept secret.
Later reassessments gave the Luftwaffe five weeks, from 8 August to 15 September, to establish temporary air superiority over England.
Reprisal attacks of terror bombing had the potential to cause quicker capitulation but the effect on morale was uncertain.
As the battle was fought, both sides exaggerated the losses inflicted on the other by an equally large margin.
This "Proposal for the Conduct of Air Warfare" argued for a counter to the British blockade and said "Key is to paralyse the British trade".
On 25 August 1940, 81 bombers of Bomber Command were sent out to raid industrial and commercial targets in Berlin.
By using a tight "cross-over" turn, a ''Schwarm'' could quickly change direction.
Predictions were made that a bomber offensive would quickly cause thousands of deaths and civilian hysteria leading to capitulation, but widespread pacifism contributed to a reluctance to provide resources.
The bomber contribution was, therefore, much more dangerous on a loss-per-sortie comparison.
To Hitler's great annoyance, all his diplomacy failed to stop Britain declaring war when he invaded Poland.
This removed the main Luftwaffe precision-bombing weapon and shifted the burden of pinpoint attacks on the already-stretched ''Erpro'' 210.
One Blenheim returned early (the pilot was later charged and due to appear before a court martial, but was killed on another operation), the other 11, which reached Denmark, were shot down, five by flak and six by Bf 109s.
In a further attempt to camouflage the existence of Ultra, Dowding created a unit named No.
Only the squadron leader at the front was free to watch for the enemy; the other pilots had to concentrate on keeping station.
Fighter tactics were then complicated by bomber crews who demanded closer protection.
To offset some losses, some 58 Fleet Air Arm fighter pilot volunteers were seconded to RAF squadrons, and a similar number of former Fairey Battle pilots were used.
13" which authorised the Luftwaffe "to attack the English homeland in the fullest manner, as soon as sufficient forces are available.
The high command's indecision over which aim to pursue was reflected in shifts in Luftwaffe strategy.
Their replacement problem became even worse than the British.
Göring did nothing to resolve this disagreement between his commanders, and only vague directives were set down during the initial stages of the battle, with Göring seemingly unable to decide upon which strategy to pursue.
"If Holland and Belgium are successfully occupied and held, and if France is also defeated, the fundamental conditions for a successful war against England will have been secured.
They conclude that during August no more than 260 fighter pilots were turned out by OTUs and casualties in the same month were just over 300.
However, during the Battle of Britain, this single-engined two-seater proved hopelessly outclassed.
The biggest disadvantage faced by Bf 109 pilots was that without the benefit of long-range drop tanks (which were introduced in limited numbers in the late stages of the battle), usually of  capacity, the 109s had an endurance of just over an hour and, for the 109E, a  range.
9 – Instructions For Warfare Against The Economy Of The Enemy" stated that once this coastline had been secured, the Lufwaffe together with the Kriegsmarine (German Navy) was to blockade UK ports with sea mines, attack shipping and warships, and make air attacks on shore installations and industrial production.
