The defenders, led by the 7th Armored Division, included the remaining regiment of the 106th U.S. Infantry Division, with elements of the 9th Armored Division and 28th U.S. Infantry Division.
While operations continued in the autumn, notably the Lorraine Campaign, the Battle of Aachen and fighting in the Hürtgen Forest, the strategic situation in the west had changed little.
In October, the First Canadian Army fought the Battle of the Scheldt, opening the port of Antwerp to shipping.
About fifteen minutes after Peiper's advance guard passed through, the main body under the command of SS Sturmbannführer Werner Pötschke arrived.
During the liberation of France, the extensive network of the French resistance had provided valuable intelligence about German dispositions.
The images of supply troops trying to bring ammunition and cold food, crawling through mud and snow, to front-line troops dug into frozen foxholes around Montjoie, Elseborn and Butgenbach were not exciting news.
Peiper learned that his reinforcements had been directed to gather in La Gleize to his east, and he withdrew, leaving wounded Americans and Germans in the .
However, Montgomery, refusing to risk underprepared infantry in a snowstorm for a strategically unimportant area, did not launch the attack until 3 January, by which time substantial numbers of German troops had already managed to fall back successfully, but at the cost of losing most of their heavy equipment.
The Germans achieved total surprise on the morning of 16 December 1944 due to a combination of Allied overconfidence, preoccupation with Allied offensive plans, and poor aerial reconnaissance.
These soldiers were to be dressed in American and British uniforms and wear dog tags taken from corpses and POWs.
He stated that he (i.e., the German) was "headed off&nbsp;... seen off&nbsp;... and&nbsp;... written off".
However, intervention by Montgomery's and Eisenhower's Chiefs of Staff, Maj. Gen. Freddie de Guingand, and Lt. Gen. Walter Bedell Smith, moved Eisenhower to reconsider and allowed Montgomery to apologize.
On 26 and 27 December the trapped units of 2nd Panzer Division made two break-out attempts, again only with partial success, as major quantities of equipment fell into Allied hands.
The total for Seventh Army for January was 11,609.
However, the Luftwaffe lost 277 planes, 62 to Allied fighters and 172 mostly because of an unexpectedly high number of Allied flak guns, set up to protect against German V-1 flying bomb/missile attacks and using proximity fused shells, but also by friendly fire from the German flak guns that were uninformed of the pending large-scale German air operation.
It was the largest and bloodiest battle fought by the United States in World War II.
Adolf Hitler first officially outlined his surprise counter-offensive to his astonished generals on September 16, 1944.
Eisenhower, after saying he was not that optimistic, asked Patton how long it would take to turn his Third Army, located in northeastern France, north to counterattack.
If the attack were to succeed in capturing Antwerp, four complete armies would be trapped without supplies behind German lines.
One of the fault lines between the British and American high commands was General Dwight D. Eisenhower's commitment to a broad front advance.
Thus McAuliffe wrote on the paper, which was typed up and delivered to the Germans, the line he made famous and a morale booster to his troops: "NUTS!"
Chester Wilmot explained that his dispatch to the BBC about it was intercepted by the German wireless, re-written to give it an anti-American bias, and then broadcast by Arnhem Radio, which was then in Goebbels' hands.
By 23 December, as the Germans shattered their flanks, the defenders' position became untenable and U.S. troops were ordered to retreat west of the Salm River.
This offensive, known as Unternehmen Nordwind (Operation North Wind), was the last major German offensive of the war on the Western Front.
He later attributed this to needing more time for preparation on the northern front.
The men of the Kampfgruppe were forced to abandon their vehicles and heavy equipment, although most of the 800 remaining troops were able to escape.
Heavy snowstorms engulfed parts of the Ardennes area.
The strong right flank of the assault was therefore composed mostly of SS Divisions under the command of "Sepp" (Joseph) Dietrich, a fanatical political disciple of Hitler, and a loyal follower from the early days of the rise of National Socialism in Germany.
Model and von Rundstedt both believed aiming for Antwerp was too ambitious, given Germany's scarce resources in late 1944.
Units of the British XXX Corps were holding the bridges at Dinant, Givet, and Namur and U.S. units were about to take over.
Over-the-beach supply operations using the Normandy landing areas and direct landing LSTs on the beaches were unable to meet operational needs.
Further Allied pressure out of Marche finally led the German command to the conclusion that no further offensive action towards the Meuse was possible.
Once that was accomplished, Hitler believed he could fully concentrate on the Soviets on the Eastern Front.
Given the reduced manpower of their land forces at the time, the Germans believed the best way to seize the initiative would be to attack in the West against the smaller Allied forces rather than against the vast Soviet armies.
The horse drawn artillery and rocket units were a significant obstacle to the tanks.
Total casualties included at least 9,000 wounded.
The Germans also referred to it as "Ardennenoffensive" (Ardennes Offensive) and Rundstedt-Offensive, both names being generally used nowadays in modern Germany.
As result, parts of the 2nd Panzer Division were cut off.
The extremely swift operation ended only when the advancing Soviet Red Army forces outran their supplies.
In a personal conversation on 13 December between Walther Model and Friedrich von der Heydte, who was put in charge of Operation Stösser, von der Heydte gave Operation Stösser less than a 10% chance of succeeding.
Additional Allied airborne units remained in England.
They took 36 hours to advance from the Eifel region to Stavelot, while the same advance had taken just nine hours in 1940.
German historian Hermann Jung lists 67,675 casualties from 16 December 1944 to late January 1945 for the three German armies that participated in the offensive.
British Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery had differing views of how to approach the German attack with the U.S. command.
German personnel, and later Luftwaffe aircraft (in the concluding stages of the engagement), also sustained heavy losses.
Without radio or telephone communication Montgomery managed to improvise an effective command and control system based on those of the Duke of Wellington's 'gallopers' of the Battle of Waterloo.
Capitalizing on his success and not wanting to lose more time, Peiper rushed an advance group toward the vital bridge at Trois-Ponts, leaving the bulk of his strength in Stavelot.
The two field marshals combined their plans to present a joint "small solution" to Hitler.
Von Rundstedt then ran through the battle plan, while Hitler made one of his endless speeches.
They believed he had belittled them—and they were not slow to voice reciprocal scorn and contempt."
The surprise attack caught the Allied forces completely off guard.
The Panzer-Lehr division tried to relieve them, but was only partially successful, as the perimeter held.
Adolf Hitler personally selected for the counter-offensive on the northern shoulder of the western front the best troops available and officers he trusted.
Since the German plan called for the capture of St. Vith by 18:00 on 17 December, the prolonged action in and around it dealt a major setback to their timetable.
On 7 January 1945 Hitler agreed to withdraw all forces from the Ardennes, including the SS-Panzerdivisionen, thus ending all offensive operations.
This decision played into American hands, as Robertson had already decided to abandon the villages.
Three tanks attempted to take the bridge, but the lead vehicle was disabled by a mine.
A team of volunteer surgeons flew in by military glider and began operating in a tool room.
His comments were interpreted as self-promoting, particularly his claiming that when the situation "began to deteriorate," Eisenhower had placed him in command in the north.
Montgomery subsequently recognized his error and later wrote: "Not only was it probably a mistake to have held this conference at all in the sensitive state of feeling at the time, but what I said was skilfully distorted by the enemy.
The Germans could field a total of 55 understrength divisions.
The rapid advance by the German forces who surrounded the town, the spectacular resupply operations via parachute and glider, along with the fast action of General Patton's Third U.S. Army, all  were featured in newspaper articles and on radio and  captured the public's imagination; but there were no correspondents in the area of Saint-Vith, Elsenborn, or Monschau-Höfen.
Bradley and Patton both threatened to resign unless Montgomery's command was changed.
Montgomery started with giving credit to the "courage and good fighting quality" of the American troops, characterizing a typical American as a "very brave fighting man who has that tenacity in battle which makes a great soldier", and went on to talk about the necessity of Allied teamwork, and praised Eisenhower, stating, "Teamwork wins battles and battle victories win wars.
Major General Freddie de Guingand, Chief of Staff of Montgomery's 21st Army Group, rose to the occasion, and personally smoothed over the disagreements on 30 December.
Recently brought back up to strength and re-equipped after heavy fighting during Market Garden, it was located on the far north of the Ardennes battlefield and tasked with holding U.S. forces in place, with the possibility of launching its own attack given favorable conditions.
On 16 December 1944 at 05:30, the Germans began the assault with a massive, 90-minute artillery barrage using 1,600 artillery pieces across a  front on the Allied troops facing the 6th Panzer Army.
Both 2nd Panzer and Panzer-Lehrdivision moved forward from Bastogne after 21 December, leaving only Panzer-Lehrdivision's 901st Regiment to assist the 26th Volksgrenadier-Division in attempting to capture the crossroads.
Within a week 250,000 troops had been sent.
Accounts of the killing vary, but at least 84 of the POWs were murdered.
By late November another ambitious special operation was added: Col. Friedrich August von der Heydte was to lead a Fallschirmjäger-Kampfgruppe (paratrooper combat group) in Operation Stösser, a night-time paratroop drop behind the Allied lines aimed at capturing a vital road junction near Malmedy.
Ultra also picked up communiqués regarding extensive rail and road movements in the region, as well as orders that movements should be made on time.
Only the 5th Parachute Division of Brandenberger's command was able to thrust forward  on the inner flank to partially fulfill its assigned role.
On 1 January, in an attempt to keep the offensive going, the Germans launched two new operations.
Columns of armor and infantry that were supposed to advance along parallel routes found themselves on the same roads.
Up to this point the German losses had been light, notably in armor, which was almost untouched with the exception of Peiper's losses.
Meanwhile, the Allied air offensive of early 1944 had effectively grounded the Luftwaffe, leaving the German Army with little battlefield intelligence and no way to interdict Allied supplies.
This resulted in headlines in British newspapers.
Food was scarce, and by 22 December artillery ammunition was restricted to 10 rounds per gun per day.
Armies from Gen. Bradley's 12th Army Group and placed them under Montgomery's 21st Army Group.
The Schnee Eifel battle, therefore, represents the most serious reverse suffered by American arms during the operations of 1944–45 in the European theater."
Though some of his staff were concerned at the image it would give, the conference had been cleared by Alan Brooke, the CIGS, who was possibly the only person to whom Monty would listen.
It was led by Oberst Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte, considered by Germans to be a hero of the Battle of Crete.
Sixth Panzer Army commander SS-Oberstgruppenführer Sepp Dietrich ordered Hermann Prieß, commanding officer of the I SS Panzer Corps, to increase its efforts to back Peiper's Kampfgruppe, but Prieß was unable to break through.
Another, smaller massacre was committed in Wereth, Belgium, approximately  northeast of Saint-Vith, on 17 December 1944.
In the west supply problems began significantly to impede Allied operations, even though the opening of the port of Antwerp in late November improved the situation somewhat.
The battle also severely depleted Germany's armored forces on the Western Front, and they were largely unable to replace them.
A hastily assembled Allied blocking force on the east side of the river, however, prevented the German probing forces from approaching the Dinant bridge.
Because of troop shortages during the Battle of the Bulge, Eisenhower decided to integrate the service for the first time.
The Germans suffered heavy losses at an airfield named Y-29, losing 24 of their own planes while downing only one American plane.
He learned that Stoumont was strongly held and that the Americans were bringing up strong reinforcements from Spa.
Even Sepp Dietrich, commanding the strongest arm of the attack, felt that the Ardennes was a poor area for armored warfare, and that the inexperienced and badly equipped Volksgrenadier units would clog the roads that the tanks would need for their rapid advance.
The Germans fared better in the center (the  Schnee Eifel sector) as the Fifth Panzer Army attacked positions held by the U.S. 28th and 106th Infantry Divisions.
The leadership composition of the Sixth Panzer Division had a distinctly political nature.
German losses were much higher.
This created a bottleneck in the German advance.
It was hoped that Soviet leader Stalin would delay the start of the operation once the German assault in the Ardennes had begun and wait for the outcome before continuing.
Kampfgruppe Peiper did not begin his advance until nearly 16:00, more than 16 hours behind schedule and didn't reach Bucholz Station until the early morning of 17 December.
A preliminary Army report restricted to the First and Third U.S.
The decision to stop the attacks on the twin villages and change the axis of the attacks southward to the hamlet of Domäne Bütgenbach, was also made by Dietrich.
SS Sturmbannführer Knittel crossed the bridge at Stavelot around 19:00 against American forces trying to retake the town.
German efforts to reinforce Peiper were unsuccessful.
British casualties totaled 1,400 with 200 deaths.
By the time Eisenhower asked him how long it would take, the movement was already underway.
Eisenhower wanted Montgomery to go on the counter offensive on 1 January, with the aim of meeting up with Patton's advancing Third Army and cutting off most of the attacking Germans, trapping them in a pocket.
Rundstedt later testified that while he recognized the merit of Hitler's operational plan, he saw from the very first that "all, absolutely all conditions for the possible success of such an offensive were lacking,"
Kampfgruppe Peiper, at the head of the SS Oberstgruppenführer Sepp Dietrich's Sixth Panzer Army, had been designated to take the Losheim-Losheimergraben road, a key route through the Losheim Gap, but it was closed by two collapsed overpasses that German engineers failed to repair during the first day.
On the same day as Hitler's withdrawal order, 7 January, Montgomery held his press conference at Zonhoven.
To the disbelief of the other generals present, Patton replied that he could attack with two divisions within 48 hours.
The converse was equally damaging; daytime movement of German forces was almost instantly noticed, and interdiction of supplies combined with the bombing of the Romanian oil fields starved Germany of oil and gasoline.
The 112th Infantry Regiment (the most northerly of the 28th Division's regiments), holding a continuous front east of the Our, kept German troops from seizing and using the Our River bridges around Ouren for two days, before withdrawing progressively westwards.
It was the German paratroopers' only night time drop during World War II.
The Wehrmachts code name for the offensive was Unternehmen Wacht am Rhein ("Operation Watch on the Rhine"), after the German patriotic hymn ''Die Wacht am Rhein,'' a name that deceptively implied the Germans would be adopting a defensive posture along the Western Front.
In the south, Brandenberger's Seventh Army pushed towards Luxembourg in its efforts to secure the flank from Allied attacks.
The 6th Panzer Army was given priority for supply and equipment and were assigned the shortest route to the ultimate objective of the offensive, Antwerp.
They had little time to establish any unit cohesion or train together.
On our team, the captain is General Ike."
The phrase Battle of the Bulge was coined by contemporary press to describe the way the Allied front line bulged inward on wartime news maps.
The Allies pressed their advantage following the battle.
To preserve the quantity of armor available, the infantry of the 9th Fallschirmjaeger Regiment, 3rd Fallschirmjaeger Division, had been ordered to clear the village first.
Winston Churchill, addressing the House of Commons following the Battle of the Bulge said, "This is undoubtedly the greatest American battle of the war and will, I believe, be regarded as an ever-famous American victory."
Only about 100 of his weary men finally reached the German rear.
The lead role in the attack was given to Sepp Dietrich’s 6th Panzer Army, commanded by SS-Oberstgruppenführer Sepp Dietrich.
In the center, von Manteuffel's Fifth Panzer Army attacked towards Bastogne and St. Vith, both road junctions of great strategic importance.
British XXX Corps was significantly reinforced for this effort.
Knittel pressed forward towards La Gleize, and shortly afterward the Americans recaptured Stavelot.
"The battle has been the most interesting, I think possibly one of the most interesting and tricky battles I have ever handled.
A trucking system nicknamed the Red Ball Express brought supplies to front-line troops, but used up five times as much fuel to reach the front line near the Belgian border as was delivered.
He believed a critical fault line existed between the British and American military commands, and that a heavy blow on the Western Front would shatter this alliance.
Hitler believed he could split the Allied forces and compel the Americans and British to settle for a separate peace, independent of the Soviet Union.
Kampfgruppe Peiper attacked Stavelot on 18 December but was unable to capture the town before the Americans evacuated a large fuel depot.
In loyalty to their commander, 150 men from von der Heydte's own unit, the 6th Parachute Regiment, went against orders and joined him.
The United States Army Center of Military History's official numbers are 75,000 American casualties and 100,000 German casualties.
This Army was made up of only four infantry divisions, with no large-scale armored formations to use as a spearhead unit.
Believing in omens and the successes of his early war campaigns that had been planned at Kransberg, Hitler had chosen the site from which he had overseen the successful 1940 campaign against France and the Low Countries.
I should therefore have said nothing."
The majority of the German force executed a successful fighting withdrawal and escaped the battle area, although the fuel situation had become so dire that most of the German armor had to be abandoned.
The Germans attacked a weakly defended section of the Allied line, taking advantage of heavily overcast weather conditions, which grounded the Allies' overwhelmingly superior air forces.
One officer, Lt. Col. Harry Kinnard, noted that McAuliffe's initial reply would be "tough to beat."
One of the few advantages held by the German forces in November 1944 was that they were no longer defending all of Western Europe.
On the evening of 24 December, General Hasso von Manteuffel recommended to Hitler's Military Adjutant a halt to all offensive operations and a withdrawal back to the Westwall (literally ''Western Rampart'').
Their intention was to control the twin villages of Rocherath-Krinkelt which would clear a path to the high ground of Elsenborn Ridge.
Allied air forces also helped the defenders of Bastogne, dropping much-needed supplies—medicine, food, blankets, and ammunition.
The objective was the "Baraque Michel" crossroads.
He followed this with a Panzer attack, gaining the eastern edge of the town.
Eisenhower wrote, "...&nbsp;the action of the 2nd and 99th Divisions on the northern shoulder could be considered the most decisive of the Ardennes campaign."
What little intelligence they had led the Allies to believe precisely what the Germans wanted them to believe-–that preparations were being carried out only for defensive, not offensive, operations.
On the Eastern Front, the Soviets' Operation Bagration during the summer had destroyed much of Germany's Army Group Center (Heeresgruppe Mitte).
The tactical efficiency of these units were somewhat reduced.
There will be only cheerful faces at this table."
Patton, realizing what Eisenhower implied, responded, "Hell, let's have the guts to let the bastards go all the way to Paris.
They succeeded in surrounding two largely intact regiments (422nd and 423rd) of the 106th Division in a pincer movement and forced their surrender, a tribute to the way Manteuffel's new tactics had been applied.
That reply had to be explained, both to the Germans and to non-American Allies.
While the Siege of Bastogne is often credited as the central point where the German offensive was stopped, the battle for Elsenborn Ridge was actually the decisive component of the Battle of the Bulge, stopping the advance of the best equipped armored units of the German army and forcing them to use unfavorable routes that considerably slowed their advance.
At Cheneux, the advance guard was attacked by American fighter-bombers, destroying two tanks and five halftracks, blocking the narrow road.
On the same evening the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division under Maj. Gen. James Gavin arrived and deployed at La Gleize and along Peiper's planned route of advance.
The General Staff estimated they only had enough fuel to cover one-third to one-half of the ground to Antwerp in heavy combat conditions.
Despite determined German attacks, however, the perimeter held.
However, the narrow corridor caused considerable difficulties, as constant flanking attacks threatened the division.
When they reached it at 11:30 on 18 December, retreating U.S. engineers blew it up.
The disputes between Montgomery and Bradley were well known, and Hitler hoped he could exploit this disunity.
Knittel joined up with Peiper and reported the Americans had recaptured Stavelot to their east.
Eisenhower, however, preferred a broad-front strategy.
While some sources report that up to 19,000 were killed, Eisenhower's personnel chief put the number at about 8,600.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower (the Supreme Allied Commander on the Western Front) and his staff chose to hold the Ardennes region which was occupied by the U.S. First Army.
These losses included SS-Gruppenführer (Major General) Kurt Meyer, commander of the 12th SS Panzer (Armor) Division, captured by Belgian partisans on 6 September 1944.
Because Skorzeny's men were captured in American uniforms, they were executed as spies.
In this Dietrich was proved correct.
Montgomery and Bradley both pressed for priority delivery of supplies to their respective armies so they could continue their individual lines of advance and maintain pressure on the Germans.
The British Prime Minister Winston Churchill found it necessary in a speech to Parliament to explicitly state that the Battle of the Bulge was purely an American victory.
Even General George Patton was alarmed and, on 17 December, described the situation to General Dwight Eisenhower as "Krauts…speaking perfect English…raising hell, cutting wires, turning road signs around, spooking whole divisions, and shoving a bulge into our defenses."
The fierce defense of Bastogne, in which American paratroopers particularly distinguished themselves, made it impossible for the Germans to take the town with its important road junctions.
Skorzeny and his men were fully aware of their likely fate, and most wore their German uniforms underneath their American ones in case of capture.
German units assembling in the area were even issued charcoal instead of wood for cooking fires to cut down on smoke and reduce chances of Allied observers deducing a troop buildup was underway.
The struggle for the villages and American strong points, plus transport confusion on the German side, slowed the attack sufficiently to allow the 101st Airborne Division (reinforced by elements from the 9th and 10th Armored Divisions) to reach Bastogne by truck on the morning of 19 December.
In the south, Patton's Third Army was battling to relieve Bastogne.
Model and Manteuffel, the technical experts from the eastern front, took the view that a limited offensive with the goal of surrounding and crushing the American 1st Army would be the best the offensive could hope for.
Although he realized nothing significant could be accomplished in the Eastern Front, he still believed an offensive against the Western Allies, whom he considered militarily inferior to the Red Army, would have some chances of success.
American forces bore the brunt of the attack and incurred their highest casualties for any operation during the war.
At dawn on 19 December, Peiper surprised the American defenders of Stoumont by sending infantry from the 2nd SS Panzergrenadier Regiment in an attack and a company of Fallschirmjäger (paratroopers) to infiltrate their lines.
The British 29th Armoured Brigade of British 11th Armored Division, which had turned in its tanks for re-equipping, was told to take back their tanks and head to the area.
By the evening the spearhead had pushed north to engage the U.S. 99th Infantry Division and Kampfgruppe Peiper arrived in front of Stavelot.
At 12:30 on 17 December, Kampfgruppe Peiper was near the hamlet of Baugnez, on the height halfway between the town of Malmedy and Ligneuville, when they encountered elements of the 285th Field Artillery Observation Battalion, U.S. 7th Armored Division.
Of the two bridges now remaining between Kampfgruppe Peiper and the Meuse, the bridge over the Lienne was blown by the Americans as the Germans approached.
These predictions were largely dismissed by the U.S. 12th Army Group.
Historian John S.D.
Because the Ardennes was considered a quiet sector, economy-of-force considerations led it to be used as a training ground for new units and a rest area for units that had seen hard fighting.
Due to the news blackout imposed on the 16th, the change of leadership to Montgomery did not become known to the outside world until eventually SHAEF made a public announcement making clear that the change in command was "absolutely nothing to do with failure on the part of the three American generals".
These were reinforced a couple weeks later, bringing the offensive's total strength to around 450,000 troops.
They destroyed a number of American armored units and vehicles, and took several dozen prisoners who were subsequently murdered.
Historian Patrick K. O'Donnell writes that on 8 December 1944 U.S. Rangers at great cost took Hill 400 during the Battle of the Hürtgen Forest.
The Allies captured the port of Antwerp intact in the first days of September, but it was not operational until 28 November.
The High Command of the Allied forces had planned to resume the offensive by early January 1945, after the wet season rains and severe frosts, but those plans had to be postponed until 29 January 1945 in connection with the unexpected changes in the front.
The parachute drop was a complete failure.
First, Third and Seventh Armies suffered a total of 17,000 hospitalized from the cold.
For the next two days the perimeter was strengthened.
The citation covered the Ardennes sector where the actual battle took place and units further south in the Alsace sector.
When the relief force was unable to penetrate the Allied lines, he decided to break through the Allied lines and return to the German lines on 23 December.
The Allies were slowly pushing towards Germany, but no decisive breakthrough was achieved.
SS Obersturmbannführer Joachim Peiper led Kampfgruppe Peiper, consisting of 4,800 men and 600 vehicles, which was charged with leading the main effort.
