He asked for cannon before he advanced and was immediately sent three 6-pounders but he still made no attack.
The young, 26-year-old, Cumberland owed his position to his high rank and he had no prior experience commanding an army.
To these ends, he first besieged the fortress of Tournai, protecting the siege with his main force about 5 miles (~9&nbsp;km) southeast of the town.
On 20 April he reached his base of operations at Maubeuge, gathering his army totalling some 95,000 men consisting of 69,000 infantry and 25,600 cavalry.
He was suspended from service and allowed to sell out.
On obtaining the summit of the ridge the allied column found itself facing the French infantry line.
The French counter-attacks eventually halted and then repelled the British column, taking the field.
At last Cumberland himself confronted the Brigadier, but by this time the British infantry were drawing up on the plain beyond Vezon in readiness for the main attack, while to their left the Dutch were preparing to advance on Fontenoy and the redoubts between that village and Antoing.
Along the French right flank the allies had been routed; but the battle was not yet over.
From Cambron the allies marched to Moulbay and to within the sound of the siege guns at Tournai.
Saxe went on the offensive in April 1745 with a large French army, looking to build on the previous year's gains.
He would win only one battle in his career with a very small army, Culloden, and he is described by historian Armstrong Starkey as "a very good brigadier."
Newly encouraged, the allies once again began to move forward.
In this campaign Saxe had one primary aim: take control of the upper Scheldt basin and hence the heart of the Austrian Netherlands.
The Dutch now made a second attempt on Fontenoy, reinforced with Austrian cavalry and two battalions of British infantry, including the Highland Regiment.
Elsewhere, the Pragmatic Allies had scored considerable success in late 1744.
The Hanoverian regiments were on the left of the British lines.
Bruges and Oudenarde soon capitulated, and by the end of July the French stood on the threshold of Zeeland, the south-western corner of the Dutch Republic.
However, this number was growing and reinforcements would eventually bring his army up to 53,000, and for a brief time an irrepressible optimism pervaded the allied councils of war.
The whole southern sector of maritime Flanders was soon in French hands, but the strategic situation abruptly changed when Prince Charles of Lorraine led 70,000 imperial troops across the Rhine and into Alsace.
At 2:00am on 11 May, the allied regiments took up their stations.
And so the allies fell back on a defensive strategy while awaiting clear evidence of Saxe's intentions.
The Comte d'Auteroche, then lieutenant of Grenadiers, shouted, ' Gentlemen, we never fire first ; fire yourselves."
The British and Hanoverians themselves overlooked the opportunity to attack Fontenoy on its unbarricaded side with the French cannon either out of shot or running low on ammunition, a much easier task than that the Dutch had faced.
Convinced it was over, Noailles had implored the King to seek safety; but Saxe reassured him that the battle was not lost.
Here the line comprised the ''Gardes Suisses'', four battalions of the ''Gardes Françaises'', as well as the brigade of Aubeterre composed of three battalions of the Swiss regiment of Courten and one battalion of the Regiment Aubeterre.
The youthful Cumberland had designs on a campaign that would culminate in Paris, but the more experienced Ligonier – Cumberland's mentor and commander of the British infantry – warned that France's numerical advantage meant the allies must "by their situation, be masters of besieging wherever they please".
The Battle of Fontenoy is central to the plotline of Liam Mac Cóil's prizewinning Irish novel ''Fontenoy'' (Leabhar Breac, 2005).
From his vantage point near Notre Dame de Bois, Louis XV, attended by the Dauphin, Noailles, the Duke of Richelieu, and Louis XV's minister of war, the Marquis d'Argenson, had witnessed his best infantry fall back in disorder.
Joseph sued for peace and gave his support for the candidacy of Maria Theresa's husband, Francis Stephen, in the coming imperial election for the vacant throne.
Cumberland had decided to ignore the danger on his right flank.
Whole allied ranks were swept away, but still they pressed forward in perfect order as if on parade, the better to foster cohesion and the better to overawe their opponents.
To compound his troubles General Campbell, commander of the British cavalry, had earlier been mortally wounded while screening the infantry advance onto the plain, and had been carried from the field without having revealed his orders to any other officer.
Between Fontenoy and the larger village of Antoing on the French right a further three redoubts were built along the ridge-line.
Further success followed with the death in January 1745 of the French puppet emperor, Charles VII.
The night of the 10th had seen the left wing of the allies more advanced towards the enemy than the right.
The allied army consisted of some 53,000 men in 52 battalions and 85 squadrons of which 22.000 were Dutch, 21,000 were British, 8,000 Hanoverian and 2,000 Austrians.
By the year's end, the Saxon-born Saxe had completed the conquest of much of the Austrian Netherlands, and with his successes he became a national hero in his adopted country.
During a hasty reconnoitre late on 9 May, Cumberland, Königsegg, and Waldeck found the French fortifying the hamlet of Fontenoy; they also discovered the enemy's pickets at the villages of Vezon and Bourgeon.
Historian David Chandler writes that upon the order "first firing, take care", in the British platoon firing system, the six platoons of the first firing with the whole of the front rank of each British battalion fired together – explaining the efficacy of the British first volley.
However, this movement was only a feint to disguise Saxe's real intention of besieging Tournai; it was a deception that had the desired effect on the allied command.
The brigade of the Maison du Roi, the ''carabiniers'', the ''gendarmerie'', the finest cavalry of France, charged and charged again, but each time were driven back by the steady discipline and fire of the British infantry.
After failing to make progress on the flanks – the Dutch on the left, Brigadier Ingolsby's brigade on the right – Cumberland decided to smash his way through the centre without securing the flanks of his main attack.
Immediately to the rear of Fontenoy there were three battalions of the regiment Le Roi.
A simultaneous attack on the allied left was made by all the regiments which had faced the Dutch between Fontenoy and Antoing.
The first British line, from right to left, was composed of three brigades: first, on the right, the Guards Brigade composed of the 1st, 3rd and 2nd foot guards; second, Ponsonby's brigade of the Royal Scots (1st Foot), Scots Fusiliers (21st Foot), Handaside's (31st Foot); third, Onslow's brigade of Onslow's's (8th Foot), Rothe's/Sempill's (25th Foot), Johnson's (33rd Foot) and Howard's (19th Foot).
As the column advanced up a slight rise, the British brought up a battery of twelve six-pounder cannons to the front of the column at such close range that the ''Gardes Françaises'' left their supported defensive position against orders, as they had at Dettingen, and advanced, unsupported, in an attempt to take the guns.
Saxe was still seriously ill on the day of the battle and had spent the early part of the engagement in his wicker carriage.
That same day, 8 May, Saxe began to move his main troops into position to face the Pragmatic Army.
Ligonier later recorded, "Having had orders to make a second attempt, our troops … a second time made the enemy give way; and they were once more pushed as far as their camp with great loss of men, which we too felt upon our side."
The British and the Hanoverians were deployed in two lines.
Additionally, Chandler describes the advance as also a British development of the platoon firing system in which troops mounting an attack continue to advance to give fire by stepping out ahead of the rest of the marching battalion, when they are done and reloading the other platoons advance ahead of them and give fire in turn.
Although the allied attack on Fontenoy had failed, the commander of the second line of the French centre had dispatched much of this line to support the brigade in Fontenoy so there was now no support infantry line behind the part of the line formerly held by the ''Gardes Françaises'' and the British Guards advanced deep into this gap.
The victory was followed by a rapid French advance.
Although the constant charges of the French cavalry had been thrown back, their perseverance at last achieved Saxe's aim: they had made time for his infantry brigades to reform.
This left the French commander with approximately 50,000 troops to fight the coming battle.
Ingolsby was court-martialled on the charge 'That he received orders from the Duke to attack a redoubt or battery in the last action near Fontenoy, which orders he did not execute'.
The position which Saxe had chosen to make his defence was naturally strong: the right of his army rested on Antoing, the centre on Fontenoy, and the left was covered by the Wood of Barry.
The initial disorder of the allied column was soon checked as each battalion rallied around its colours; the compact formation was restored, and the British and Hanoverians accomplished their retreat in good order.
"If I owe this triumph to the valour of my troops … you also contributed to it no less by your steadfast daring, by your sage counsel and by your remarkable foresight."
Historian David Chandler quotes Saxe:
Some historians put the French as more numerous and others the allies.
Without hope of relief, Tournai surrendered to Saxe on 21 May and the citadel of Tournai capitulated on 20 June.
The capture of Tournai would consolidate and extend the gains that had been made in the previous campaign, and provide the French with the key to the approaches of Ghent and Oudenarde, threatening British communications with Ostend and the sea.
Although British leadership was found lacking, British infantry's superior discipline showed that however much French infantry had improved under Saxe's tutelage, France could not match the best that Britain could put in the field.
The strength of the French left was only now appreciated, and the position became a matter of the greatest importance.
The fighting was extremely close and deadly, some British regiments lost half their strength such as the Royal Welch Fusiliers which lost 322 soldiers, over 200 killed, while the brigade of British Guards suffered over 700 casualties.
The Dutch line, from left to right, was formed of: 36 squadrons of cavalry, next eight infantry battalions, then four squadrons and finally, facing Fontenoy, 12 battalions in two lines.
Ligonier made provisions for covering the retreat.
The Duc de Gramont, of Dettingen infamy, was killed by a shot from these.
He had made up his mind not only as to what he would do, but what he would compel his enemy to do, correctly calculating the operational and political difficulties that such a diverse opponent would face.
To counter this threat, Louis XV and Noailles led a large number of reinforcements south, while Maurice de Saxe, illegitimate son of Augustus II the Strong and, since March, a Marshal of France, was left in charge in Flanders with a reduced army of between 50,000 and 60,000 men facing an allied army of 96,000.
Long after the battle Saxe justified his tactics writing:
For the allies there were recriminations with the Dutch getting most of the blame in English accounts with no explanation as to why the Hanoverian advance on Fontenoy failed to occur.
In three months Saxe had achieved his grand design: he had established himself on the shores of the English Channel and the River Scheldt.
The allied bombardment was to little effect however, as most of the French were in the woods, in redoubts, behind the swell of ground leading to their position, or fortified in Fontenoy.
On 5 May the allies reached Cambron.
Accounts from both sides speak to the three-hour duration and intensity of the other's fire.
Cumberland chose to attack.
The charge of disobedience of orders was found proved.
The army reformed behind Vezon, before retreating on Ath.
However, Cumberland's official report praised his co-commander, Königsegg, who, fighting between the first and second lines of infantry "was present on horseback during the whole action, and gave his orders with great calmness."
The wings of the line had moved round on either flank in order to face the enemy to their left and right, thus forming a hollow, three sided square, against which Saxe now flung his second line of cavalry.
Du Chayla at once withdrew in the direction of Tournai, but he had achieved his objective: he had satisfied himself as to which road the allies would approach.
His initial aim was to take control of the upper Scheldt basin and thereby gain access to the heart of the Austrian Netherlands.
''In part'', the risible results of the allied campaign in the Low Countries had led to the fall of the Carteret government in Britain, leading to a new administration led by Henry Pelham and his brother, the Duke of Newcastle.
Despite devastating flanking fire the allied column, made up of British and Hanoverian infantry, burst through the French lines to the point of victory.
Likewise, Bavarian repudiation of its French ties meant France was freed of its German involvement, and could now concentrate on its own military efforts in Italy and the Low Countries.
Louis XV took to the field in person, accompanied by his son Louis, and their enormous retinue.
The garrison from Tournai was contained by the French besiegers.
The hinge of the French line consisted of the small hamlet of Fontenoy.
The French guards rose and advanced towards the crest, whereupon the two forces confronted each other at a distance of 30 paces.
Fontenoy dispelled the notion of British military superiority held in Europe since Marlborough and demonstrated French battlefield superiority over the British and their allies.
Skelton's (32nd) and Cholmondeley's (34th) formed the rearguard, the Buffs were ordered to hold the churchyard, while hedges and ravines were lined with the Black Watch.
The true glory is to save it."
From the Redoubt of d'Eu and Fontenoy the French cannon poured tremendous flanking fire.
The French were the first to fire, the volley was somewhat ineffective but threw the Third Guards into some confusion and wounded George Churchill, the commander of the guards brigade.
The French campaign to gain the initiative began immediately.
After observing the siege at Tournai, the King moved on to the Château de Calonne between Tournai and Antoing.
This dispirited the Dutch who retired out of range and did not participate in the main attack.
But the enemy were not, even now, lacking in discipline or morale, and the allied cavalry were at last admirably handled.
Additionally, six 12-pounders were mounted on the far side of the Scheldt facing Antoing, targeting the left flank of any force attacking in that quarter.
Saxe was able to maintain his position at Courtrai and along the lines of the Lys, and remained relatively untroubled throughout.
Cumberland failed to make effective use of his cavalry.
The volley of musketry with the battalion guns delivering numerous rounds of grape-shot, swept away the front rank of the ten battalions of the French first line, killing and wounding between 700–800 men, breaking the ''Gardes Françaises'', while the ''Gardes Suisses'' and the four battalions of the Brigade Aubeterre were driven back by the British advance.
The Duke of Cumberland – the nominal commander-in-chief of the allied force – arrived at The Hague on 18 April 1745; two days later he arrived at Brussels where the Allied army was to concentrate.
On either flank the British cavalry closed in to form a screen for the infantry – the Royal Horse Guards to the fore especially distinguished themselves.
Prince Waldeck was thus able to complete his dispositions for battle in the morning more rapidly than Ligonier.
Additionally, with Cumberland at the head of the allied column he was in no position to capitalize on his own attack through efforts elsewhere: he could not prevent the French from concentrating against his column because he was behaving more like a battalion commander than a captain general.
Napoleon I later declared that the victory at Fontenoy prolonged the ''Ancien Régime'' monarchy in France by 30 years.
A large battery of allied guns, some 40 to 50 according to French accounts, began to bombard the French positions at long range.
With French cannon taking a heavy toll on these dense formations it was clear that the opportunity for Ingolsby's attack had slipped by, and the Duke simply ordered him to move his brigade forward in line with the main British formation under Ligonier.
Even now Cumberland was still unsure of the situation facing him, "I cannot come at any certain knowledge of the enemy's numbers, but I have concurring information that the body on this side the Schelde does not exceed 31 battalions and 32 squadrons.
The battle had established French superiority in force and high command.
The allies grew indecisive.
The French army had some 48,000 men 32,000 infantry in 55 battalions and 14,000 cavalry in 101 squadrons and 90 to 110 cannons at least 86 of which were small four-pounder battalion guns.
Saxe now ordered his cavalry to attack the advancing foe, but they too recoiled, broken by shattering fire.
He was so absorbed in the infantry attack that he left his horse regiments idle in the rear until the time for useful action had passed.
This success was followed by a rapid advance against the less organised and outnumbered allied army: Ghent, Oudenarde, Bruges, and Dendermonde soon fell to French forces.
Endeavouring to restore order, Cumberland personally exhorted and inspired his men, halting their retreat, rallying them with the cry:
Tournai lay six miles (~10&nbsp;km) to the north-west.
Only when Saxe concentrated all available infantry, cavalry, and artillery was the column forced to yield.
The only good news for the British came in North America when William Pepperrell captured the key French fortress of Louisbourg at Cape Breton in late June.
In the rear of these works and extending northeast to the village of Ramcroix stood the French left wing, including the six battalions of the Irish Brigade.
However, the incessant fire from the flanks – from Fontenoy and the Redoubt of Eu – followed by the constant cavalry and infantry attacks, had caused the British and Hanoverian infantry to yield ground, forcing them slowly back towards the crest of the plateau.
With Fontenoy and the Redoubt of Eu still in French hands Cumberland and Königsegg had to decide whether to move forward or retreat and wait for a more propitious opportunity.
After surveying the field, Louis XV told his son the Dauphin, Louis-Ferdinand  "See how much blood a triumph costs.
Two were built along the Fontenoy-Barry gap, defended by two regiments of the Brigade of Eu, and each supplied with four cannons – the first breastwork (nearest Fontenoy), known as the Redoubt of Eu, played a central part in the battle.
Behind the first line were further infantry supports, and behind these stood the whole body of French cavalry, with their left resting on the Leuze–Tournai causeway, and their right some distance back from Fontenoy.
Yet the siege was also a decoy for a much more original manoeuvre – the prompt engagement of the enemy in a place favourable to the French army, and at a time before the allies could reach their full strength.
The moment was immortalised by Lord Charles Hay of the 1st Regiment of Guards who later wrote that he stepped forward, took out a hip flask and drank with a flourish, shouting out to his opponent, "We are the English Guards, and we hope you will stand till we come up to you, and not swim the Scheldt as you did the Main at Dettingen."
s politely discussing who should fire first at the battle of Fontenoy (1745).
Their cavalry turned about; but while the bulk of them halted within cannon-shot, a minority of them fled.
Cumberland responded by deploying seven of the Guards Brigade's three-pounder battalion guns to push them back.
As Saxe and Löwendahl led the infantry, D'Estrées, and Richelieu brought up the whole Household Cavalry.
But it was the Fontenoy–Barry gap which was of particular danger to Saxe.
On the evening of 9 May the allies at last reached the final stage of their tiring march, encamping their left wing on Maubray, and their right on Baugnies, almost within musket-shot of the French outposts.
Due to indecision the allies had not begun their march until 30 April, reaching Soignies on 2 May where they were detained due to bad weather.
These 'troops in the wood' were the Grassins, a combination of light infantry and light cavalry who tenaciously defended the position against the allied attack.
Cumberland took up his place alongside Ligonier at the head of 20 battalions, 15 British and 5 Hanoverian to their left, led by the British Guards Brigade, each with their two battalion guns, about 13,000 to 15,000 men, drawn up in two disciplined lines, each six ranks deep.
After a council with Louis XV it was resolved to unite all available forces, and at around 2:00pm, Saxe made a final concerted effort to repulse the enemy.
My Lord Charles Hai, captain in the English Guards, cried, 'Gentlemen of the French Guards, fire .'
While there is not complete agreement among historians on the exact numbers there is general agreement that there were about 50,000 on each side with the French having more cavalry and the allies having more infantry.
On being congratulated by Monsieur de Bauffremont, Saxe simply replied, "all is not said; let us go to the English, they will be harder to digest."
By now the allied foot had penetrated the French lines for a distance of 300 yards, and into the French camp.
Here, a reserve corps was formed under the Hanoverian general, Moltke, and detached towards Leuze where 50 French squadrons under Du Chayla were stationed as a corps of observation.
However, Waldeck also had not sufficiently reconnoitred his objectives, and was unaware of the strength of the enemy position in the village.
With his defiant oath that "We must all conquer or die together", the French commander rode off to restore order at the front.
With the capitulation of Ath in early October France controlled much of the Austrian Netherlands.
The French army was commanded by one of the great captains of the age but it had fallen behind some of the other powers in tactics, training and discipline.
The battle had shown, however, the strength of a defensive force relying on firepower and a strong reserve.
As the British and Hanoverians advanced the French pushed forward the four small three-pounder battalion guns of the ''Gardes Françaises'' Brigade and the four of Aubeterre Brigade, the fire from these was added to the bombardment from the Redoubt d'Eu.
Ingolsby continued to falter and hesitate.
This explains the slow advance of the column noted in many first hand accounts.
Here he remained, telling Lord Bury (one of Cumberland's six aides-de-camp), "that he saw troops in the wood, that he did not know the number of them, and had consulted with his officers, who were of opinion it was impracticable."
Britain was perilously near to exclusion from the mainland of Europe, and would find it hard to make contact with its continental allies.
Gradually, however, the French onslaught had brought about a change in the column's formation.
He had some reason to believe in his ultimate success as all but 8,000 British troops were away on the continent and recently defeated at Fontenoy.
The true intentions of the French were not discovered by the allies until 28 April.
Opposing Saxe was the Pragmatic Army, the bulk of which was made up of British and Hanoverian troops under General George Wade, and Dutch troops under Prince Maurice of Nassau.
To guard against any break-out by the Dutch from within the besieged city the Marquis of Dreux-Brézé was left with 21,550 men in the trenches, and orders to contain the garrison of about 8,000 men at all costs.
By the time of the British-Hanoverian advance, however, he had mounted his horse and, despite great pain, directed French actions personally.
Meanwhile, a second column, with cavalry in its rear, advanced on Antoing.
In effect, the Duke relied not on manoeuvre but on force; it was a direct approach that fell victim to Saxe's clever exploitation of his defensive position.
Upon reaching the safety of Ath, Cumberland burst into tears over his disappointment at the defeat and the huge number of lives the defeat cost.
The reports vary of the progress of the siege, the weather is so bad that, tho' we are within a distance to hear the canon very distinctly, yet no true judgement can be formed from thence whether the enemy are retir'd over the Schelde or not."
Attacked from three sides the allies performed a fighting withdrawal – the rearguard of the column facing about at measured intervals to fire at their pursuers.
The court concluded his failure arose 'from an error of judgement, and not from want of courage.'
He later explained that while the allied cavalry were still relatively intact, his own had been decimated.
Cumberland's reconnaissance on the evening of the 10th had failed to detect the Redoubt of Eu near the woods, but during the night information had been brought to him of its whereabouts.
Although the details have not been precisely established, casualty figures were high for both sides: the French amounting to at least 7,000 killed and wounded; the allies are estimated as 10,000 to 12,000.
Antoing itself was defended by seven battalions, including four veteran battalions of Piedmont, and six guns.
Here lay the strength and advantage of Saxe's choice: the descent in many places along the position formed a natural glacis, and throughout the whole length, from Antoing to the wood, the prolonged slope offered an even and deadly field for cannon and musketry fire.
Casualties were high on both sides, but the French had gained the field, and Tournai fell shortly after the battle.
and, at about 10:15, he abandoned his wicker carriage and mounted his famous white palfrey.
Saxe rallied six Irish battalions of the "Wild Geese" supported by the remnants of Vaisseaux and Normandie for a final assault and flung themselves into the attack with the wild Gaelic cry of "''Cuimhnigidh ar Luimnech agus feall na Sassonach!''"
As the second Dutch attack on Fontenoy went in, the main allied formation moved towards the French position on the plateau.
– "Remember Limerick and Saxon Perfidy".
French reconnaissances had confirmed Saxe in his belief that the allies would endeavour to relieve Tournai by attempting to force a passage from the south-east via the hamlet of Fontenoy and the small town of Antoing on the Scheldt.
The Dutch advanced, moving up three batteries of artillery to support their attack.
Here he met Königsegg, Waldeck, and General de Wendt, commander of the Hanoverian contingent who had orders to fight in close coordination with the British.
Saxe, stricken with dropsy (regarded in the eighteenth century as a fatal disorder), left Paris for the front in Flanders on 31 March.
The hollow "square" had again progressed several hundred yards beyond the flanking batteries, but Cumberland had become increasingly isolated in the centre with his shrinking mass of British and Hanoverian infantry.
This defensive line rested on the edge of a crest of high ground.
The Irish Brigade, as a brigade, would suffer the heaviest overall casualties on the French side, losing 656 men including one-quarter of their officers.
With Bavaria out of the war the Austrians could now try to win back Silesia from Frederick II.
Much had been expected of the allies in 1744 but the timidity of their generals had produced nothing against a numerically inferior enemy.
He failed to make his orders clear and Ingolsby's hesitation on the allied right was in part due to receiving conflicting orders.
The regiments of Vaisseaux, Hainault, Normandie, and part of the Irish Brigade, were all beaten back.
Adding, "The Marshal Count Saxe is at Maubeuge and is in so low a state that his death is daily expected."
Dendermonde and the vital port of Ostend, where a battalion of British Foot Guards and a garrison of 4,000 fell to French forces in August, and Nieuport in early September.
While the allies were at Brussels making dispositions to march to the relief of Mons, Saxe slipped down the Scheldt with the main body of the army towards his real target; one column on the left bank of the river, and two columns on the right to cover the march and engage the allies in battle.
According to a "State of the Allied Troops", sent home by Cumberland, the allied army's effective strength was less than 43,000 consisting of 30,550 infantry and 12,000 cavalry.
Saxe was blamed by the "carpet generals" for halting the pursuit 100 yards from the battlefield and not turning the defeat of the allies into a rout.
After another reconnoitre the allied commanders resolved to defer the battle until the morning of the 11th, but all agreed that the French position – the barrier between themselves and Tournai – must be attacked.
The allied field army, now reduced to 35,000 men, was less than half the number of the French and they fell back to Diegem in the vicinity of Brussels.
Ligonier finally sent word to Cumberland that he was ready to advance as soon as the Dutch carried out their attack on Fontenoy.
The allied forward units now held the Peronne–Bourgeon–Vezon line.
Although Saxe favoured movement over siege warfare he knew there was nothing more likely to provoke an early encounter than to threaten one of the allies' larger fortresses, which only the most confident and able commander could ignore.
The second British line was three brigades, from right to left: first Howard's brigade with Howard's 'Buffs' (3rd Foot) on the right, the Welsh Fusiliers (23rd) Foot and Skelton's (32nd Foot); second, Bland's brigade of Sowle's (11th Foot) and Bragg's (28th Foot); and third Skelton's brigade of Cholmondeley's (34th Foot) and Bligh's (20th Foot).
