Although the Japanese continued to try to secure more territory, and the U.S. did not move from a state of naval parity to one of supremacy until after several more months of hard combat, Midway allowed the Allies to switch to the strategic initiative, paving the way for the landings on Guadalcanal and the prolonged attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign.
Most significantly, American cryptographers were able to determine the date and location of the planned attack, enabling the forewarned U.S. Navy to prepare its own ambush.
The Japanese repelled these attacks, losing 2 fighters while destroying 5 TBFs, 2 SB2Us, 8 SBDs, and 2 B-26s.
The Japanese hoped another demoralizing defeat would force the U.S. to capitulate in the Pacific War and thus ensure Japanese dominance in the Pacific.
''Hiryū'', the sole surviving Japanese aircraft carrier, wasted little time in counterattacking.
Limping along on a straight course at 12&nbsp;knots—roughly one-third their top speed and only 1 knot faster than ''Tambor'' while submerged—''Mogami'' and ''Mikuma'' had been almost perfect targets for a submarine attack.
The abysmal performance of American torpedoes in the early months of the war became a scandal.
Nevertheless, Leslie and others still dive-bombed, strafing carrier decks and providing covers for those with bombs.
In reality, the whole operation had been compromised from the beginning due to Allied code-breaking efforts.
Fletcher transferred his flag to ''Saratoga'' on the afternoon of 8 June and resumed command of the carrier force.
He mistakenly reported this group as the Main Force.
Browning therefore suggested a launch time of 07:00, giving the carriers an hour to close on the Japanese at .
Mitsuo Fuchida, the Japanese aviator who led the attack on Pearl Harbor, was on the ''Akagi'' when it was hit, and described the attack:
His emphasis on dispersal also meant none of his formations were in a position to support each other.
Nagumo's opportunity to hit the American ships was now limited by the imminent return of his Midway strike force.
Yamamoto's primary strategic goal was the elimination of America's carrier forces, which he regarded as the principal threat to the overall Pacific campaign.
Having taken off prior to the Japanese attack, American bombers based on Midway made several attacks on the Japanese carrier force.
He already had Vice Admiral William Halsey's two-carrier (''Enterprise'' and ''Hornet'') task force at hand, though Halsey was stricken with severe dermatitis and had to be replaced by Rear Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, Halsey's escort commander.
Naval base at Pearl Harbor would induce all of the American fleet to sail out to fight, including the carriers.
Several minutes later, Best and his two wingmen dived on the ''Akagi''.
In addition to serving as a seaplane base, Midway's airstrips also served as a forward staging point for bomber attacks on Wake Island.
The strike planes returned to the carriers after nightfall, prompting Spruance to order ''Enterprise'' and ''Hornet'' to turn on their lights to aid the landings.
While the Japanese were able to launch 108 aircraft in just seven minutes, it took ''Enterprise'' and ''Hornet'' over an hour to launch 117.
The appearance of a third torpedo plane attack from the southeast by Torpedo Squadron 3 (VT-3 from ''Yorktown'') at 10:00 very quickly drew the majority of the Japanese CAP to the southeast quadrant of the fleet.
It was the Allies' first major naval victory against the Japanese.
For a variety of reasons, production of the "Val" had been drastically reduced, while that of the "Kate" had been stopped completely and, as a consequence, there were none available to replace losses.
They attacked, crippling ''Yorktown'' with two torpedoes; she lost all power and developed a 23-degree list to port.
Accordingly, American squadrons were launched piecemeal and proceeded to the target in several different groups.
In it, one of the more striking revelations is the comment on the Mobile Force Commander's (Nagumo's) estimates: "The enemy is not aware of our plans (we were not discovered until early in the morning of the 5th at the earliest)."
The plan was handicapped by faulty Japanese assumptions of the American reaction and poor initial dispositions.
The damage also forced Admiral Fletcher to move his command staff to the heavy cruiser .
All four of Japan's large aircraft carriers—, ,  and , part of the six-carrier force that had attacked Pearl Harbor six months earlier—and a heavy cruiser were sunk, while the U.S. lost only the carrier  and a destroyer.
Simultaneously, he detached a cruiser raiding force to bombard the island.
One B-26, after being seriously damaged by anti-aircraft fire, veered into a steep dive straight toward ''Akagi''.
As darkness fell, both sides took stock and made tentative plans for continuing the action.
It was fortunate Spruance did not pursue, for had he come in contact with Yamamoto's heavy ships, including , in the dark and considering the Japanese Navy's superiority in night-attack tactics at the time, his cruisers would have been overwhelmed and his carriers sunk.
For his part, Yamamoto initially decided to continue the engagement and sent his remaining surface forces searching eastward for the American carriers.
The Guadalcanal Campaign is also regarded by some as a turning point in the Pacific War.
However, following hasty repairs at Pearl Harbor, ''Yorktown'' sortied and played a critical role in the discovery and eventual destruction of the Japanese fleet carriers at Midway.
This, and other successful hit-and-run raids by American carriers in the South Pacific, showed that they were still a threat, although seemingly reluctant to be drawn into an all-out battle.
After futile attempts at controlling the blaze, most of the crew remaining on ''Hiryū'' were evacuated and the remainder of the fleet continued sailing northeast in an attempt to intercept the American carriers.
These messages were, contrary to earlier historical accounts, also received by Nagumo before the battle began.
However, due to the increased strength of American land-based air power on the Hawaiian Islands since the December 7 attack the previous year, he judged that it was now too risky to attack Pearl Harbor directly.
Despite their failure to score any hits, the American torpedo attacks indirectly achieved three important results.
These inexperienced pilots were fed into front-line units, while the veterans who remained after Midway and the Solomons campaign were forced to share an increased workload as conditions grew more desperate, with few being given a chance to rest in rear areas or in the home islands.
By contrast, Yamamoto and Kondo had between them two light carriers, five battleships, four heavy cruisers, and two light cruisers, none of which saw action at Midway.
This made it unlikely that they would be effective in an airstrike against the Japanese battleships, even if they had managed to catch them during daytime.
Despite a scuttling attempt by a Japanese destroyer that hit her with a torpedo and then departed quickly, ''Hiryū'' stayed afloat for several more hours, being discovered early the next morning by an aircraft from the escort carrier  and prompting hopes she could be saved, or at least towed back to Japan.
Japanese reconnaissance arrangements were flimsy, with too few aircraft to adequately cover the assigned search areas, laboring under poor weather conditions to the northeast and east of the task force.
Spruance judged that, though the range was extreme, a strike could succeed and gave the order to launch the attack.
It was accepted that the lack of coordination would diminish the impact of the American attacks and increase their casualties, but Spruance calculated that this was worthwhile, since keeping the Japanese under aerial attack impaired their ability to launch a counterstrike (Japanese tactics preferred fully constituted attacks), and he gambled that he would find Nagumo with his flight decks at their most vulnerable.
Coming under an onslaught of bombs from almost two full squadrons, ''Kaga'' sustained four or five direct hits, which caused heavy damage and started multiple fires.
Naval Oceanographic Office searched for the Japanese aircraft carriers.
Thirteen dive bombers and three escorting fighters were lost in this attack (two escorting fighters turned back early after they were damaged attacking some of ''Enterprise''s SBDs returning from their attack on the Japanese carriers).
Rear Admiral Tamon Yamaguchi, leading Carrier Division 2 (''Hiryū'' and ''Sōryū''), recommended that Nagumo strike immediately with the forces at hand: 18 Aichi D3A1 dive bombers each on ''Sōryū'' and ''Hiryū'', and half the ready cover patrol aircraft.
The remaining officers and men were quickly dispersed to other units of the fleet and, without being allowed to see family or friends, were shipped to units in the South Pacific, where the majority died in battle.
The returning strike force needed to land promptly or it would have to ditch into the sea.
Midway showed the worth of pre-war naval cryptanalysis and intelligence-gathering.
Nimitz knew that the Japanese had negated their numerical advantage by dividing their ships into four separate task groups, all too widely separated to be able to support each other.
The ''Yorktown'' squadron (VB-3) had flown just behind VT-3 but elected to attack from a different course.
Because of this, preliminary planning for a second phase of operations commenced as early as January 1942.
Nagumo quickly reversed his order to re-arm the bombers with general purpose bombs and demanded that the scout plane ascertain the composition of the American force.
Japanese radio intercepts did notice an increase in both American submarine activity and message traffic.
A few months after Midway, the JNAF sustained similar casualty rates in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and Battle of Santa Cruz, and it was these battles, combined with the constant attrition of veterans during the Solomons campaign, which were the catalyst for the sharp downward spiral in operational capability.
At 05:34, a PBY reported sighting 2 Japanese carriers and another spotted the inbound airstrike 10 minutes later.
In order to obtain support from the Imperial Japanese Army for the Midway operation, the Imperial Japanese Navy agreed to support their invasion of the Aleutian Islands.
The Japanese operation, like the earlier attack on Pearl Harbor, sought to eliminate the United States as a strategic power in the Pacific, thereby giving Japan a free hand in establishing its Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
On 19 May 1998, Robert Ballard and a team of scientists and Midway veterans from both sides located and photographed ''Yorktown''.
The Japanese combat air patrol, flying Mitsubishi A6M2 Zeros made short work of the unescorted, slow, under-armed TBDs.
In the end, Nagumo decided to wait for his first strike force to land, then launch the reserve, which would by then be properly armed with torpedoes.
Japanese carrier doctrine preferred the launching of fully constituted strikes rather than piecemeal attacks.
Early the following morning Japanese oil tanker ''Akebono Maru'' sustained the first hit when a torpedo from an attacking PBY struck her around 01:00.
Without confirmation of whether the American force included carriers (not received until 08:20), Nagumo's reaction was doctrinaire.
Midway was the last time the TBD Devastator was used in combat.
Beginning at 10:22, the two squadrons of ''Enterprise''s air group split up with the intention of sending one squadron each to attack ''Kaga'' and ''Akagi''.
In addition, the destroyers ''Arashio'' (bombed; 35) and ''Asashio'' (strafed by aircraft; 21) were both damaged during the air attacks which sank ''Mikuma'' and caused further damage to ''Mogami''.
There were strategic disagreements between the Imperial Army (IJA) and Imperial Navy (IJN), and infighting between the Navy's GHQ and Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto's Combined Fleet, and a follow-up strategy was not formed until April 1942.
Whereas many earlier historical accounts considered the Aleutians operation as a feint to draw American forces away, early twenty-first century research has suggested that AL was intended to be launched simultaneously with the attack on Midway.
In the final analysis, it made no difference; Fletcher's carriers had launched their planes beginning at 07:00, so the aircraft that would deliver the crushing blow were already on their way.
Despite estimates that ''Yorktown'', damaged in the Battle of the Coral Sea, would require several months of repairs at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, her elevators were intact and her flight deck largely so.
The Japanese, by contrast, remained mainly unaware of their opponent's true strength and dispositions even after the battle began.
At least part of this was due to fatigue; Japanese carriers had been constantly on operations since 7 December 1941, including raids on Darwin and Colombo.
This had been under way for about 30 minutes when, at 07:40, the delayed scout plane from ''Tone'' signaled that it had sighted a sizable American naval force to the east, but neglected to describe its composition.
Ballard's subsequent search for the Japanese carriers was unsuccessful.
In addition, the arrival of another land-based American air strike at 07:53 gave weight to the need to attack the island again.
''Hiryū''s first attack wave, consisting of 18 D3As and 6 fighter escorts, followed the retreating American aircraft and attacked the first carrier they encountered, ''Yorktown'', hitting her with three bombs, which blew a hole in the deck, snuffed out her boilers, and destroyed one anti-aircraft mount.
Clay Blair argued in 1975 that had Spruance pressed on, he would have been unable to launch his aircraft after nightfall, and his cruisers would have been overwhelmed by Yamamoto's powerful surface units, including ''Yamato''.
Although the F2As and SB2Us were already obsolete, they were the only aircraft available to the Marine Corps at the time.
The raid, while militarily insignificant, was a shock to the Japanese and showed the existence of a gap in the defenses around the Japanese home islands as well as the accessibility of Japanese territory to American bombers.
This was a result of the attacks from Midway, as well as of the morning flight leader's recommendation of a second strike.
After receiving medical care, at least one of these sailors cooperated during interrogation and provided intelligence.
Nimitz also hurriedly recalled Rear Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher's task force, including the carrier ''Yorktown'', from the South West Pacific Area.
Senior Navy and Bureau of Ordnance officers never questioned why half a dozen torpedoes, released so close to the Japanese carriers, produced no results.
Yamamoto reasoned that another air attack on the main U.S.
For instance, cryptanalysis made possible the shooting down of Admiral Yamamoto's airplane in 1943.
Dead aboard the destroyers ''Tanikaze'' (11), ''Arashi'' (1), ''Kazagumo'' (1) and the fleet oiler ''Akebono Maru'' (10) made up the remaining 23 casualties.
Torpedo after torpedo either missed by running directly under the target, prematurely exploded, or struck targets with textbook right angle hits (sometimes with an audible clang) and failed to explode.
More carrier crew members were trained in damage-control and firefighting techniques, although the losses later in the war of ''Shōkaku'', '''', and especially '''' suggest that there were still problems in this area.
Parshall and Tully have stated that the heavy losses in veteran aircrew (110, just under 25% of the aircrew embarked on the four carriers), were not crippling to the Japanese naval air corps as a whole; the Japanese navy had 2,000 carrier-qualified aircrew at the start of the Pacific war.
The ship was remarkably intact for a vessel that had sunk in 1942; much of the original equipment and even the original paint scheme were still visible.
News of the two strikes, with the reports each had sunk an American carrier (actually both strikes had damaged, but not sunk, ''Yorktown''), greatly improved morale in the Japanese carrier task force.
Luring the American aircraft carriers into a trap and occupying Midway was part of an overall "barrier" strategy to extend Japan's defensive perimeter, in response to the Doolittle air raid on Tokyo.
He then left Halsey's Chief of Staff, Captain Miles Browning, to work out the details and oversee the launch.
First, they kept the Japanese carriers off balance and unable to prepare and launch their own counterstrike.
Spruance knew the United States had won a great victory, but he was still unsure of what Japanese forces remained and was determined to safeguard both Midway and his carriers.
Replacement pilots were pushed through an abbreviated training regimen in order to meet the short-term needs of the fleet.
Over the following two days, first Midway and then Spruance's carriers launched several strikes against the stragglers.
In reality, the ships sighted by ''Tambor'' were the detachment of four cruisers and two destroyers Yamamoto had sent to bombard Midway.
By 1942 the United States was already three years into a shipbuilding program mandated by the Second Vinson Act, intended to make the navy larger than all the Axis navies combined, plus the British and French navies, which it was feared might fall into Axis hands.
Admiral Nimitz had one priceless advantage: US cryptanalysts had partially broken the Japanese Navy's JN-25b code.
This was in the context as referenced above, of mistaken criticism of submariner performance for severe ineffectiveness of navy torpedoes, already reported as technical by submariners, but unaddressed until 1943.
McClusky's decision to continue the search and his judgment, in the opinion of Admiral Chester Nimitz, "decided the fate of our carrier task force and our forces at Midway&nbsp;..." All three American dive-bomber squadrons (VB-6, VS-6 and VB-3) arrived almost simultaneously at the perfect time, locations and altitudes to attack.
Japan had a new codebook, but its introduction had been delayed, enabling HYPO to read messages for several crucial days; the new code, which would take several days to be cracked, came into use on 24 May, but the important breaks had already been made.
Japanese strategic scouting arrangements prior to the battle were also in disarray.
American carrier aircraft had difficulty locating the target, despite the positions they had been given.
Approximately one hour later, ''Hiryū's'' second attack wave, consisting of ten B5Ns and six escorting A6Ms, arrived over the ''Yorktown''; the repair efforts had been so effective that the Japanese pilots assumed that ''Yorktown'' must be a different, undamaged carrier.
The Battle of Midway has often been called "the turning point of the Pacific".
Midway was not especially important in the larger scheme of Japan's intentions, but the Japanese felt the Americans would consider Midway a vital outpost of Pearl Harbor and would therefore be compelled to defend it vigorously.
This late afternoon strike narrowly missed detecting Yamamoto's main body and failed to score hits on a straggling Japanese destroyer.
This meant that Midway was outside the effective range of almost all of the American aircraft stationed on the main Hawaiian islands.
The other carrier was not sighted.
Five torpedo bombers and two fighters were shot down in this attack.
At about the same time as this change of course, ''Tambor'' was sighted and during maneuvers designed to avoid a submarine attack,  and  collided, inflicting serious damage on ''Mogami''s bow.
Furthermore, the American air groups had suffered considerable losses, including most of their torpedo bombers.
Japan's heavy surface forces were intended to destroy whatever elements of the U.S. fleet might come to Midway's defense once Nagumo's carriers had weakened them sufficiently for a daylight gun duel; this was typical of the battle doctrine of most major navies at the time.
These included 6 Grumman Avengers, detached to Midway from the USS ''Hornet''s VT-8 (Midway was the first combat mission for the VT-8 airmen, and the combat debut of the TBF), Marine Scout-Bombing Squadron 241 (VMSB-241), consisting of 11 SB2U-3s and 16 SBDs, plus 4 USAAF B-26s of the 18th Reconnaissance and 69th Bomb Squadrons, armed with torpedoes, and 15 B-17s of the 31st, 72nd and 431st Bomb Squadrons.
Two enlisted men from ''Mikuma'' were rescued from a life raft on 9 June by  and brought to Pearl Harbor.
Spruance ordered the striking aircraft to proceed to target immediately, rather than waste time waiting for the strike force to assemble, since neutralizing enemy carriers was the key to the survival of his own task force.
Although the carrier  escaped the battle undamaged, she had lost almost half her air group, and was in port in Kure awaiting replacement planes and pilots.
As a result, Japanese naval air groups as a whole progressively deteriorated during the war while their American adversaries continued to improve.
The main airfield at Guadalcanal was named after him in August 1942.
Soon after being spotted, ''Hiryū'' sank.
As soon as ''Tambor'' returned to port, Spruance had Murphy relieved of duty and reassigned to a shore station, citing his confusing contact report, poor torpedo shooting during his attack run and general lack of aggression, especially as compared to ''Nautilus'', the oldest of the 12 boats at Midway and the only one which had successfully placed a torpedo on target (albeit a dud).
It required the careful and timely coordination of multiple battle groups over hundreds of miles of open sea.
Spruance judged that the need to throw something at the enemy as soon as possible was greater than the need to coordinate the attack by aircraft of different types and speeds (fighters, bombers, and torpedo bombers).
A second attempt at reconnaissance, using four-engine H8K "Emily" flying boats to scout Pearl Harbor prior to the battle and detect whether the American carriers were present, part of Operation K, was thwarted when Japanese submarines assigned to refuel the search aircraft discovered that the intended refueling point—a hitherto deserted bay off French Frigate Shoals—was now occupied by American warships, because the Japanese had carried out an identical mission in March.
Making no attempt to pull out of its run, the aircraft narrowly missed crashing directly into the carrier's bridge, which could have killed Nagumo and his command staff.
On 13 September 2000, Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt designated the lands and waters of Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge as the Battle of Midway National Memorial.
Without fighter escort, all 15 TBD Devastators of VT-8 were shot down without being able to inflict any damage, with Ensign George H. Gay, Jr., the only survivor.
Admiral Fletcher, obliged to abandon the derelict ''Yorktown'' and feeling he could not adequately command from a cruiser, ceded operational command to Spruance.
In addition, surviving pilots from USS ''Lexington'', under the command of ''Lexington'''s Lieutenant Commander John S. "Jimmy" Thach, were also assigned to ''Yorktown''.
Under heavy anti-aircraft fire, they dropped their bombs.
Spruance once again withdrew to the east to refuel his destroyers and rendezvous with the carrier ''Saratoga'', which was ferrying much-needed replacement aircraft.
After expanding the war in the Pacific to include Western outposts, the Japanese Empire had attained its initial strategic goals quickly, taking the Philippines, Malaya, Singapore, and the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia); the latter, with its vital oil resources, was particularly important to Japan.
Waldron's squadron sighted the enemy carriers and began attacking at 09:20, followed by Torpedo Squadron 6 (VT-6, from ''Enterprise'') whose Wildcat fighter escorts also ran low on fuel and had to turn back at 09:40.
These efforts continued and were expanded throughout the war in both the Pacific and Atlantic theaters.
Using advanced renavigation techniques in conjunction with the ship's log of the submarine USS ''Nautilus'', the expedition located a large piece of wreckage, subsequently identified as having come from the upper hangar deck of ''Kaga''.
VT-3 targeted ''Hiryū'', which was hemmed in by ''Sōryū'', ''Kaga'', and ''Akagi'', but achieved no hits.
Only Emperor Hirohito and the highest Navy command personnel were accurately informed of the carrier and pilot losses.
''Yorktown''s partially depleted air group was rebuilt using whatever planes and pilots could be found.
These comprised two squadrons each of dive bombers and torpedo bombers.
Meanwhile, salvage efforts on ''Yorktown'' were encouraging, and she was taken in tow by .
The U.S. did consider Midway vital; after the battle, establishment of a U.S. submarine base on Midway allowed submarines operating from Pearl Harbor to refuel and re-provision, extending their radius of operations by .
Successes were numerous and significant.
The 10 F4Fs from ''Hornet'' ran out of fuel and had to ditch.
Also, by this time Spruance's destroyers were critically low on fuel.
Towards the end of the day he launched a search-and-destroy mission to seek out any remnants of Nagumo's carrier force.
Osmus was held on ''Arashi''; O'Flaherty and Gaido on the cruiser ''Nagara'' (or destroyer ''Makigumo'', sources vary); all three were interrogated, and then killed by being tied to water-filled kerosene cans and thrown overboard to drown.
In accordance with Japanese carrier doctrine at the time, Admiral Nagumo had kept half of his aircraft in reserve.
The execution of Ensign Wesley Osmus in this manner was apparently ordered by ''Arashi'''s captain, Watanabe Yasumasa (if Watanabe had survived the war (he died in December 1943), he would have likely been tried as a war criminal).
In the time it took Japan to build three carriers, the U.S. Navy commissioned more than two dozen fleet and light fleet carriers, and numerous escort carriers.
At the same time he launched his 8 search aircraft (one from the heavy cruiser  launched 30 minutes late).
Repairs continued even as she sortied, with work crews from the repair ship , herself damaged in the attack on Pearl Harbor six months earlier, still aboard.
All remained temporarily afloat, as none had suffered damage below the waterline, other than the rudder damage to ''Akagi'' caused by the near miss close astern.
Since early 1942, the US had been decoding messages stating that there would soon be an operation at objective "AF".
Lieutenant Clarence E. Dickinson, part of McClusky's group, dove on the ''Kaga'':
Despite the heavy losses, the Japanese believed that they could scrape together enough aircraft for one more strike against what was believed to be the only remaining American carrier.
''Hammann'' broke in two and sank with the loss of 80 lives, mostly due to her own depth charges exploding.
This was one of the carriers from Task Force 16.
There were few casualties aboard, since most of the crew had already been evacuated, but a third torpedo from this salvo struck the destroyer , which had been providing auxiliary power to ''Yorktown''.
During the Battle of the Coral Sea one month earlier,  had been sunk and  damaged so severely that the Japanese believed she too had been lost.
A few TBDs managed to get within a few ship-lengths range of their targets before dropping their torpedoes—close enough to be able to strafe the enemy ships and force the Japanese carriers to make sharp evasive maneuvers—but all of their torpedoes either missed or failed to explode.
Nagumo was now in a quandary.
One of the bombs landed near the bridge, killing Captain Jisaku Okada and most of the ship's senior officers.
A miscommunication caused both of the squadrons to dive at the ''Kaga''.
A picket line of Japanese submarines was late getting into position (partly because of Yamamoto's haste), which let the American carriers reach their assembly point northeast of Midway (known as "Point Luck") without being detected.
The few aircraft on the Japanese flight decks at the time of the attack were either defensive fighters or, in the case of ''Sōryū'', fighters being spotted to augment the Combat Air Patrol.
Unescorted bombers headed off to attack the Japanese carriers, their fighter escorts remaining behind to defend Midway.
Unaware of the exact location of Yamamoto's "Main Body" (a persistent problem since the time PBYs had first sighted the Japanese), Spruance was forced to assume the "four large ships" reported by ''Tambor'' represented the main invasion force and so he moved to block it, while staying  northeast of Midway.
Much of Yamamoto's planning, coinciding with the general feeling among the Japanese leadership at the time, was based on a gross misjudgement of American morale, which was believed to be debilitated from the string of Japanese victories in the preceding months.
Despite efforts to get ''Saratoga'' (which had been undergoing repairs on the American West Coast) ready for the coming engagement, the need to resupply and assemble sufficient escorts meant that she was not able to reach Midway until after the battle.
The  was a decisive naval battle in the Pacific Theater of World War II.
Another 35 crewmen from ''Hiryu'' were taken from a lifeboat by  on 19 June after being spotted by an American search plane.
Instead, Yamamoto selected Midway, a tiny atoll at the extreme northwest end of the Hawaiian Island chain, approximately  from Oahu.
The carriers had to launch into the wind, so the light southeasterly breeze would require them to steam away from the Japanese at high speed.
At 06:20, Japanese carrier aircraft bombed and heavily damaged the U.S. base.
Fletcher, upon completing his own scouting flights, followed suit at 08:00 from ''Yorktown''.
Captain Richard E. Fleming, a U.S. Marine Corps aviator, was killed while executing a glide bomb run on ''Mikuma'' and was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor.
This information was in Yamamoto's hands prior to the battle.
The initial Japanese attack did not succeed in neutralizing Midway: American bombers could still use the airbase to refuel and attack the Japanese invasion force, and most of Midway's land-based defenses were intact.
Poor discipline caused many of the Japanese bombers to ditch their bombs and attempt to dogfight intercepting F4Fs.
Despite ''Hiryū'' being defended by a strong cover of more than a dozen Zero fighters, the attack by ''Enterprise'' and orphaned ''Yorktown'' aircraft launched from ''Enterprise'' was successful: four, possibly five bombs hit ''Hiryū'', leaving her ablaze and unable to operate aircraft.
The Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard worked around the clock, and in 72 hours she was restored to a battle-ready state, judged good enough for two or three weeks of operations, as Nimitz required.
307 Americans had been killed.
The IJA wished to occupy the western Aleutians to place the Japanese home islands out of range of U.S. land-based bombers based in Alaska.
At 02:15 on the night of 5/6 June, Commander John Murphy's , lying  west of Midway, made the second of the submarine force's two major contributions to the battle's outcome, although its impact was heavily blunted by Murphy himself.
VT-6 lost 10 of their 14 Devastators, and 10 of ''Yorktown's'' VT-3's 12 Devastators were shot down with no hits to show for their effort, thanks in part to the abysmal performance of their unimproved Mark 13 torpedoes.
Nine B-17s took off from Midway at 12:30 for the first air attack.
Another bomb exploded under water very close astern; the resulting geyser bent the flight deck upward "in grotesque configurations" and caused crucial rudder damage.
The two squadrons from ''Enterprise'' were running low on fuel because of the time spent looking for the enemy.
