In the four layers of sub-soil along the foundation of the Gothic cathedral (in the "apse of the cathedral" area) a 2-metre depth was found of old objects from the end of the 1st century—in particular sigillated Gallic ceramics from Montans imitating Italian styles, thin-walled bowls, and fragments of amphorae.
Modern industry—metallurgy and chemicals—are established to take advantage of procurement opportunities and sea shipments through the harbour.
Coming from upstream on the Adour there is the A63 bridge, then the Saint-Frédéric bridge which carries the D 810, then the railway bridge that replaced the old Eiffel iron bridge, the Saint-Esprit bridge, and finally the Grenet bridge.
The houses lining the Nive are examples of Basque architecture, with half-timbering and shutters in the national colours of red and green.
The commune was part of the Basque province of Labourd.
The Nive divides Bayonne into Grand Bayonne and Petit Bayonne with five bridges between the two, both quarters still being backed by Vauban's walls.
This Roman settlement was strategic as it allowed the monitoring of the trans-Pyrenean roads and of local people rebellious to the Roman power.
In the 16th century the king's engineers, under the direction of Louis de Foix, were dispatched to rearrange the course of the Adour by creating an estuary to maintain the river bed.
Bayonne is in the Diocese of Bayonne, Lescar and Oloron, with a Suffragan bishop since 2002 under the Archdiocese of Bordeaux.
In certain cases the element ''-onne'' follows an Indo-European theme: ''*ud-r/n'' (Greek ''húdōr'' giving hydro, Gothic ''watt'' meaning "water") hence ''*udnā'' meaning "water" giving ''unna'' then ''onno'' in the glossary of Vienne.
They brought with them chocolate and the recipe for its preparation.
The Bayonnaises became carriers of Bordeaux wines and other south-western products like resin, ham, and woad to England.
It is home to a wooden ''Flight into Egypt'' sculpture.
It also occupies part of communes of Anglet and Boucau in Pyrenees-Atlantiques and Tarnos in Landes.
Named ''Lapurdum'', the name became the name of the province of ''Labourd''.
The climate of Bayonne is relatively similar to that of its neighbour Biarritz, described below, with fairly heavy rainfall; The oceanic climate is due to the proximity of the Atlantic Ocean.
This toponymic type evoking a river traversing a locality is common.
Bayonne was, in 2014, a commune with over 45,000 inhabitants, the heart of the urban area of Bayonne and of the ''Agglomeration Côte Basque-Adour'' which includes Anglet and Biarritz.
Bayonnaise industry at that time was dominated by shipbuilding: wood (oak, beech, chestnut from the Pyrenees, and pine from Landes) being overabundant.
The occupation of the hill that dominates this narrowing of the valley developed through a gradual spread across the lowlands by building embankments and the aggradation from flood soil.
The loss of trade with the English and the silting up of the river as well as the movement of the city towards the north weakened it.
In addition a line further north served Anglet, operated by the ''Chemin de fer Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz'' company from 1877 to 1953.
Bayonne is now the centre of certain craft industries that were once widespread, including the manufacture of ''makilas'', traditional Basque walking-sticks.
On 11 November 1518 plague was present in Bayonne to the point that in 1519 the city council moved to the district of Brindos (Berindos at the time) in Anglet.
The museum is one of the best galleries in south west France and has paintings by Edgar Degas, El Greco, Sandro Botticelli, and Francisco Goya, among others.
In 1951 the Lacq gas field was discovered whose extracted sulphur and associated oil are shipped from the port of Bayonne.
It is served by TGV, Intercités, Lunéa, and TER Aquitaine trains (to Hendaye, Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, Dax, Bordeaux, Pau, and Tarbes).
During the sporadic conflicts that troubled the French countryside from the mid 17th century, Bayonne peasants were short of powder and projectiles.
Until 1868 the bridge had a moving span near the left bank.
In 1454 Charles VII created a separate judicial district: the ''Seneschal of Lannes'' a "single subdivision of Guyenne during the English period" which had jurisdiction over a wide area including Bayonne, Dax and Saint-Sever and which exercised civil justice, criminal jurisdiction within the competence of the district councilors.
A bylaw regulating the ''encierro'' is dated 1283: cows, oxen and bulls are released each year in the streets of Petit Bayonne during the summer festivals.
The meeting in 1565 between Catherine de Medici and the envoy of Philip II: the Duke of Alba, is known as the ''Interview of Bayonne''.
Bayonne is also a cultural capital, a city with strong Basque and Gascon influences and a rich historical past.
For 65 years the autonomous commune was part of the department of Landes.
After the deposit of the lowest alluvial terrace ( high at Grand Bayonne), the course of the Adour became fixed in its lower reaches.
"It has perhaps been lost from sight that many urban place names in France, from north to south, came from the element ''Bay-'' or ''Bayon-'' such as: Bayons, Bayonville, Bayonvillers and pose the unusual problem of whether they are Basque or Gascon"
However, the most ancient form of Bayonne: ''Baiona'', clearly indicates a feminine or a theme of ''-a'' whereas this is not the case for Béon or Bayon.
Like many cities at the time, in 1215 Bayonne obtained the award of a municipal charter and was emancipated from feudal powers.
The construction covered 6 to 10 hectares according to several authors.
Similarly, on the right bank of the Nive, the heights of Château-Neuf (Mocoron Hill) met the latest advance of the plateau of Saint-Pierre-d'Irube (height ).
The golden age of the city ended in the 15th century with the loss of trade with England and the silting of the port of Bayonne created by the movement of the course of the Adour to the north.
Grand Bayonne is the commercial and civic hub, with small pedestrianised streets packed with shops, plus the cathedral and Hôtel de Ville.
The Fabrique Alza just outside the city is known for its ''palas'', bats used in ''pelota'', the traditional Basque sport.
Fertilizers are a traffic of 500,000 tons per year and sulphur from Lacq, albeit in sharp decline, is 400,000 tons.
It is the property of the Aquitaine region who manage and control the site.
Rains on the Basque coast are rarely persistent except during winter storms.
To the south the last bend of the Nive widens near the Saint-Léon hills.
In 1451 the city was taken by the Crown of France after the Hundred Years' War.
Novempopulania was renamed Vasconia and then Gascony after a Germanic deformation (resulting from the Visigoth and Frankish invasions).
It was expanded in 1912 to facilitate the movement of horse-drawn carriages and motor vehicles.
There are also the Maurice Ravel Conservatory of Music, Dance, and Dramatic Art and the art school of the urban community of Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz.
Bayonne is located in the south-west of France on the western border between Basque Country and Gascony.
"Tissier, director of the ''Crédit Municipal'', was arrested and imprisoned under suspicion of forgery and misappropriation of public funds.
The city has developed at the confluence of the Adour and Nive  from the ocean.
Many nationalities were represented, particularly the Spanish, the Portuguese, the Czechs, and the Poles
Five health clinics, providing a total of more than 500 beds, each employ 120 to 170 staff.
Bayonne is connected to many cities in the western half of the department such as Saint-Jean-de-Luz and Saint-Palais by the Pyrenees-Atlantiques long distance coach network of ''Transport 64'' managed by the General Council.
On the right bank of the Adour the heights of Castelnau (today the citadel) with an altitude of , and Fort (today Saint-Esprit) with an altitude of  rise above the Barthes of the Adour, the Nive, Bourgneuf, Saint-Frédéric, Sainte-Croix, Aritxague, and Pontots.
Documentation on Bayonne for the period from the High Middle Ages are virtually nonexistent.
At the back of Petit Bayonne is the Château Neuf, among the ramparts.
The Port took on an industrial look but its slow decline seemed inexorable in the 19th century.
During the second half of the 20th century many housing estates were built forming new districts on the periphery and the city was extended to form a conurbation with Anglet and Biarritz: this agglomeration became the heart of a vast Basque-Landes urban area.
A centre for engagement of foreign volunteers was established in August 1914 in Bayonne.
On 5 April 1942 the Allies made a landing attempt in Bayonne but after a barge penetrated the Adour with great difficulty, the operation was canceled.
In 1523 Marshal Odet of Foix, Viscount of Lautrec resisted the Spaniards under Philibert of Chalon in the service of Charles V and lifted the siege of Bayonne.
The bridge was finally called Saint-Esprit.
Metallurgical products movement are more than one million tons per year and maize exports to Spain vary between 800,000 and 1 million tons.
The walls nearby have been opened to visitors.
The soldiers of Wellington's army who died besieging the citadelle in 1813 are buried in the nearby English Cemetery, visited by Queen Victoria and other British dignitaries when staying in Biarritz.
The inhabitants of the commune are known as ''Bayonnais'' or ''Bayonnaises''.
It developed at the confluence of the Adour and its tributary on the left bank, the Nive, 6&nbsp;km from the Atlantic coast.
Bayonne was traversed by Route nationale 10 connecting Paris to Hendaye but this is now downgraded to a departmental road D810.
It is an important part of the Basque ''Bayonne-San Sebastián Eurocity'' and it plays the role of economic capital of the Adour basin.
''Unna'' therefore would refer to the Adour.
In the 17th century the city was fortified by Vauban.
Bayonne was then an important military base.
Banks, cleaning companies (Onet, 170 employees), and security (Brink's, 100 employees) are also major employers in the commune, as is urban transport which employs nearly 200 staff.
The history of Bayonne proper started in 1056 when Raymond II the Younger, Bishop of Bazas, had the mission to build the Church of Bayonne
The airport of Biarritz-Anglet-Bayonne had nearly 1.1 million passengers in 2013.
In fact they never hesitated to use violence and criminal sanctions for keeping order in the name of the "public good".
Bayonne has few such industries, as indicated in the previous tables.
In 1130 the King of Aragon Alfonso the Battler besieged the city without success.
Basquisation of the plains region was too weak against the advance of romanization.
adds Pierre Hourmat.
Construction of and modifications to the defences of the city also developed to protect the new districts.
Downstream from this point the river has shaped a large bed in the sand dunes creating a significant bottleneck at the confluence.
The Adour was then captured by the gaves and this system, together with the Nive, led to the emergence of a new alignment of the lower Adour and the Adour-Nive confluence.
In the absence of accurate objective data there is some credence to the probable existence of a fishing village on the site in a period prior to ancient times.
Bayonne is also served by services from the Landes departmental network, ''XL'R''.
It is the ancient road used by pilgrims descending to Bayonne then either along the coast on the ''Way of Soulac'' or because they landed there from England, for example, to join the French Way as soon as possible in Pamplona.
During the Second World War Bayonne was occupied by the 3rd SS Panzer Division Totenkopf from 27 June 1940 to 23 August 1944.
He responded well, with some astonishment, to his persistent interview.
Bayonne is known for its fine chocolates, produced in the town for 500 years, and Bayonne ham, a cured ham seasoned with peppers from nearby Espelette.
Monseigneur Marc Aillet has been the bishop of this diocese since 15 October 2008.
Now bayonnaise can refer to a particular mayonnaise flavoured with the Espelette chillis.
A dozen bullfights are held each year, attracting the biggest names in bullfighting.
They often take the form of intense thunderstorms of short duration.
It overcame the disputes in fixing the Franco-Spanish border in the area extending from the mouth of the Bidassoa to the border between Navarre and Aragon.
The city offers free bicycles on loan.
From the 21st century, a census of communes with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants is held every five years, unlike larger communes that have a sample survey every year.
Above this the alluvial plain extends for nearly  towards both Tercis-les-Bains and Peyrehorade, and is characterized by swampy meadows called ''barthes'' which are influenced by floods and high tides.
Izarra, the liqueur made in bright green or yellow colours, is distilled locally.
Bayonne turned instead to the steel industry with the forges of the Adour.
The hospitals for all the Basque Coast are mainly established in Bayonne (the main site of Saint-Léon and Cam-de-Prats) and also in Saint-Jean-de-Luz which has several clinics.
According to François Lafitte Houssat, "... a municipal ordinance of 1327 provided for the imprisonment of any quarrellsome woman of bad character in an iron cage dropped into the waters of the Nive River from the bridge.
He had issued thousands of false bonds in the name of ''Crédit Municipal'' ..."
Nearby is the Château Vieux, some of which dates back to the 12th century, where the governors of the city were based, including the English Black Prince.
a set of hills overlooking a swampy lowland.
The course of the Adour was changed in 1578 under the direction of Louis de Foix and the river returned to its former mouth, returning business lost to Bayonne lost business for over a hundred years.
The archaeological discoveries of October and November 1995 provided a shred of evidence to support this projection.
It now has special exhibitions on Basque agriculture, seafaring and ''pelota'', handicrafts and Basque history and way of life.
The current arena, opened in 1893, is the largest in South-west France with more than 10,000 seats.
Bayonne has the oldest French bullfighting tradition.
The Chamber of Commerce was founded in 1726.
The official publication in 1273 of a Coutume unique to the city, remained in force for five centuries until the separation of Bayonne from Labourd.
In that same century, Vauban was charged by Louis XIV to fortify the city.
This capture has been dated to the early Quaternary (80,000 years ago).
The Treaty of Bayonne was concluded on 2 December 1856.
The district of Saint-Esprit developed anyway thanks to the arrival of a Jewish population fleeing the Spanish Inquisition.
At the beginning of the 16th century Labourd saw the emergence of the plague.
At the time that Catholics and Protestants tore each other apart in parts of the kingdom of France, Bayonne seemed relatively untouched by these troubles.
It was at Château-Vieux that the ransom demand for the release of Francis I, taken prisoner after his defeat at the Battle of Pavia, was gathered.
The Siege of Bayonne marked the end of the period with the surrender of the Napoleonic troops of Marshal Jean-de-Dieu Soult who were defeated by the coalition led by Wellington on 5 May 1814.
It benefits greatly from the natural gas field of Lacq to which it is connected by pipeline.
The construction was under the authority of Raymond III of Martres, Bishop of Bayonne from 1122 to 1125, combined with Viscount Bertrand for the Romanesque cathedral, the rear of which can still be seen today, and the first wooden bridge across the Adour extending the Mayou bridge over the Nive, which inaugurated the heyday of Bayonne.
The Gare de Bayonne is located in the Saint-Esprit district and is an important station on the Bordeaux-Irun railway.
An iron fist from the city leaders did not appear to be unknown.
The Jewish community of Bayonne is old—it consists of different groups of fugitives from Navarre and Portugal who established at SAint-Esprit-lès-Bayonne after the expulsion of Jews from Spain in 1492 and Portugal in 1496.
A Roman castrum dating to the end of the 4th century has been proven as a fortified place of Novempopulania.
However it is possible to see a pre-Celtic suffix ''-ona'' in the name of the Charente (''Karantona'' in 875) or the Charentonne (''Carentona'' in 1050).
In July 1515 the city of Bayonne was "prohibited to welcome people from plague-stricken places" and on 21 October, "we inhibit and prohibit all peasants and residents of this city ... to go Parish Bidart ... because of the contagion of the plague".
The Saint-Esprit bridge connects the Saint-Esprit district to the Amiral-Bergeret dock just upstream of the confluence with the river Nive.
Bayonne occupies a territory characterized by a flat relief to the west and to the north towards the Landes forest, tending to slightly raise towards the south and east.
The Musée Bonnat began with a large collection bequeathed by the local-born painter Léon Bonnat.
The Musée Basque is the finest ethnographic museum of the entire Basque Country.
In 1854 the railway arrived from Paris bringing many tourists eager to enjoy the beaches of Biarritz.
In 1808 at the Château of Marracq the act of abdication of the Spanish king Charles IV in favour of Napoleon was signed under the "friendly pressure" of the Emperor.
The most direct line, that of the ''Tramway Bayonne-Lycée–Biarritz'' was operated from 1888 to 1948.
Numerous traces of human occupation have been found in the Bayonne region from the Middle Paleolithic especially in the discoveries at Saint-Pierre-d'Irube, a neighbouring locality.
This was the beginning of the Stavisky Affair which, together with other scandals and political crises, led to the Paris riots of 6 February 1934.
The average winter temperature is around 8&nbsp;°C and is around 20&nbsp;°C in summer.
The tourist infrastructure in the surrounding urban area of Bayonne complements the local supply with around 5800 rooms spread over nearly 200 hotels and 86 campsites offering over 14,000 beds.
It is said by some that Bayonne is the birthplace of mayonnaise, supposedly a corruption of ''Bayonnaise'', the French adjective describing the city's people and produce.
It has regular connections to Paris-Orly, Paris-CDG, Lyon, Nice, Geneva, and London Stansted and from March to October 2014 had connections with: Marseille, Strasbourg, Lille, Brussels South Charleroi Airport, Dublin, Stockholm-Skavsta, Stockholm-Arlanda, London-Gatwick, Copenhagen, Oslo, and Helsinki.
They often wavered between Catholicism and Protestantism but always wanted to ensure the unity and prestige of the city.
In 2011 47.8% of households were not taxable.
From 1120 new districts were created under population pressure.
Before this capture the Nive had deposited pebbles from the Mindel glaciation of medium to large sizes that slowed erosion of the hills causing the bottleneck at Bayonne.
In 1846 the Central Consistory moved to Saint-Esprit which was integrated with Bayonne in 1857.
Bayonne is located at the intersection of the A63 autoroute (Bordeaux-Spain) and the D1 extension of the A64 autoroute (towards Toulouse).
It transported Gestapo Customs agents and some elements of the ''Feldgendarmerie''.
The Pont Saint-Esprit connects Petit Bayonne with the Quartier Saint-Esprit across the Adour, where the massive Citadelle and the railway station are located.
When Labourd was created in 1023 Bayonne was the capital and the Viscount resided there.
On 14 December 2015 Bayonne had 10 kindergartens, 22 elementary or primary schools (12 public and 10 private primary schools including two ikastolas).
2 public colleges (Albert Camus and Marracq colleges), 5 private colleges (La Salle Saint-Bernard, Saint Joseph, Saint-Amand, Notre-Dame and Largenté) which meet the criteria of the first cycle of second degree studies.
In 1814 Bayonne and its surroundings were the scene of fighting between the Napoleonic troops and the Spanish-Anglo-Portuguese coalition led by the Duke of Wellington: the city then underwent its final siege.
In 1023 Bayonne was the capital of Labourd and, in the 12th century, extended to and beyond the Nive.
The Izarra liqueur company set up a distillery in 1912 at Quai Amiral-Bergeret and has long symbolized the economic wealth of Bayonne.
There are other details and sculptures of note, although much was destroyed in the Revolution.
According to Eugene Goyheneche the name ''Baiona'' designated the city, the port, and the cathedral while that of ''Lapurdum'' was only a territorial designation.
In the "southern sector" near the cloister door there were objects from the second half of the 1st century as well as coins from the first half of the 3rd century.
It opened in 1922 but has been closed for a decade recently for refurbishment.
Trade was the wealth of the city in the 18th century but suffered greatly in the 19th century, severely sanctioned by conflicts with Spain, its historic trading partner for the region.
The Nive has played a leading role in the development of the Bayonne river system in recent geological time by the formation of alluvial terraces that form the sub-soil of Bayonne beneath the surface accumulations of silt and aeolian sands.
From 1611 to 1612 the college Principal of Bayonne was a man of 26 years old with a future: Cornelius Jansen known as ''Jansénius'', the future Bishop of Ypres.
The port also receives Ford and General Motors vehicles from Spain and Portugal and wood both tropical and from Landes.
It could also be an augmentative Gascon from the original Latin radical ''Baia-'' with the suffix ''-ona' in the sense of "vast expanse of water" or a name derived from the Basque ''bai'' meaning "river" and ''ona'' meaning "good", hence "good river".
The proposal by Eugene Goyheneche repeated by Manex Goyhenetche and supported by Jean-Baptiste Orpustan is ''bai una'', "the place of the river" or ''bai ona'' "hill by the river"—''Ibai'' means "river" in Basque and ''muinoa'' means "hill".
The port also receives refined oil products from the Total oil refinery at Donges (800,000 tons per year).
On 21 August 1944, after blowing up twenty ships in port, German troops withdrew.
On 11 April 1518 the plague raged in Saint-Jean-de-Luz and the city of Bayonne "inhibited and prohibited for all peasants and city inhabitants and other foreigners to maintain relationships at the location and Parish of Saint-Jean-de-Luz where people have died of the plague".
In 1845 the old bridge, originally made ?
They attached the long hunting knives in the barrels of their muskets and that way they fashioned makeshift spears later called ''bayonets''.
The river discharged in the right place to the Ocean on 28 October 1578.}
In 2013 549 new establishments were created in Bayonne including 406 Sole proprietorships.
The third exit is the D1 / A64 via the Mousserolles interchange (exit  Bayonne Mousserolles) which links the district of the same name and also serves the neighbouring communes of Mouguerre and Saint-Pierre-d'Irube.
The termination ''-onne'' in ''Bayonne'' can come from many in hydronyms ''-onne'' or toponyms derived from that.
Airport management is carried out by the joint association for the development and operation of the airport of Biarritz-Anglet-Bayonne, which includes the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Bayonne Basque Country, the agglomeration of Côte Basque-Adour, the departments of Pyrénées-Atlantiques and Landes, and the commune of Saint-Jean-de-Luz.
On the morning of 23 December 1933, sub-prefect Anthelme received Gustave Tissier, the director of the ''Crédit Municipal de Bayonne''.
It was constructed in the 12th and 13th centuries.
Over time, the "Seneschal of the Sword" which was at Dax lost any role other than protocol and Bayonne, along with Dax and Saint-Sever, became the de facto seat of a separate Seneschal under the authority of a "lieutenant-general of the Seneschal".
In May 1462 King Louis XI authorized the holding of two annual fairs by letters patent after signing the Treaty of Bayonne after which it was confirmed by the coutoumes of the inhabitants in July 1472 following the death of Charles de Valois, Duke de Berry, the king's brother.
These same deposits are spread across the barthes.
In 2012 the commune had 45,855 inhabitants.
On the 23rd there was an informal and immediate installation of a "special municipal delegation" by the young deputy prefect Guy Lamassoure representing the Provisional Government of the French Republic which had been established in Algiers since 27 June.
On the 22nd a final convoy of five vehicles passed through the city.
The commune has a police station, a Departmental Gendarmerie, an Autonomous Territorial Brigade of the district gendarmerie, squadron 24/2 of Mobile Gendarmerie and a Tax collection office.
It did not surprise him to see the man unpacking what became the scam of the century.
They are important for plant life now and Bayonne's botanic gardens adjoin the walls on both sides of the Nive.
The Saint-Esprit church was part of a bigger complex built by Louis&nbsp;XI to care for pilgrims to Santiago de Compostela.
Route nationale 117, linking Bayonne to Toulouse has been downgraded to departmental road D817.
The area of the commune is  and its altitude varies between .
The drainage network of the western Pre-Pyrenees evolved mostly from the Quaternary from south-east to northwest oriented east-west.
There was also maritime activity in providing crews for whaling, commercial marine or, and it was often so at a time when it was easy to turn any merchant ship into a warship, the English Royal Navy.
700 Bayonnaises perished in the conflict.
While there were 30,012 jobs in the employment area, against 29,220 in 2006, and the number of employed workers residing in the employment area was 17,667, the indicator of job concentration is 169.9% which means that the employment area offers nearly two jobs to for every available worker.
At its foot lies the famous "Bayonne Sea"—the junction of the two rivers—which may have been about  wide between Saint-Esprit and the Grand Bayonne and totally covered the current location of Bourg-Neuf (in the district of Petit Bayonne).
In addition, the ''Bayon-'' in Bayonville or Bayonvillers in northern France is clearly the personal Germanic name ''Baio''.
The appellative ''unna'' seems to be found in the name of the Garonne (''Garunna'' 1st century; ''Garonna'' 4th century).
In 1177 King Richard separated the Viscounty of Labourd whose capital then became Ustaritz.
