Bears are overwhelmingly solitary and are considered to be the most asocial of all the Carnivora.
Sexual maturity is dependent on body condition, which is in turn dependent upon the food supply available to the growing individual.
With their tremendous physical presence and charisma, they play a prominent role in the arts, mythology, and other cultural aspects of various human societies.
The Italian surname Orsini, the name of a prominent Medieval Aristocratic family, is ultimately derived from Latin ''ursinus'' ("bearlike") and originating as an epithet or sobriquet describing the name-bearer's purported strength.
Bears' nonretractable claws are used for digging, climbing, tearing, and catching prey.
Thus, some Indo-European language groups do not share the same PIE root.
Their ears are rounded.
Polar bears appear to have secondarily re-evolved carnassial-like cheek teeth, as their diets have switched back towards carnivory.
It is unclear whether late-Eocene ursids were also present in Eurasia, although faunal exchange across the Bering land bridge may have been possible during a major sea level low stand as early as the late Eocene (about 37 Mya) and continuing into the early Oligocene.
minimus'': the black bears (including the sun bear, the Asiatic black bear, and the American black bear); and the brown bears (which includes the polar bear).
This sense of smell is used for signalling between bears (either to warn off rivals or detect mates) and for finding food.
Female bears are often successful in driving off males in protection of their cubs, despite being rather smaller.
In the 1970s, this story was adapted into the East German fantasy film ''The Singing Ringing Tree'' and broadcast on British television.
Species of ''Ursavus'' subsequently entered North America, together with ''Amphicynodon'' and ''Cephalogale'', during the early Miocene (21–18 Mya).
The Atlas bear, a subspecies of the brown bear, was the only bear native to Africa.
Bears appear in the canting arms of two cities, Bern and Berlin, both of whose names include "bear".
The single exception is the spectacled bear (''Tremarctos ornatus''); native to South America it inhabits the Andean region.
The subfamily Ursinae experienced a dramatic proliferation of taxa about 5.3–4.5 Mya ago, coincident with major environmental changes; with the first members of the genus ''Ursus'' also appearing around this time.
*The giant panda, which has adopted a diet mainly of bamboo.
Bears use shelters, such as caves and burrows, as their dens; most species occupy their dens during the winter for a long period (up to 100 days) of sleep similar to hibernation.
After killing a bear, the tiger will concentrate its feeding on the bear's fat deposits, such as the back, legs and groin.
Smokey wears a hat similar to one worn by U.S. Forest Service rangers; state police officers in some states wear a similar style, giving rise to the CB slang "bear" or "Smokey" for the highway patrol.
The poaching and international trade of these most threatened populations are prohibited, but still ongoing.
Bears will reach sexual maturity in five to seven years.
Female bears give birth during the hibernation period, and are roused when doing so.
In Russian and other Slavic languages, the word for bear, ''medved'' (медведь), and variants or derivatives, such as Medvedev, are common surnames.
Smell is the principal sense used by bears to find most of their food.
A bear also features prominently in the legend of St. Romedius, who is also said to have tamed one of these animals and had the same bear carry him from his hermitage in the mountains to the city of Trento.
The peoples of China, Japan, and Korea use bears' body parts and secretions (notably their gallbladders and bile) as part of traditional Chinese medicine.
They are generally diurnal, but may be active during the night (nocturnal) or twilight (crepuscular), particularly around humans.
With the exception of courting individuals and mothers with their young, bears are typically solitary animals.
Its original classification by Armand David in 1869 was within the bear genus ''Ursus'', but, in 1870, it was reclassified by Alphonse Milne-Edwards to the raccoon family.
Based on genetic and morphological data, the Ailuropodinae (pandas) were the first to diverge from other living bears about 19 Mya ago, although no fossils of this group have been found before about 5 Mya.
Common characteristics of modern bears include large bodies with stocky legs, long snouts, shaggy hair, plantigrade paws with five nonretractile claws, and short tails.
Around the world, many children have stuffed toys in the form of bears.
Laws have been passed in many areas of the world to protect bears from habitat destruction.
The dental formula for living bears is:
Also among other Native American tribes, bear-related names are attested.
Bears are able to defend a carcass against some comers.
Multiple similarities between the two pandas, including the presence of false thumbs, are thus thought to represent an example of convergent evolution for feeding primarily on bamboo.
The mitochondrial DNA of brown bears of Alaska's ABC Islands is more closely related to polar bears than to brown bears elsewhere in the world.
Head-and-body length can range from  in sun bears to  in large polar and brown bears and shoulder height can range from  to over  in the same species, respectively.
Koalas are often referred to as bears due to their appearance; however, they are marsupials, not bears.
Members of the living lineages of bears diverged from ''Ursavus'' between 15 and 20 Mya ago, likely via the species ''Ursavus elmensis''.
Public perception of bears is often very positive, as people identify with bears due to their omnivorous diets, ability to stand on two legs, and symbolic importance, and support for bear protection is widespread, at least in more affluent societies.
It is likely ancestral to all bears within Ursinae, perhaps aside from the sloth bear.
This competition is the main source of interspecies conflict.
Modern brown bears evolved from ''U.
In Finland, the male personal name Otso is an old poetic name for bear, similar to Kontio.
They distribute their weight toward the hind feet, which makes them look lumbering when they walk.
This genus is probably the direct ancestor to the North American short-faced bears (genus ''Arctodus''), the South American short-faced bears (''Arctotherium''), and the spectacled bears, ''Tremarctos'', represented by both an extinct North American species (''T.
"Ten Bears" (Paruasemana) was the name of a well-known 19th-century chieftain among the Comanche.
The cubs of brown bears, usually born in litters of one to three, will typically stay with the mother for two full seasons.
Also, the very rare Tibetan blue bear is a type of brown bear.
Though the best collection of these is in the church at Brompton, North Yorkshire, their distribution ranges across northern England and southern Scotland, with a scattered few in the north Midlands and single survivals in Wales, Cornwall, and Ireland; a late group is found in the Orkney Islands.
Some exceptional polar bears and Kodiak bears (a brown bear subspecies) have been weighed at  and , respectively.
Bears are found on the continents of North America, South America, Europe, and Asia.
However, both species of black bears and the brown bear can sometimes take large prey, such as ungulates.
Also, "bear", "bruin", or specific types of bears are popular nicknames or mascots for sports teams, including Bayern Munich, Chicago Bears, California Golden Bears, UCLA Bruins, Boston Bruins.
Smokey Bear has become a part of American culture since his introduction in 1944.
The tails of bears are often considered a vestigial feature and can range from .
However, more recent research does not support such a conclusion, and instead places it in its own family Ailuridae, in superfamily Musteloidea along with Mustelidae, Procyonidae, and Mephitidae.
As to which species is the largest depends on whether the assessment is based on which species has the largest individuals (brown bears) or on the largest average size (polar bears), as some races of brown bears are much smaller than polar bears.
They invaded South America (~1 Ma) following formation of the Isthmus of Panama.
With the transition from Yiddish to Hebrew under the influence of Zionism, the Hebrew word for "bear", ''dov'' (דב), was taken up in contemporary Israel and is at present among the commonly used male first names in that country.
Korean people in their mythology identify the bear as their ancestor and symbolic animal.
The bear's courtship period is very brief.
The sloth bear is a modern survivor of one of the earliest lineages to diverge during this radiation event (5.3 Mya); it took on its peculiar morphology, related to its diet of termites and ants, no later than by the early Pleistocene.
They will remain with the mother for about three years, until she enters the next cycle of estrus and drives the cubs off.
Bears possess an excellent sense of smell and, despite their heavy build and awkward gait, are adept runners, climbers, and swimmers.
The most widespread species is the brown bear, which occurs from Western Europe eastwards through Asia to the western areas of North America.
Anthropologists such as Joseph Campbell have regarded this as a common feature in most of the fishing and hunting-tribes.
Although only eight species of bears are extant, they are widespread, appearing in a wide variety of habitats throughout the Northern Hemisphere and partially in the Southern Hemisphere.
There are two significant exceptions to this however:
Similar stories are told of Saint Gall and Saint Columbanus.
This recurrent motif was used by the Church as a symbol of the victory of Christianity over paganism.
The female first name "Ursula", originally derived from a Christian saint's name and common in English- and German-speaking countries, means "little she-bear" (diminutive of Latin ''ursa'').
Evidence of bear worship has been found in early Chinese and Ainu cultures, as well (see Iomante).
The red panda was included within Ursidae in the past.
The sloth bear, though not as specialized as the previous two species, has lost several front teeth usually seen in bears, and developed a long, suctioning tongue to feed on the ants, termites, and other burrowing insects they favour.
The immobilised bear is then killed with a bite to the spinal column.
There is evidence of prehistoric bear worship.
First breeding may be even later in males, where competition for mates may leave younger males without access to females.
The giant panda's taxonomy (subfamily Ailuropodinae) has long been debated.
Bears are classified as caniforms, or doglike carnivorans, with the pinnipeds being their closest living relatives.
Unlike most other members of the Carnivora, bears have relatively undeveloped carnassial teeth, and their teeth are adapted for a diet that includes a significant amount of vegetable matter.
Legends of saints taming bears are common in the Alpine zone.
Regarding warm-blooded animals, bears will typically take small or young animals, as they are easier to catch.
In modern times, the bears' existence has been pressured through the encroachment on their habitats and the illegal trade of bears and bear parts, including the Asian bile bear market.
Some species, particularly the brown bear, may inhabit or seasonally use other areas, such as alpine scrub or tundra.
All bears are physically powerful and are likely capable of fatally attacking a person, but they, for the most part, are shy, are easily frightened and will avoid humans.
This is why the bear (''karhu'') was a greatly respected animal, with several euphemistic names (such as ''otso'', ''mesikämmen,'' and ''kontio'').
This is because of repeated historical interbreeding between polar bears and brown bears on the islands.
File:ShunsenOniguma.jpg|Onikuma from ''Ehon Hyaku Monogatari''
In the Norse settlements of northern England during the 10th century, a type of "hogback" grave cover of a long narrow block of stone, with a shaped apex like the roof beam of a long house, is carved with a muzzled, thus Christianised, bear clasping each gable end.
Bears are generally diurnal, meaning that they are active for the most part during the day.
More than 12,000 bile bears are thought to be kept on farms, for their bile, in China, Vietnam, and South Korea.
In Switzerland, the male first name "Urs" is especially popular, while the name of the canton and city of Bern is derived from ''Bär'', German for bear.
These problems may be the work of only a few bears, but they create a climate of conflict, as farmers and ranchers may perceive all losses as due to bears and advocate the preventive removal of all bears.
The canine teeth are large, and the molar teeth flat and crushing.
Some bears will climb trees to obtain mast (edible vegetative or reproductive parts, such as acorns); smaller species that are more able to climb include a greater amount of this in their diets.
The danger that bears pose is often vastly exaggerated, in part by the human imagination.
File:Theodor Kittelsen-En uheldig bjørnejakt.jpg|"En uheldig bjørnejakt" (An Unfortunate Bear Hunt) by Theodor Kittelsen, 1908
Bear meat must be cooked thoroughly, as it can be infected with ''Trichinella spiralis'', which can cause trichinosis.
*The polar bear, which has adopted a diet mainly of marine mammals to survive in the Arctic.
Adult male Kodiak bears average  compared to an average of  in adult male polar bears, per the ''Guinness Book of World Records''.
This may indicate bears are still in the process of evolving from carnivorous to predominantly herbivorous diets.
During hibernation, the bear's metabolism slows down, its body temperature decreases slightly, and its heart rate slows from a normal value of 55 to just 9 beats per minute.
The Germanic name Bernard (including Bernhardt and other forms) means "bear-brave", "bear-hardy", or "bold bear".
In the binomial name of the brown bear, ''Ursus arctos'', Linnaeus simply combined the Latin and Greek names.
Bears can stand on their hind feet and sit up straight with remarkable balance.
Most bears have diets of more plant than animal matter and are completely opportunistic omnivores.
They are sexually dimorphic with regard to size, with the males being larger.
In the UK, the bear and staff has long featured on the heraldic arms of Warwickshire county.
Some species, such as the polar bear, American black bear, grizzly bear, sloth bear, and brown bear, are dangerous to humans, especially in areas where they have become used to people.
Bears include the most massive terrestrial members of the order Carnivora.
Known to almost all Americans, he and his message, "Only you can prevent forest fires" (updated in 2001 to "Only you can prevent wildfires"), have been a symbol of preserving woodlands.
The tiger is the only predator known to regularly prey on adult bears, including fully grown adults of brown bears, sloth bears, Asiatic black bears, and sun bears.
The earliest members of Ursidae belong to the extinct subfamily Amphicynodontinae, including ''Parictis'' (late Eocene to early middle Miocene, 38–18 Mya) and the slightly younger ''Allocyon'' (early Oligocene, 34–30 Mya), both from North America.
A bear cub called Misha was mascot of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, Soviet Union.
Their earliest fossil representative is ''Plionarctos'' in North America (~&nbsp;10–2 Ma).
All the remaining species are Asian.
minimus'' via ''Ursus etruscus'', which itself is ancestral to both the extinct Pleistocene cave bear and today's brown and polar bears.
It was distributed in North Africa from Morocco to Libya, but has been extinct since around the 1870s.
'''Bears''' are mammals of the family '''Ursidae'''.
Some cultures use bears for food and folk medicine.
The subfamily also includes the younger genera ''Phoberocyon'' (20–15 Mya), and ''Plithocyon'' (15–7 Mya).
Also compared is Hittite '''', the name of a monster or predator.
The IUCN lists six bear species as vulnerable or endangered, and even least concern species, such as the brown bear, are at risk of extirpation in certain countries.
A study of Asiatic black bears in Taiwan found they would consume large numbers of acorns when they were most common, and switch to ungulates at other times of the year.
In recent studies, the majority of DNA analyses suggest that the giant panda has a much closer relationship to other bears and should be considered a member of the family Ursidae.
Modern bears comprise eight species in three subfamilies: Ailuropodinae (monotypic with the giant panda), Tremarctinae (monotypic with the spectacled bear), and Ursinae (containing six species divided into one to three genera, depending on the authority).
The name Beowulf or "bee-wolf" is a kenning for bear, meaning a brave warrior.
File:Corbinian-panel-bear.jpg|According to his hagiography, a bear killed Saint Corbinian's pack horse on the way to Rome, so the saint commanded it to carry his load.
File:BXVI CoA like gfx PioM.svg|The saddled "bear of St. Corbinian" the emblem of Freising, here incorporated in the arms of Pope Benedict XVI
Direct ancestor-descendent relationships between individual species are often fairly well established, with sufficient intermediate forms known to make the precise cut-off between an ancestral and its daughter species subjective.
Species of Ursinae have migrated repeatedly into North America from Eurasia as early as 4 Mya during the early Pliocene.
The Irish family name "McMahon" means "Son of Bear" in Irish.
The Yiddish ''Ber'' is still in use among Orthodox Jewish communities in Israel, the US, and other countries.
The sloth bear of Asia is the most nocturnal of the bears, but this varies by individual, and females with cubs are often diurnal to avoid competition with males and nocturnal predators.
The bear is the national animal of Finland.
Bears have been hunted since prehistoric times for their meat and fur.
They are still quite fast, with the brown bear reaching , although they are still slower than felines and canines.
The fossil record of bears is exceptionally good.
All "medium"-sized bear species (which include the other five extant species) are around the same average weight, with males averaging around  and females averaging around , although it is not uncommon for male American black bears to considerably exceed "average" weights.
Stable isotope analysis of the extinct giant short-faced bear (''Arctodus simus'') shows it was also an exclusive meat-eater, probably a scavenger.
Bears are a popular feature of many children's stories, including Goldilocks and "The Story of the Three Bears", the Berenstain Bears, and Winnie the Pooh.
Injuries caused by bears are rare, but are often widely reported.
Once he arrived in Rome, however, he let the bear go.
Bears in northern climates reproduce seasonally, usually after a period of inactivity similar to hibernation, although tropical species breed all year round.
File:Coa Abbey Saint Gall.svg|Coat of Arms of the Abbey of Saint Gall
Cubs are born toothless, blind, and bald.
Considerable variation occurs in dental formula even within a given species.
floridanus''), and the lone surviving representative of the Tremarctinae, the South American spectacled bear (''T.
Bears have an excellent sense of smell, better than the dogs (Canidae), or possibly any other mammal.
Male bears, especially polar and brown bears, will kill and sometimes devour cubs born to another father to induce a female to breed again.
Mother bears also can usually defend their cubs against other predators.
Where bears raid crops or attack livestock, they may come into conflict with humans.
In autumn, some bear species forage large amounts of fermented fruits, which affects their behavior.
All bears will feed on any food source that becomes available, the nature of which varies seasonally.
The prehistoric Finns, along with most Siberian peoples, considered the bear as the spirit of one's forefathers.
The belief that they are nocturnal apparently comes from the habits of bears that live near humans, which engage in some nocturnal activities, such as raiding trash cans or crops while avoiding humans.
The American black bear is restricted to North America, and the polar bear is restricted to the Arctic Sea.
Many bears of northern regions hibernate in the winter.
This kind of attitude is reflected in the traditional Russian fairy tale "''Morozko''", whose arrogant protagonist Ivan tries to kill a mother bear and her cubs—and is punished and humbled by having his own head turned magically into a bear's head and being subsequently shunned by human society.
Bears in captivity have been trained to dance, box, or ride bicycles; however, this use of the animals became controversial in the late 20th century.
Liaisons between breeding bears are brief, and the only times bears are encountered in small groups are mothers with young or occasional seasonal bounties of rich food (such as salmon runs).
It is recommended to give all bears a wide berth; because, they are behaviorally unpredictable.
The smallest bears are the sun bears of Asia, which weigh an average of  for the males and  for the females, though the smallest mature females can weigh only .
In East European Jewish communities, the name ''Ber'' (בער)—Yiddish cognate of "Bear"—has been attested as a common male first name, at least since the 18th century, and was, among others, the name of several prominent rabbis.
While the polar bear is mostly carnivorous, and the giant panda feeds almost entirely on bamboo, the remaining six species are omnivorous with varied diets.
Other extinct bear genera include ''Agriarctos'', ''Indarctos'', and ''Agriotherium'' (sometimes placed within hemicyonids).
Bears are generally bulky and robust animals with relatively short legs.
European genera morphologically are very similar to ''Allocyon'', and also the much younger American ''Kolponomos'' (about 18 Mya), are known from the Oligocene, including ''Amphicticeps'' and ''Amphicynodon''.
By 3–4 Mya ago, the species ''Ursus minimus'' appears in the fossil record of Europe; apart from its size, it was nearly identical to today's Asiatic black bear.
A ''Cephalogale''-like species gave rise to the genus ''Ursavus'' during the early Oligocene (30–28 Mya); this genus proliferated into many species in Asia and is ancestral to all living bears.
The raccoon-sized, dog-like ''Cephalogale'' is the oldest-known member of the subfamily Hemicyoninae, which first appeared during the middle Oligocene in Eurasia about 30 Mya ago.
In more rural and poorer regions, attitudes may be more shaped by the dangers posed by bears and the economic costs they cause to farmers and ranchers.
The age at which bears reach sexual maturity is highly variable, both between and within species.
Their meat is dark and stringy, like a tough cut of beef.
With the exception of the polar bear, bears are mostly forest species.
Such masts can be very important to the diets of these species, and mast failures may result in long-range movements by bears looking for alternative food sources.
The females of smaller species may have young in as little as two years, whereas the larger species may not rear young until they are four or even nine years old.
In Cantonese cuisine, bear paws are considered a delicacy.
Unlike most other land carnivorans, bears are plantigrade.
Estimates of divergence dates place the giant panda as the most ancient offshoot among living taxa within Ursidae, having split from other bears as recently as 11.6 Mya to as distantly as 22.1 Mya.
When hunting bears, tigers will position themselves from the leeward side of a rock or fallen tree, waiting for the bear to pass by.
Some populated areas with bear populations have also outlawed the feeding of bears, including allowing them access to garbage or other food waste.
Bears are primarily found in the Northern Hemisphere, and with one exception, only in Asia, North America, and Europe.
The Proto-Indo-European (PIE) word for bear, '''' seems to have been subject to taboo deformation or replacement in some languages (as was the word for wolf, ''''), resulting in the use of numerous unrelated words with meanings like "brown one" (English bruin) and "honey-eater" (Slavic ''medved'').
According to the Korean legend, a god imposed a difficult test on a she-bear; when she passed it, the god turned her into a woman and married her.
The New World short-faced bears (Tremarctinae) differentiated from Ursinae following a dispersal event into North America during the mid-Miocene (about 13 Mya).
A number of hybrids have been bred between American black, brown, and polar bears.
Mitigation methods may be used to reduce bear damage to crops, and reduce local antipathy towards bears.
Bear symbols are used extensively in Berlin street decorations.
Larger species tend to show increased levels of sexual dimorphism in comparison to smaller species, and where a species varies in size across its distribution, individuals from larger-sized areas tend also to vary more.
These animals looked very different from today's bears, being small and raccoon-like in overall appearance, and diets perhaps more similar to that of a badger.
Often, bears will feed on other large animals when they encounter a carcass, whether or not the carcass is claimed by, or is the kill of, another predator.
When the bear passes, the tiger will spring from an overhead position and grab the bear from under the chin with one forepaw and the throat with the other.
The reconstructed Proto-Indo-European name of the bear is '''', whence Sanskrit '''', Avestan '''', Greek , Latin '''', Welsh '''' (whence perhaps "Arthur"), Albanian '''', Armenian .
