''The Information'' in 2006 was inspired by electrofunk, hip hop, and psychedelia; 2008's ''Modern Guilt'' was inspired by '60s pop music; and 2014's folk-infused ''Morning Phase'' won Album of the Year at the 57th Grammy Awards on February 8, 2015.
In January 2015, it was announced that Beck would be headlining the Boston Calling Music Festival in May 2015.
With a pop art collage of musical styles, oblique and ironic lyrics, and postmodern arrangements incorporating samples, drum machines, live instrumentation and sound effects, Beck has been hailed by critics and the public throughout his musical career as being among the most idiosyncratically creative musicians of 1990s and 2000s alternative rock.
For Beck, it was a return to the high-energy performances that had been his trademark as far back as Lollapalooza.
The song has appeared on association football game ''FIFA 16'' from developers EA Sports and 4th generation Apple TV commercial.
In March 2010, Beck revealed that he had produced songs for the new Jamie Lidell album, ''Compass''.
He aimed to keep the arrangements as open as possible, to re-create the simplicity of the standards, and became preoccupied with creating only pieces that could fit within the Great American Songbook.
"Loser" unexpectedly received radio airplay, starting in Los Angeles, where college radio station KXLU was the first to play it, and later on Santa Monica College radio station KCRW, where radio host Chris Douridas played the song on ''Morning Becomes Eclectic'', the station's flagship music program.
It was disheartening to the musician, who felt the two years of songwriting represented something more technically complex.
Beck's nine-year relationship with designer Leigh Limon and their subsequent breakup is said to have inspired his 2002 album, ''Sea Change''.
"We had Radio Shack mics and this homemade speaker and we'd draft people in the audience to recite comic books or do a beatbox thing, or we'd tie the whole audience up in masking tape," Beck recalled.
He also collaborated with electronic dance music duo The Chemical Brothers on their most recent album Born in the Echoes, providing lead vocals and also credited in writing for the track "Wide Open", released in July.
He has made two cameo appearances as himself on ''Saturday Night Live'': one in a sketch about medicinal marijuana, and one in a VH1 ''Behind the Music'' parody that featured "Fat Albert & the Junkyard Gang".
My father has been a Scientologist for about 35 years, so I grew up in and around it."
Beck expressed a loose interest in hip hop, and Rothrock introduced him to Carl Stephenson, a record producer for Rap-A-Lot Records.
Beck's musical style has been considered alternative and indie.
I was never good at that," he later told Pitchfork.
He was also featured on "Tiny Cities" by Flume on Skin.
Beck collaborated on two songs for Childish Gambino's "Royalty" mixtape in 2012.
In consequence the main character begins throwing all of his "Beck" albums out his upper-story window.
Beck's non-exclusive contract with Geffen allowed him an unusual amount of creative freedom, with Beck remaining free to release material through such small, independent labels as Flipside, which issued the sprawling, 25-track collection of pre-"Loser" recordings titled ''Stereopathetic Soulmanure'' on February 22 the following year.
At one-day festivals in California, he surrounded himself with an artnoise combo.
He is reportedly working on a 13th studio album, with the singles "Dreams" and "Wow" having already been released.
As Bong Load struggled to press more copies of "Loser", Beck was beset with offers to sign with major labels.
You could go up onstage and say anything, and you wouldn't feel weird or feel any pressure."
In the third Record Club venture, Wilco, Feist, Jamie Lidell and James Gadson joined Beck to cover Skip Spence's ''Oar''.
Beck was introduced to the Dust Brothers, producers of the Beastie Boys' album ''Paul's Boutique'', whose cut-and-paste, sample-heavy production suited Beck's vision of a more fun, accessible album.
Later that day, it was announced his still untitled thirteenth studio album would be released on October 21, 2016.
He also contributed songs to the soundtrack of the movie ''Scott Pilgrim vs. the World'', which was released in August 2010.
Beck expected to release both albums independently.
"I was tired of being cold, tired of getting beat up," he later remarked.
Beck obtained his first guitar at 16 and became a street musician, often playing Lead Belly covers at Lafayette Park.
A fierce bidding war ensued, with Geffen Records A&R director Mark Kates signing Beck in December 1993 despite intense competition from Warner Bros. and Capitol.
In December 2012, an interactive iPhone app titled "Rework_" was released to complement the album.
During the bidding war in November, Beck spent several days in Olympia, Washington, recording material with Calvin Johnson of Beat Happening, which would later see release the following year on Johnson's K Records as ''One Foot in the Grave''.
Beyond his work as a performer, Beck acted as the album's curator, bringing together a diverse collection of artists—including Amon Tobin, Tyondai Braxton, Nosaj Thing, and Memory Tapes—whose work had also been influenced by Glass.
Retailers initially predicted that the album would not receive much radio support, but they also believed that Beck's maverick reputation and critical acclaim, in addition to the possibility of multiple Grammy nominations, might offset ''Sea Change'''s uncommercial sound.
The album, ''Rework Philip Glass Remixed'', was released on October 23, 2012, to critical acclaim, and featured Beck as both a curator and a performer.
The song also charted in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, and throughout Europe.
Beck's mother grew up amid New York's Andy Warhol Factory art scene of the 1960s, but moved to California at age 17, where she met Campbell.
In 2007, Beck released the single "Timebomb", which was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance.
He also contributed on the song "Attracted to Us" on ''Turtleneck & Chain'', the second album from The Lonely Island.
When sent a book of transcribed sheet music for that album, Beck decided to play through it and grew interested in the world before recorded sound.
"I called the record label that day and asked to have Beck play live on the air," Douridas said.
frontman Nate Ruess on the single, "What This World Is Coming To", which was one of the Grammy-winning artist's many works featured on his debut solo album "Grand Romantic" released in June 2015.
The show toured from the Santa Monica Museum of Art to galleries in New York City and Winnipeg, Manitoba, in Canada.
Inspired by that freedom and by the local spoken-word performers, Beck began to write free-associative, surrealistic songs about pizza, MTV, and working at McDonald's, turning mundane thoughts into songs.
He began performing on city buses, often covering Mississippi John Hurt alongside original, sometimes improvisational compositions.
By 1993, Beck was living in a rat-infested shed near a Los Angeles alleyway with little money.
Godrich was leaving the United States for England in a short time, which led to the album's quick production schedule—"No looking back, no doctoring anything".
Beck has an irreverent style of sampling, often using such sources as obscure films to splice together cuts of people talking in the background of his music, or various other found sounds to create sound collages in the background of his music.
When questioned by the interviewer about Scientology's core beliefs, he replied:
After a record executive explained that ''Odelay'' would be a "huge mistake", he spent many months thinking "that I'd blown it forever".
I mean, I ''never'' had any slack.
Reflecting on Beck's contribution to the album, Glass remarked that he was "impressed by the novelty and freshness of a lot of the ideas".
Beck's original vision was a short 10-track burst with two-minute songs, but the songs gradually grew as he fit 'two years of songwriting into two and a half months."
Beck has contributed three new songs—"Cities", "Touch the People" and "Spiral Staircase"—to the video game ''Sound Shapes'' for PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, and PlayStation Vita.
Bong Load issued "Loser" as a single in March 1993 on 12" vinyl with only 500 copies pressed.
Released from his label contract and going independent, Beck began working more heavily on his own seven-year-old label, which went through a variety of names.
In late February 2010, it was announced that electronic artist Tobacco of Black Moth Super Rainbow had collaborated with Beck on two songs, "Fresh Hex" and "Grape Aerosmith", on his upcoming album ''Maniac Meat''.
The review continued to comment on Beck, saying that his mix of goofy piety and ambiguous intent helped the album. ''
Working with producer Nigel Godrich, Beck built a studio in his garden, where they wrote many of the tracks.
Beck was roommates with Paleface, sleeping on his couch and attending open mic nights together.
An album he produced for Stephen Malkmus and the Jicks, ''Mirror Traffic'', was released in August 2011.
''Guero'', Beck's eighth studio album, was recorded over the span of nine months during which several significant events occurred in his life: his girlfriend, Marissa Ribisi, became pregnant; they were married; their son, Cosimo, was born; and they moved out of Silver Lake.
"Everybody knew each other.
Feeling as though he were "constantly trying to prove myself", Beck suffered a backlash, with skeptics denouncing him as a self-indulgent fake and the latest marketing opportunity.
On March 1, 2014, Beck was the musical guest on a ''Saturday Night Live'' episode hosted by Jim Parsons.
Starting on June 18, the club began posting covers of songs from the album on Thursday evenings, each with its own video.
In the summer of 1994, Beck was struggling and many of his fellow musicians thought he had lost his way.
Beck, inspired by the Nintendocore remix scene and feeling a connection with its lo-fi, home-recording method, collaborated with artists 8-Bit and Paza on ''Hell Yes'', an EP issued in February 2005.
In December 2005, Geffen also issued ''Guerolito'', a fully reworked version of ''Guero'' featuring remixes by the Beastie Boys' Ad-Rock, the Dust Brothers' John King and Scottish electronic duo Boards of Canada.
The first contemporary music that made a direct connection with Beck was hip hop, which he first heard on Grandmaster Flash records in the early 1980s.
A third single, "Gimme", appeared on September 17.
In 1989, Beck caught a bus to New York City with little more than eight dollars and a guitar.
A catalog of the show was published by Plug in Editions/Smart Art Press.
A Beck song called "Harry Partch", a tribute to the composer and his "Corporeal" music, employs Partch's 43-tone scale.
Nearly half of the songs had existed since the 1990s.
Lead single "E-Pro" peaked at number one at Modern Rock radio, making it his first chart-topper since "Loser".
Further confirmation came in an interview with the Irish ''Sunday Tribune's'' ''i Magazine'' on June 11, 2005, where he was quoted as saying, "Yeah, I'm a Scientologist.
At other concerts, crowds were treated to twenty minutes of reggae or Miles Davis or jazz-punk iterations of "Loser".
Schnapf saw Beck perform at Jabberjaw and felt he would suit their small venture.
It doesn't feel natural to me.
He released two standalone singles over the course of the summer: the electro ballad "Defriended" and the chorus-heavy "I Won't Be Long".
In 2011, he collaborated with Seu Jorge on a track titled "Tropicália (Mario C. 2011 Remix)" for the Red Hot Organization's most recent charitable album ''Red Hot+Rio 2.''
He was sent for a time to live with his paternal grandparents in Kansas, with Beck later remarking that "I think they were kind of concerned" about his "weird" home life.
Eventually, Beck gained key boosters in Margaret Mittleman, the West Coast's director of talent acquisitions for BMG Music Publishing, and the partners behind independent record label Bong Load Custom Records: Tom Rothrock, Rob Schnapf and Brad Lambert.
He spent the summer attempting to find a job and a place to live with little success.
Beck and his bandmates hammered out fourteen songs in fourteen days, although just twelve made it onto the album, 1998's ''Mutations''.
Beck became involved in a loose posse of acoustic musicians—including Cindy Lee Berryhill, Kirk Kelly, Paleface, and Lach, headed by Roger Manning—whose raggedness and eccentricity placed them well outside the acoustic mainstream.
Contributors included MGMT, Devendra Banhart, Andrew Stockdale of Wolfmother and Binki Shapiro of Little Joy.
Bibbe's mother was Jewish, while Bibbe's father, Al Hansen, was partly of Norwegian descent.
Combined with the song's wildly popular music video and the world tour, Beck reacted believing the attention could not last, resulting in a status as a "one-hit wonder".
The artist then sought to void his contracts with both record labels, and in turn the labels sued him for breach of contract.
During one busy week in January 1997, he landed his Grammy nominations, appeared on ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''Howard Stern'', and did a last-minute trot on ''The Rosie O'Donnell Show''.
''Guerolito'' combines remixes previously heard as B-sides and new versions of album tracks to make a track-by-track reconfiguration of the album.
By the time Beck released his first album for Geffen, the low-budget, genre-blending ''Mellow Gold'' on March 1, "Loser" was already in the top 40 and its video in MTV's Buzz Bin.
Beck has also done some remixes for fellow artists, notably David Bowie and Björk.
Beck provided four songs for the film ''Scott Pilgrim vs. the World'' (2010), each attributed to the title character's fictional band, Sex Bob-Omb.
Following the grueling recording schedule, Beck was exhausted, calling it "the most intense work I've ever done on anything", relating that he "did at least 10 weeks with no days off, until four or five in the morning every night."
He worked for five or six days a week at the small studio on his property in Malibu, and founded Record Club, a project whereby an entire classic album—by The Velvet Underground, Leonard Cohen, INXS, Yanni—would be covered by another singer in the span of a single day.
The musicians held communal meals and mountain-bike rides on dusty trails nearby, but remained focused on Beck's instructions: to make an up-tempo album that would be fun to play on tour night after night.
The live stage set included a red bed that descended from the ceiling for the song "Debra", and the touring band was complemented by a brass section.
He later said that although he felt school was important, he felt unsafe there.
The record produced several hit singles, including "Where It's At", "Devils Haircut", and "The New Pollution", and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1997, winning a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album as well as a Grammy Award for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance for "Where It's At".
He would often get recognized in public, which made him feel strange.
"The whole mission was to destroy all the clichés and make up some new ones," said Beck of his New York years.
Feeling like "a total outcast", Beck dropped out of school after junior high.
Beck had known Danger Mouse casually before, as many of his former musicians ended up working with Danger Mouse's side project, Gnarls Barkley.
"By the time we left there, they were ripping out miles of houses en masse and building low-rent, giant apartment blocks," he later recalled.
In November 2013, Beck revealed that he had suffered a severe injury to his spine a few years earlier, but has since healed greatly.
Beck eventually began to frequent Manhattan's Lower East Side and stumbled upon the tail end of the East Village's anti-folk scene's first wave.
For the recording of ''Morning Phase'', Beck reunited with many of the same musicians with whom he had worked on the critically acclaimed 2002 album ''Sea Change''.
He moved to New York City in 1989 and became involved in the city's small fiery anti-folk movement.
Still, the musicians were surprised at how well they got along.
Beck released his twelfth studio album, ''Morning Phase'', on February 21, 2014.
The Record Club has since covered albums by INXS and Yanni.
He soon began a stream of menial jobs, including loading trucks and operating a leaf blower.
It sounded too good, that was the problem."
As a child, he lived in a declining neighborhood just off Hollywood Boulevard.
After his parents separated when he was ten, Beck stayed with his mother and brother in Los Angeles, where he was influenced by the city's diverse musical offerings—everything from hip hop to Latin music and his mother's art scene—all of which would later reappear in his recorded and published work.
In November 1999, Geffen released the much-anticipated ''Midnite Vultures'', which attracted confusion: "fans and critics misguidedly worried whether it was serious or a goof," and as a result, ''The New York Times'' wrote that the album "never won the audience it deserved".
Beck is married to actress Marissa Ribisi, and is an active Scientologist.
The idea of ''Song Reader'' came about nearly fifteen years prior, shortly after the release of ''Odelay''.
The album is a follow-up to the 1996 ''Red Hot + Rio.''
That slacker stuff is for people who have the time to be depressed about everything."
In 2013 Beck began playing special ''Song Reader'' concerts with a variety of guests and announced he was working on a record of ''Song Reader'' material with other musicians as well as possibly a compilation of fan versions.
Beck felt that "Loser" was mediocre, and only agreed to its release at Rothrock's insistence.
He released the psychedelic ''Mutations'' in 1998, and the funk-infused ''Midnite Vultures'' in 1999.
Eventually, however, he decided the songs spoke to a common experience (a relationship breakup), and that it would not seem self-indulgent to record them.
Accepting an award, he comes up onstage wearing the new "Spicy pants" trend.
On September 4, 2009, Beck announced the second Record Club album, ''Songs of Leonard Cohen''.
Beck began life in a rooming house near downtown Los Angeles.
He used a fake I.D.
The whole point of the record was to capture the performance of the musicians live, an uncharacteristic far-cry from the cut-and-paste aesthetic of ''Odelay''.
Beck married actress Marissa Ribisi, the twin sister of actor Giovanni Ribisi, in April 2004, shortly before the birth of their son, Cosimo Henri.
His focus on smaller, more quixotic projects, Beck moonlighted as a producer, working with artists such as Charlotte Gainsbourg, Thurston Moore and Stephen Malkmus.
In 2016, Beck collaborated with French electronic music band M83, providing vocals for the song "Time Wind".
Two of Beck's most popular and acclaimed recordings are ''Odelay'' and ''Sea Change'', both of which were ranked on ''Rolling Stone'' list of the 500 greatest albums of all time.
His father is a Canadian-born arranger, composer and conductor who worked on hundreds of albums and numerous films.
For the release, Beck was allowed for the first time to fulfill a long-running wish for an unconventional rollout: he made low-budget videos to accompany each song, packaged the CD with sheets of stickers so buyers could customize the cover, and leaked tracks and videos on his website months ahead of the album's release.
He wrote most of the songs for the album in one week after the breakup.
Beck publicly acknowledged his affiliation with Scientology for the first time in an interview published in ''The New York Times Magazine'' on March 6, 2005.
Each day, the musicians started from scratch, often working on songs for 16 hours straight.
''Odelay'' sold two million copies and put "one-hit wonder" criticisms to rest.
''Modern Guilt'' (2008), "full of off-kilter rhythms and left-field breakdowns, with an overall 1960s vibe", was the final release in his contract with Geffen Records.
''Odelay'''s conception lies in an unfinished studio album Beck first embarked on following the success of "Loser", chronicling the difficult time he experienced: "There was a cycle of everyone dying around me," he recalled later.
"I can't tell you how many times I was looking at faces that were looking back at me with complete bewilderment—or just pointing and shaking their heads and laughing—while performing during that period," he later recalled.
Born in Los Angeles in 1970, Beck grew towards hip-hop and folk in his teens and began to perform locally at coffeehouses and clubs.
2)'', with "Bad Blood".
In the summer of 2010, Beck contributed songs to both ''The Twilight Saga: Eclipse'' soundtrack, with "Let's Get Lost" (a duet with Bat for Lashes), and ''True Blood (HBO Original Series Soundtrack, Vol.
In 2001, Beck drifted back to the songs and called producer Nigel Godrich.
"It was hard to be in New York with no money, no place....
Despite this, Beck gained the respect of his peers, such as Tom Petty and Johnny Cash, and created an entire wave of bands determined to recapture the ''Mellow Gold'' sound.
The four-time platinum artist has collaborated with several artists and has made several contributions to soundtracks.
Marissa and Giovanni Ribisi were delivered by Beck's mother, Bibbe Hansen.
Beck enjoyed but, like several executives at Geffen, was bewildered by the success of ''Odelay''.
Beck released the second single, "Waking Light", on February 4, 2014.
Shortly thereafter, Beck explored blues and folk music further, discovering Woody Guthrie and Blind Willie Johnson.
The song was reportedly made for the purpose of having something lively to play while on tour.
In July 1998, a core group began to assemble at Beck's Pasadena home: bassist Justin Meldal-Johnsen, keyboardist Roger Joseph Manning Jr., and producer-engineers Mickey Petralia and Tony Hoffer.
The result—the slide-sampling hip hop track "Loser"—was a one-off experiment that Beck set aside, going back to his folk songs, making his home tapes, such as ''Golden Feelings'', and releasing several independent singles.
The record was supported by an extensive world tour.
In the summer of 2013, Beck was reported to be working on two new studio albums: one a more self-contained acoustic disc in the vein of ''One Foot in the Grave'' and another described as a "proper follow-up" to ''Modern Guilt''.
Beck began as a folk musician, switching between country blues, Delta blues and more traditional rural folk music in his teens.
He performed in episode 11 of the fourth season of ''The Larry Sanders Show'', in which the producer character Artie (Rip Torn) referred to him as a "hillbilly from outer space".
The album was later listed by the magazine as one of the best records of the decade and of all-time, and it also placed second on the year's Pazz & Jop Critics Poll.
During his teens, Beck discovered the music of Sonic Youth, Pussy Galore and X, but remained uninterested in most music outside folk until many years into his career.
On June 18, 2009, Beck announced that he was starting an experiment called Record Club, in which he and other musicians would record cover versions of entire albums in one day.
"I'd be banging away on a Son House tune and the whole audience would be talking.
''Sea Change'', issued by Geffen in September 2002, was regardless a commercial hit and critical darling, with ''Rolling Stone'' revering it as "the best album Beck has ever made, ... an impeccable album of truth and light from the end of love.
In 1992, Beck visited Stephenson's home to collaborate.
He began performing in arthouse clubs and coffeehouses such as Al's Bar and Raji's.
It doesn't feel right.
In October 2011, it was widely reported that Beck and producer Hector Castillo were collaborating with American composer Philip Glass to produce a remix album of the composer's works in honor of his 75th birthday.
He was constantly recording, and eventually put together an album of somber, orchestrated folk tunes; one that, perhaps, "could have been a commercial blockbuster along with similarly themed work by Smashing Pumpkins, Nine Inch Nails and Nirvana".
On June 2, 2016, Beck released a new single titled "Wow" along with a lyric video of the song.
He has also taken music from Los Angeles as a reference point in his songs.
Beck was later awarded Best Alternative Music Performance for ''Mutations'' at the 42nd Grammy Awards.
In order to keep indifferent audiences engaged in his music, Beck would play in a spontaneous, joking manner.
For his next studio effort, his tenth, Beck tapped Danger Mouse to produce, and the two first met in December 2007 to record.
Following the release of ''Sea Change'', Beck felt newer compositions were sketches for something more evolved in the same direction, and wrote nearly 35 more songs in the coming months, keeping demos of them on tapes in a suitcase.
He also made a very brief voice appearance in the 1998 cartoon feature film ''The Rugrats Movie'', and guest-starred as himself in a 1997 episode of ''Space Ghost Coast to Coast'' titled "Edelweiss".
Feeling his previous releases were just collections of demos recorded over the course of several years, Beck desired to enter the studio and record an album in a continuous linear fashion, which became ''Odelay''.
Since his paternal grandfather was a Presbyterian minister, Beck grew up influenced by church music and hymns.
Tobacco revealed that in making the album, Beck sent the vocal parts to him, and that they had never actually met.
Feeling as though it might take him a while to "get back to that songwriting territory", he entered the studio with Dust Brothers to complete a project that dated back to ''Odelay''.
''Odelay'' was released on June 18, 1996, to commercial success and critical acclaim.
''Midnite Vultures'', Beck's next studio effort, was originally recorded as a double album, and more than 25 nearly completed songs were left behind.
During this time, he contributed "Deadweight" to the soundtrack of the film ''A Life Less Ordinary'' (1997).
On June 15, 2015, Beck released the first single titled "Dreams" off his upcoming thirteenth studio album.
The collaboration with the Dust Brothers, his second, was notable for their use of high-tech measures to achieve a lo-fi sound.
Beck has said that he was "raised celebrating Jewish holidays", and that he considers himself Jewish.
"I'd get on the bus and start playing Mississippi John Hurt with totally improvised lyrics.
In particular, Pitchfork described Beck's 22-minute contribution to the album, "NYC: 73–78", as "a fantasia ... the most startling and original piece of music with Beck's name on it in a while, and the first new work to bear his own spirit in even longer."
"The idea was to get people in a room together recording live, hitting bad notes and screaming," said Beck, adding that the album is best described as "introspective hip hop".
Growing up in a predominantly Latin district, he found himself the only white child at his school, and he quickly learned to breakdance.
I don't think I was made for that.
Beck wrote the music, co-wrote the lyrics, and produced and mixed the album.
Beck has also made appearances on the Adult Swim show ''Mission Hill''.
