This behaviour occurs because sexual attraction in bed bugs is based primarily on size, and males mount any freshly fed partner regardless of sex.
All bed bugs mate by traumatic insemination.
Bed bug secretions can inhibit the growth of some bacteria and fungi; antibacterial components from the bed bug could be used against human pathogens, and be a source of pharmacologically active molecules as a resource for the discovery of new drugs.
If it does not feed, it continues to search for a host.
lectularius'' only feeds every five to seven days, which suggests that it does not spend the majority of its life searching for a host.
lectularius'' would return to its shelter and aggregate after feeding.
The microbes can cause infections in the females.
lectularius'' mounts another male, the mounted male releases the pheromone signal and the male on top stops before insemination.
After measuring ejaculate volume, mating rate and estimating sperm density, Reinhardt et al.
Bed bugs were a serious problem at U.S. military bases during World War II.
Because infestation of human habitats has begun to increase, bed bug bites and related conditions have been on the rise as well.
Bed bug detection dogs are trained to pinpoint infestations, with a possible accuracy rate between 11% and 83%.
Many species of these microbes live in the bodies of females after mating.
Investigations into potential transmission of HIV, MRSA, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and hepatitis E have not shown that bed bugs can spread these diseases.
lectularius'' allocate 12% of their sperm and 19% of their seminal fluid per mating.
Bed bugs use pheromones and kairomones to communicate regarding nesting locations, feeding, and reproduction.
Bedbugs have mouth parts that saw through the skin, and inject saliva with anticoagulants and painkillers.
They usually feed on their hosts without being noticed.
In a 1988 study, one of 479 eggs was fertile and resulted in a hybrid, ''Cimex hemipterus'' × ''lectularius''.
Resistance to pesticides has increased significantly over time, and harm to health from their use is of concern.
Bed bugs have five immature nymph life stages and a final sexually mature adult stage.
Males are generally unable to discriminate between the sexes until after mounting, but before inseminating.
Traditional methods of repelling and/or killing bed bugs include the use of plants, fungi, and insects (or their extracts), such as black pepper; black cohosh (''Actaea racemosa''); ''Pseudarthria hookeri''; ''Laggera alata'' (Chinese ''yángmáo cǎo'' | 羊毛草); ''Eucalyptus saligna'' oil; henna (''Lawsonia inermis'' or camphire); "infused oil of ''Melolontha vulgaris''" (presumably  cockchafer); fly agaric (''Amanita muscaria''); ''Actaea'' spp.
Injected sperm travel via the haemolymph (blood) to sperm storage structures called seminal conceptacles, with fertilisation eventually taking place at the ovaries.
While diatomaceous earth performed poorly, silica gel may be effective.
lectularius'', males sometimes mount other males because male sexual interest is directed at any recently fed individual regardless of their sex, but unfed females may also be mounted.
''Cimex lectularius'' and ''C.
At a point in the early 1940s, they were mostly eradicated in the developed world, but have increased in prevalence since 1995, likely due to pesticide resistance, governmental bans on effective pesticides, and international travel.
); "herb and seeds of ''Cannabis''"; "opulus" berries (possibly maple or European cranberrybush); masked hunter bugs (''Reduvius personatus''), "and many others".
Declines in household cockroach populations that have resulted from the use of insecticides effective against this major bed bug predator have aided the bed bugs' resurgence, as have bans on DDT and other potent pesticides.
The increase in bed bug populations in the early 20th century has been attributed to the advent of electric heating, which allowed bed bugs to thrive year-round instead of only in warm weather.
For this reason, males have evolved alarm pheromones to signal their sex to other males.
Airborne pheromones are responsible for aggregations.
Furthermore, investigators have found high populations of bed bugs at poultry facilities in Arkansas.
The stylets are retained in a groove in the labium, and during feeding, they are freed from the groove as the jointed labium is bent or folded out of the way; its tip never enters the wound.
Sexual dimorphism occurs in ''C.
Traumatic insemination is the only way for copulation to occur in bed bugs.
In 2013, Chicago was listed as the number 1 city in the United States with the worst bed bug infestation.
Aggregations are formed and disbanded based on the associated cost and benefits.
Bed bug infestations resurged since the 1980s for reasons that are not clear, but contributing factors may be complacency, increased resistance, bans on pesticides, and increased international travel.
The exact causes of this resurgence remain unclear; it is variously ascribed to greater foreign travel, increased immigration from the developing world to the developed world, more frequent exchange of second-hand furnishings among homes, a greater focus on control of other pests, resulting in neglect of bed bug countermeasures, and increasing resistance to pesticides.
Basket-work panels were put around beds and shaken out in the morning in the UK and in France in the 19th century.
DNA from human blood meals can be recovered from bed bugs for up to 90 days, which mean they can be used for forensic purposes in identifying on whom the bed bugs have fed.
Bed bugs can survive a wide range of temperatures and atmospheric compositions.
The "bed bug alarm pheromone" consists of (''E'')-2-octenal and (''E'')-2-hexenal.
''Cimex lectularius'' males have environmental microbes on their genitals.
One recent theory about bed bug reappearance in the US is that they never truly disappeared, but may have been forced to alternative hosts.
hemipterus'' mate with each other given the opportunity, but the eggs then produced are usually sterile.
A combination of heat and drying treatments is most effective.
The number of reported incidents in New York City alone rose from 500 in 2004 to 10,000 in 2009.
Bed bugs can also be detected by their characteristic smell of rotting raspberries.
The female lays fertilized eggs until she depletes the sperm found in her conceptacle.
In all, the insect may spend less than 20 minutes in physical contact with its host, and does not try to feed again until it has either completed a moult or, if an adult, has thoroughly digested the meal.
Natural enemies of bed bugs include the masked hunter insect (also known as "masked bed bug hunter"), cockroaches, ants, spiders (particularly ''Thanatus flavidus''), mites, and centipedes (particularly the house centipede ''Scutigera coleoptrata'').
The name "bed bug" derives from the preferred habitat of ''Cimex lectularius'': warm houses and especially near or inside beds and bedding or other sleep areas.
'''Bed bugs''', '''bed-bugs''', or '''bedbugs''' are parasitic insects of the cimicid family that feed exclusively on blood.
The U.S. National Pest Management Association reported a 71% increase in bed bug calls between 2000 and 2005.
Males, when found in areas with few females, abandon an aggregation to find a new mate.
''Cimex pilosellus'' and ''Cimex pipistrella'' primarily infest bats, while ''Haematosiphon inodora'', a species of North America, primarily infests poultry.
However, biological pest control is not considered practical for eliminating bed bugs from human dwellings.
Bed bugs are obligatory hematophagous (bloodsucking) insects.
A number of adverse health effects may result from bed bug bites, including skin rashes, psychological effects, and allergic symptoms.
Females are capable of producing alarm pheromones to avoid multiple mating, but they generally do not do so.
The number of eggs a ''C.
However, males will mount unfed, flat females on occasion.
lectularius'' bugs through mechanoreceptors located on their antennae.
lectularius'', with the females larger in size than the males on average.
al proposed that multiple mating is limited by seminal fluid and not sperm.
Below , adults enter semihibernation and can survive longer; they can survive for at least five days at , but die after 15 minutes of exposure to .
Previously, they were common in the developing world, but rare in the developed world.
The fungus ''Beauveria bassiana'' is being researched  for its ability to control bed bugs.
Since males are attracted to large body size, any bed bug with a recent blood meal can be seen as a potential mate.
The rostrum is composed of the maxillae and mandibles, which have been modified into elongated shapes from a basic, ancestral style.
After searching—regardless of whether or not it has eaten—the bed bug returns to the shelter to aggregate before the photophase (period of light during a day-night cycle).
It has been suggested that females receive benefit from the ejaculate.
Sperm remains viable in a female's spermathecae (a better term is conceptacle), a sperm-carrying sack, for a long period of time as long as body temperature is optimum.
Bedbugs prefer exposed skin, preferably the face, neck, and arms of a sleeping person.
Due to these dangerous microbes, males have evolved antimicrobial ejaculate substances that prevent sperm damage.
Initially, the problem was solved by fumigation, using Zyklon Discoids that released hydrogen cyanide gas, a rather dangerous procedure.
For public health reasons, individuals are encouraged to call a professional pest control service to eradicate bed bugs in a home, rather than attempting to do it themselves, particularly if they live in a multifamily building.
Genetic analysis has shown that a single pregnant bed bug, possibly a single survivor of eradication, can be responsible for an entire infestation over a matter of weeks, rapidly producing generations of offspring.
'''''Cimex lectularius''''', the common bed bug, is the best known as it prefers to feed on human blood.
Females are more often found separate from the aggregation than males.
Consistent with this is the finding that bed bug DNA shows no evidence of an evolutionary bottleneck.
Giovanni Antonio Scopoli noted their presence in Carniola (roughly equivalent to present-day Slovenia) in the 18th century.
Due to egg production, females may refrain from spending additional energy on alarm pheromones.
Bed bugs are mainly active at night, but are not exclusively nocturnal.
They shed their skins through ecdysis at each stage, discarding their outer exoskeleton, which is somewhat clear, empty exoskeletons of the bugs themselves.
Others believe it might simply be the cyclical nature of the organism.
The mandibular stylet tips have small teeth, and through alternately moving these stylets back and forth, the insect cuts a path through tissue for the maxillary bundle to reach an appropriately sized blood vessel.
Bed bugs may choose to aggregate because of predation, resistance to desiccation, and more opportunities to find a mate.
black cohosh); tobacco; "heated oil of Terebinthina" (i.e.
Bed bugs may also nest near animals that have nested within a dwelling, such as bats, birds, or rodents.
Pressure from the blood vessel itself fills the insect with blood in three to five minutes.
The carbamate insecticide propoxur is highly toxic to bed bugs, but it has potential toxicity to children exposed to it, and the US Environmental Protection Agency has been reluctant to approve it for indoor use.
Boric acid, occasionally applied as a safe indoor insecticide, is not effective against bed bugs because they do not groom.
According to a report by the UK Ministry of Health, in 1933, all the houses in many areas had some degree of bed bug infestation.
A bed bug pierces the skin of its host with a stylet fascicle, rostrum, or "beak".
The lifespan of bed bugs varies by species and is also dependent on feeding.
In organisms, sexual selection extends past differential reproduction to affect sperm composition, sperm competition, and ejaculate size.
In Chhattisgarh, India, bed bugs have been used as a traditional medicine for alopecia, epilepsy, piles, and urinary disorders, but this practice has no scientific basis.
Due to these findings, Reinhard et.
Bed bugs must molt six times before becoming fertile adults, and must consume at least one blood meal to complete each moult.
The decline of bed bug populations in the 20th century is often credited to potent pesticides that had not previously been widely available.
Common commercial and residential freezers reach temperatures low enough to kill most life stages of bed bug, with 95% mortality after 3 days at .
Fertilized females with enough food lay three to four eggs each day continually until the end of their lifespans (about nine months under warm conditions), possibly generating as many as 500 eggs in this time.
On fertilization, the female's ovaries finish developing, which suggests that sperm plays a role other than fertilizing the egg.
After the depletion of sperm, she lays a few sterile eggs.
A bed bug nymph of any age that has just consumed a blood meal has a bright red, translucent abdomen, fading to brown over the next several hours, and to opaque black within two days as the insect digests its meal.
The entire maxillary and mandibular bundle penetrates the skin.
The right and left mandibular stylets extend along the outer sides of their respective maxillary stylets and do not reach anywhere near the tip of the fused maxillary stylets.
Bed bugs apparently cannot survive high concentrations of carbon dioxide for very long; exposure to nearly pure nitrogen atmospheres, however, appears to have relatively little effect even after 72 hours.
Though the benefit is not direct, females are able to produce more eggs than optimum increasing the amount of the females' genes in the gene pool.
It is released when a bed bug is disturbed, as during an attack by a predator.
lectularius'' female produces does not depend on the sperm she harbors, but on the female's nutritional level.
showed that mating could be limited by seminal fluid.
Image:Cimex lectularius2.jpg|Blood-fed ''C.
Newly hatched nymphs are translucent, lighter in color, and become browner as they moult and reach maturity.
Image:Cimex lectularius 3.jpg|Slide of ''Cimex lectularius''
However, arboviruses may be transmissible.
Some in the 18th century believed bed bugs had been brought to London with supplies of wood to rebuild the city after the Great Fire of London (1666).
Certain signs and symptoms suggest the presence of bed bugs; finding the adult insects confirms the diagnosis.
The bug then withdraws the stylet bundle from the feeding position and retracts it back into the labial groove, folds the entire unit back under the head, and returns to its hiding place.
Most species feed on humans only when other prey are unavailable.
They obtain all the additional moisture they need from water vapor in the surrounding air.
An hour at a temperature of  or over, or two hours at less than  kills them; a domestic clothes drier or steam kills bedbugs.
Two reasons are proposed as to why females do not release alarm pheromones to protect themselves.
One is to find a mate and the other is to find shelter to avoid getting smashed after eating.
Younger instars cannot survive nearly as long, though even the vulnerable newly hatched first instars can survive for weeks without taking a blood meal.
When a bed bug is starved, it leaves its shelter and searches for a host.
Bed bugs have been known as human parasites for thousands of years.
Because males lack this organ, traumatic insemination could leave them badly injured.
Bed bugs may be mistaken for other insects, such as booklice, small cockroaches, or carpet beetles; however, when warm and active, their movements are more ant-like and, like most other true bugs, they emit a characteristic disagreeable odor when crushed.
Bed bugs have segmented abdomens with microscopic hairs that give them a banded appearance.
Though strictly parasitic, they spend only a tiny fraction of their lifecycles physically attached to hosts.
lectularius'' (note the differences in color with respect to digestion of blood meal)
Of these, diatomaceous earth in particular has seen a revival as a nontoxic (when in amorphous form) residual pesticide for bed bug abatement.
Although under certain cool conditions adult bed bugs can live for over a year without feeding, under typically warm conditions they try to feed at five- to ten-day intervals, and adults can survive for about five months without food.
The bite usually produces a swelling with no red spot, but when many bugs feed on a small area, reddish spots may appear after the swelling subsides.
bayberry); Robert geranium (''Geranium robertianum''); bugbane (''Cimicifuga'' spp.
Female bed bugs possess a reproductive tract that functions during oviposition, but the male does not use this tract for sperm insemination.
Bed bugs can exist singly, but tend to congregate once established.
Bed bugs were first mentioned in Germany in the 11th century, in France in the 13th century, and in England in 1583, though they remained rare in England until 1670.
Other ''Cimex'' species specialize in other animals, e.g., bat bugs, such as ''Cimex pipistrelli'' (Europe), ''Cimex pilosellus'' (western US), and ''Cimex adjunctus'' (entire eastern US).
They are also capable of surviving on domestic cats and dogs, though humans are the preferred host of ''C.
lectularius'' is ; all stages of life are killed by 7 minutes of exposure to .
They show high desiccation tolerance, surviving low humidity and a 35–40&nbsp;°C range even with loss of one-third of body weight; earlier life stages are more susceptible to drying out than later ones.
These places can vary greatly in format, including luggage, inside of vehicles, within furniture, amongst bedside clutter—even inside electrical sockets and nearby laptop computers.
Rates of infestations in developed countries, while decreasing from the 1930s to the 1980s, have increased dramatically since the 1980s.
The increase in the developed world may have been caused by increased international travel, resistance to insecticides, and the use of new pest-control methods that do not affect bed bugs.
Another source of aggregation could be the recognition of other ''C.
Dusts have been used to ward off insects from grain storage for centuries, including "plant ash, lime, dolomite, certain types of soil, and diatomaceous earth or Kieselguhr".
The trichomes on the bean leaves capture the insects by impaling the feet (tarsi) of the insects.
The right and left maxillary stylets are connected at their midline and a section at the centerline forms a large food canal and a smaller salivary canal.
Females are more likely to expand the population range and find new sites.
Active female dispersal can account for treatment failures.
It is found in temperate climates throughout the world.
First, alarm pheromone production is costly.
The invention of the vacuum cleaner and simplification of furniture design may have also played a role.
Image:Bed bug nymph, Cimex lectularius.jpg|A bed bug nymph feeding on a host
The pests have been known by a variety of other informal names, including chilly billies, chinche bug, crimson rambler, heavy dragoon, mahogany flat, redcoat, and wall louse.
In the mid-19th century, smoke from peat fires was recommended as an indoor domestic fumigant against bed bugs.
Scattering leaves of plants with microscopic hooked hairs around a bed at night, then sweeping them up in the morning and burning them, was a technique reportedly used in Southern Rhodesia and in the Balkans.
Poultry workers at these facilities may be spreading bed bugs, unknowingly carrying them to their places of residence and elsewhere after leaving work.
Fertilization also allows for egg production through the corpus allatum.
It takes between five and ten minutes for a bed bug to become completely engorged with blood.
Other contributing factors that are less frequently mentioned in news reports are increased public awareness and slum clearance programs that combined pesticide use with steam disinfection, relocation of slum dwellers to new housing, and in some cases also follow-up inspections for several months after relocated tenants moved into their new housing.
Instead, the male pierces the female's abdomen with his hypodermic penis and ejaculates into the body cavity.
Adults grow to  long and  wide.
In all bed bug species except ''Primicimex cavernis,'' sperm are injected into the mesospermalege, a component of the spermalege, a secondary genital structure that reduces the wounding and immunological costs of traumatic insemination.
Bed bugs are not known to transmit any pathogens as disease vectors.
Additionally, bed bugs are reaching places in which they never established before, such as southern South America.
The term "bed bug" may also be spelled "bedbug" or "bed-bug", though published sources consistently use the unhyphenated two-word name "bed bug".
Bed bugs occur around the world.
, no truly effective pesticides were available.
Later, DDT was used to good effect as a safer alternative.
The common bed bug (''C.
As a result, the Chicago City Council passed a bed bug control ordinance to limit their spread.
The front wings are vestigial and reduced to pad-like structures.
Sensitivity of humans varies from extreme allergic reaction to no reaction at all (about 20%).
(Belief in the medicinal use of bed bugs persisted until at least the 18th century, when Guettard recommended their use in the treatment of hysteria.)
Females have evolved the spermalege to protect themselves from wounding and infection.
Mechanical approaches, such as vacuuming up the insects and heat-treating or wrapping mattresses, are effective.
The abdomens of the sexes differ in that the males appear to have "pointed" abdomens, which are actually their copulatory organs, while females have more rounded abdomens.
Starving them is difficult as they can survive without eating for 100 to 300 days, depending on temperature.
The second proposed reason is that releasing the alarm pheromone reduces the benefits associated with multiple mating.
Benefits of multiple mating include material benefits, better quality nourishment or more nourishment, genetic benefits including increased fitness of offspring, and finally, the cost of resistance may be higher than the benefit of consent—which appears the case in ''C.
The tips of the right and left maxillary stylets are not the same; the right is hook-like and curved, and the left is straight.
As bed bugs continue to adapt pesticide resistance, researchers have examined on the insect's genome to see how the adaptations develop and to look for potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited in the growth and development phases.
Males fertilize females only by traumatic insemination into the structure called the ectospermalege (the organ of Berlese, however the organ of Ribaga, as it was first named, was first designated as an organ of stridulation.
If it successfully feeds, it returns to its shelter.
Another study found 100% mortality rates for bed bugs exposed to temperatures greater than  for more than 2 minutes.
Bean leaves have been used historically to trap bedbugs in houses in Eastern Europe.
lectularius'') is the species best adapted to human environments.
Adult bed bugs are light brown to reddish-brown, flattened, oval-shaped, and have no hind wings.
The males excrete an aggregation pheromone into the air that attracts virgin females and arrests other males.
These two names are not descriptive, so other terminologies are used).
Other species include ''Cimex hemipterus'', found in tropical regions, which also infests poultry and bats, and ''Leptocimex boueti'', found in the tropics of West Africa and South America, which infests bats and humans.
The leaves are then destroyed.
The female is able to curl her abdomen forward and underneath toward the head to not mate.
