In Antoine Magnan's 1934 book ''Le vol des insectes'', he wrote that he and André Sainte-Laguë had applied the equations of air resistance to insects and found that their flight could not be explained by fixed-wing calculations, but that "One shouldn't be surprised that the results of the calculations don't square with reality".
The orchid bees include some primitively eusocial species with similar biology.
They have no legs but are able to move within the confines of the cell, helped by tubercles on their sides.
However, certain wasp species such as pollen wasps have similar behaviours, and a few species of bee scavenge from carcases to feed their offspring.
By the Eocene (~45 mya) there was already considerable diversity among eusocial bee lineages.
Tropical bees may have several generations in a year and no diapause stage.
Contract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries.
Behaviourally, one of the most obvious characteristics of bees is that they collect pollen to provide provisions for their young, and have the necessary adaptations to do this.
By raising native plants, they provide food for native bee pollinators like ''L.
However, unlike many other bee brood parasites, they have pollen baskets and often collect pollen.
The group is called eusocial if, in addition, the group consists of a mother (the queen) and her daughters (workers), with male drones at certain stages.
The Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, around 34 Mya, of the Florissant shale.
The humorous 2007 animated film ''Bee Movie'' used Jerry Seinfeld's first script and was his first work for children; he starred as a bee named Barry B. Benson, alongside Renée Zellweger.
The egg is generally oblong, slightly curved and tapering at one end.
The Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene (~25 Mya) to early Miocene.
The sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilised; after mating, a female stores the sperm, and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid, fertilised eggs producing female offspring and unfertilised eggs, males.
The highly eusocial corbiculate Apidae appeared roughly 87 Mya, and the Allodapini (within the Apidae) around 53 Mya.
There is a gland under the mouth that secretes a viscous liquid which solidifies into the silk they use to produce their cocoons.
Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences, namely: carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, polyester bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees and digger bees.
Bees range in size from tiny stingless bee species whose workers are less than  long, to ''Megachile pluto'', the largest species of leafcutter bee, whose females can attain a length of .
This type of group is called "communal" and is not uncommon.
This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle "Emery's rule".
In some species, groups of cohabiting females may be sisters, and if there is a division of labour within the group, they are considered semisocial.
From 2013 the European Union restricted some pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further.
In 2006 and 2007 the rate of attrition increased, and was described as colony collapse disorder.
These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images.
mellifera'' that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies; they are unusually defensive.
In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as "Telling the bees".
In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species worldwide using the IUCN Red List criteria.
This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton termed "supersisters", more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring.
There is, however, a pronounced tendency for oligolectic bees to be associated with common, widespread plants which are visited by multiple pollinators.
Most bees have scopal hairs located on their hind legs or on the underside of their abdomens, some bees in the family Apidae possess pollen baskets on their hind legs while very few species lack these entirely and instead collect pollen in their crops.
The honey buzzard attacks bees' nests and eats the larvae.
Stingless bees are highly eusocial.
The ethologist Karl von Frisch studied navigation in the honey bee.
'''Bees''' are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants, known for their role in pollination and, in the case of the best-known bee species, the European honey bee, for producing honey and beeswax.
In rare cases, a plant species may only be effectively pollinated by a single bee species, and some plants are endangered at least in part because their pollinator is also threatened.
Until recently, the oldest non-compression bee fossil had been found in New Jersey amber, ''Cretotrigona prisca'' of Cretaceous age, a corbiculate bee.
Apart from honey and pollination, honey bees produce beeswax, royal jelly and propolis.
When the cuckoo bee larva hatches it consumes the host larva's pollen ball, and often the host egg also.
Beewolves are large wasps that habitually attack bees; the ethologist Niko Tinbergen estimated that a single colony of the beewolf ''Philanthus triangulum'' might kill several thousand honeybees in a day: all the prey he observed were honeybees.
The wings are synchronised in flight and the somewhat smaller hind wings connect to the forewings by a row of hooks along their margin which connect to a groove in the forewing.
2012, which used molecular phylogeny to demonstrate that the bees arose from deep within the Crabronidae, which is therefore paraphyletic.
Bees also developed structures known as scopal hairs and pollen baskets to collect and carry pollen.
The cuckoo bees in the ''Bombus'' subgenus ''Psithyrus'' are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size.
But, monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees.
Some have refracting superposition compound eyes: these combine the output of many elements of their compound eyes to provide enough light for each retinal photoreceptor.
Other predatory insects that sometimes catch bees include robber flies and dragonflies.
mellifera scutellata'') are being destroyed by parasitic workers of the Cape honeybee, ''A.
Among Classical Era authors, beekeeping with the use of smoke is described in the ''History of Animals'' Book 9 (a book not written by Aristotle himself).
Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer.
Specialist ambush predators of visitors to flowers include crab spiders, which wait on flowering plants for pollinating insects; predatory bugs, and praying mantises, some of which (the flower mantises of the tropics) wait motionless, aggressive mimics camouflaged as flowers.
Honey bees are affected by parasites including acarine and ''Varroa'' mites.
Derived features of its morphology (apomorphies) place it clearly within the bees, but it retains two unmodified ancestral traits (plesiomorphies) of the legs (two mid-tibial spurs, and a slender hind basitarsus), showing its transitional status.
Four bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular.
Bumblebees are eusocial, like the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets.
Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of ''A.
These lay diploid eggs ("thelytoky"), escaping normal worker policing, leading to the colony's destruction; the parasites can then move to other hives.
A bee fossil from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya), ''Melittosphex burmensis'', is considered ''"an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees"''.
The location and type differ among and between groups of bees.
The requirements for eusociality are more easily fulfilled by haplodiploid species such as bees because of their unusual relatedness structure.
Bee larvae are included in the Javanese dish ''botok tawon'', where they are eaten steamed with shredded coconut.
The nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood, in solitary bees, to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees.
Others parasitize bees in different families, like ''Townsendiella'', a nomadine apid, two species of which are cleptoparasites of the dasypodaid genus ''Hesperapis'', while the other species in the same genus attacks halictid bees.
The most advanced of these are eusocial colonies found among the honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless bees; these are characterised by having cooperative brood care and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive adults.
Before domestication of bees was even attempted, humans were raiding their nests for their honey.
Apart from colony collapse disorder, losses outside the US have been attributed to causes including pesticide seed dressings, such as Clothianidin, Imidacloprid and Thiamethoxam.
Bees navigate using spatial memory with a "rich, map-like organization".
Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency.
The Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species  found in amber.
Simple hives and smoke were used; jars of honey were found in the tombs of pharaohs such as Tutankhamun.
They also gather "bee brood" (the larvae, pupae and surrounding cells) for consumption.
Bees are adapted for feeding on nectar and pollen, the former primarily as an energy source and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients.
Bees are also mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate (pseudocopulation) with the furry lip of the flower, thus pollinating it.
Large groups of solitary bee nests are called ''aggregations'', to distinguish them from colonies.
Specialist pollinators also include bee species which gather floral oils instead of pollen, and male orchid bees, which gather aromatic compounds from orchids (one of the few cases where male bees are effective pollinators).
There are nearly 20,000 known species of bees in seven to nine recognized families, though many are undescribed and the actual number is probably higher.
Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other.
The queen initiates a nest on her own.
The antennae usually have thirteen segments in males and twelve in females and are geniculate, having an elbow joint part way along.
In the Indonesian dish ''botok tawon'' from Central and East Java, bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut,  wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.
Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax.
Most are in the family Halictidae, or "sweat bees".
When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males.
Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females hibernate.
The novelty is that bees are specialized as pollination agents, with behavioral and physical modifications that specifically enhance pollination, and are the most efficient pollinating insects.
When ready to emerge, it splits its skin dorsally and climbs out of the exuviae as a winged adult and breaks out of the cell.
Honey is a natural product produced by bees and stored for their own use, but its sweetness has always appealed to humans.
They have short horns on the head, jaws for chewing their food and an appendage on either side of the mouth tipped with a bristle.
In 2010 invertebrate iridescent virus and the fungus ''Nosema ceranae'' were shown to be in every killed colony, and deadly in combination.
In 1996 it was shown that vortices created by many insects' wings helped to provide lift.
Some bees provide tufts of hairs called acarinaria that appear to provide lodgings for mites; in return, it is believed that the mites eat fungi that attack pollen, so the relationship in this case may be mutualistc.
Most bees are polylectic (generalist) meaning they collect pollen from a range of flowering plants, however, some are oligoleges (specialists), in that they only gather pollen from one or a few species or genera of closely related plants.
From the 18th century, European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the colony.
Bees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities.
The most common bees in the Northern Hemisphere are the Halictidae, or sweat bees, but they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies.
They also produce some substances used as dietary supplements with possible health benefits, pollen, propolis, and royal jelly, though all of these can also cause allergic reactions.
The number of colonies kept by beekeepers declined slightly, through urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and ''Varroa'' mites, and the closure of beekeeping businesses.
This unusual situation has been proposed as an explanation of the multiple independent evolutions of eusociality (arising at least nine separate times) within the Hymenoptera.
High-speed cinematography and robotic mock-up of a bee wing showed that lift was generated by "the unconventional combination of short, choppy wing strokes, a rapid rotation of the wing as it flops over and reverses direction, and a very fast wing-beat frequency".
The image of a community of honey bees has been used from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, and by political and social theorists such as Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx as a model for human society.
The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when there are multiple females using that same entrance on a regular basis.
A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds.
Bee pollination is important both ecologically and commercially; the decline in wild bees has increased the value of pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees.
In the case of solitary bees, each one is laid in a cell with a supply of mixed pollen and nectar next to it.
Some species including honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless bees live socially in colonies.
Bees have appeared in mythology and folklore, again since ancient times, and they feature in works of literature as varied as Virgil's ''Georgics'', Beatrix Potter's ''The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse'', and W. B. Yeats's poem ''The Lake Isle of Innisfree''.
Bees were associated, too, with the Delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee.
He showed that honey bees communicate by the waggle dance, in which a worker indicates the location of a food source to other workers in the hive.
The female typically creates a compartment (a "cell") with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off.
In ''Lasioglossum leucozonium'', the Dufour's Gland mostly contains octadecanolide as well as some eicosanolide.
Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average.
According to inclusive fitness theory, organisms can gain fitness not just through increasing their own reproductive output, but also that of close relatives.
Smoke was often used to subdue the bees and such activities are depicted in rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC.
This may be rolled into a pellet or placed in a pile and is known as mass provisioning.
There are 29 subspecies of ''Apis mellifera'', native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.
Conversely, many bees are haplodiploid yet are not eusocial, and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males, creating half-sisters that share only 25% of their genes.
The Arctic bee species, ''Bombus hyperboreus,'' in particular are an aggressive species that attack and enslave other bees of the same subgenus.
vierecki'' and ''L.
The life cycle of a bee, be it a solitary or social species, involves the laying of an egg, the development through several moults of a legless larva, a pupation stage during which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis, followed by the emergence of a winged adult.
They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee.
The world's largest species of bee is thought to be the Indonesian resin bee ''Megachile pluto'', whose females can attain a length of .
The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests.
Some allodapine bees are primitively eusocial colonies, with progressive provisioning: a larva's food is supplied gradually as it develops, as is the case in honey bees and some bumblebees.
They house large numbers of sense organs that can detect touch (mechanoreceptors), smell and taste, and small, hairlike mechanoreceptors that can detect air movement so as to "hear" sounds.
There is also evidence of n-triscosane, n-heptacosane, and 22-docosanolide.
Most other bees, including familiar insects such as carpenter bees, leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself.
Vertebrate predators of bees include birds such as bee-eaters; insect predators include beewolves and dragonflies.
English names, where available, are given in parentheses.
Bees are able to sense the presence of desirable flowers through ultraviolet patterning on flowers, floral odors, and even electromagnetic fields.
This drove the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, the bees themselves.
The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae.
Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea, presently considered as a clade '''Anthophila'''.
He demonstrated that bees can recognize a desired compass direction in three different ways: by the sun, by the polarization pattern of the blue sky, and by the earth’s magnetic field.
Most are tropical or subtropical, but there are some which live in arid regions at higher latitudes.
Honey bees are used commercially to produce honey.
The Melittidae are known from ''Palaeomacropis eocenicus'' in the Early Eocene.
The account mentions that bees die after stinging; that workers remove corpses from the hive, and guard it; castes including workers and non-working drones, but "kings" rather than queens; predators including toads and bee-eaters; and the waggle dance, with the "irresistible suggestion" of άpοσειονται (aroseiontai, it waggles) and παρακολουθούσιν (parakolouthousin, they watch).
Solitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood.
Wing-beat frequency normally increases as size decreases, but as the bee's wing beat covers such a small arc, it flaps approximately 230 times per second, faster than a fruitfly (200 times per second) which is 80 times smaller.
There is no division of labor so these nests lack queens and ''worker'' bees for these species.
The mouthparts are adapted for both chewing and sucking by having both a pair of mandibles and a long proboscis for sucking up nectar.
Most pollen is used as food for larvae.
In the south of Africa, hives of African honeybees (''A.
Depictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago; efforts to domesticate them are shown in Egyptian art around 4,500 years ago.
Brood parasites occur in several bee families including the apid subfamily Nomadinae.
Three bee maidens with the power of divination and thus speaking truth are described in Homer's ''Hymn to Hermes'', and the food of the gods is "identified as honey"; the bee maidens were originally associated with Apollo, and are probably not correctly identified with the Thriae.
such as the European mason bee ''Hoplitis anthocopoides'', and the Dawson's Burrowing bee, ''Amegilla dawsoni,'' are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, and giving the appearance of being social.
In a process of coevolution, flowers developed floral rewards such as nectar and longer tubes, and bees developed longer tongues to extract the nectar.
A nest may consist of numerous cells.
Critics found its premise awkward and its delivery tame.
Human beekeeping or apiculture has been practised for millennia, since at least the times of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece.
Beekeeping is described in detail by Virgil in his ''Eclogues''; it is also mentioned in his ''Aeneid'', and in Pliny's ''Natural History''.
In evolutionary terms, individuals should help relatives when ''Cost < Relatedness * Benefit''.
The ancestors of bees were wasps in the family Crabronidae, which were predators of other insects.
Between and above these are three small simple eyes (ocelli) which provide information for the bee on light intensity.
Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the pre-existing nest cavity, and colonies rarely last more than a year.
leucozonium'', leading to less reliance on honey bee populations.
Winter losses increased to about 1/3.
The Heterogynaidae is also broken up.
The larvae are generally whitish grubs, roughly oval and bluntly-pointed at both ends.
They have fifteen segments and spiracles in each segment for breathing.
In social species of bee there is progressive provisioning with the larva being fed regularly while it grows.
The smallest species may be dwarf stingless bees in the tribe Meliponini whose workers are less than  in length.
The pupa can be seen through the semi-transparent cocoon and over the course of a few days, the insect undergoes metamorphosis into the form of the adult bee.
The true honey bees (genus ''Apis'') are highly eusocial, and are among the best known of all insects.
Their ability to fly by night enables them to avoid many predators, and to exploit flowers that produce nectar only or also at night.
This has led to a common misconception that bees "violate aerodynamic theory", but in fact it merely confirms that bees do not engage in fixed-wing flight, and that their flight is explained by other mechanics, such as those used by helicopters.
Because a male is haploid (has only one copy of each gene), his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's.
They practise mass provisioning, with complex nest architecture and perennial colonies.
The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge.
In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming.
The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age.
He showed that the sun is the preferred or main compass; the other mechanisms are used under cloudy skies or inside a dark beehive.
Haplodiploidy is thus neither necessary nor sufficient for eusociality.
The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate.
The humans break open the nests and take the honey and the bird feeds on the larvae and the wax.
Swifts and swallows fly almost continually, catching insects as they go.
Some solitary bees have advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies.
Queens and workers differ only in size, if at all.
There are some forty oligoleges associated with the creosote bush in the arid parts of the United States southwest, for example.
They are found on every continent except Antarctica, in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants.
Most solitary bees nest in the ground in a variety of soil textures and conditions while others create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, holes in wood.
While solitary females each make individual nests, some species.
When the castes are purely behavioural alternatives, the system is considered primitively eusocial as in many paper wasps; when the castes are morphologically discrete, the system is considered highly eusocial.
There are many more species of primitively eusocial than highly eusocial bees, but they have rarely been studied.
A bee has a pair of large compound eyes which cover much of the surface of the head.
Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom.
Females of these bees lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests.
In haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs.
From 1972 to 2006, feral honey bees declined dramatically in the US, and they are now almost absent.
The thorax has three segments, each with a pair of robust legs, and a pair of membranous wings on the hind two segments.
This cladogram is based on Debevic et al.
Indigenous people in many countries eat insects, including consuming the larvae and pupae of bees, mostly stingless bees.
Honey, according to a Greek myth, was discovered by a nymph called Melissa ("Bee"); and honey was offered to the Greek gods from Mycenean times.
However farmers have focused on alternative solutions in order to mitigate these problems.
Workers often do not reproduce, but they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters (as queens) than they would by having their own offspring (each of which would only have 50% of their genes).
Once landed, a bee then uses nectar quality and pollen taste to determine whether to continue visiting similar flowers.
The abdomen has nine segments, the hindermost three being modified into the sting.
''Varroa'' mites were thought to be responsible for about half the losses.
