The initial costs and equipment requirements are typically much less than other hive designs.
In addition, when a bee consumes honey the bee's abdomen distends, supposedly making it difficult to make the necessary flexes to sting, though this has not been tested scientifically.
These hives have no frames and the honey-filled comb is not returned after extraction.
In the United States, the Langstroth hive is commonly used.
Once either process has begun, the old queen normally leaves the hive with the hatching of the first queen cells.
Other regions have only a single nectar flow.
There are more than 20,000 species of wild bees.
Her first orientation flight may only last a few seconds, just enough to mark the position of the hive.
Some of the most well known top-bar hive designs are the Kenyan Top Bar Hive with sloping sides, the Tanzanian Top Bar Hive with straight sides, and Vertical Top Bar Hives, such as the Warre or "People's Hive" designed by Abbe Warre in the mid-1900s.
Although the stinger is barbed, a worker bee is less likely to become lodged into clothing than human skin.
Beekeeping with European honeybee, (''Apis mellifera'') was started by '''Dr.
In the United Kingdom, the most common type of hive is the British National, which can hold Hoffman, British Standard or Manley frames.
The most popular vertical top-bar hive is probably the Warré hive, based on a design by the French priest Abbé Émile Warré (1867–1951) and popularized by Dr. David Heaf in his English translation of Warré's book ''L'Apiculture pour Tous'' as ''Beekeeping For All''.
In prehistoric Greece (Crete and Mycenae), there existed a system of high-status apiculture, as can be concluded from the finds of hives, smoking pots, honey extractors and other beekeeping paraphernalia in Knossos.
'''Apiculture''' (from  "bee") is the maintenance of honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, by humans.
These combs must contain eggs or larvae less than three days old and be covered by young ''nurse bees'', which care for the brood and keep it warm.
When a hive swarms despite the beekeeper's preventative efforts, a good management practice is to give the reduced hive a couple frames of open brood with eggs.
Some beekeeping supply sources also sell commercial fuels like pulped paper and compressed cotton, or even aerosol cans of smoke.
At this juncture, the bees produce one or more queen cells by modifying existing worker cells that contain a normal female egg.
Torpor may also be induced by the introduction of chilled air into the hive – while chilled carbon dioxide may have harmful long-term effects.
Successive swarms are called 'after-swarms' or 'casts' and can be very small, often with just a thousand or so bees—as opposed to a prime swarm, which may contain as many as ten to twenty-thousand bees.
Older workers leave the hive daily, weather permitting, to forage for nectar, pollen, water, and propolis.
Its archives are held in the National Library of Wales.
Root pioneered the manufacture of hives and the distribution of bee-packages in the United States.
Sealed pots of honey were found in the grave goods of pharaohs such as Tutankhamun.
The horizontal top-bar hive, as championed by Marty Hardison, Michael Bush, Philip Chandler, Dennis Murrell and others, can be seen as a modernization of hollow log hives, with the addition of wooden bars of specific width from which bees hang their combs.
The disadvantage is that in subsequent generations these advantages may fade away and hybrids tend to be very defensive and aggressive.
The queen who leaves finds herself in a new hive with no eggs and no larvae but lots of energetic young bees who create a new set of brood combs from scratch in a very short time.
The Langstroth was the first successful top-opened hive with movable frames.
These appear similar to large peanut-like structures about an inch long that hang from the center or side of the brood combs.
However, skeps are still used for collecting swarms by hobbyists in the UK, before moving them into standard hives.
An environment of year-round, uninterrupted bloom creates an ideal environment for colony reproduction.
It is generally accepted that a colony of bees does not swarm until they have completed all of their brood combs, i.e., filled all available space with eggs, larvae, and brood.
Italian bees are very prolific and inclined to swarm; Northern European black bees have a strong tendency to supersede their old queen without swarming.
In the tropics, other species of social bees are managed for honey production, including the Asiatic honey bee (''Apis cerana'').
All modern beehives are descendants of his design.
It takes many years of learning and experience to be able to manage all these aspects successfully, though owing to variable circumstances many beginners often achieve a good honey harvest.
These fuels include hessian, twine, burlap, pine needles, corrugated cardboard, and mostly rotten or punky wood.
In Egypt in the 1930s, Abushady established The Bee Kingdom League and its organ, The Bee Kingdom.
Inevitably, the queen begins to falter, and the bees decide to replace her by creating a new queen from one of her worker eggs.
The Rose hive is a modern design that attempts to address many of the flaws and limitations of other movable frame hives.
'''Jan Dzierżon''', was the father of modern apiology and apiculture.
All of the ''Apis mellifera'' sub-species are capable of inter-breeding and hybridizing.
In general the more northerly black races are said to swarm less and supersede more, whereas the more southerly yellow and grey varieties are said to swarm more frequently.
Some have found that "city bees" are actually healthier than "rural bees" because there are fewer pesticides and greater biodiversity.
In many developing countries fixed comb hives are widely used and, because they can be made from any locally available material, are very inexpensive.
All the time that the queen is fertile and laying eggs she produces a variety of pheromones, which control the behavior of the bees in the hive.
Otherwise, it returns to a feral state, in which case it finds shelter in a hollow tree, excavation, abandoned chimney, or even behind shutters.
The advantages of the initial F1 hybrids produced by these crosses include: hybrid vigor, increased honey productivity, and greater disease resistance.
J. Cook''', author of ''The Bee-Keepers' Guide; or Manual of the Apiary'', 1876.
Some of these hybrids are marketed under specific brand names, such as the Buckfast Bee or Midnite Bee.
If, however, he can use the swarming impulse to breed a new queen but keep all the bees in the colony together, he maximizes his chances of a good harvest.
The bees travelling from frame to frame and box to box via the channels.
The developing larva in a queen cell is fed differently from an ordinary worker-bee; in addition to the normal honey and pollen, she receives a great deal of royal jelly, a special food secreted by young 'nurse bees' from the hypopharyngeal gland.
The 19th century saw this revolution in beekeeping practice completed through the perfection of the movable comb hive by the American Lorenzo Lorraine Langstroth.
Scouts are sent out from the swarm to find suitable hollow trees or rock crevices.
Subsequent mating flights may last from 5 minutes to 30 minutes, and she may mate with a number of male drones on each flight.
Supersedure is highly valued as a behavioral trait by beekeepers because a hive that supersedes its old queen does not swarm and so no stock is lost; it merely creates a new queen and allows the old one to fade away, or alternatively she is killed when the new queen emerges.
P. Goyal''' in Punjab in early 1960s.It remained confined to Punjab and Himachal Pradesh up to late 1970s.
She can choose whether or not to fertilize an egg as she lays it; if she does so, it develops into a female worker bee; if she lays an unfertilized egg it becomes a male drone.
These differences are the result of differing evolutionary pressures in the regions where each sub-species evolved.
His book, ''Fifty Years Among the Bees'', remains a classic and his influence on bee management persists to this day.
This was destructive and unhygienic, but for hunter-gatherer societies this did not matter, since the honey was generally consumed immediately and there were always more wild colonies to exploit.
Dadant and Modified Dadant hives are widely used in France and Italy where their large size is an advantage.
Smoke also masks alarm pheromones released by guard bees or when bees are squashed in an inspection.
He was also the first to confirm that mating with drones takes place outside of hives and that queens are inseminated by a number of successive matings with male drones, high in the air at a great distance from their hive.
They are a step up from fixed comb and top bar hives because they have movable frames that can be extracted.
Intermediate stages in the transition from the old beekeeping to the new were recorded for example by Thomas Wildman in 1768/1770, who described advances over the destructive old skep-based beekeeping so that the bees no longer had to be killed to harvest the honey.
She decides which type of egg to lay depending on the size of the open brood cell she encounters on the comb.
Smoke calms bees; it initiates a feeding response in anticipation of possible hive abandonment due to fire.
If all the honey is 'stolen', including the amount of honey needed to survive winter, the beekeeper must replace these stores by feeding the bees sugar or corn syrup in autumn.
It is a water-based solution that is sprayed onto the bees from a plastic spray bottle.
A fixed comb hive is a hive in which the combs cannot be removed or manipulated for management or harvesting without permanently damaging the comb.
This meant that honeycombs could be returned to a hive undamaged but empty, saving the bees a vast amount of work, time, and materials.
This single invention greatly improved the efficiency of honey harvesting and catalysed the modern honey industry.
Honeybees were kept in Egypt from antiquity.
Usually smoke is not needed, since swarms tend to be less defensive, as they have no stores or brood to defend, and a fresh swarm has fed well from the hive.
Feeding older larvae
'''Petro Prokopovych''', used frames with channels in the side of the woodwork, these were packed side by side in boxes that were stacked one on top of the other.
The De-Layens hive is popular in parts of Spain.
This cargo of honey also makes swarming bees less inclined to sting.
Beekeeping has also been practiced in ancient China since antiquity.
Disadvantages include combs that are fragile and cannot usually be extracted and returned to the bees to be refilled and that they cannot easily be expanded for additional honey storage.
Experienced beekeepers sometimes elect not to use gloves because they inhibit delicate manipulations.
Its widespread adoption in recent years can be attributed to the publication in 2007 of ''The Barefoot Beekeeper'' by Philip Chandler, which challenged many aspects of modern beekeeping and offered the horizontal top-bar hive as a viable alternative to the ubiquitous Langstroth-style movable-frame hive.
The invention and development of the movable-comb-hive fostered the growth of commercial honey production on a large scale in both Europe and the USA (see also Beekeeping in the United States).
propolis foraging; robbing other hives
Within the central brood nest, a single frame of comb typically has a central disk of eggs, larvae and sealed brood cells that may extend almost to the edges of the frame.
One of these chemicals suppresses the development of ovaries in all the female worker bees in the hive and prevents them from laying eggs.
The Apis Club was transitioned to the International Bee Research Association (IBRA).
Before leaving, the worker bees fill their stomachs with honey in preparation for the creation of new honeycombs in a new home.
The De-Layens hive, Jackson Horizontal Hive, and various chest type hives are widely used in Spain, France, Ukraine, Belarus, Africa, and parts of Russia.
The first cautionary step that should be taken following a bee sting is removing the stinger without squeezing the attached venom glands.
Miller''' was one of the first entrepreneurs to actually make a living from apiculture.
A small after-swarm has less chance of survival and may threaten the original hive's survival if the number of individuals left is unsustainable.
This enables the beekeeper to slide any frame out of the hive for inspection, without harming the bees or the comb, protecting the eggs, larvae and pupae contained within the cells.
Urban bees may fail to find forage, however, and homeowners can use their landscapes to help feed local bee populations by planting flowers that provide nectar and pollen.
The gross symptoms displayed by affected adult bees are very similar, whatever the cause, making it difficult for the apiarist to ascertain the causes of problems without microscopic identification of microorganisms or chemical analysis of poisons.
The development of a bee colony follows an annual cycle of growth that begins in spring with a rapid expansion of the brood nest, as soon as pollen is available for feeding larvae.
Otherwise, she is quickly superseded in the new home.
Mating takes place at some distance from the hive and often several hundred feet in the air; it is thought that this separates the strongest drones from the weaker ones, ensuring that only the fastest and strongest drones get to pass on their genes.
In ancient Greece, aspects of the lives of bees and beekeeping are discussed at length by Aristotle.
This generally occurs in late spring at a time when the other areas of the hive are rapidly filling with honey stores.
Smoke is the beekeeper's third line of defense.
The Jackson Horizontal Hive is particularly well adapted for tropical agriculture.
The queen may live for up to three years or more and may be capable of laying half a million eggs or more in her lifetime.
In modern hives the beekeeper places separate boxes, called 'supers', above the brood box, in which a series of shallower combs is provided for storage of honey.
He also described using such hives in a multi-storey configuration, foreshadowing the modern use of supers:  he described adding (at a proper time) successive straw hives below, and eventually removing the ones above when free of brood and filled with honey, so that the bees could be separately preserved at the harvest for a following season.
One key trigger of the swarming instinct is when the queen has no more room to lay eggs and the hive population is becoming very congested.
However, even the best queens live only a few years and one or two years longevity is the norm.
Over several matings, possibly a dozen or more, the queen receives and stores enough sperm from a succession of drones to fertilize hundreds of thousands of eggs.
Indian beekeepers, especially in Kerala, often use coconut fibers as they are readily available, safe, and of negligible expense.
A newly issued swarm is noticeably gentle for up to 24 hours and is often capable of being handled by a beekeeper without gloves or veil.
The 18th and 19th centuries saw successive stages of a revolution in beekeeping, which allowed the bees themselves to be preserved when taking the harvest.
Some production of brood may begin as early as January, even in a cold winter, but breeding accelerates towards a peak in May (in the northern hemisphere), producing an abundance of harvesting bees synchronized to the main nectar flow in that region.
Another important factor in swarming is the age of the queen.
The only significant weakness of the Rose design is that it requires 2 or 3 boxes as a brood nest which infers a large number of frames to be worked when managing the bees.
Each race or sub-species of honey bee has its own swarming characteristics.
Without a properly performing queen, the hive is doomed.
The face and neck are the most important areas to protect, so most beekeepers wear at least a veil.
This provides the maximum differentiation from the colony's natural predators (such as bears and skunks) which tend to be dark-colored and furry.
'''Moses Quinby''', often termed 'the father of commercial beekeeping in the United States', author of ''Mysteries of Bee-Keeping Explained''.
Huber was the first to prove by observation and experiment that queens are physically inseminated by drones outside the confines of hives, usually a great distance away.
L. Langstroth''', revered as the "father of American apiculture", no other individual has influenced modern beekeeping practice more than Lorenzo Lorraine Langstroth.
This enables the beekeeper to remove some of the supers in the late summer, and to extract the surplus honey harvest, without damaging the colony of bees and its brood nest below.
A beekeeper may capture it and introduce it into a new hive, helping meet this need.
A growing number of amateur beekeepers are adopting various top-bar hives similar to the type commonly found in Africa.
The charity Bees for Development recognizes that local skills to manage bees in fixed comb hives are widespread in Africa, Asia, and South America.
Scrap wood or #2 or #3 pine can often be used to build a nice hive.
These brood combs and attendant nurse bees are then placed into a small 'nucleus hive' with other combs containing honey and pollen.
Some regions of Europe have two nectar flows: one in late spring and another in late August.
All colonies are totally dependent on their queen, who is the only egg-layer.
They may do this because she has been damaged (lost a leg or an antenna), because she has run out of sperm and cannot lay fertilized eggs (has become a 'drone laying queen'), or because her pheromones have dwindled to where they cannot control all the bees in the hive.
Mating flight is otherwise known as 'nuptial flight'.
If a colony swarms unexpectedly and the beekeeper does not manage to capture the resulting swarm, he is likely to harvest significantly less honey from that hive, since he has lost half his worker bees at a single stroke.
This also simplifies honey collection since an entire box of honey can be removed instead of removing one frame at a time.
Entrance guards; nectar, pollen, water and
Usually, however, the bees deliberately prevent her from doing this, in which case, she too leads a second swarm from the hive.
This swarm looks for shelter.
Later on in 1982,  '''Dr.
the little honeybee (''Apis florea''), giant honeybee (''Apis dorsata'') and rock bee (''Apis laboriosa'').
A beekeeper (or apiarist) keeps bees in order to collect their honey and other products that the hive produces (including beeswax, propolis, pollen, and royal jelly), to pollinate crops, or to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers.
It is not unusual to see some other sorts of hive (Smith, Commercial, WBC, Langstroth, and Rose).
Over the course of their lives, worker bees' duties are dictated by age.
Inscriptions detailing the production of honey are found on the tomb of Pabasa from the Twenty-sixth Dynasty (c. 650 BCE), depicting pouring honey in jars and cylindrical hives.
If one were to cut a vertical cross-section through the hive from side to side, the brood nest would appear as a roughly ovoid ball spanning 5-8 frames of comb.
Worker bees sometimes kill a non-performing queen and produce another.
Almost any hollow structure can be used for this purpose, such as a log gum, skep, wooden box, or a clay pot or tube.
Square Dadant hives - often called 12 frame Dadant or  Brother Adam hives - are used in large parts of Germany and other parts of Europe by commercial beekeepers.
Ahmed Zaky Abushady''' (1892–1955), was an Egyptian poet, medical doctor, bacteriologist and bee scientist who was active in England and in Egypt in the early part of the twentieth century.
At the peak of the breeding season, late spring to summer, a good queen may be capable of laying 3,000 eggs in one day, more than her own body weight.
The amount of royal jelly fed to a larva determines whether it develops into a worker bee or a queen.
Smoke is of questionable use with a swarm, because swarms do not have honey stores to feed on in response.
'''Walter T. Kelley''' was an American pioneer of modern beekeeping in the early and mid-20th century.
The ensuing confusion creates an opportunity for the beekeeper to open the hive and work without triggering a defensive reaction.
Many species are solitary (e.g., mason bees, leafcutter bees (Megachilidae), carpenter bees and  other ground-nesting bees).
Practitioners of 'natural beekeeping' tend to use variations of the top-bar hive, which is a simple design that retains the concept of movable comb without the use of frames or foundation.
The emptied honey combs could then be returned to the bees intact for refilling.
If she does not manage to leave the hive to mate—possibly due to bad weather or being trapped in part of the hive—she remains infertile and become a ''drone layer'', incapable of producing female worker bees.
Because of this, the production of honey is likely to be somewhat less than that of a frame and super based hive such as Langstroth or Dadant.
The workers realize that the queen is absent after as little as an hour, as her pheromones fade in the hive.
Their advantages include being light weight, adaptable, easy to harvest honey, and less stressful for the bees.
R. C. Sihag''', working at Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar (Haryana), introduced and established this honeybee in Haryana and standardized its management practices for semi-arid-subtropical climates.On the basis of these practices, beekeeping with this honeybee could be extended to the rest of the country.
As soon as the nurse bees find themselves in this new hive and realize they have no queen, they set about constructing emergency queen cells using the eggs or larvae they have in the combs with them.
Although he went blind before he was twenty, Huber employed a secretary, Francois Burnens, to make daily observations, conduct careful experiments, and keep accurate notes over more than twenty years.
The skill of the beekeeper lies in predicting when the nectar flow will occur in his area and in trying to ensure that his colonies achieve a maximum population of harvesters at exactly the right time.
However, the bees pursue two distinct behaviors:
The last step that needs to be taken is to apply ice or a cold compress to the stung area.
It wasn't until the 18th century that European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the entire colony.
In the U.K. practical beekeeping was led in the early 20th century by a few men, pre-eminently '''Brother Adam''' and his Buckfast bee and '''R.O.B.
The queen is the only sexually mature female in the hive and all of the female worker bees and male drones are her offspring.
The oldest testimony on their use dates back to 1669 although it is probable that their use is more than 3000 years old.
Quinby used box hives to produce so much honey that he saturated the New York market in the 1860s.
Many others rear their young in burrows and small colonies (e.g., bumblebees and stingless bees).
This allowed inspecting individual wax combs and greatly improved direct observation of hive activity.
His plans were detailed in a stele of 760 BCE:
The common agents of disease that affect adult honey bees include fungi, bacteria, protozoa, viruses, parasites, and poisons.
A domesticated bee colony is normally housed in a rectangular hive body, within which eight to ten parallel frames house the vertical plates of honeycomb that contain the eggs, larvae, pupae and food for the colony.
Other beekeepers use sumac as fuel because it ejects lots of smoke and doesn't have an odor.
Depictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago.
There could be no continuity of production and no possibility of selective breeding, since each bee colony was destroyed at harvest time, along with its precious queen.
Beekeepers monitor their colonies carefully in spring and watch for the appearance of queen cells, which are a dramatic signal that the colony is determined to swarm.
In the US, commercial beekeepers have been increasing the number of hives to deal with higher rates attrition.
Many other hive designs are based on the principle of bee space first described by Langstroth.
He observed queens laying eggs in open cells, but still had no idea of how a queen was fertilized; nobody had ever witnessed the mating of a queen and drone and many theories held that queens were "self-fertile," while others believed that a vapor or "miasma" emanating from the drones fertilized queens without direct physical contact.
It also meant that combs containing honey could be gently removed and the honey extracted without destroying the comb.
Each race of bees times this build-up slightly differently, depending on how the flora of its original region blooms.
The protective clothing is generally light colored (but not colorful) and of a smooth material.
But in settled societies the destruction of the bee colony meant the loss of a valuable resource; this drawback made beekeeping both inefficient and something of a "stop and start" activity.
In a small worker cell, she lays a fertilized egg; if she finds a larger drone cell, she lays an unfertilized drone egg.
The pollen is protein-rich food for developing larvae, while honey is also food but largely energy rich rather than protein rich.
'''Amos Root''', author of the ''A B C of Bee Culture'', which has been continuously revised and remains in print.
# Swarm cell production: the division of the hive into two colonies by swarming
In the book "Golden Rules of Business Success" written by Fan Li (or Tao Zhu Gong) during the Spring and Autumn Period there are sections describing the art of beekeeping, stressing the importance of the quality of the wooden box used and how this can affect the quality of the honey.
Antibodies correlate with the frequency of bee stings.
Beekeeping, or apiculture, is concerned with the practical management of the social species of honey bees, which live in large colonies of up to 100,000 individuals.
Gathering honey from wild bee colonies is usually done by subduing the bees with smoke and breaking open the tree or rocks where the colony is located, often resulting in the physical destruction of the nest.
For the first few weeks of their lifespan, they perform basic chores within the hive: cleaning empty brood cells, removing debris and other housekeeping tasks, making wax for building or repairing comb, and feeding larvae.
This species has several sub-species or regional varieties, such as the Italian bee (''Apis mellifera ligustica'' ), European dark bee (''Apis mellifera mellifera''), and the Carniolan honey bee (''Apis mellifera carnica'').
The colony cannot survive without a fertile queen laying eggs to renew the population, so the workers select cells containing eggs aged less than three days and enlarge these cells dramatically to form "emergency queen cells".
