In 1516, William IV, Duke of Bavaria, adopted the ''Reinheitsgebot'' (purity law), perhaps the oldest food-quality regulation still in use in the 21st century, according to which the only allowed ingredients of beer are water, hops and barley-malt.
The Benedictine Weihenstephan Brewery in Bavaria, Germany, can trace its roots to the year 768, as a document from that year refers to a hop garden in the area paying a tithe to the monastery.
These pieces remain with the grain during the mash, and act as a filter bed during lautering, when sweet wort is separated from insoluble grain material.
Beer is sold in bottles and cans; it may also be available on draught, particularly in pubs and bars.
The acidity of hops is a preservative.
Before the role of yeast in fermentation was understood, fermentation involved wild or airborne yeasts.
A life cycle study of one beer brand, including grain production, brewing, bottling, distribution and waste management, shows that the CO2 emissions from a 6-pack of micro-brew beer is about 3 kilograms (6.6 pounds).
Cask-conditioned ales (or cask ales) are unfiltered and unpasteurised beers.
The strength of beers has climbed during the later years of the 20th century.
Additional fermentable sugars are sometimes added to increase alcohol content, and enzymes are often added to the wort for certain styles of beer (primarily "light" beers) to convert more complex carbohydrates (starches) to fermentable sugars.
The alcohol in beer comes primarily from the metabolism of sugars that are produced during fermentation.
The history of breweries in the 21st century has been one of larger breweries absorbing smaller breweries in order to ensure economy of scale.
There are a number of variations including Baltic porter, dry stout, and Imperial stout.
The word ''beer'' comes from Old English ''bēor'', from Proto-Germanic ''*beuzą'', probably from Proto-Indo-European ''*bʰeusóm'', originally "brewer's yeast, beer dregs", although other theories have been provided connecting the word with Old English ''bēow'', "barley", or Latin ''bibere'', "to drink".
Beer ranges from less than 3% alcohol by volume (abv) to around 14% abv, though this strength can be increased to around 20% by re-pitching with champagne yeast, and to 55% abv by the freeze-distilling process.
The modern pale lager is light in colour with a noticeable carbonation (fizzy bubbles) and a typical alcohol by volume content of around 5%.
Brewing with several runnings is called parti gyle brewing.
Nitrogen produces fine bubbles, resulting in a dense head and a creamy mouthfeel.
During the secondary stage, the lager clears and mellows.
The mashing process takes around 1 to 2 hours, during which the starches are converted to sugars, and then the sweet wort is drained off the grains.
At this point the beer is ready to sell, either being pulled through a beer line with a hand pump, or simply being "gravity-fed" directly into the glass.
After boiling, the hopped wort is now cooled, ready for the yeast.
Alternatively, the bottle may be inverted prior to opening.
In September 2011, the Scottish brewery BrewDog produced Ghost Deer, which, at 28%, they claim to be the world's strongest beer produced by fermentation alone.
In Africa, there are various ethnic beers made from sorghum or millet, such as Oshikundu in Namibia and Tella in Ethiopia.
The long term health effects of continuous, moderate or heavy alcohol consumption include the risk of developing alcoholism and alcoholic liver disease.
Drinking games, such as beer pong, are also popular.
Lager is cool fermented beer.
The customary strength of British ales is quite low, with many session beers being around 4% abv.
Fermentation is sometimes carried out in two stages, primary and secondary.
The Andes in South America has Chicha, made from germinated maize (corn); while the indigenous peoples in Brazil have Cauim, a traditional beverage made since pre-Columbian times by chewing manioc so that an enzyme (amylase) present in human saliva can break down the starch into fermentable sugars; this is similar to Masato in Peru.
Draught beer's environmental impact can be 68% lower than bottled beer due to packaging differences.
The most common starch source used in beer is malted grain.
Beer made on a domestic scale for non-commercial reasons is classified as homebrewing regardless of where it is made, though most homebrewed beer is made in the home.
The Ebla tablets, discovered in 1974 in Ebla, Syria, show that beer was produced in the city in 2500 BC.
The production of beer is called brewing, which involves the fermentation of starches, mainly derived from cereal grains—most commonly malted barley, although wheat, maize (corn), and rice are widely used.
Where legal, the use of a refillable jug, reusable bottle or other reusable containers to transport draught beer from a store or a bar, rather than buying pre-bottled beer, can reduce the environmental impact of beer consumption.
There are breweries in Middle Eastern countries such as Syria, and in some African countries.
The 49 men in the study were subject to positron emission tomography scans, while a computer-controlled device sprayed minute amounts of beer, water and a sports drink onto their tongues.
Unlike sake, mould was not used to saccharify the rice (amylolytic fermentation); the rice was probably prepared for fermentation by mastication or malting.
Brewing at home is subject to regulation and prohibition in many countries.
These beers are termed "real ale" by the CAMRA organisation.
Typically, when serving a hefeweizen wheat beer, 90% of the contents are poured, and the remainder is swirled to suspend the sediment before pouring it into the glass.
The effects of alcohol depend on the amount an individual has drunk, the percentage of alcohol in the beer and the timespan over which the consumption took place, the amount of food eaten and whether an individual has taken other prescription, over-the-counter or street drugs, among other factors.
It is usually dark coloured with an abv of 3% to 3.6%, although there are lighter hued milds as well as stronger examples reaching 6% abv and higher.
A beer tower is a beer dispensing device, usually found in bars and pubs, that consists of a cylinder attached to a beer cooling device at the bottom.
probably the oldest alcoholic beverage; it is the third most popular drink overall, after water and tea.
A 60% abv blend of beer with whiskey was jokingly claimed as the strongest beer by a Dutch brewery in July 2010.
Hops are added during boiling as a source of bitterness, flavour and aroma.
Most beer is flavoured with hops, which add bitterness and act as a natural preservative, though other flavourings such as herbs or fruit may occasionally be included.
In 2008, when InBev (the second-largest) bought Anheuser-Busch (the third largest), the new Anheuser-Busch InBev company became again the largest brewer in the world.
In 2002 South African Breweries bought the North American Miller Brewing Company to found SABMiller, becoming the second largest brewery, after North American Anheuser-Bush.
Low temperatures and too little fermentation time decreases the effectiveness of yeasts and consequently decreases the alcohol content.
It is likely that many cultures, on observing that a sweet liquid could be obtained from a source of starch, independently invented beer.
Alcoholism, also known as "alcohol use disorder", is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in problems.
A brewpub is a type of microbrewery that incorporates a pub or other eating establishment.
It was preceded by ''The End of History'', a 55% Belgian ale, made by BrewDog in 2010.
In addition to fermenting the beer, yeast influences the character and flavour.
Once fermentation is complete, the yeast also settles, leaving the beer clear.
Beer is measured and assessed by bitterness, by strength and by colour.
The maximum amount of beer a brewery can produce and still be classed as a microbrewery varies by region and by authority, though is usually around 15,000 barrels (1.8 megalitres, 396 thousand imperial gallons or 475 thousand US gallons) a year.
Several diet books quote beer as having an undesirably high glycemic index of 110, the same as maltose; however, the maltose in beer undergoes metabolism by yeast during fermentation so that beer consists mostly of water, hop oils and only trace amounts of sugars, including maltose.
Stout and porter are dark beers made using roasted malts or roast barley, and typically brewed with slow fermenting yeast.
The main active ingredient of beer is alcohol, and therefore, the health effects of alcohol apply to beer.
A BAC of 0.09% to 0.25% causes lethargy, sedation, balance problems and blurred vision.
Downstream emissions from distribution, retail, storage and disposal of waste can be over 45% of a bottled micro-brew beer's CO2 emissions.
The development of hydrometers and thermometers changed brewing by allowing the brewer more control of the process and greater knowledge of the results.
However, it is possible to collect a second or even third wash with the not quite spent grains as separate batches.
In some breweries, the hopped wort may pass through a hopback, which is a small vat filled with hops, to add aromatic hop flavouring and to act as a filter; but usually the hopped wort is simply cooled for the fermenter, where the yeast is added.
A relatively new profession is that of the beer sommelier, who informs restaurant patrons about beers and food pairings.
It is considered that overeating and lack of muscle tone is the main cause of a beer belly, rather than beer consumption.
Some modern breweries prefer the use of filter frames which allow a more finely ground grist.
This process makes the beer appear bright and clean, rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles of beer such as wheat beers.
The strength of beer is usually around 4% to 6% alcohol by volume (abv), although it may vary between 0.5% and 20%, with some breweries creating examples of 40% abv and above.
A technology developed by Crown Holdings for the 2010 FIFA World Cup is the 'full aperture' can, so named because the entire lid is removed during the opening process, turning the can into a drinking cup.
The sweet wort collected from sparging is put into a kettle, or "copper" (so called because these vessels were traditionally made from copper), and boiled, usually for about one hour.
Drinking chilled beer began with the development of artificial refrigeration and by the 1870s, was spread in those countries that concentrated on brewing pale lager.
The earliest known chemical evidence of barley beer dates to circa 3500–3100 BC from the site of Godin Tepe in the Zagros Mountains of western Iran.
Pale ale is a beer which uses a top-fermenting yeast and predominantly pale malt.
The pouring process has an influence on a beer's presentation.
The rate of flow from the tap or other serving vessel, tilt of the glass, and position of the pour (in the centre or down the side) into the glass all influence the end result, such as the size and longevity of the head, lacing (the pattern left by the head as it moves down the glass as the beer is drunk), and the release of carbonation.
The loss of natural habitat potential from the 6-pack of micro-brew beer is estimated to be 2.5 square metres (26 square feet).
Beer is composed mostly of water.
The alcohol content of beer varies by local practice or beer style.
A few styles such as lambics rely on this method today, but most modern fermentation adds pure yeast cultures.
A total of 3.3 million deaths (5.9% of all deaths) are believed to be due to alcohol.
Hops, and beer made with it, contain 8-prenylnaringenin which is a potent phytoestrogen.
Typically, when a cask arrives in a pub, it is placed horizontally on a frame called a "stillage" which is designed to hold it steady and at the right angle, and then allowed to cool to cellar temperature (typically between ), before being tapped and vented—a tap is driven through a (usually rubber) bung at the bottom of one end, and a hard spile or other implement is used to open a hole in the side of the cask, which is now uppermost.
On the currency of two words for the same thing in the Germanic languages, the 12th-century Old Icelandic poem ''Alvíssmál'' says, "Ale it is called among men, but among the gods, beer."
The most common colour is a pale amber produced from using pale malts.
Tryptophol, tyrosol and phenylethanol are aromatic higher alcohols found in beer as secondary products of alcoholic fermentation (products also known as congeners) by ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae''.
A dedicated building for the making of beer is called a brewery, though beer can be made in the home and has been for much of its history.
Alcohol acts as a magnesium diuretic, causes a prompt, vigorous increase in the urinary excretion of magnesium and other electrolytes.
These brewers noticed that the beers continued to ferment, and to also clear of sediment, when stored in cool conditions.
A fermented beverage using rice and fruit was made in China around 7000 BC.
Each of these beers are made using the eisbock method of fractional freezing, in which a strong ale is partially frozen and the ice is repeatedly removed, until the desired strength is reached, a process that may class the product as spirits rather than beer.
It is usually recommended that the beer be poured slowly, leaving any yeast sediment at the bottom of the bottle.
Some beers today, such as Fraoch' by the Scottish Heather Ales company and Cervoise Lancelot by the French Brasserie-Lancelot company, use plants other than hops for flavouring.
Malting grain produces enzymes that convert starches in the grain into fermentable sugars.
It is applied to bottle conditioned and cask conditioned beers.
The process of filtering the spent grain from the wort and sparge water is called ''wort separation''.
Combinations of various aromatic herbs, berries, and even ingredients like wormwood would be combined into a mixture known as gruit and used as hops are now used.
Some beers, such as table beer are of such low alcohol content (1%–4%) that they are served instead of soft drinks in some schools.
Archaeologists speculate that beer was instrumental in the formation of civilisations.
With improved modern yeast strains, most lager breweries use only short periods of cold storage, typically 1–3 weeks.
AB InBev remains the largest brewery, with SABMiller second, and Heineken International third.
They merged into InBev, becoming the largest brewery.
But with most overconsumption, it is more a problem of improper exercise and overconsumption of carbohydrates than the product itself.
Beer is considered to be a social lubricant in many societies and is consumed in countries all over the world.
Beer was spread through Europe by Germanic and Celtic tribes as far back as 3000 BC, and it was mainly brewed on a domestic scale.
The flower of the hop vine is used as a flavouring and preservative agent in nearly all beer made today.
Many of these are not strains of brewer's yeast (''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'') and may have significant differences in aroma and sourness.
Wine writer Malcolm Gluck disputed the need to pair beer with food, while beer writers Roger Protz and Melissa Cole contested that claim.
However, bottle conditioned beers retain some yeast—either by being unfiltered, or by being filtered and then reseeded with fresh yeast.
Almost any substance containing sugar can naturally undergo alcoholic fermentation.
Most beers are cleared of yeast by filtering when packaged in bottles and cans.
Pale lagers are the most commonly consumed beers in the world.
A study published in the ''Neuropsychopharmacology'' journal in 2013 revealed the finding that the flavour of beer alone could provoke dopamine activity in the brain of the male participants, who wanted to drink more as a result.
Hops contribute floral, citrus, and herbal aromas and flavours to beer.
In addition, other organisms such as ''Lactobacillus'' bacteria produce acids which contribute to the sourness.
Beer produced before the Industrial Revolution continued to be made and sold on a domestic scale, although by the 7th century AD, beer was also being produced and sold by European monasteries.
Glass bottles are always used for bottle conditioned beers.
Vetter 33, a 10.5% abv (33 degrees Plato, hence Vetter "33") doppelbock, was listed in the 1994 ''Guinness Book of World Records'' as the strongest beer at that time, though Samichlaus, by the Swiss brewer Hürlimann, had also been listed by the ''Guinness Book of World Records'' as the strongest at 14% abv.
Some brewers add one or more clarifying agents to beer, which typically precipitate (collect as a solid) out of the beer along with protein solids and are found only in trace amounts in the finished product.
The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum, which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ales will add gypsum to the local water in a process known as Burtonisation.
Hops contribute a bitterness that balances the sweetness of the malt; the bitterness of beers is measured on the International Bitterness Units scale.
After malting, barley is milled, which finally removes the hull, breaking it into large pieces.
The dominant types of yeast used to make beer are the top-fermenting ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' and bottom-fermenting ''Saccharomyces pastorianus''.
Yeast metabolises the sugars extracted from grains, which produces alcohol and carbon dioxide, and thereby turns wort into beer.
In Sweden in 2001, 63.9% of beer was sold in cans.
Each run would produce a weaker wort and thus a weaker beer.
Bhutan, Nepal, Tibet and Sikkim also use millet in Chhaang, a popular semi-fermented rice/millet drink in the eastern Himalayas.
It was previously divided into two types: alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence.
Wheat beer is brewed with a large proportion of wheat although it often also contains a significant proportion of malted barley.
Beer is sometimes referred to as "liquid bread".
Before the thirteenth century, and until the sixteenth century, during which hops took over as the dominant flavouring, beer was flavoured with other plants; for instance, grains of paradise or ''alehoof''.
Alongside the basic starch source, the early European beers might contain fruits, honey, numerous types of plants, spices and other substances such as narcotic herbs.
A 2004 study, however, found a link between binge drinking and a beer belly.
Day and night make merry'') to Gilgamesh, recorded in the Epic of Gilgamesh, by the ale-wife Siduri may, at least in part, have referred to the consumption of beer.
The same company had previously made ''Sink The Bismarck!
Some brewers have produced gluten-free beer, made with sorghum with no barley malt, for those who cannot consume gluten-containing grains like wheat, barley, and rye.
Samuel Adams reached 20% abv with ''Millennium'', and then surpassed that amount to 25.6% abv with Utopias.
The flavour of wheat beers varies considerably, depending upon the specific style.
Lambic, a beer of Belgium, is naturally fermented using wild yeasts, rather than cultivated.
Breweries offer branded glassware intended only for their own beers as a marketing promotion, as this increases sales.
The purpose of brewing is to convert the starch source into a sugary liquid called wort and to convert the wort into the alcoholic beverage known as beer in a fermentation process effected by yeast.
Chilling beer makes it more refreshing, though below 15.5&nbsp;°C the chilling starts to reduce taste awareness and reduces it significantly below .
The process of making beer is known as brewing.
Mild ale has a predominantly malty palate.
A BAC from 0.18% to 0.30% causes profound confusion, impaired speech (e.g., slurred speech), staggering, dizziness and vomiting.
Other colourants—such as caramel—are also widely used to darken beers.
Drinking enough to cause a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.03%-0.12% typically causes an overall improvement in mood and possible euphoria, increased self-confidence and sociability, decreased anxiety, a flushed, red appearance in the face and impaired judgment and fine muscle coordination.
The flowers themselves are often called "hops".
Consumption of small quantities of alcohol (less than one drink in women and two in men) is associated with a ''decreased'' risk of cardiac disease, stroke and diabetes mellitus.
During fermentation, the wort becomes beer in a process which requires a week to months depending on the type of yeast and strength of the beer.
The strongest beer brewed in Britain was Baz's Super Brew by Parish Brewery, a 23% abv beer.
As of 2006, more than 133 billion litres (35 billion gallons), the equivalent of a cube 510 metres on a side, of beer are sold per year, producing total global revenues of $294.5 billion (£147.7 billion).
Some beers which are made from bread, which is linked to the earliest forms of beer, are Sahti in Finland, Kvass in Russia and Ukraine, and Bouza in Sudan.
Examples of clarifying agents include isinglass, obtained from swimbladders of fish; Irish moss, a seaweed; kappa carrageenan, from the seaweed ''Kappaphycus cottonii''; Polyclar (artificial); and gelatin.
Today, the brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries.
During the building of the Great Pyramids in Giza, Egypt, each worker got a daily ration of four to five litres of beer, which served as both nutrition and refreshment that was crucial to the pyramids' construction.
Coke was first used for roasting malt in 1642, but it was not until around 1703 that the term ''pale ale'' was used.
The longer the hops are boiled, the more bitterness they contribute, but the less hop flavour and aroma remains in the beer.
'', a 41% abv IPA, and ''Tactical Nuclear Penguin'', a 32% abv Imperial stout.
The brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries.
For example, Dublin has hard water well-suited to making stout, such as Guinness; while the Plzeň Region has soft water well-suited to making Pilsner (pale lager), such as Pilsner Urquell.
The name "lager" comes from the German "lagern" for "to store", as brewers around Bavaria stored beer in cool cellars and caves during the warm summer months.
The Pilsner Urquell, Bitburger, and Heineken brands of beer are typical examples of pale lager, as are the American brands Budweiser, Coors, and Miller.
Different roasting times and temperatures are used to produce different colours of malt from the same grain.
The pale lagers that most consumers are familiar with fall in the range of 4–6%, with a typical abv of 5%.
The name "porter" was first used in 1721 to describe a dark brown beer popular with the street and river porters of London.
In terms of sales volume, most of today's beer is based on the pale lager brewed in 1842 in the town of Pilsen in the present-day Czech Republic.
The perceived bitterness is measured by the International Bitterness Units scale (IBU), defined in co-operation between the American Society of Brewing Chemists and the European Brewery Convention.
This process is known as second (and third) runnings.
''Real ale'' is the term coined by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) in 1973 for "beer brewed from traditional ingredients, matured by secondary fermentation in the container from which it is dispensed, and served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide".
However, some drinkers prefer to pour in the yeast; this practice is customary with wheat beers.
Plastic (PET) bottles are used by some breweries.
Hops may be added at more than one point during the boil.
The brewery was licensed by the City of Freising in 1040, and therefore is the oldest working brewery in the world.
The act of stillaging and then venting a beer in this manner typically disturbs all the sediment, so it must be left for a suitable period to "drop" (clear) again, as well as to fully condition — this period can take anywhere from several hours to several days.
The first step, where the wort is prepared by mixing the starch source (normally malted barley) with hot water, is known as "mashing".
''Brettanomyces'' ferments lambics, and ''Torulaspora delbrueckii'' ferments Bavarian weissbier.
The first historical mention of the use of hops in beer was from 822 AD in monastery rules written by Adalhard the Elder, also known as Adalard of Corbie, though the date normally given for widespread cultivation of hops for use in beer is the thirteenth century.
Different concentrations of alcohol in the human body have different effects on a person.
The alcohol 2M2B is a component of hops brewing.
Grain is malted by soaking it in water, allowing it to begin germination, and then drying the partially germinated grain in a kiln.
Some of humanity's earliest known writings refer to the production and distribution of beer: the Code of Hammurabi included laws regulating beer and beer parlours, and "The Hymn to Ninkasi", a prayer to the Mesopotamian goddess of beer, served as both a prayer and as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people.
It is one of the world's major beer styles.
In the 1980s, Guinness introduced the beer widget, a nitrogen-pressurised ball inside a can which creates a dense, tight head, similar to beer served from a nitrogen system.
The product that the early Europeans drank might not be recognised as beer by most people today.
Boiling also destroys any remaining enzymes left over from the mashing stage.
The history and development of stout and porter are intertwined.
The highest density of breweries in the world, most of them microbreweries, exists in the German Region of Franconia, especially in the district of Upper Franconia, which has about 200 breweries.
Around the world, there are many traditional and ancient starch-based drinks classed as beer.
Some breweries have developed beers to pair with food.
Beer colour is determined by the malt.
Hop also contains myrcene, humulene, xanthohumol, isoxanthohumol, myrcenol, linalool, tannins and resin.
Secondary fermentation is used when the beer requires long storage before packaging or greater clarity.
Cans protect the beer from light (thereby preventing "skunked" beer) and have a seal less prone to leaking over time than bottles.
Many beers are sold in cans, though there is considerable variation in the proportion between different countries.
