Evidence for a close relationship of the two suborders, Polyphaga and Myxophaga, includes the shared reduction in the number of larval leg articles.
The ground beetle's (of Carabidae) defensive glands, located at the posterior, produce a variety of hydrocarbons, aldehydes, phenols, quinones, esters, and acids released from an opening at the end of the abdomen.
Beetles may combine their color mimicry with behavioral mimicry, acting like the wasps they already closely resemble.
The beetle fauna is not equally well known in all parts of the world.
During the Cretaceous, the diversity of Cupedidae and Archostemata decreased considerably.
The eyes are compound and may display remarkable adaptability, as in the case of whirligig beetles (family Gyrinidae), where they are split to allow a view both above and below the waterline.
Some beetle larvae resemble hardened worms with dark head capsules and minute legs.
Larvae defecate in honey and the honey becomes discolored from the feces, which causes fermentation and a frothiness in the honey; the honey develops a characteristic odor of decaying oranges.
Curculionoidea) and click beetles (e.g.
The beetles make the dung unavailable to breeding pests by quickly rolling and burying it in the soil, with the added effect of improving soil fertility, tilth, and nutrient cycling.
The abdomen is everything posterior to the thorax.
Other beetles have fossorial legs that are widened and often spined for digging.
In most, the appendages are not attached to the pupae; ones that do have appendages are mostly obtect, and the rest are exarate.
The larvae of the darkling beetle and the rhinoceros beetle are also commonly eaten.
A notable number of species have developed special glands to produce chemicals for deterring predators (see Defense and predation).
During this time, the continents began to be located closer to where they are today.
Among others, they can be laid loose in the substrate (for example, flour beetle), laid in clumps on leaves (for example, Colorado potato beetle), individually attached (for example, mungbean beetle and other seed borers), or buried in the medium (for example, carrot weevil).
Others may utilize behaviors that would be done when releasing noxious chemicals (for example, Tenebrionidae).
In some species, the pupa may be enclosed in a cocoon constructed by the larva towards the end of its final instar.
In order to overcome the chemical defenses of potential host trees, the beetles emit a pheromone that attracts other beetles to the tree.
They often feed on plants and fungi, break down animal and plant debris, and eat other invertebrates.
This helps to avoid the harmful effects of having too many beetles on one tree competing for resources.
Beetles are by far the largest order of insects, with 350,000–400,000 species in four suborders (Adephaga, Archostemata, Myxophaga, and Polyphaga), making up about 40% of all insect species described, and about 30% of all animals.
In the stages of the Upper Triassic, representatives of the algophagous, or algae-feeding species (e.g.
The head, having mouthparts projecting forward or sometimes downturned, is usually heavily sclerotized and varies in size.
Species in the order Coleoptera are generally characterized by a particularly hard exoskeleton and hard forewings (elytra, singular elytron).
Bark beetles in particular carry Dutch elm disease as they move from infected breeding sites to feed on healthy elm trees, which in turn allows the Asian longhorned beetle to continue killing more elms.
Different glands specialize for different pheromones produced for finding mates.
The fungus penetrates the plant's xylem tissue, digests it, and concentrates the nutrients on and near the surface of the beetle gallery, so the weevils and the fungus both benefit.
All beetle larvae go through several instars, which are the developmental stages between each moult.
It can be the most destructive insect pest of mature pine forests.
For example, the known beetle diversity of Australia is estimated at 23,000 species in 3265 genera and 121 families.
A few species of beetles are actually ectoparasitic on mammals.
Chemically mediated by a bacterially produced polyunsaturated peroxide,  this mutualistic relationship between the beetle and the fungus is coevolved.
When the ball is finished, the female lays eggs inside it, a form of mass provisioning.
However, a few exceptions are noted, as in Eastern Europe; at the Babiy Kamen site in the Kuznetsk Basin, numerous beetle fossils were discovered, even entire specimen of the infraorders Archostemata (e.g.
This word is related to the word ''bītan'' (to bite) The name also derives from the Middle English word ''betylle'' from Old English ''bitula'' (also meaning to bite).
In many species, the mandibles are sexually dimorphic, with the males' enlarged enormously compared with those of females of the same species.
The giant African longhorn beetle (''Petrognatha gigas'') resembles the moss and bark of the tree it feeds on.
In day-flying species (for example, Buprestidae, Scarabaeidae), flight does not include large amounts of lifting of the elytra, having the metathorac wings extended under the lateral elytra margins.
These include camouflage, mimicry, toxicity, and active defense.
They may not mate at all if they do not perform the precopulatory ritual.
Some of the beetles found within dung and carrion are in fact predatory.
Though many recent genera and species already existed during the Miocene, their distribution differed considerably from today's.
Due to the P-Tr extinction, the fossil record of insects only includes beetles from the Lower Triassic ().
The superficial consistency of most beetles' morphology, in particular their possession of elytra, has long suggested that Coleoptera is a monophyletic group.
Whole beetles, either as-is or encased in clear plastic, are also made into objects varying from cheap souvenirs such as key chains to expensive fine-art jewelry.
These elytra distinguish beetles from most other insect species, except for a few species of Hemiptera.
In Australia, the Koonwarra fossil beds of the Korumburra group, South Gippsland, Victoria, are noteworthy.
Close to the Upper Jurassic, the portion of the Cupedidae decreased, but at the same time the diversity of the early plant-eating, or phytophagous species increased.
Damage and fermentation cause honey to run out of combs, destroying large amounts of it both in hives and sometimes also in honey extracting rooms.
The spread of Dutch elm disease by the beetle has led to the devastation of elm trees in many parts of the Northern Hemisphere, notably in Europe and North America.
While most beetles use their legs for walking, legs may be variously modified and adapted for other uses.
Hydrophilidae have hairs on their under surface that retain a layer of air against their bodies.
Among aquatic families – Dytiscidae, Haliplidae, many species of Hydrophilidae and others – the legs, most notably the last pair, are modified for swimming and often bear rows of long hairs to aid this purpose.
In developing countries, the beetle is especially important as an adjunct for improving standards of hygiene.
Sometimes, they are also incorporated into ritual objects for their religious significance.
This 'call for help' allows the beetles to colonize the tree.
Beetle-pollinated flowers are usually large, greenish or off-white in color, and heavily scented.
The general anatomy of a beetle is quite uniform, although specific organs and appendages may vary greatly in appearance and function between the many families in the order.
The membership of the clade Coleoptera is not in dispute, with the exception of the twisted-wing parasites, Strepsiptera.
The current infestation in British Columbia is the largest Canada has ever seen.
Ground beetles and rove beetles (family Staphylinidae), among others, are primarily carnivorous and catch and consume many other arthropods and small prey, such as earthworms and snails.
About 75% of beetle species are phytophagous in both the larval and adult stages, and live in or on plants, wood, fungi, and a variety of stored products, including cereals, tobacco, and dried fruits.
These include some ground beetles (family Carabidae) and some "true weevils" (family Curculionidae), but also desert- and cave-dwelling species of other families.
This design provides armored defenses while maintaining flexibility.
The English name "beetle" comes from the Old English word ''bitela'', literally meaning small biter, deriving from the word ''bitel'', which means biting.
A few beetle genera also possess ocelli, which are small, simple eyes usually situated farther back on the head (on the vertex).
Another benefit is, with no traces of meat remaining and no emulsified fats in the bones, the trophy does not develop the unpleasant dead odor.
These are elateriform larvae, and are found in the click beetle (Elateridae) and darkling beetle (Tenebrionidae) families.
Many beetles have beautiful and durable elytra that have been used as material in arts, with beetlewing the best example.
Like many other insect orders, beetles bear claws, usually one pair, on the end of the last tarsal segment of each leg.
In the Chiang Mai district of northern Thailand, male ''Xylotrupes'' rhinoceros beetles are caught in the wild and trained for fighting.
In 2009, a fossil beetle was described from the Pennsylvanian of Mazon Creek, Illinois, pushing the origin of the beetles to an earlier date, .
The beetle larvae are used to clean skulls because they do a thorough job of cleaning, and do not leave the tool marks that taxidermists' tools do.
File:Egypt.KV6.04.jpg|A scarab on a wall of Tomb KV6 in the Valley of the Kings
Elateroidea) appeared.
In the genus ''Eupompha'' of said family, the male draws the antennae along his longitudinal vertex.
Outstanding fossil sites include Solnhofen in Upper Bavaria, Germany, Karatau in South Kazakhstan, the Yixian formation in Liaoning, North China, as well as the Jiulongshan formation and further fossil sites in Mongolia.
The word "coleoptera" is from the Greek , ''koleos'', meaning "sheath"; and , ''pteron'', meaning "wing", thus "sheathed wing", because most beetles have two pairs of wings, the front pair, the "elytra", being hardened and thickened into a shell-like protection for the rear pair and the beetle's abdomen.
By the mid-1920s, it had entered all cotton-growing regions in the US, traveling  per year.
Further records are known from Khey-Yaga, Russia, in the Korotaikha Basin.
Coleoptera are found in nearly all natural habitats, including freshwater and marine habitats, everywhere  vegetative foliage is found, from trees and their bark to flowers, leaves, and underground near roots- even inside plants in galls, in every plant tissue, including dead or decaying ones.
A fold (''jugum'') of the membrane at the base of each wing  is a characteristic feature.
Beetles of the family Dytiscidae hold air between the abdomen and the elytra when diving.
File:Egyptian Dung beetle2008.jpg|A scarab statue in the Karnak temple complex
Of these parts, the most commonly known are probably the mandibles, which appear as large pincers on the front of some beetles.
Suitable hosts can include a number of plants from the potato family (Solanaceae), such as nightshade, tomato, eggplant and capsicum, as well as potatoes.
In Spain, important sites are located near Montsec and Las Hoyas.
The digestive system of beetles is primarily based on plants, upon which they, for the most part, feed, with mostly the anterior midgut performing digestion, although in predatory species (for example Carabidae), most digestion occurs in the crop by means of midgut enzymes.
In contrast to funerary contexts, some of ancient Egypt's neighbors adopted the scarab motif for seals of varying types.
The abdomen itself does not have any appendages, but some (for example, Mordellidae) have articulating sternal lobes.
Further fossils have been found in Obora, Czech Republic and Tshekarda in the Ural mountains, Russia.
The first primitive weevils appear (e.g.
While other predictions show there could be as many as 28,000 species in North America, including those currently undescribed, a realistic estimate of the little-studied Australian beetle fauna's true diversity could vary from 80,000 to 100,000.
The air that it traps is in contact with oxygenated water, so as the animal's consumption depletes the oxygen in the bubble, more oxygen can diffuse in to replenish it.
They are found in almost all types of habitats, but are not known to occur in the sea or in the polar regions.
The pheromone language of the mountain pine beetle is well known to scientists.
The larva is usually the principal feeding stage of the beetle lifecycle.
Some species of dung beetle also display a form of parental care.
The beetles cannot eat the wood due to toxins, and uses its relationship with fungi to help overcome its host tree defenses and to provide nutrition for their larvae.
Another advantage is that the mother protects the eggs and larvae from the predatory carabid beetle ''Dicheirotrichus gustavi'' and from the parasitoid wasp ''Barycnemis blediator''.
The alimentary canal basically consists of a short, narrow pharynx, a widened expansion, the crop, and a poorly developed gizzard.
Some scarab beetles (for example, Rutelinae) utilize pheromones derived from fatty acid synthesis, while other scarab beetles use amino acids and terpenoid compounds (for example, Melolonthinae).
In some cases the male and the female roll together.
Situations in which a species has developed immunity to pesticides are worse, as in the case of the Colorado potato beetle, ''Leptinotarsa decemlineata'', which is a notorious pest of potato plants.
Dung beetles (Scarabidae) have been successfully used to reduce the populations of pestilent flies and parasitic worms that breed in cattle dung.
It attacks hardwoods such as oak and chestnut, always where some fungal decay has taken or is taking place.
The elytra are not used for flight, but tend to cover the hind part of the body and protect the second pair of wings (''alae'').
Aquatic beetles use several techniques for retaining air beneath the water's surface.
The order contains more species than any other order, constituting almost 25% of all known animal life-forms.
It has paired inlets or ''ostia'' at intervals down its length, and circulates the hemolymph from the main cavity of the haemocoel and out through the anterior cavity in the head.
Another way species of Coleoptera find mates is the use of biosynthesized light, or bioluminescence.
Coleopteran internal morphology is similar to other insects, although there are several examples of novelty.
Certain species are agricultural pests, such as the Colorado potato beetle ''Leptinotarsa decemlineata'', the boll weevil ''Anthonomus grandis'', the red flour beetle ''Tribolium castaneum'', and the mungbean or cowpea beetle ''Callosobruchus maculatus'', while other species of beetles are important controls of agricultural pests.
The light produce is highly efficient, as it is produced by oxidation of luciferin by enzymes (luciferases) in the presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and oxygen, producing oxyluciferin, carbon dioxide, and light.
One example is in insect fighting for entertainment and gambling.
Obrienidae), as well as the first representatives of the rove beetles (e.g.
This further segmentation is usually best seen on the abdomen.
Dung beetles collect animal feces, or "dung", from which their name is derived, and roll it into a ball, sometimes being up to 50 times their own weight; albeit sometimes it is also used to store food.
They then mate underground.
The maternal beetle patrols the eggs and larvae and applies the appropriate burrowing behavior to keep them from flooding and from asphyxiating.
Adult crawling water beetles use both their elytra and their hind coxae (the basal segment of the back legs) in air retention, while whirligig beetles simply carry an air bubble down with them whenever they dive.
Large ground beetles and longhorn beetles may defend themselves using strong mandibles, spines or horns to forcibly persuade a predator to seek out easier prey.
Beetles are not only pests, but can also be beneficial, usually by controlling the populations of pests.
Around , the land bridge between South America and North America was formed, and the fauna exchange between Asia and North America started.
The larvae are highly varied amongst species, with well-developed and sclerotized heads, and have distinguishable thoracic and abdominal segments (usually the tenth, though sometimes the eighth or ninth).
Triaplidae and Hydrophilidae) begin to appear, as well as predatory water beetles.
The jewel beetles' diversity increased rapidly during the Cretaceous, as they were the primary consumers of wood, while longhorn beetles (Cerambycidae) were rather rare, and their diversity increased only towards the end of the Upper Cretaceous.
Predatory ground beetles (Carabidae) and rove beetles (Staphylinidae) began to distribute into different patterns; whereas the Carabidae predominantly occurred in the warm regions, the Staphylinidae and click beetles (Elateridae) preferred many areas with temperate climates.
The bubble covers at least some of the spiracles, thereby permitting the oxygen to enter the tracheae.
The largest taxonomic family, the Curculionidae (the weevils or snout beetles), also belongs to this order.
The multisegmented legs end in two to five small segments called tarsi.
After landing on a suitable tree, an ambrosia beetle excavates a tunnel in which it releases spores of its fungal symbiont.
Occasional visits to the surface are sufficient for the beetle to re-establish the constitution of the bubble.
Coleoptera comes from the Greek ''koleopteros'', literally "sheath-wing", from ''koleos'' meaning "sheath", and ''pteron'', meaning "wing".
About 344 species are known to be used as food, usually eaten in the larval stage.
The elytra allow beetles to both fly and move through confined spaces, doing so by folding the delicate wings under the elytra while not flying, and folding their wings out just before take off.
Pairing is generally quick, but in some cases lasts for several hours.
The mountain pine beetle can also stridulate to communicate, or rub body parts together to create sound, having a "scraper" on their abdomens that they rub against a grooved surface on the underside of their left wing cover to create a sound that is not audible to humans.
The larval period varies between species, but can be as long as several years.
They are strikingly flattened dorsoventrally, no doubt as an adaptation for slipping between the beavers' hairs.
''Austroplatypus incompertus'' is eusocial, one of the few organisms outside Hymenoptera to do so, and the only species of Coleoptera.
On September 27, 2007, Philippines' Metro Manila and 26 provinces were quarantined due to having been infested with this pest (to save the $800-million Philippine coconut industry).
A single female may lay from several dozen to several thousand eggs during her lifetime.
Beetles have mouthparts similar to those of grasshoppers.
Many species such as the rhinoceros beetle have large protrusions from their thorax and head, which can be used to defend themselves from predators.
Some species are prey of various animals including birds and mammals.
By burying and consuming dung, they improve nutrient recycling and soil structure.
The sternum is the most widely visible part of the abdomen, being a more or less sclerotized segment.
Pests do not only affect agriculture, but can also even affect houses, such as the death watch beetle.
Some 70–95% of all beetle species, depending on the estimate, remain undescribed.
These chemicals mix and result in an explosive ejection, forming temperatures of around , with the breakdown of hydroquinone to H2 + O2 + quinone, with the O2 propelling the excretion.
Like all insects, beetles' bodies are divided into three sections: the head, the thorax, and the abdomen.
Important fossil sites from the Upper Cretaceous include Kzyl-Dzhar in South Kazakhstan and Arkagala in Russia.
Most beetle-pollinated flowers are flattened or dish-shaped, with pollen easily accessible, although they may include traps to keep the beetle longer.
The boll weevil crossed the Rio Grande near Brownsville, Texas, to enter the United States from Mexico around 1892, and had reached southeastern Alabama by 1915.
Typically, four to six Malpighian tubules occur.
The larvae are commonly called grubs and the pupa sometimes is called the chrysalis.
At this point, the female stops producing aggregation pheromones and starts producing anti-aggregation pheromone to deter more beetles from coming.
Though beetles constitute a large order and live in a variety of niches, examples of hearing are surprisingly lacking amongst species, though likely most simply remain undiscovered.
Many male beetles are territorial and fiercely defend their small patches of territory from intruding males.
The beetles excavate tunnels in dead trees in which they cultivate fungal gardens, their sole source of nutrition.
The best-known of these are the Judean LMLK seals (eight of 21 designs contained scarab beetles), which were used exclusively to stamp impressions on storage jars during the reign of Hezekiah.
In North America and especially in South America and Africa, the number of sites from that time period is smaller, and the sites have not been exhaustively investigated yet.
When viewed from below, the thorax is that part from which all three pairs of legs and both pairs of wings arise.
These include the clown beetles, preying on the larvae of coprophagous and necrophagous insects.
Other species also have divided eyes – some longhorn beetles (family Cerambycidae) and weevils – while many have eyes that are notched to some degree.
One theory states parental care is necessary for the survival of the larvae, protecting them from adverse environmental conditions and predators.
In some of these species, sculpturing or various colored scales or hairs cause the beetle to resemble bird dung or other inedible objects.
Species of the superfamily Chrysomeloidea are believed to have developed around the same time, which include a wide array of plant hosts ranging from cycads and conifers, to angiosperms.
Ademosynidae, Schizocoleidae), Adephaga (e.., Triaplidae, Trachypachidae) and Polyphaga (e.g.
Their phylogenetic relationship is uncertain, with the most popular hypothesis being that Polyphaga and Myxophaga are most closely related, with Adephaga as the sister group to those two, and Archostemata as sister to the other three collectively.
Polyphaga is the largest suborder, containing more than 300,000 described species in more than 170 families, including rove beetles (Staphylinidae), scarab beetles (Scarabaeidae), blister beetles (Meloidae), stag beetles (Lucanidae) and true weevils (Curculionidae).
The larvae tunnel through comb towards stored honey or pollen, damaging or destroying cappings and comb in the process.
Other ladybugs feed on scale insects and mealybugs.
The Coleopterans include more species than any other order, constituting nearly 25% of all known types of animal life forms.
One such species, ''Platypsyllus castoris'', parasitises beavers (''Castor'' spp.).
In some species (for example, Meloidae), the male climbs onto the dorsum of the female and strokes his antennae on her head, palps, and antennae.
In these beetles, the testes are tubular and the first abdominal sternum (a plate of the exoskeleton) is divided by the hind coxae (the basal joints of the beetle's legs).
The first scarab beetles appeared around this time, but they were not coprophagous (feeding upon fecal matter), instead presumably feeding upon the rotting wood with the help of fungus; they are an early example of a mutualistic relationship.
This immense number of species allegedly led evolutionary biologist J.
This can range from dung, which is consumed by coprophagous species (such as certain scarab beetles of the family Scarabaeidae), to dead animals, which are eaten by necrophagous species (such as the carrion beetles of the family Silphidae).
In parts of Mexico, beetles of the genus ''Zopherus'' are made into living brooches by attaching costume jewelry and golden chains, which is made possible by the incredibly hard elytra and sedentary habits of the genus.
Buprestidae) are present, but they were rather rare until the Cretaceous.
Like all insects, beetles' bodies are divided into three sections: the head, the thorax, and the abdomen.
Diving beetles, such as the Dytiscidae, carry a bubble of air with them when they dive.
Many species of weevil that feed out in the open on leaves of plants react to attack by employing a "drop-off reflex".
About 40% of all described insect species are beetles (about 400,000 species), and new species are discovered frequently.
These beetles can be identified by the presence of cervical sclerites (hardened parts of the head used as points of attachment for muscles) absent in the other suborders.
Chemical defense may serve purposes other than just protection from vertebrates, such as protection from a wide range of microbes, and repellents.
The nervous system in beetles contains all the types found in insects, varying between different species, from three thoracic and seven or eight abdominal ganglia which can be distinguished to that in which all the thoracic and abdominal ganglia are fused to form a composite structure.
Up to 15% of larvae are killed by this parasitoid wasp, being only protected by maternal beetles in their dens.
Ground beetles (family Carabidae) are common predators of many different insects and other arthropods, including fly eggs, caterpillars, wireworms, and others.
Tympanal organs or hearing organs, which is a membrane (tympanum) stretched across a frame backed by an air sac and associated sensory neurons, are described in two families.
Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water than either oxygen or nitrogen, so it readily diffuses out faster than in.
Scents may be spicy, fruity, or similar to decaying organic material.
Adults have extremely variable lifespans, from weeks to years, depending on the species.
In North America there are only a few sites with fossil records of insects from the Jurassic, namely the shell limestone deposits in the Hartford basin, the Deerfield basin and the Newark basin.
They also are wingless and eyeless, as are many other ectoparasites.
