Travel + Leisure magazine called Gemmayzeh "SoHo by the Sea," due to its colorful and chic cafés amid 1950s apartment buildings and hole-in-the-wall shops.
Gigues discovered a Copper Age flint industry at around  above sea level.
They included around 50 varied bifaces accredited to the Acheulean period, some with a lustrous sheen, now held at the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory.
It has on display some 1600 minerals from more than 60 countries.
File:USJ Campus.jpg|Saint Joseph University, or Université Saint-Joseph, founded by the Jesuits in 1875
In October 2013, mim museum, a private mineral museum, opened its doors to the public.
John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut (1179–1236) rebuilt the city after the battles with Saladin and also built the Ibelin family palace in Beirut.
''Beirut II'', or ''Umm el Khatib'', was suggested by Burkhalter to have been south of Tarik el Jedideh, where P.E.
Autumn and spring are warm, winter is mild and rainy, and summer can be virtually rainless.
The coast is rather diverse, with rocky beaches, sandy shores and cliffs situated beside one another.
One of them, Fakhr-al-Din II, fortified it early in the 17th century, but the Ottomans reclaimed it in 1763.
mim museum's collection is considered to be one of the world's paramount private collection for the variety and quality of its minerals.
the city was destroyed by Diodotus Tryphon in his contest with Antiochus VII Sidetes for the throne of the Macedonian Seleucid monarchy.
Beirut was chosen in 2012 by Condé Nast Traveler as the best city in the Middle East, beating Tel Aviv and Dubai.
Beirut Souks are the Central District's old medieval market, recently renovated along with the original Hellenistic street grid that characterized the old souks and the area's historical landmarks along long vaulted shopping alleys and arcades.
File:Kaniys.jpg|Jewish Maghen Abraham Synagogue that was renovated in 2010 in Downtown Beirut
The inauguration of the Beirut Art Center, a non-profit association, space and platform dedicated to contemporary art in Lebanon, in the Mkalles suburb of Beirut added to the number of exhibition spaces available in the city, with a screening and performance room, mediatheque, bookstore, cafe and terrace.
The last Syrian troops withdrew from Beirut on 26 April 2005, and the two countries established diplomatic relations on 15 October 2008.
On 27 December 2013, a car bomb exploded in the Central District killing at least five people, including the former Lebanese ambassador to the U.S. Mohamad Chatah, and wounding 71 others.
Beirut is a destination for tourists from both the Arab world and West.
High-rise hotels and towers line the district's New Waterfront, marina and seaside promenade.
File:St Elie - St Gregory Armenian Catholic Cathedral.jpg|Church of St. Gregory the Illuminator Armenian Catholic in Downtown Beirut
The Phoenician port of Beirut was located between Rue Foch and Rue Allenby on the north coast.
That list was voted upon shortly before the 2006 Lebanon War broke out, but in 2008 ''The Guardian'' listed Beirut as one of its top ten cities in the world.
Another version is that the city was named after the Phoenician daughter of Adonis and Aphrodite, Beroe.
Provided with water from a British company and gas from a French one, silk exports to Europe came to dominate the local economy.
The Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut is the third oldest museum in the Middle East, exhibiting a wide range of artifacts from Lebanon and neighboring countries.
+Beirut mean sea temperature
The area was covered in red sand that represented Quaternary river terraces.
The architecture of the area is a mix of French Architecture and Venetian Gothic architecture mixed with Arabesque and Ottoman Architecture.
The country's tourism ministry is working closely with the medical sector and top-class hotels to create an organized, quality medical destination.
Its name derives from the Canaanite-Phoenician ''be'erot'' ("wells"), referring to the underground water table that is still tapped by the local inhabitants for general use.
This symbol was later taken up by the early printer Aldus Manutius in 15th century Venice.
Approximately 3&nbsp;million visitors visited in 2010; the previous record was 1.4&nbsp;million in 1974.
No recent population census has been done but in 2007 estimates ranged from slightly more than 1&nbsp;million to slightly less than 2&nbsp;million as part of Greater Beirut.
Pieces of Roman pottery and mosaics were found in the upper layer.
Due to the devastation incurred on the city center from the Lebanese Civil War, the Beirut Central District underwent a thorough reconstruction and development plan that gave it back its cultural and economic position in the region.
French influence in the area soon exceeded that of any other European power.
The conference agreed to appoint a new president of Lebanon and to establish a new national government involving all the political adversaries.
There are over 100 cafes, restaurants, pubs and nightclubs open in the Beirut Central District, and over 350 retail outlets distributed along its streets and quarters.
File:Beirut Universitet Haigazian.jpg|Haigazian University was founded in 1955 by the Armenian Evangelical community
The site was found by Jesuit Father Dillenseger and published by fellow Jesuits Godefroy Zumoffen, Raoul Describes and Auguste Bergy.
In the same year it was proclaimed World Book Capital by UNESCO.
2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totaling $6.5 billion.
Prince Arslan bin al-Mundhir founded the Principality of Sin-el-Fil in Beirut in 759 AD.
Auguste Bergy discussed polished axes that were also found at this site, which has now completely disappeared as a result of construction and urbanization of the area.
Two of the twelve official Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon are located in the southern suburbs of Beirut: Bourj el-Barajneh and Shatila.
Before the Lebanese Civil War, Beirut was widely regarded as "The Paris of the Middle East," often cited as a financial and business hub where visitors could experience the Levantine Mediterranean culture.
There are a number of different companies providing public transport in Lebanon.
During most of the war, Beirut was divided between the Muslim west part and the Christian east.
Its Agency for Investment Development in Lebanon reports that growth in the medical tourism industry is growing by up to 30% a year since 2009.
Public architecture included several bath complexes, colonnaded streets, a circus and theater; residential areas were excavated in the Future Garden of Forgiveness, Martyrs' Square and the Beirut Souks.
The Beirut Governorate occupies , and the city's metropolitan area .
There are dozens of restaurants, pubs and sidewalk cafés of virtually every style.
Beirut has frequent bus connections to other cities in Lebanon and major cities in Syria such as Homs and its capital Damascus.
The city is home to numerous international organizations.
Burkhalter suggested that it was west of the Damascus road, although this determination has been criticized by Lorraine Copeland.
Major hotel and spa chains work with local clinics, travel agencies and the tourism ministry to create comprehensive healthcare and recuperation packages for foreign visitors.
Collections from the site were made by Bergy, Describes and another Jesuit, Paul Bovier-Lapierre.
After Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt captured Acre in 1832, Beirut began its revival.
The Lebanese capital hosted the Mediterranean Games in 1959, FIBA Asia Champions Cup in 1999, 2000, 2012, the AFC Asian Cup in 2000, and the FIBA Asia Cup in 2010.
Beirut was controlled by local Druze emirs throughout the Ottoman  period.
The prevailing wind during the afternoon and evening is from the west (onshore, blowing in from the Mediterranean); at night it reverses to offshore, blowing from the land out to sea.
According to the 2012 tourist statistics, 34% of the tourists in Beirut came from states within the Arab League, 33% came from European countries (mainly France, Germany, and Britain), and 16% from the Americas (about half of which are from the United States).
August is considered the only really hot muggy month, with a monthly average high temperature of , and January and February are the coldest months, with a monthly average low temperature of .
Calls for civil marriage are unanimously rejected by the religious authorities, but civil marriages held in another country are recognized by Lebanese civil authorities.
"Banks are still attracting deposits because the interest rates offered are higher than the ones in Europe and the United States", says Marwan Mikhael, head of research at BLOM Bank.
It is more comparable Greenwich Village.
A didactic circuit, accompanied by screens showing films and scientific applications of mineralogy, will reveal a world of unsuspected marvels—priceless both from an aesthetic and scientific point of view.
Gemmayzeh is Beirut's artistic Bohemian quarter, full of narrow streets and historic buildings from the French era.
Badaro is one of Beirut's most appealing neighborhoods, a lovely place to stroll during daytime and a destination for going out in the evening.
Beirut was conquered by Pompey in 64 B.C.
That evolution was accompanied with the relocation of international organizations, reoccupation of civic and government buildings, expansion of financial activities, and establishment of regional headquarters and global firms in the city center.
Rafic Hariri was assassinated in 2005 near the Saint George Hotel in Beirut.
The city was known in antiquity as ''Berytus''.
No population census has been taken in Lebanon since 1932, and estimates of Beirut's population range from as low as 938,940 through 1,303,129 to as high as 2,012,000 as part of Greater Beirut.
Rue Monnot has an international reputation among clubbers, and Rue Gouraud in districts such as Gemmayze and Mar Mikhael have emerged as new hotspots for bar patrons and clubbers, as well as "The Alleyway" in Hamra Street.
See Marine environmental issues in Lebanon.
The campaign was held by New 7 Wonders.
European interests in Lebanese silk and other export products transformed the city into a major port and commercial centre.
The site had been built on and destroyed by 1948.
The Lebanese currency is fully convertible and can be exchanged freely with any other currency.
The district's total area is , the majority of which is dedicated to residential space ().
Since the end of the civil war, East and West Beirut have begun to see an increase in Muslims and Christians moving into each half.
In 14 B.C., during the reign of Herod the Great, Berytus became a ''colonia'' and was named ''Colonia Iulia Augusta Felix Berytus''.
At the start of the 20th century, Salim Ali Salam was one of the most prominent figures in Beirut, holding numerous public positions including deputy from Beirut to the Ottoman parliament and President of the Municipality of Beirut.
A particularly destructive period was the 1978 Syrian siege of Achrafiyeh, the main Christian district of Beirut.
Cosmetic surgery is a major component of medical tourism in Lebanon.
Many of the tourists are returning Lebanese expatriates, but many are from Western countries.
The capital hosts the headquarters of Banque du Liban, Lebanon's central bank, the Beirut Stock Exchange, the head office of Lebanon's flag-carrier Middle East Airlines, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, the Union of Arab Banks, and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges.
The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) is headquartered in downtown Beirut, The Arab Air Carriers Organization (AACO), the Union of Arab Banks and the Union of Arab Stock Exchanges are also headquartered in the city.
The 1911 ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' reported a population consisting of 36,000 Muslims, 77,000 Christians, 2,500 Jews, 400 Druze and 4,100 foreigners.
At the onset of the oil boom starting in the 1960s, Lebanon-based banks were the main recipients of the region's petrodollars.
"Let the Shiite apostates know that we will not rest until we take revenge in the name of the Prophet."
The Directorate General of Higher Education is responsible for managing the university colleges, university institutes and universities in Beirut and nationwide.
The modern city overlies the ancient one, and little archaeology was carried out until after the end of the civil war in 1991.
In 1888, Beirut was made capital of a vilayet (governorate) in Syria, including the sanjaks (prefectures) Latakia, Tripoli, Beirut, Acre and Bekaa.
Mid-first-century coins from Berytus bear the head of Tyche, goddess of fortune; on the reverse, the city's symbol appears: a dolphin entwines an anchor.
The city was assimilated into the Roman Empire, veteran soldiers were sent there, and large building projects were undertaken.
Beirut was considered the most Roman city in the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire.
Ever since, Beirut Central District has evolved into an integrated business and commercial environment and the focus of the financial activity in the region.
Moreover, no restrictions are put on the free flow of capital and earnings into and out of the Lebanese economy.
The city's renovated airport is the Rafic Hariri International Airport, located in the southern suburbs.
From 1110 to 1291 it was in the hands of the Crusaders' Kingdom of Jerusalem.
The first historical mention of Beirut is found in the ancient Egyptian Tell el Amarna letters dating from the 15th century BC.
One site was behind the parking lot of the Byblos Cinema and showed collapsed walls, pits, floors, charcoal, pottery and flints.
Middle Bronze Age tombs were found in this area, and the ancient tell of Beirut is thought to be in the Bourj area.
The passing of the banking secrecy law on 3 September 1956, subjected all banks established in Lebanon as well as foreign banks' branches to the "secret of the profession".
Beirut is also home to the Lebanese American University (LAU), which is also, together with many of its programs, accredited by US bodies and considered lately one of the top universities in the Middle East.
Beirut is also home to the American University of Science and Technology (AUST), University of Balamand, École Supérieure des Affaires (ESA), Beirut Arab University (BAU), Haigazian University (HU), Lebanese International University (LIU), as well as the Notre Dame University – Louaize (NDU).
In ''Travel + Leisure'' magazine's World Best Awards 2006, it was ranked 9th best city in the world.
File:Beirut 017.jpg|Cathedral of St. George's Greek Orthodox in Downtown Beirut
After this a national dialogue conference was held in Doha at the invitation of the Prince of Qatar.
As a final destination, Lebanon can be reached by ferry from Cyprus via the nearby city of Jounieh or by road from Damascus via the Beqaa valley in the east.
During the 2006 Lebanon War, Israeli bombardment caused damage in many parts of Beirut, especially the predominantly Shiite southern suburbs of Beirut.
Beirut-based Clemenceau Medical Center (CMC), affiliated with Johns Hopkins International, was ranked one of the world's top ten best hospitals for medical tourism in 2012.
Some say Badaro is like NYC's east village without the beatniks.
It is flanked by the Lebanon Mountains and has taken on a triangular shape, largely influenced by its situation between and atop two hills: Al-Ashrafieh and Al-Musaytibah.
Following the destructive Lebanese Civil War, Beirut's cultural landscape underwent major reconstruction.
In addition, 78 others were wounded in the bombing.
The District contains tens of restaurants, cafes and pubs, as well as a wide range of shopping stores mainly in Beirut Souks.
English newspapers published in Beirut are The Daily Star, Executive Magazine (weekly), Beirut Online, Beirut Times (weekly) and Monday Morning.
The government is highly involved in this industry and strives to make the process as easy as possible.
The flint industry from the site was described as Mousterian and is held by the Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon.
It is located East of the Beirut Central District, bordering the Saifi Village.
Artist workshops exist all over Lebanon.
Beirut is also the home for a dynamic street art scene that has developed after the Lebanese Civil War, one of the most notable street artists is Yazan Halwani who is known to produce the largest murals on the walls of Beirut in areas such as Gemmayzeh, Hamra, Verdun and Achrafieh.
The southern suburbs are populated largely by Shia Muslims, while the eastern and northern suburbs are largely Christian.
This boom in cross-regional trade allowed certain groups, such as the Sursock family, to establish trade and manufacturing empires that further strengthened Beirut's position as a key partner in the interests of imperial dynasties.
After the 551 Beirut earthquake the students were transferred to Sidon.
Instead, historic and commercial landmarks and location codes such as PinLiban are more common.
Meanwhile, Ottoman power in the region continued to decline.
Every year hundreds of fine art students graduate from universities and institutions.
Beirut became a destination for Maronite Christian refugees fleeing from the worst areas of the fighting on Mount Lebanon and in Damascus.
''Beirut III'', ''Furn esh Shebbak'' or ''Plateau Tabet'', was suggested to have been located on the left bank of the Beirut River.
By this time, Beirut had grown into a cosmopolitan city and had close links with Europe and the United States.
Among the private secondary schools in Beirut are, College Saint Joseph Antoura, Lycee Abdel Kader Grand Lycée Franco-Libanais, Lycée Franco-Libanais Verdun, American Community School, International College, Collège Notre-Dame de Jamhour, College Melkart, Carmel Saint-Joseph, Collège Louise Wegmann, Rawdah High School, Saint Mary's Orthodox College, Collège Notre Dame de Nazareth, Collège du Sacré-Coeur Gemmayzé, Collège Protestant Français, Armenian Evangelical Central High School, German School of Beirut, and the Armenian Hamazkayin Arslanian College.
Badaro is within Beirut's green district with a  public park (The Beirut Pine forest) and a  hippodrome.
In 2013, CNN Traveler ranked Beirut in the top 20 best cities in the world.
''Beirut VI'', or ''Patriarchate'', was a site discovered while building on the property of the Lebanese Evangelical School for Girls in the Patriarchate area of Beirut.
It now houses Beirut's most influential and popular art museum.
Like other forms of tourism, medical tourism in Lebanon is on the rise recently.
There is also one within its municipal boundaries: Mar Elias.
Fragments of blades and broad flakes were recovered from the first layer of black soil, above which some Bronze Age pottery was recovered in a layer of grey soil.
Its top clinics and hospitals like Sahel General are equipped to handle the full range of surgical procedures.
Beirut also hosted the Pan Arab Games in 1957, 1997, and will do so again in 2015.
Beirut's diverse atmosphere and ancient history make it an important destination which is slowly rebuilding itself after continued turmoil.
Its reconstruction constitutes one of the most ambitious contemporary urban developments.
Another popular tourist destination in Beirut is the Corniche Beirut, a  pedestrian promenade that encircles the capital's seafront from the Saint George Bay in the north all the way to Avenue de Paris and Avenue General de Gaulle south of the city.
Sectarian and religious conflicts, power vacuums, and changes in the political dynamics of the region culminated in the 1860 Lebanon conflict.
The Beirut Central District (BCD) or Centre Ville is the name given to Beirut's historical and geographical core by "Solidere", the "vibrant financial, commercial, and administrative hub of the country."
2011 MasterCard Index revealed that Beirut had the second-highest visitor spending levels in the Middle East and Africa, totaling $6.5 billion.
Groceries and eateries can be found on almost every street of the area.
The city has been host to the Asian Club Basketball Championship and the Asian Football Cup and has hosted the Miss Europe pageant eight times, 1960–1964, 1999, 2001–2002.
Planet Discovery is a children's science museum with interactive experiments, exhibitions, performances, workshops and awareness competitions.
People in Lebanon often use different names for the same geographic locations, and few people rely on official, government-provided street numbers.
Although visitors from neighboring Arab nations make up the bulk of medical tourism patients here due to its proximity, Beirut is strongly trying to woo more southern Europeans, Asians and North Americans to its land.
In 2016, Yahoo listed Beirut as the best international city for food.
The AUB campus is another popular visitor destination, composed of a cluster of 19th century red-roofed buildings dispersed on a wooded hillside overlooking the Mediterranean.
Summer receives very little rainfall, if any.
During that period, Beirut was the region's financial services center.
The corniche reaches its maximum height above sea level at Raouché, a high-rise residential neighborhood rising over a giant white limestone cliff and facing the recognizable off-shore Raouché Rocks.
The Lebanese University is the only public institution for higher education in Beirut.
Lebanon achieved independence in 1943, and Beirut became the capital city.
It was notable for the discovery of a finely styled Canaanean blade javelin suggested to date to the ''Néolithique Ancien'' or ''Néolithique Moyen'' periods of Byblos and which is held in the school library.
The first historical reference to Beirut dates from the 14th century BC, when it is mentioned in the cuneiform tablets of the Amarna letters, three letters that Ammunira of ''Biruta'' (Beirut) sent to the pharaoh of Egypt.
Badaro "Village" thrives on local residents, day-trippers and hipsters from all over Beirut, office employees and many expatriates.
According to a 2010 study by the American global consulting firm Mercer comparing high-end items such as upscale residential areas and entertainment venues, Beirut was ranked as the 4th most expensive city in the Middle East and 15th among the Upper Middle Income Countries included in the survey.
Beirut hosted the Francophonie and Arab League summits in 2002, and in 2007 it hosted the ceremony for the Prix Albert Londres, which rewards outstanding francophone journalists every year.
There are two stadiums in the city, Camille Chamoun Sports City Stadium and Beirut Municipal Stadium.
The city also hosted the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009.
By the second half of the nineteenth century, Beirut was developing close commercial and political ties with European imperial powers, particularly France.
''Beirut IV'', or ''Furn esh Shebbak, river banks'', was also on the left bank of the river and on either side of the road leading eastwards from the Furn esh Shebbak police station towards the river that marked the city limits.
Before the civil war the neighborhoods of Beirut were fairly heterogeneous, but they became largely segregated by religion since the conflict.
It is one of the oldest cities in the world, inhabited more than 5,000 years ago.
Identified and graded for accountancy, advertising, banking/finance and law, Beirut is ranked as a Beta World City by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
Contrary to areas such as Gemmayzé or Mar Mikhael, despite being very lively, pubs and cafes are keen on avoiding to make a lot of noise, and people are respectful and do not do things in public that they wouldn't want someone to do in front of their house.
Travel and Leisure ranked Beirut in the top 15 World's best cities.
It is a neighborhood on a very human scale with small groceries around every corner.
It has about 1,300 exhibits ranging in date from prehistoric times to the medieval Mamluk period.
Beirut is the focal point of the Economy of Lebanon.
Beirut passed into Arab control in 635.
The publicly owned buses are managed by Office des Chemins de Fer et des Transports en Commun (OCFTC&nbsp;– "Railway and Public Transportation Authority").
Hamra Street is a long cobblestone street connecting the Beirut Central District with the coastal Raouche area.
In the 12 November 2015 Beirut bombings, two suicide bombers detonated explosives outside a mosque and inside a bakery, killing 43 people and injuring 200.
The street is a large concentration of shopping stores, boutiques, restaurants, banks, street vendors, sidewalk cafes, newspaper kiosks, and a booming nightlife spurred by students from the neighboring American University of Beirut.
In May 2015, Beirut was officially recognized as one of the New7Wonders Cities together with Vigan, Doha, Durban, Havana, Kuala Lumpur, and La Paz.
The Saint Joseph University opened the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory in 2000, the first prehistory museum in the Arabic Middle East, displaying bones, stone tools and neolithic pottery collected by Jesuits.
Located on a peninsula at the midpoint of Lebanon's Mediterranean coast, Beirut is the country's largest and main seaport.
The Beirut Central District contains over 60 gardens, squares and open spaces.
Currently, four Beirut teams play in Lebanese Basketball League Division 1: Hekmeh, Sporting Al Riyadi Beirut, Hoops Club and Homenetmen Beirut.
The tourism industry in Beirut has been historically important to the local economy and remains to this day to be a major source of revenue for the city, and Lebanon in general.
On 19 October 2012, a car bomb killed eight people in the Beirut's neighbourhood of Achrafiyeh, including Brigadier General Wissam al-Hassan, chief of the Intelligence Bureau of the Internal Security Forces.
The National Museum of Beirut is the principal museum of archaeology in Lebanon.
The district is a cluster of stone-façade buildings lining arcaded streets and radial alleyways.
In 1983, French and US barracks were bombed, killing 241 American servicemen, 58 French servicemen, six civilians and the two suicide bombers.
Syrian troops relentlessly bombed the eastern quarter of the city, but Christian militias defeated multiple attempts by Syria's elite forces to capture the strategic area in a three-month campaign later known as the Hundred Days' War.
A large number of Middle Paleolithic flint tools were found on the surface and in side gullies that drain into the river.
File:American-University-Beirut-NW.jpg|AUB established in 1866 by the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions
The city boasts significant Christian and Muslim communities.
