+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the six largest cities in Belarus
The name ''Belarus'' is closely related with the term ''Belaya Rus' '', i.e., ''White Rus'''.
Each region of Belarus has developed specific design patterns.
In 2000 Belarus and Russia signed a treaty for greater cooperation, with some hints of forming a Union State.
About 40% of Belarus is covered by forests.
Demographic decreases in the Belarusians of conscription age have increased the importance of contract soldiers, who numbered 12,000 in 2001.
Belarus is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
In 1863, economic and cultural pressure exploded in a revolt, led by Kalinowski.
Most of the phone lines are operated by Beltelecom, a state-owned company.
In the 1920s, agricultural reforms that culminated in the Belarusian phase of Soviet collectivization were set in motion.
In the aftermath of the 1917 Russian Revolution, Belarus declared independence as the Belarusian People's Republic, which was conquered by Soviet Russia as the Socialist Soviet Republic of Byelorussia, which became a founding constituent republic of the Soviet Union in 1922 and was renamed as the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic (Byelorussian SSR).
Cimmerians and other pastoralists roamed through the area by 1,000 BC, and by 500 AD, Slavs had taken up residence, which was circumscribed by the Scythians who roamed its outskirts.
Typically, Belarusians eat a light breakfast and two hearty meals, with dinner being the largest meal of the day.
The population of Belarus did not regain its pre-war level until 1971.
The Council of Europe has barred Belarus from membership since 1997 for undemocratic voting and election irregularities in the November 1996 constitutional referendum and parliament by-elections.
Natural resources include peat deposits, small quantities of oil and natural gas, granite, dolomite (limestone), marl, chalk, sand, gravel, and clay.
The law was compared with serfdom by Lukashenko himself.
On 23 May 2011, the Belarusian ruble depreciated 56% against the United States dollar.
Officially, the full name of the country is "Republic of Belarus" (, ,  ).
Stanislav Shushkevich, the chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Belarus, met with Boris Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine on  1991 in Belavezhskaya Pushcha to formally declare the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In 1696, Polish replaced Belarusian as the official language and Belarusian was outlawed.
Belarus has an average annual rainfall of .
According to the National Statistical Committee, as of January 2016, the population is 9.49 million people.
Marc Chagall was born in Liozna (near Vitebsk) in 1887.
The depreciation was even steeper on the black market and financial collapse seemed imminent as citizens rushed to exchange their rubles for dollars, euros, durable goods, and canned goods.
The use of Byelorussian SSR and any abbreviations thereof were allowed from 1991–93.
Belarus has a population density of about 50 people per square kilometer (127 per sq&nbsp;mi); 70% of its total population is concentrated in urban areas.
Much of northeastern Poland, which had been part of the country since the Peace of Riga two decades earlier, was annexed to the Byelorussian SSR, and now constitutes West Belarus.
About two-thirds of all of the phone services are run on digital systems, and the mobile-cellular teledensity is about 90 phones per 100 persons.
The climate features mild to cold winters, with average January minimum temperatures ranges from  in southwest (Brest) to  in northeast (Vitebsk), and cool and moist summers with an average temperature of .
Around the 5th century, the area was taken over by Slavic tribes.
The law decreed that all the forms of the new term should be transliterated into other languages from their Belarusian language forms.
Its net migration rate is +0.38 per 1,000, indicating that Belarus experiences slightly more immigration than emigration.
During his stay, he worked with Belarusian poet Vintsent Dunin-Martsinkyevich and created the opera ''Sialanka'' (''Peasant Woman'').
He was named by Svetlana Alexievich, the Belarusian winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature 2015, as "her main teacher, who helped her to find a path of her own".
Several local newspapers kept the old name of the country in Russian in their names, for example '''', which is the localized publication of a popular Russian newspaper.
Belarus is the only country in Europe which retains capital punishment in law and in practice.
During this period, Anatoly Bogatyrev, creator of the opera ''In Polesye Virgin Forest'', served as the "tutor" of Belarusian composers.
As part of the Union of Russia and Belarus, both states have discussed using a single currency along the same lines as the Euro.
The first coins of the Republic of Belarus were issued on 27 December 1996.
This asserted that the territories are all Russian and all the peoples are also Russian; in the case of the Belarusians, they were variants of the Russian people.
It is landlocked, relatively flat, and contains large tracts of marshy land.
The Soviet-controlled Byelorussian People's Council officially took control of the territories, whose populations consisted of a mixture of Poles, Ukrainians, Belarusians and Jews, on 28 October 1939 in Białystok.
The OSCE and Freedom House have commented regarding the loss of press freedom in Belarus.
This led to a proposal that the Belarusian ruble be discontinued in favor of the Russian ruble (RUB), starting as early as  2008.
The unemployment rate, according to government statistics, was 1.5% in 2005.
Accordingly, the name ''Byelorussia'' was replaced by ''Belarus'' in English and to some extent in Russian (although the traditional name persists in that language as well); likewise, the adjective ''Belorussian'' or ''Byelorussian'' was replaced by ''Belarusian'' in English (though Russian has not developed a new adjective).
While the freedom of worship is granted in the same article, religious organizations deemed harmful to the government or social order can be prohibited.
Its population is also aging; the median age of 37 is estimated to rise to between 55 and 65 in 2050.
After the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917, the term "White Russia" caused some confusion as it was also the name of the military force that opposed the red Bolsheviks.
Belarus lost almost half of its territory to Poland after the Polish-Soviet war of 1919-1921.
Joseph Stalin implemented a policy of Sovietization to isolate the Byelorussian SSR from Western influences.
This policy involved sending Russians from various parts of the Soviet Union and placing them in key positions in the Byelorussian SSR government.
The Belarusian Constitution forbids the use of special extrajudicial courts.
In 1998, there were fewer than 100 radio stations in Belarus: 28 AM, 37 FM and 11 shortwave stations.
In June 1988, the archaeologist and leader of the Christian Conservative Party of the BPF Zyanon Paznyak discovered mass graves of victims executed in 1937–41 at Kurapaty, near Minsk.
Elections under Lukashenko's rule have been widely criticized as unfair by the international community; and according to many countries and organizations, political opposition has been violently suppressed.
Belarus's two official languages are Russian and Belarusian; Russian is the main language, used by 72% of the population, while Belarusian, the   official first language, is spoken by 11.9%.
Several state holidays, such as Independence Day and Victory Day, draw big crowds and often include displays such as fireworks and military parades, especially in Vitebsk and Minsk.
In 2005, about 1.4% of Belarus's gross domestic product was devoted to military expenditure.
An alternate explanation for the name comments on the white clothing worn by the local Slavic population.
Belarus has not expressed a desire to join NATO but has participated in the Individual Partnership Program since 1997, and Belarus provides refueling and airspace support for the ISAF mission in Afghanistan.
Two-round elections for the presidency on ( 1994 and  1994) catapulted the formerly unknown Alexander Lukashenko into national prominence.
In 2005, nearly a quarter of the population was employed by industrial factories.
However, there is a political will to fight against corruption in the government, and the government has made some progress in combating corruption, such as minimizing tax regulations in order to improve transparency in the tax office.
The ruble was reintroduced with new values in 2000 and has been in use ever since.
Statistically, the Byelorussian SSR was the hardest-hit Soviet republic in World War II; it remained in Nazi hands until 1944.
In 2005, GDP increased by 9.9%; the inflation rate averaged 9.5%.
The Belarusian government sponsors annual cultural festivals such as the Bazaar in Vitebsk, which showcases Belarusian performers, artists, writers, musicians, and actors.
As of 2015, 38% of Belarusian exported goods go to Russia and 56% of imported goods come from Russia.
The Armed Forces were formed in 1992 using parts of the former Soviet Armed Forces on the new republic's territory.
Travel bans imposed by the European Union have been lifted in the past in order to allow Lukashenko to attend diplomatic meetings and also to engage his government and opposition groups in dialogue.
In addition, remains from the Dnieper-Donets culture were found in Belarus and parts of Ukraine.
She also won the gold medal in mixed doubles at the 2012 Summer Olympics with Max Mirnyi, who holds ten Grand Slam titles in doubles.
Receiving heavy sponsorship from the government, ice hockey is the nation's second most popular sport after football.
After the December completion of the 2010 presidential election, Lukashenko was elected to a fourth straight term with nearly 80% of the vote in elections.
In response, the Belarusian government called the assessment "quite far from reality".
The traditional Belarusian dress originates from the Kievan Rus' period.
The Brest Fortress, which had been annexed in 1939, at this time was subjected to one of the most destructive onslaughts that happened during the war.
Due to its failure to protect labor rights, including passing laws forbidding unemployment or working outside of state-controlled sectors, Belarus lost its EU Generalized System of Preferences status on  2007, which raised tariff rates to their prior most favored nation levels.
The next largest ethnic groups are: Russians (8.3%), Poles (3.1%), and Ukrainians (1.7%).
The judges of national courts are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Council of the Republic.
Economically, Belarus involved itself in the CIS, Eurasian Economic Community, and Union with Russia.
A new currency, the new Belarusian ruble (ISO 4217 code: BYN) was introduced in July 2016, replacing the Belarusian ruble in a rate of 1:10,000 (10,000 old rubles = 1 new ruble).
In the 1930s, the implementation of the Soviet five-year plans for the national economy led to rapid industrialization.
Lukashenko has described himself as having an "authoritarian ruling style".
Corrupt practices such as bribery often take place during tender processes, and whistleblower protection and national ombudsman are lacking in Belarus's anti-corruption system.
In 1994, Belarus's main exports included heavy machinery (especially tractors), agricultural products, and energy products.
The second most widespread religious group, Roman Catholicism, has a much smaller following; nevertheless, Belarus celebrates both Orthodox and Catholic versions of Christmas and Easter as national holidays.
In western Belarus under Polish control, ''Byelorussia'' became commonly used in the regions of Białystok and Grodno during the interwar period.
Minorities also practice Greek Catholicism, Judaism, Islam and Neopaganism.
Belarus declared itself sovereign on  1990 by issuing the Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic.
All media companies are regulated by the Law on Press and Other Mass Media, passed on  1995.
But since the mid-20th century, the number of Jews has been reduced by the Holocaust, deportation, and emigration, so that today it is a very small minority of less than one percent.
It was also after this conflict that the final borders of Belarus were set by Stalin when parts of Belarusian territory were given to the recently annexed Lithuania.
The term ''Belorussia'' (, the latter part similar but spelled and stressed differently from Росси́я, ''Russia'') first rose in the days of the Russian Empire, and the Russian Tsar was usually styled "the Tsar of All the Russias", as ''Russia'' or the ''Russian Empire'' was formed by three parts of Russia—the Great, Little, and White.
The borders of the Byelorussian SSR and Poland were redrawn and became known as the Curzon Line.
The region that is now Belarus was first settled by Baltic tribes in the 3rd century.
After Belarus was incorporated into the Soviet Union, the Soviet government took control of the Republic's cultural affairs.
The significance of this act was not immediately clear; some incorrectly speculated that Putin would become president of a unified state of Russia and Belarus after stepping down as Russian president in May 2008.
'''', ; ), officially the '''Republic of Belarus''', formerly and sometimes known as '''Byelorussia''' is a landlocked country in Eastern Europe bordered by Russia to the northeast, Ukraine to the south, Poland to the west, and Lithuania and Latvia to the northwest.
Tennis player Victoria Azarenka became the first Belarusian to win a Grand Slam singles title at the Australian Open in 2012.
Employment is also high in agriculture, manufacturing sales, trading goods, and education.
Tensions between NATO and Belarus peaked after the March 2006 presidential election in Belarus.
The largest media holding group in Belarus is the state-owned National State Teleradiocompany.
He garnered 45% of the vote in the first round and 80% in the second, defeating Vyacheslav Kebich who received 14% of the vote.
In 2008, there were 3.718&nbsp;million phone landlines used in comparison to  cellular phones in Belarus.
'''Belarus''' ( ; , tr.
Wheat and rye breads are consumed in Belarus, but rye is more plentiful because conditions are too harsh for growing wheat.
On 1 June 2011, Belarus requested an economic rescue package from the International Monetary Fund.
The United Nations and other agencies have aimed to reduce the level of radiation in affected areas, especially through the use of caesium binders and rapeseed cultivation, which are meant to decrease soil levels of caesium-137.
In 2015, 39.3% of Belarusians were employed by state-controlled companies, 57.2% were employed by private companies (in which the government has a 21.1% stake) and 3.5% were employed by foreign companies.
Three major rivers run through the country: the Neman, the Pripyat, and the Dnieper.
Darya Domracheva is a leading biathlete whose honors include three gold medals at the 2014 Winter Olympics.
Invaders from Asia, among whom were the Huns and Avars, swept through c. 400–600 AD, but were unable to dislodge the Slavic presence.
On 11 December 2007, reports emerged that a framework for the new state was discussed between both countries.
In 2009, Freedom House gave Belarus a score of 6.75 (not free) when it came to dealing with press freedom.
The last major revival of Belarusian literature occurred in the 1960s with novels published by Vasil Bykaŭ and Uladzimir Karatkievich.
After the failed revolt, the Russian government reintroduced the use of Cyrillic to Belarusian in 1864 and no documents in Belarusian were permitted by the Russian government until 1905.
Belarusian intelligentsia in the Stalin era attempted to change the name from ''Byelorussia'' to a form of ''Krivia'' because of the supposed connection with Russia.
Over 40% of its  is forested.
The banking system of Belarus consists of thirty state-owned banks and one privatized bank.
The country's folk music traditions can be traced back to the times of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
Belarus has four UNESCO-designated World Heritage Sites: the Mir Castle Complex, the Nesvizh Castle, the Belovezhskaya Pushcha (shared with Poland), and the Struve Geodetic Arc (shared with nine other countries).
One ornamental pattern common in early dresses currently decorates the hoist of the Belarusian national flag, adopted in a disputed referendum in 1995.
Belarus also has strong ties with Syria, considered a key partner in the Middle East.
Another issue for the Belarusian press is the unresolved disappearance of several journalists.
Diplomatic relations remained tense, and in 2004, the United States passed the Belarus Democracy Act, which authorized funding for anti-government Belarusian NGOs, and prohibited loans to the Belarusian government, except for humanitarian purposes.
It operates several television and radio stations that broadcast content domestically and internationally, either through traditional signals or the Internet.
Under the 1994 constitution, the president could serve for only two terms as president, but a change in the constitution in 2004 eliminated term limits.
According to the government sources, , 58.9% of all Belarusians adhere to some kind of religion; out of those, Eastern Orthodoxy (Belarusian Exarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church) makes up about 82%.
It was published in Prague and Vilnius sometime between 1517 and 1525, making it the first book printed in Belarus or anywhere in Eastern Europe.
The Latin term "Alba Russia" was used again by Pope Pius&nbsp;VI in 1783 to recognize the Society of Jesus there, exclaiming "."
The Lipka Tatars, numbering over 15,000, are predominantly Muslims.
The parliament of the republic declared the sovereignty of Belarus on  1990, and during the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Belarus declared independence on  1991.
Its strongest economic sectors are service industries and manufacturing.
He spent the World War I years in Soviet Belarus, becoming one of the country's most distinguished artists and a member of the modernist avant-garde and was a founder of the Vitebsk Arts College.
The country is in the transitional zone between continental climates and maritime climates.
At first, a policy of "Belarusianization" was followed in the newly formed Byelorussian SSR.
The takeover was partially due to the lack of military coordination of the Balts but the gradual assimilation of the Balts into Slavic culture was peaceful in nature.
Belarusian cuisine consists mainly of vegetables, meat (particularly pork), and bread.
In a Russification drive in the 1840s, Nicholas I prohibited use of the Belarusian language in public schools, campaigned against Belarusian publications and tried to pressure those who had converted to Catholicism under the Poles to reconvert to the Orthodox faith.
There are several claims to the origin of the name ''White Rus'.''
However, Belarus cannot join NATO because it is a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation.
The ballet ''Nightingale'' by M. Kroshner was composed during the Soviet era and became the first Belarusian ballet showcased at the National Academic Vialiki Ballet Theatre in Minsk.
An influential author who devoted his work to awakening the awareness of the catastrophes the country has suffered, was Ales Adamovich.
The Viasna Human Rights Centre lists 11 political prisoners currently detained in Belarus.
Lukashenko won the election with 80% of the vote; the Russian Federation and the CIS deemed the vote open and fair while the OSCE and other organizations called the election unfair.
The labor force consists of more than four million people, among whom women hold slightly more jobs than men.
On 2 February 1386, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland were joined in a personal union through a marriage of their rulers.
Belarusian literature began with 11th- to 13th-century religious scripture, such as the 12th-century poetry of Cyril of Turaw.
The republic was redeveloped in the post-war years.
The National Academic Theatre of Ballet in Minsk was awarded the Benois de la Dance Prize in 1996 as the top ballet company in the world.
The term ''Byelorussia'' (its names in other languages such as English being based on the Russian form) was only used officially until 1991, when the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian SSR decreed by law that the new independent republic should be called ''Republic of Belarus'' ( spelled in Russian), as well its abridged form should be "Belarus".
The runner-up opposition leader Andrei Sannikov received less than 3% of the vote; independent observers criticized the election as fraudulent.
This redenomination can be considered an effort to fight the high inflation rate.
Music in Belarus largely comprises a rich tradition of folk and religious music.
Belarus's Catholic minority, which constitute about 9% of the country's population and is concentrated in the western part of the country, especially around Hrodna, is made up of a mixture of Belarusians and the country's Polish and Lithuanian minorities.
This union set in motion the developments that eventually resulted in the formation of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, created in 1569.
Rock music has become increasingly popular in recent years, though the Belarusian government has attempted to limit the amount of foreign music aired on the radio in favor of traditional Belarusian music.
For criminal cases, the highest court of appeal is the Supreme Court.
Until the 20th century, different states at various times controlled the lands of modern-day Belarus, including the Principality of Polotsk (11th to 14th centuries), the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Russian Empire.
The Muscovites, led by Ivan III of Moscow, began military campaigns in 1486 in an attempt to incorporate the lands of Kievan Rus', specifically the territories of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine.
Gomel, with a population of 481,000, is the second-largest city and serves as the capital of the Homiel Voblast.
Ethnic Belarusians constitute 83.7% of Belarus's total population.
In addition to the CIS, Belarus is a member of the Eurasian Economic Community, the Collective Security Treaty Organisation, the international Non-Aligned Movement since 1998, the Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and the UN since its founding in 1945.
Sino-Belarusian relations have improved, strengthened by the visit of President Lukashenko to China in October 2005.
Other sources claim that, before 1267, the land not conquered by the Mongols was considered "White Rus'".
Alexander Lukashenko has been the president of Belarus since 1994.
In 1945 Belarus became a founding member of the United Nations, along with the Soviet Union and the Ukrainian SSR.
Other large cities are Mogilev (365,100), Vitebsk (342,400), Hrodna (314,800) and Brest (298,300).
The unemployment rate has been in decline since 2003, and the overall rate of employment is the highest since statistics were first compiled in 1995.
Foods are usually either slowly cooked or stewed.
Most non-partisans represent a wide scope of social organizations such as workers' collectives, public associations, and civil society organizations, similar to the composition of the Soviet legislature.
The National Bank of Belarus abandoned pegging the Belarusian ruble to the Russian ruble in August 2007.
Six months later amid an unprecedented economic crisis, activists utilized social networking to initiate a fresh round of protests characterized by wordless hand-clapping.
Among them is the human rights activist Ales Bialiatski, Vice President of International Federation for Human Rights and head of Viasna.
The referendum on the extension was denounced as a "fantastic" fake by the chief electoral officer, Viktar Hanchar, who was removed from office during the campaign.
The Belarusian Government has since been criticized for acting against media outlets.
Western governments, Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch have criticized Lukashenko's authoritarian style of government.
From July 1 until December 31, 2016, the old and new currencies will be in parallel circulation and series 2000 notes and coins can be exchanged for series 2009 from January 1, 2017 to 31 December 2021.
They were decorated with ornate patterns influenced by the neighboring cultures: Poles, Lithuanians, Latvians, Russians, and other European nations.
The Constitution of Belarus does not declare any official religion, although the primary religion in the country is Eastern Orthodox Christianity.
In 1939, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union invaded and occupied Poland, marking the beginning of World War II.
Over 70% of Belarus's population of 9.49&nbsp;million resides in urban areas.
In some languages, including German and Dutch, the country is generally called "White Russia" to this day ('''' and '''' respectively).
Bilateral relations with the United States are strained because the U.S. Department of State supports various anti-Lukashenko non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and also because the Belarusian government has made it increasingly difficult for United States-based organizations to operate within the country.
The government includes a Council of Ministers, headed by the prime minister and five deputy prime ministers.
There are approximately 113,000 internet hosts in Belarus in 2009 to meet the needs of approximately  Internet users.
The contested lands were divided between Poland and the Soviet Union after the war ended in 1921, and the Byelorussian SSR became a founding member of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in 1922.
Roman Catholicism is practiced mostly in the western regions, and there are also different denominations of Protestantism.
Most of Belarus's service members are conscripts, who serve for 12 months if they have higher education or 18 months if they do not.
Similar regulations were introduced for the forestry industry in 2012.
The name Rus' is often conflated with its Latin forms Russia and Ruthenia, thus Belarus is often referred to as ''White Russia'' or ''White Ruthenia''.
The national hockey team finished fourth in overall competition at the 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics, and its players have been present in the National Hockey League in North America.
In 1986, the Byelorussian SSR was exposed to significant nuclear fallout from the explosion at the Chernobyl power plant in the neighboring Ukrainian SSR.
The Communist Party of Belarus won 3 seats, and the Agrarian Party and Republican Party of Labour and Justice, one each.
Lukashenko continued a number of Soviet-era policies, such as state ownership of large sections of the economy.
Each chamber has the ability to veto any law passed by local officials if it is contrary to the constitution.
Since a referendum in 1995, the country has had two official languages: Belarusian and Russian.
