Belfast is one of the constituent cities that makes up the Dublin-Belfast corridor region, which has a population of just under 3 million.
The architecture of the Grand Opera House has an oriental theme and was completed in 1895.
Opposite but comparatively high levels are seen in the predominantly Protestant east Belfast.
There is also a red square in the top corner (''a canton gules'') on which there is a silver bell.
Belfast has approximately  of sewers, which are currently being replaced in a project costing over £100 million and due for completion in 2009.
Apart from London, this was the greatest loss of life in a night raid during the Blitz.
Rates in Belfast (and the rest of Northern Ireland) were reformed in April 2007.
Commentators have argued that this may create a bottleneck at York Street, the next at-grade intersection, until that too is upgraded.
Bus services in the city proper and the nearer suburbs are operated by Translink Metro, with services focusing on linking residential districts with the city centre on 12 quality bus corridors running along main radial roads,
The '''Gaeltacht Quarter''' is an area around the Falls Road in west Belfast which promotes and encourages the use of the Irish language.
The Edwardian architectural style of Belfast City Hall influenced the Victoria Memorial in Calcutta, India, and Durban City Hall in South Africa.
BBC Radio 4's World reported furthermore that despite higher levels of corporation tax in the UK than in the Republic.
The Provisional IRA detonated 22 bombs within the confines of Belfast city centre in 1972, on what is known as "Bloody Friday", killing eleven people.
In 2007, Belfast saw house prices grow by 50%, the fastest rate of growth in the UK.
There are no rail services to cities in other countries of the United Kingdom, due to the lack of a bridge or tunnel connecting Great Britain to the island of Ireland.
An alternative interpretation of the name is "mouth of the river of the sandbar", an allusion to the River Farset, which flows into the Lagan where the sandbar was located.
The citizens of Belfast pay for their water in their rates bill.
They also hope to invest in a new modern transport system (including high-speed rail and others) for Belfast, with a cost of £250 million.
The zoo also carries out important conservation work and takes part in European and international breeding programmes which help to ensure the survival of many species under threat.
The lowest temperature to occur in recent years was  on 22 December 2010.
The Belfast City Hospital is the regional specialist centre for haematology and is home to a cancer centre that rivals the best in the world.
The seasonal flight to Orlando is also operated by Virgin Atlantic.
The Harland and Wolff shipyard has two of the largest dry docks in Europe, where the giant cranes, Samson and Goliath stand out against Belfast's skyline.
Over 2.2 million passengers flew between Belfast and London in 2009.
''"That's because of the fundamentals of the UK economy and because people actually want to invest in the UK,"'' he commented on that report.
For elections to the European Parliament, Belfast is within the Northern Ireland constituency.
Course provision is broad – biomedical sciences, environmental science and geography, psychology, business, the humanities and languages, film and journalism, travel and tourism, teacher training and computing are among the campus strengths.
The bid was run by an independent company, ''Imagine Belfast'', who boasted that it would "make Belfast the meeting place of Europe's legends, where the meaning of history and belief find a home and a sanctuary from caricature, parody and oblivion."
The Mary G McGeown Regional Nephrology Unit at the City Hospital is the kidney transplant centre and provides regional renal services for Northern Ireland.
Belfast played a key role in the Industrial Revolution, and was a global industrial centre until the latter half of the 20th century.
It was not until industry transformed the linen and shipbuilding trades that the economy and the population boomed.
The city is flanked on the north and northwest by a series of hills, including Divis Mountain, Black Mountain and Cavehill, thought to be the inspiration for Jonathan Swift's ''Gulliver's Travels''.
The Conflict Archive on the INternet (CAIN) Web Service receives funding from both universities and is a rich source of information and source material on the Troubles as well as society and politics in Northern Ireland.
Since 1973 it has been a local government district under local administration by Belfast City Council.
The first Lord Mayor of Belfast was Daniel Dixon, who was elected in 1892.
This heraldic language describes a shield that is divided in two horizontally (''party per fesse'').
However, since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, there has been significant urban regeneration in the city centre including Victoria Square, Queen's Island and Laganside as well as the Odyssey complex and the landmark Waterfront Hall.
The absolute maximum temperature at the weather station at Stormont is , set during July 1983.
Well known city centre venues would include Kelly's Cellars, Maddens and the Hercules bar.
The city gets significant precipitation (greater than 1mm) on 157 days in an average year with an average annual rainfall of , less than areas of northern England or most of Scotland, but higher than Dublin or the south-east coast of Ireland.
Named after  ''RMS Titanic'', which was built here in 1912, work has begun which promises to transform some former shipyard land into "one of the largest waterfront developments in Europe".
and Sirocco Works F.C.
The seal was used by Belfast merchants throughout the 17th century on their signs and trade-coins.
The areas around the Falls and Shankill Roads are the most deprived wards in Northern Ireland.
The 2001 census population in the same Urban Area had fallen to 277,391 people, with 579,554 people living in the wider Belfast Metropolitan Area.
Belfast blossomed as a commercial and industrial centre in the 18th and 19th centuries and became Ireland's pre-eminent industrial city.
The results were: 19(+3) Sinn Féin, 13(-2) Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), 8(+2) Alliance Party, 7(-1) SDLP, 7(+4) Ulster Unionist Party (UUP), 3(+1) Progressive Unionist Party (PUP), with the Traditional Unionist Voice.
Superseded by the River Lagan as the more important river in the city, the Farset now languishes in obscurity, under High Street.
The Royal Courts of Justice in Chichester Street are home to Northern Ireland's Supreme Court.
Other major developments include the regeneration of the Titanic Quarter, and the erection of the Obel Tower, a skyscraper set to be the tallest tower on the island.
Major arterial roads (quality bus corridor) into the city include the Antrim Road, Shore Road, Holywood Road, Newtownards Road, Castlereagh Road, Cregagh Road, Ormeau Road, Malone Road, Lisburn Road, Falls Road, Springfield Road, Shankill Road, and Crumlin Road, Four Winds.
Because of this, it is less an agglomeration of villages and towns which have expanded into each other, than other comparable cities, such as Manchester or Birmingham.
Broadcasting only over the Internet is Homely Planet, the Cultural Radio Station for Northern Ireland, supporting community relations.
Over the past 10 years employment has grown by 16.4 per cent, compared with 9.2 per cent for the UK as a whole.
Belfast is one of the most visited cities in the UK, and the second most visited on the island of Ireland.
Northern Ireland's peace dividend has led to soaring property prices in the city.
The Belfast Giants are a huge brand in Northern Ireland and their increasing stature in the game led to the Belfast Giants playing the Boston Bruins of the NHL on 2 October 2010 at the Odyssey Arena in Belfast, losing the game 5–1.
The highest levels of segregation in the city are in west Belfast with many areas greater than 90% Catholic.
Census figures (2011) showed that Belfast has a total non-white population of 10,219 or 3.3%, while 18,420 or 6.6% of the population were born outside the UK and Ireland.
Additionally, Belfast city centre has undergone considerable expansion and regeneration in recent years, notably around Victoria Square.
Der Spiegel, a German weekly magazine for politics and economy, titled Belfast as ''The New Celtic Tiger'' which is "open for business".
The Coleraine campus, about  from Belfast city centre concentrates on a broad range of subjects.
Many of Belfast's oldest buildings are found in the Cathedral Quarter area, which is currently undergoing redevelopment as the city's main cultural and tourist area.
Belfast saw the worst of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, with nearly half of the total deaths in the conflict occurring in the city.
(Belfast and County Antrim, however, did not form part of this particular Plantation scheme as they were privately colonised.)
The 1999 Heineken Cup champions Ulster Rugby play at the Kingspan Stadium in the south of the city.
As with any modern economy, the service sector is vital to Northern Ireland's development and is enjoying excellent growth.
This interpretation was favoured by Edmund Hogan and John O'Donovan.
When Swift was living at Lilliput Cottage near the bottom of Belfast's Limestone Road, he imagined that the Cavehill resembled the shape of a sleeping giant safeguarding the city.
The event was hosted by Selena Gomez and celebrities such as Justin Bieber, Jessie J, Hayden Panettiere, and Lady Gaga travelled to Northern Ireland to attend the event, held in the Odyssey Arena.
The improvement scheme was completed five months ahead of schedule on February 2009, with the official opening taking place on 4 March 2009.
The Harland and Wolff shipbuilding firm was created in 1861, and by the time the ''Titanic'' was built, in 1912, it had become the largest shipyard in the world.
Despite a period of relative peace, most areas and districts of Belfast still reflect the divided nature of Northern Ireland as a whole.
Conn O'Neill of the Clannaboy O'Neills owned vast lands in the area and was the last inhabitant of Grey Castle, one remaining link being the Conn's Water river flowing through east Belfast.
Intermediate-level clubs are: Donegal Celtic, Dundela, Harland & Wolff Welders, Newington Youth, PSNI, Queen's University and Sport & Leisure Swifts, who compete in the NIFL Championship; Albert Foundry F.C., Ballysillan Swifts, Bloomfield F.C., Crumlin Star F.C., East Belfast F.C., Grove United F.C., Immaculata F.C., Malachians F.C., Orangefield Old Boys' Association F.C., Rosario Youth Club F.C., St Patrick's Young Men F.C., Shankill United F.C., Short Brothers F.C.
Throughout the Troubles, Belfast artists continued to express themselves through poetry, art and music.
Bank Street in the city centre referred to the river bank and Bridge Street was named for the site of an early Farset bridge.
The city suffered greatly during the conflict called "the Troubles", but latterly has undergone a sustained period of calm, free from the intense political violence of former years, and substantial economic and commercial growth.
Rose Week in July each year features over 20,000 blooms.
It features a criss-cross of escalators and suspended walkways and nine high-tech galleries.
In 2003, Belfast had an unsuccessful bid for the 2008 European Capital of Culture.
These arms date back to 1613, when James VI and I granted Belfast town status.
Now known as Shorts Bombardier it works as an international aircraft manufacturer located near the Port of Belfast.
An area of greater deprivation extends to the west of the city.
The population density in 2011 was 24.88 people/hectare (compared to 1.34 for the rest of Northern Ireland).
The Ulster University also maintains a campus in the city, which concentrates on fine art, design and architecture.
Belfast remains segregated by walls, commonly known as "peace lines", erected by the British Army after August 1969, and which still divide 14 districts in the inner city.
It is one of the largest universities in the UK with 25,231 undergraduate and postgraduate students spread over 250 buildings, 120 of which are listed as being of architectural merit.
The zoo is one of the top visitor attractions in Northern Ireland, receiving more than 295,000 visitors a year.
Since the expansion of the European Union, numbers have been boosted by an influx of Eastern European immigrants.
This makes the city about as ethnically diverse as Sunderland or York.
The Ulster Museum is located in Belfast.
This rise slowed and peaked around the start of the Troubles with the 1971 census showing almost 600,000 people in the Belfast Urban Area.
There are two independent cinemas in Belfast: the Queen's Film Theatre and the Strand Cinema, which host screenings during the Belfast Film Festival and the Belfast Festival at Queen's.
There is, however, a combined ferry and rail ticket between Belfast and cities in Great Britain, which is referred to as ''Sailrail''.
Other significant sportspeople from Belfast include double world snooker champion Alex "Hurricane" Higgins and world champion boxers Wayne McCullough and Rinty Monaghan.
Queen's University Belfast was founded in 1845 and is a member of the Russell Group, an association of 20 leading research-intensive universities in the UK.
Belfast saw some of the worst of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, particularly in the 1970s, with rival paramilitary groups formed on both sides.
Belfast has a direct rail connection with Dublin called ''Enterprise'' which is operated jointly by NIR and Iarnród Éireann, the state railway company of the Republic of Ireland.
The Lord Mayor for 2016-17 is Alderman Brian Kingston of the Democratic Unionist Party, while the Deputy Lord Mayor is Mary Ellen Campbell of Sinn Féin, both of whom were elected in June 2016 to serve a one-year term.
In April 2008, the Department for Regional Development reported on a plan for a light-rail system, similar to that in Dublin.
During the winter solstice, the shortest day of the year, local sunset is before 16:00 while sunrise is around 08:45.
In 2008 a process was proposed for the removal of the 'peace walls'.
Famous artists would include The McPeakes, Brian Kennedy and the band 9Lies.
Belfast remained a small settlement of little importance during the Middle Ages.
Built in the 1830s and designed by Sir Charles Lanyon, Botanic Gardens Palm House is one of the earliest examples of a curvilinear and cast iron glasshouse.
Sporadic violent events continue , although not supported by the previous antagonists who had reached political agreement in 1998.
Belfast Zoo is owned by Belfast City Council.
By the turn of the 19th century, Belfast had transformed into the largest linen producing centre in the world, earning the nickname "Linenopolis".
The city has become a popular film location; The Paint Hall at Harland and Wolff has become one of the UK Film Council's main studios.
Founded in 1966, it has existed in its present form since 1981, when the BBC Northern Ireland Orchestra was disbanded.
This area was the hub around which the original settlement developed.
The Ulster Orchestra, based in Belfast, is Northern Ireland's only full-time symphony orchestra and is well renowned in the United Kingdom.
In Ulster Scots the name of the city is ''Bilfawst'' or ''Bilfaust'', although "Belfast" is also used.
Consequently, the arterial roads along which this expansion took place (such as the Falls Road or the Newtownards Road) are more significant in defining the districts of the city than nucleated settlements.
Since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the nearby Lisburn Road has developed into the city's most exclusive shopping strip.
Temperature extremes here have slightly more variability due to the more inland location.
The Northern Ireland national football team, ranked 43rd in October 2014 in the FIFA World Rankings, plays its home matches at Windsor Park.
File:Born Outside UK And Ireland Belfast City Council 2011 Census.png|Percentage born outside the UK and Ireland
The largest groups are Poles, Chinese and Indians.
The visitors spent £285.2 million, supporting more than 15,600 jobs.
A road improvement-scheme in Belfast began early in 2006, with the upgrading of two junctions along the Westlink dual-carriageway to grade-separated standard.
Since his death the City Airport was named after him and a trust has been set up to fund a memorial to him in the city centre.
Some 13 more frosty nights than Stormont.
There were 6.4 million visitors in 2005, which was a growth of 8.5% from 2004.
In 2004, Belfast had the lowest owner occupation rate in Northern Ireland at 54%.
The music school of Queen's University is responsible for arranging a notable series of lunchtime and evening concerts, often given by renowned musicians which are usually given in The Harty Room at the university (University Square).
In 2008, 7.1 million tourists visited the city.
In 1886 the city suffered intense riots over the issue of home rule, which had divided the city.
Belfast has two universities.
There are a number Irish language Primary schools and one secondary school in Belfast.
Almost half of those born outside the UK and Ireland live in south Belfast, where they comprise 9.5% of the population.
Belfast is served by two airports: George Best Belfast City Airport in the city, and Belfast International Airport  west of the city.
Since the ending of the regions conflict tourism has boomed in Northern Ireland, greatly aided by low cost.
In 1994, a weir was built across the river by the Laganside Corporation to raise the average water level so that it would cover the unseemly mud flats which gave Belfast its name ().
In June 2007, a £16 million programme was announced which will transform and redevelop streets and public spaces in the city centre.
Belfast is situated on Northern Ireland's eastern coast at .
Evidence of this period of Belfast's growth can still be seen in the oldest areas of the city, known as the Entries.
Belfast has over forty public parks.
Shows filmed at The Paint Hall include the film ''City of Ember'' (2008) and HBO's ''Game of Thrones'' series (beginning in late 2009).
The nearest weather station for which sunshine data and longer term observations are available is Belfast International Airport (Aldergrove).
In 2008, Belfast was named a finalist in the Large City (200,001 and over) category of the RHS Britain in Bloom competition along with London Borough of Croydon and Sheffield.
The City Hall was finished in 1906 and was built to reflect Belfast's city status, granted by Queen Victoria in 1888.
The area has a large student population and hosts the annual Belfast Festival at Queen's each autumn.
Today, Belfast is Northern Ireland's educational and commercial hub.
Belfast Metropolitan College is a large further education college with three main campuses around the city, including several smaller buildings.
Bombing, assassination and street violence formed a backdrop to life throughout the Troubles.
The '''Queen's Quarter''' in south Belfast is named after Queen's University.
In particular, the region has a booming tourist industry with record levels of visitors and tourist revenues and has established itself as a significant location for call centres."
Custom House Square is one of the city's main outdoor venues for free concerts and street entertainment.
Taking in Dublin Road, Great Victoria Street, Shaftesbury Square and Bradbury Place, it contains some of the best bars and restaurants in the city.
Belfast has four teams in rugby's All-Ireland League: Belfast Harlequins in Division 1B; and Instonians, Queen's University and Malone in Division 2A.
In the 2015 UK general election, Belfast elected one MP from each constituency to the House of Commons at Westminster, London.
Ethnic minority communities have been in Belfast since the 1930s.
The first nationalist Lord Mayor of Belfast was Alban Maginness of the SDLP, in 1997.
The minimum temperature at Aldergrove was , during December 2010.
Formerly known as Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education, it specialises in vocational education.
It was bombed several times during the Troubles but has now been restored to its former glory.
In the period since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, Belfast has begun a social, economic and cultural transformation giving it a growing international cultural reputation.
Like many British cities dependent on traditional heavy industry, Belfast suffered serious decline since the 1960s, exacerbated greatly in the 1970s and 1980s by the Troubles.
Belfast contains most of Northern Ireland's regional specialist centres.
There is a tourist information centre located at Donegall Place.
Many ex-NHL players have featured on the Giants roster, none more famous than world superstar Theo Fleury.
The Belfast Health & Social Care Trust is one of five trusts that were created on 1 April 2007 by the Department of Health.
Plans include apartments, a riverside entertainment district, and a major Titanic-themed museum.
This position was confirmed in the three subsequent council elections, with mayors from Sinn Féin and the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), both of whom are Nationalist parties, and the cross-community Alliance Party regularly elected since.
Today, Belfast remains a centre for industry, as well as the arts, higher education, business, and law, and is the economic engine of Northern Ireland.
Phoenix Natural Gas Ltd. started supplying customers in Larne and Greater Belfast with natural gas in 1996 via the newly constructed Scotland-Northern Ireland pipeline.
Stena Line runs regular routes to Cairnryan in Scotland using its conventional vessels – with a crossing time of around 2 hours 15 minutes.
Most of their victims were Catholics with no links to the Provisional IRA.
The name would thus translate literally as "(river) mouth of the sandbar" or "(river) mouth of the ford".
A large stained glass window in the City Hall displays the arms, where an explanation suggests that the seahorse and the ship refer to Belfast's significant maritime history.
There are no less than eleven other minor rivers in and around Belfast, namely the Blackstaff, the Colin, the Connswater, the Cregagh, the Derriaghy, the Forth, the Knock, the Legoniel, the Milewater, the Purdysburn and the Ravernet.
It is also translated as "In return for so much, what shall we give back?"
Belfast was granted borough status by James VI and I in 1613 and official city status by Queen Victoria in 1888.
In February 2006, Belfast's unemployment rate stood at 4.2%, lower than both the Northern Ireland and the UK average of 5.5%.
It has an area of  of meadows, woodland and gardens and features a Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Garden, a Japanese garden, a walled garden, and the Golden Crown Fountain commissioned in 2002 as part of the Queen's Golden Jubilee celebrations.
Belfast produced the Formula One racing stars John Watson who raced for five different teams during his career in the 1970s and 1980s and Ferrari driver Eddie Irvine.
Musicians and bands who have written songs about or dedicated to Belfast:
Belfast has a longstanding underground club scene which was established in the early 1980s.
Around this time, the linen trade in Northern Ireland blossomed and by the middle of the 18th century, one fifth of all the linen exported from Ireland was shipped from Belfast.
Casement Park in west Belfast, home to the Antrim county teams, has a capacity of 32,000 which makes it the second largest Gaelic Athletic Association ground in Ulster.
Stena Line also operates a route to Liverpool.
The industrial estate and docklands ''BT3''.
Queen's University of Belfast is the main university in the city.
In 1791, the Society of United Irishmen was founded in Belfast, after Henry Joy McCracken and other prominent Presbyterians from the city invited Theobald Wolfe Tone and Thomas Russell to a meeting, after having read Tone's "Argument on Behalf of the Catholics of Ireland".
There are "huge amounts" of foreign investment coming into the country.
Industries thrived, including linen, rope-making, tobacco, heavy engineering and shipbuilding, and at the end of the 19th century, Belfast briefly overtook Dublin as the largest city in Ireland.
The climate of Belfast is significantly milder than some other locations in the world at a similar latitude, due to the warming influence of the Gulf Stream.
As an urban and coastal area, Belfast typically gets snow on fewer than 10 days per year.
Belfast council takes part in the twinning scheme, and is twinned with Nashville, in the United States, Hefei in China, and Boston, in the United States.
Belfast's population is evenly split between its Protestant and Catholic residents.
Belfast is represented in both the British House of Commons and in the Northern Ireland Assembly.
The absolute minimum temperature at Stormont is , during January 1982, although in an average year the coldest night will fall no lower than  with air frost being recorded on just 26 nights.
Belfast was heavily bombed during World War II.
Segregation has been present throughout the history of Belfast, but has been maintained and increased by each outbreak of violence in the city.
Black taxis are common in the city, operating on a share basis in some areas.
Greens and People Before Profit Alliance all winning their first seats.
The Irish name '''' is shared by a townland in County Mayo, whose name has been anglicised as ''Belfarsad''.
It is likely that the bell is an example here of "canting" (or punning) heraldry, representing the first syllable of Belfast.
