No political activity was permitted in the Congo whatsoever.
Executive power rested with the Belgian Minister of Colonial Affairs, assisted by a Colonial Council (Conseil Colonial).
The timetable called for the gradual emancipation of the Congo over a 30-year period—the time Van Bilsen expected it would take to create an educated elite who could replace the Belgians in positions of power.
The necessary work force was recruited in the interior of the vast colony with the active support of the territorial administration.
Low birth rates in the countryside and the depopulation of certain areas were typically attributed to the disruption of traditional community life as a result of forced labour migration and mandatory cultivation.
and submit to stringent controls (including house visits).
In this way, an extensive plantation economy was developed.
But he dragged his feet and played out his opponents against one another to gain time.
The educational system was dominated by the Roman Catholic Church and, in some rare cases, Protestant churches, and the curricula reflected Christian and Western values.
From 1886 until 1926, the Governor-general and his administration were posted in Boma, near the Congo River estuary.
Children received basic education such as learning how to read, write and some mathematics.
Before the war the copper was sold to Germany; but the British purchased all the wartime output, with the revenues going to the Belgian government in exile.
The crime of "red rubber" was put to a stop.
The colony had curfews for Congolese city-dwellers and similar racial restrictions were commonplace.
There was an "implicit apartheid".
This self-declared "civilizing mission" went hand in hand with the goal of economic gain.
King Leopold II of the Belgians persuaded the government to support colonial expansion around the then-largely unexplored Congo Basin.
With support from a number of Western countries, Leopold achieved international recognition for a personal colony, the Congo Free State, in 1885.
The lack of accurate records makes it difficult to quantify the number of deaths caused by the ruthless exploitation and the lack of immunity to new diseases introduced by contact with European colonists.
Endemic diseases, such as sleeping sickness, were all but eliminated through large-scale and persistent campaigns.
Health care, too, was largely supported by the missions, although the colonial state took an increasing interest.
Colonial rule in the Congo began in the late 19th century.
At once, the colonial capital was in the grip of extensive rioting.
For example, the city centers were reserved to white population only, while the blacks were organized in ''cités indigènes'' (called 'le belge').
In the 1950s  two markedly different forms of nationalism arose among the Congolese elites.
Leopold's ''Force Publique,'' a private army that terrorized natives to work as forced labour for resource extraction, disrupted their societies and killed and abused natives indiscriminately.
The so-called "vacant lands" (land that was not directly used by the local tribes) were taken over by the state, which redistributed the territory to European companies, individual white landowners (''colons''), or the missions.
The Belgian government wanted to avoid being drawn into a futile and potentially very bloody colonial war, as had happened to France in Indochina and Algeria, or to the Netherlands in Indonesia.
Certain practices and traditions from the colonial period have survived into the independent Congolese state.
After Malaysia fell to the Japanese, the Belgian Congo became a strategic supplier of rubber to the Allies.
The rebellion that had started in Thyssville in the Bas-Congo in July 1960 quickly spread to the rest of the Congo.
Belgium vehemently opposed Lumumba’s leftist views and had grave concerns about the status of their financial interests should Lumumba’s MNC gain power.
On 13 January, King Baudouin declared in a radio address that Belgium would work towards the full independence of the Congo "without hesitation, but also without irresponsible rashness".
In many areas, their violence specifically targeted European victims.
The Congo had a high degree of racial segregation.
After the fall of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War in the late 1980s, Mobutu lost support in the West.
When the Belgian government took over the administration in 1908, the situation in the Congo improved in certain respects.
This allowed, in particular, the Belgian Société Générale to build up an economic empire in the colony.
The World Exhibition organised in Brussels in 1958 (Expo 58) proved another eye-opener for many Congolese leaders, who were allowed to travel to Belgium for the first time.
The so-called "Zaïrisation" of the country in the mid-1970s led to an exodus of foreign workers and economic disaster.
Their ambivalence resulted in Leopold's creating a colony on his own account.
Upon his arrival in Léopoldville, he was pelted with rocks by blacks who were angry with the imprisonment of Lumumba, convicted because of incitement against the colonial government.
Huge profits were generated and for a large part siphoned off to Europe in the form of dividends.
Opening up the Congo and its natural and mineral riches for the Belgian economy remained the main motive for colonial expansion, but other priorities, such as healthcare and basic education, slowly gained in importance.
Most of the interior of the Congo was literally unexplored if not inaccessible."
In the police, the blacks could not pass the rank of non-commissioned officer.
European rivalry in Central Africa led to diplomatic tensions, in particular with regard to the largely unclaimed Congo River basin.
The territories were further subdivided into numerous "chiefdoms" (''chefferies''), at the head of which the Belgian administration appointed "traditional chiefs" (''chefs coutumiers'').
When Governor-General Pétillon began to speak about granting the native people more civil rights, even suffrage, to create what he termed a “Belgo-Congolese community”, his ideas were met with indifference from Brussels and often with open hostility from some of the Belgians in the Congo, who feared for their privileges.
The ''Mouvement populaire de la Révolution'' (MPR), of which Mobutu was the ''président-fondateur'', firmly established one-party rule.
Although the nation was independent, Belgian paratroopers intervened in the Congo on various occasions to protect and evacuate fellow citizens.
The economic exploitation of the Congo was the colonizer’s top priority.
Until then, French had been promoted as the unique colonial language.
Leopold II had been keen to acquire a colony for Belgium even before he ascended to the throne in 1865.
The nationalist movement—to which the Belgian authorities, to some degree, turned a blind eye—promoted territorial nationalism, wherein the Belgian Congo would become one politically united state after independence.
Conversion to Catholicism, basic western-style education and improved health care were objectives in their own right, but at the same time helped to transform what was regarded as a primitive society into the Western model, in which workers who were disciplined and healthy, and who had learned to read and write, could be more efficiently put to work.
The objective of the scheme was to modernize indigenous agriculture by assigning plots of land to individual families and providing those with government support in the form of selected seeds, agronomic advice, fertilizers, etc.
For that reason, it was  inclined to give in to the demands for immediate independence voiced by the Congolese leaders.
They thought provincial elections would take place in December 1959, national elections in 1960 or 1961, after which administrative and political responsibilities would be gradually transferred to the Congolese, in a process presumably to be completed towards the mid-1960s.
In many cases, this amounted to forced labour, as in many villages minimum quotas of “able-bodied workers” to be recruited were enforced.
Following the ''Casement Report'', the British, European and American press exposed the conditions in the Congo Free State to the public in the early 1900s.
Even in 1948, 99.6% of educational facilities were run by Christian missions.
The basic idea was that the development of the Congo had to be borne not by the Belgian taxpayers but by the Congolese themselves.
The colonizer alone believed he knew what was good for the Congo.
One example among many is that of Father Gustaaf Hulstaert (1900–1990), who in 1937 created the periodical ''Aequatoria'' devoted to the linguistic, ethnographic and historical study of the Mongo people of the central Congo basin.
After the war, Belgium was rewarded for the participation of the ''Force Publique'' in the East African campaign with a League of Nations mandate over the former German colony of Ruanda-Urundi (1924-1945).
The ten-year plan ushered in a decade of strong economic growth, from which, for the first time, the Congolese began to benefit on a substantial scale.
Katanga province was re-absorbed and the so-called Simba Rebellion ended in Stanleyville (province Orientale).
Many missionaries who were in daily contact with Congolese villagers, took their plight at heart and sometimes intervened on their behalf with the colonial administration (for instance in land property questions).
In January 1961, he was flown to the rich mining province of Katanga, which by that time had declared a secession from Léopoldville under the leadership of Moïse Tshombe (with active Belgian support).
By the 1950s the Congo had a wage labour force twice as large as that in any other African colony.
From 1953, and even more so after the triumphant visit of King Baudouin to the colony in 1955, Governor-general Léon Pétillon (1952–1958) worked to create a “Belgian-Congolese community”, in which blacks and whites were to be treated as equals.
By 1916 the Belgian commander of the Force Publique, Lieutenant-General Charles Tombeur, had assembled an army of 15,000 men supported by local bearers - Reybrouck indicated that during the war no less than 260,000 native bearers were used  - and advanced on to Kigali.
Relations with Belgium, the former colonial power, went through a series of ups and downs, reflecting a steady decline in the underlying economic, financial and political interests.
The Congo Free State operated as a corporate state privately controlled by Leopold II through a non-governmental organization, the ''Association Internationale Africaine''.
In the country as a whole, the exploitation of forced labour was diminished and many such labourers returned to their villages.
The "Matongé" quarter in Brussels is the traditional focal point of the Congolese community in Belgium.
After Henry Morton Stanley had explored the region in a journey that ended in 1878, Leopold courted the explorer and hired him to help his interests in the region.
The brunt of the "war effort" was borne by the Congolese population for instance through a reinforcement of the mandatory cultivation policy.
In 1925, medical missionary Dr. Arthur Lewis Piper was the first person to use and bring tryparsamide, the Rockefeller Foundation’s drug to cure sleeping sickness, to the Congo.
But forced labour, in differing forms and degrees, would not disappear entirely until the end of the colonial period.
The colonial government was keen to convey the image of a benevolent and conflict-free administration and of the Belgian Congo as a true model colony.
Palm oil production in the Congo increased from 2,500 tons in 1914 to 9,000 tons in 1921, and 230,000 tons in 1957.
A group of Catholic ''évolués'' responded positively to the plan with a moderate manifesto in a Congolese journal called ''Conscience Africaine''; they raised issues as to the extent of Congolese participation.
A key role was played by the ''Mouvement National Congolais'' (MNC).
The Governor-General feared that such divisive issues would undermine the authority of the colonial government in the eyes of the Congolese, while also diverting attention from the more pressing need for true emancipation.
In 1997 Mobutu was chased from power by a rebel force headed by Laurent-Désiré Kabila, who declared himself president and renamed Zaïre as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In 1926 alone, the Union Minière exported more than 80,000 tons of copper ore, a large part of which was processed in Hoboken in Belgium.
The brutal exploitation and arbitrary use of violence, in which some of the concessionary companies had excelled, were curbed.
In terms of jurisdiction, two systems co-existed: a system of European courts and one of indigenous courts (''tribunaux indigènes'').
The Belgian civil government showed little interest in its monarch's dreams of empire-building.
At the same time, the economy had expanded and the number of Belgian nationals in the country more than doubled, from 39,000 in 1950 to more than 88,000 by 1960.
The rainforest, swamps and accompanying malaria and other tropical diseases, such as sleeping sickness, made it a difficult environment for European exploration and exploitation.
The Belgian-owned Union minière du Haut-Katanga, which would come to dominate copper mining, used a direct rail-line to the sea at Beira.
The term ''bula matari'' came to signify the irresistible and compelling force of the colonial state.
The Belgian government and many of the ''évolués'' were suspicious of the plan—the former because it meant eventually giving up the Congo, and the latter because Belgium would continue to rule for another three decades.
Diamond- and gold-mining also expanded during the war.
The development of education and health care in the Belgian Congo was impressive.
From the mid-1950s, it became a vocal opponent of Belgian colonial rule.
The ideology underpinning colonial policy was summed up in a catch-phrase used by Governor-general Pierre Ryckmans (1934–46): ''Dominer pour servir'' ("Dominate to serve").
The first political organisations were of the latter type.
Already in the 1920s, certain members of the Colonial Council in Brussels (among them Octave Louwers) voiced criticism regarding the often brutal recruitment methods employed by the major companies in the mining districts.
An administrative reform in 1932 increased the number of provinces to six, while “demoting” the Vice-governors-general to provincial Governors.
Despite lack of preparation and an insufficient number of educated elite (there were only a handful of Congolese holding a university degree at that time), the Belgian leaders hoped that things might work out.
Political maneuvering ahead of the elections resulted in the emergence of three political alliances: a coalition of the federalistic nationalists consisting of six separatist parties or organizations, two of which were ABAKO and the MNC—Kalonji; the centralist MNC—Lumumba; and that of Moïse Tshombe, the strong-man of Katanga, who wanted to preserve the economic vitality of its area and the business interests of the Union Minière (as  Kalonji did with respect to the diamond exploitations in Kasaï).
This was in response to the strong united front put up by the Congolese delegation.
Cotton production increased from 23,000 tons in 1932 to 127,000 in 1939.
Increasingly, the colonial administration saw varied forms of resistance, such as refusal to pay taxes.
On 3 July 1941, the Italian forces ( under General Pietro Gazzera) surrendered when they were cut off by the ''Force Public'' under Lieutenant-général Auguste-Eduard Gilliaert.
The ''Force Publique'' again participated in the Allied campaigns in Africa.
The government abandoned the use of colonial place names in 1966: Léopoldville was renamed as Kinshasa, Elisabethville as Lubumbashi, Stanleyville as Kisangani.
On 18 October 1908, the Belgian Parliament voted in favour of annexing the Congo as a Belgian colony.
Article 3 of the new Colonial Charter of 18 October 1908 established that: "Nobody can be forced to work on behalf of and for the profit of companies or privates".
In 1928, King Albert I visited the Congo to inaugurate the so-called 'voie national' that linked the Katanga mining region via rail (up to Port Francqui) and river transport (from Port Francqui to Léopoldville) to the Atlantic port of Matadi.
The United Nations maintained a large peace-keeping operation in the Congo from late 1960 onward.
The colony was divided into four provinces (six after the administrative reforms of 1933).
On 4 January 1959, a prohibited political demonstration organised in Léopoldville by ABAKO got out of hand.
In 1917, after Mahenge had been conquered, the army of the Belgian Congo, by now 25,000 men, controlled one-third of German East Africa.
Secondary and higher education for the indigenous population were not developed until relatively late in the colonial period.
This type of segregation began to disappear gradually only in the 1950s, but even then the Congolese remained or felt treated in many respects as second-rate citizens (for instance in political and legal terms).
On the occasion of his visit, King Baudouin openly endorsed the Governor-General’s vision of a “Belgo-Congolese community”; but, in practice, this idea progressed slowly.
‘Colonial affairs’ did not generate much interest or political debate in Belgium, so long as the colony seemed to be thriving and calm.
To this end "deserving" Congolese could apply for a proof of "civil merit", or, one step up, 'immatriculation' (registration), i.e., official evidence of their assimilation with European civilisation.
Black children, in small numbers, began to be admitted to European secondary schools from 1950 onward.
This was  after King Leopold II had given up any hope to maintain a substantial part of the Congo Free State as separate crown property.
An ambitious ten-year plan was launched in 1949.
From the end of the Second World War until the late 1950s, the so-called "''Pax belgica''" prevailed.
Kigali was taken by May 6, 1916, and the army went on to take Tabora on September 19 after heavy fighting.
The Belgian parliament exercised legislative authority over the Belgian Congo.
During World War II the Belgian Congo served as a crucial source of income for the Belgian government in exile in London after the occupation by the Nazis.
Congolese participation in World War II and news of changes in other colonies resulted in their organising to gain more power.
A territory was managed by a territorial administrator, assisted by one or more assistants.
In 1959, an internal split was precipitated by Albert Kalonji and other MNC leaders who favoured a more moderate political stance (the splinter group was deemed Mouvement National Congolais-Kalonji).
In the 1980s the Mobutu regime became a byword for mismanagement and corruption.
At the same time many Belgians resident in the Congo opposed independence, feeling betrayed by Brussels.
The British firm of Lever Bros. greatly expanded the palm-oil business during the war, and output of cocoa, rice and cotton increased.
Its most influential leader was the charismatic Patrice Lumumba.
Indigenous schooling was mainly religious and vocational.
On 30 June&nbsp;– 2 July 2010, King Albert II of the Belgians and Yves Leterme, the Belgian Prime Minister, visited Kinshasa to attend the festivities marking the 50th anniversary of Congolese independence from Belgium.
World War I increased demand for copper, and production soared from 997 tons in 1911 to 27,462 tons in 1917, then fell off to 19,000 tons in 1920.
A key argument that was often invoked as a justification for colonialism in Africa was that of the "civilizing influence" of the European culture.
The country was split into nesting, hierarchically organised administrative subdivisions, and run uniformly according to a set "native policy" (''politique indigène'').
It was only in the 1950s that metropolitan troops—i.e., units of the regular Belgian army—were posted in the Belgian Congo (for instance in Kamina).
During World War One, an initial stand-off between the ''Force Publique'' and the German colonial army in German East-Africa (Tanganyika) turned into open warfare with a joint Anglo-Belgian invasion of German colonial territory in 1916 and 1917 during the East African Campaign.
Though the Berlin Conference did not formally approve the territorial claims of the European powers in Central Africa, it did agree on a set of rules to ensure a conflict-free partitioning of the region.
The Belgian Congo supported the war on the Allied side in the Battle of Britain with 28 pilots in the RAF (squadron 349) and in the Royal South African Air Force (350 Squadron) and in Africa.
A compromise arrangement was forced through, with Kasa-vubu becoming the first president of the Republic of the Congo, and Lumumba its first head of government.
First set up in 1956, the MNC was established in October 1958 as a national political party that supported the goal of a unitary and centralised Congolese nation.
The economic boom of the 1920s turned the Belgian Congo into one of the leading copper ore producers worldwide.
Ambitious and stubborn, Leopold decided to pursue the matter on his own account.
During World War II, industrial production and agricultural output increased drastically.
In the early 1950s, political emancipation of the Congolese elites, let alone of the masses, seemed like a distant event.
Despite the organisational divergence of the party, Lumumba’s leftist faction (now the Mouvement National Congolais-Lumumba) and the MNC collectively had established themselves as by far the most important and influential party in the Belgian Congo.
Shortly after that army colonel Joseph Désiré Mobutu ended the political impasse by seizing power in a ''coup d'état''.
A notable exception was the young King Baudouin of the Belgians, who had succeeded his father, Leopold III, under dramatic circumstances in 1951, when Leopold was forced to abdicate.
The last Governor-general of the Congo Free State, Baron Wahis, remained in office in the Belgian Congo, and the majority of Leopold II’s administration with him.
In opposition to this was the ethno-religious and regional nationalism that took hold in the Bakongo territories of the west coast, Kasai and Katanga.
It took the authorities several days to restore order and, by the most conservative count, several hundred died.
By the mid-1950s, there were at best a few thousand Congolese who had successfully obtained the civil merit diploma or been granted "immatriculation".
Under Leopold II’s administration, the Congo Free State became a humanitarian disaster.
Each province was in turn divided into a few districts (24 districts for the whole Congo) and each district into a handful of territories (some 130-150 territories in all; some territories were merged or split over time).
New rail and steamship lines opened to handle the expanded export traffic.
Events in 1957–58 led to a sudden acceleration in the demands for political emancipation.
Since the 1940s, the colonial government had experimented in a very modest way with granting a limited elite of so-called ''évolués'' more civil rights, holding out the eventual prospect of a limited amount of political influence.
Additionally, the organization continued to serve as the major ethno-religious organization for the Bakongo and became closely intertwined with the Kimbanguist Church, which was extremely popular in the lower Congo.
As a result of the inability of the colonial government to introduce radical and credible changes, the Congolese elites began to organise themselves socially and soon also politically.
The large numbers of white immigrants who moved to the Congo after the end of World War II came from across the social spectrum, but were always treated as superior to blacks.
Foreign observers, such as the international correspondent of ''The Manchester Guardian'', remarked that Belgian paternalism “seemed to work”, and contrasted Belgium’s seemingly loyal and enthusiastic colonial subjects with the restless French and British colonies.
It is estimated that in 2010, more than 4,000 Belgian nationals were resident in the DRC, while the Congolese community in Belgium is at least 16,000 strong.
Baudouin took a close interest in the Congo.
Belgian Congolese forces (with Belgian officers) notably fought against the Italian colonial army in Ethiopia, and were victorious in Asosa, Bortaï and Saïo under Major-general Auguste-Eduard Gilliaert during the second East African Campaign of 1940-1941.
It was a hasty and traumatic time for those who were forced into exile as refugees.
These included the rise of unionism among workers, the call for public (state) schools to break the missions’ monopoly on education, and the call for equal treatment in the colony of both national languages: French and Dutch.
As a result, in 1990, he decided to end the one-party system and dramatically announced a return to democracy.
The territorial administrator was expected to inspect his territory and to file detailed annual reports with the provincial administration.
Lumumba was handed over to Katangan authorities, who executed him.
However, the Belgian government tried to resist what it described as 'interference' with its colonial policy.
It became increasingly evident that the Belgian government lacked a strategic long-term vision in relation to the Congo.
During this period, the Congo generally maintained close economic and political ties with Belgium.
In 1940 the schooling rates of children between 6 and 14 years old was 12%, reaching 37% in 1954, one of the highest rates in the whole of sub-Saharan Africa.
Until the end of colonial rule in 1960, passive forms of resistance and expressions of an anti-colonial sub-culture were manifold (e.g., Kimbanguism, after the prophet Simon Kimbangu, who was imprisoned by the Belgians).
Belgians living in the Congo had no say in the government and the Congolese did not either.
Congolese resistance against colonialism was widespread and took many different forms.
By the turn of the century, however, the violence used by Free State officials against indigenous Congolese and a ruthless system of economic exploitation led to intense diplomatic pressure on Belgium to take official control of the country, which it did in 1908, creating the Belgian Congo.
The colonial state needed to be able to levy taxes in money on the Congolese, so it was important that they could make money by selling their produce or their labour within the framework of the colonial economy.
The health care infrastructure expanded steadily throughout the colonial period, with a comparatively high availability of hospital beds relative to the population and with dispensaries set up in the most remote regions.
The influence of the Congo on Belgium has been manifested mainly in economic terms: through the activities of the Union Minière (now Umicore), the development of a nonferrous metal industry, and the development of the Port of Antwerp and diamond industry.
Without committing to a specific date for independence, the government of prime minister Gaston Eyskens had a multi-year transition period in mind.
In 1936 it was recorded that there were 728 administrators controlling the Congo from Belgium.
The territorial service was the true backbone of the colonial administration.
The state included the entire area of the present Democratic Republic of the Congo and existed from 1885 to 1908, when the government of Belgium annexed the area.
But, it was clear that the Congo could not forever remain immune from the rapid changes that, after the Second World War, profoundly affected colonialism around the world.
Apart from active and passive resistance among the Congolese, the colonial regime over time also elicited internal criticism and dissent.
The transition from the Congo Free State to the Belgian Congo was a break, but it was also marked by a considerable continuity.
William Rubinstein wrote: "More basically, it appears almost certain that the population figures given by Hochschild are inaccurate.
This was in contrast to the British and the French, who generally favoured the system of indirect rule whereby traditional leaders were retained in positions of authority under colonial oversight.
Progress was slow though; until the end of the 1950s, no Congolese had been promoted beyond the rank of non-commissioned officer in the Force Publique, nor to a responsible position in the administration (such as head of bureau or territorial administrator).
Patrice Lumumba was discharged from prison for the occasion.
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the export-based Belgian Congo economy was severely hit by the world crisis, because of the drop of international demand of raw materials and agricultural products (for example, the price of peanuts fell from 1.25 francs to 25 centimes (cents)).
The Belgian Congo was one of the few African colonies in which local languages (Kikongo, Lingala, Tshiluba and Swahili) were taught at primary school.
