Belgrade suburban railway system connects suburbs and nearby cities to the west, north and south of the city.
The Times reported that Europe's best nightlife can be found in Belgrade.
Occupied by the Habsburgs three times (1688–1690, 1717–1739, 1789–1791), headed by the Holy Roman Princes Maximilian of Bavaria and Eugene of Savoy, and field marshal Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon respectively, Belgrade was quickly recaptured by the Ottomans and substantially razed each time.
Michael's Cathedral, Belgrade
Most of the city remained under German occupation until 20 October 1944, when it was liberated by the Red Army and the Communist Yugoslav Partisans.
On 3 September 1939 the first Belgrade Grand Prix, the last Grand Prix motor racing race before the outbreak of World War II, was held around the Belgrade Fortress and was followed by 80,000 spectators.
Seven decades after the initial siege, on 28 August 1521, the fort was finally captured by Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent and his 250,000 soldiers; subsequently, most of the city was razed to the ground and its entire Orthodox Christian population was deported to Istanbul, to an area that has since become known as the ''Belgrade forest''.
The Museum of Contemporary Art was the first Contemporary art museum in Europe founded in 1958 and has a collection of around 35,000 works including Roy Lichtenstein, Andy Warhol, Joan Miró, David Hockney, Ivan Meštrović and others since 1900.
The north resisted through the Serbian Despotate, which had Belgrade as its capital.
During this period, the city was affected by the two Great Serbian Migrations, in which hundreds of thousands of Serbs, led by two Serbian Patriarchs, retreated together with the Austrians into the Habsburg Empire, settling in today's Vojvodina and Slavonia.
He shot the first motion pictures of Belgrade in the next year; however, they have not been preserved.
At one end of the neighbourhood stands Belgrade's oldest beer brewery, founded in the first half of the 19th century.
Several of these buildings have been left in their bombed states to serve as a memorial for the bombings.
The most popular commercial broadcaster is RTV Pink, a Serbian media multinational, known for its popular entertainment programs.
Concerts featuring famous local and foreign bands are often held at the center.
During the period of Communist rule, much housing was built quickly and cheaply for the huge influx of people fleeing the countryside following World War II, sometimes resulting in the brutalist architecture of the blokovi (blocks) of New Belgrade; a socrealism trend briefly ruled, resulting in buildings like the Trade Union Hall.
Jovian reestablished Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, ending the brief revival of traditional Roman religions under his predecessor Julian the Apostate.
There are numerous theatres, the most prominent of which are National Theatre, Theatre on Terazije, Yugoslav Drama Theatre, Zvezdara Theatre, and Atelier 212.
Other notable Belgrade rock acts include Riblja Čorba, Bajaga i Instruktori and Partibrejkers.
File:Serbian Government building.jpg|Government of Serbia
Aurignacian and Gravettian tools have also been discovered there, indicating occupation between 50,000 and 20,000 years ago.
A 13-member City Council, elected by the Assembly and presided over by the mayor and his deputy, has the control and supervision of the city administration, which manages day-to-day administrative affairs.
The main usage of today's system is to connect the suburbs with the city centre.
The Belgrade City Museum moved into a new building in downtown in 2006.
Today it is connected with the right bank of the Sava via two causeways, creating an artificial lake.
Situated at the confluence of two major rivers, the Danube and the Sava, Belgrade has 7 bridges—the two main ones are Branko's bridge and the Gazela Bridge, both of which connect the core of the city to New Belgrade.
File:Библиотека 01.jpg|Belgrade University Library
Belgrade is the most important media hub in Serbia.
The rock overlooking the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers has been identified as one of the place in the story of Jason and the Argonauts.
The main ethnic groups are: Serbs (1,505,448), Roma (27,325), Montenegrins (9,902), Yugoslavs (8,061), Croats (7,752), Macedonians (6,970), and Muslims by nationality (3,996).
Belgrade lies in the humid subtropical (Cfa) just short of a Humid continental climate (Dfa), climate zone, with four seasons and uniformly spread precipitation.
File:Street Knez Mihailova.png|Knez Mihailova
Lazarević built a castle with a citadel and towers, of which only the Despot's tower and west wall remain.
In 442, the area was ravaged by Attila the Hun.
With 6,924 companies in the IT sector (), Belgrade is one of the information technology centers in this part of Europe, with strong growth.
The city is home to the main headquarters of the national broadcaster Radio Television Serbia (RTS), which is a public service broadcaster.
The Pančevo Bridge, which crosses the Danube, was opened in 1935, while "King Alexander Bridge" over the Sava was opened in 1934.
It is used for major sporting events and large concerts.
File:Beogradjanka, Belgrade, Serbia.jpg|Beogradjanka
The Nikola Tesla Museum, founded in 1952, preserves the personal items of Nikola Tesla, the inventor after whom the Tesla unit was named.
With the city's expansion and a substantial increase in the number of vehicles, congestion has become a major problem; this is expected to be alleviated by the construction of a bypass connecting the E70 and E75 motorways.
The main railway station connects Belgrade with other European capitals and many towns in Serbia.
Apart from Ada, Belgrade has total of 16 islands on the rivers, many still unused.
Serbian architects took over the development from the foreign builders in the late 19th century, producing the National Theatre, Old Palace, Cathedral Church and later, in the early 20th century, the National Assembly and National Museum, influenced by art nouveau.
The historical core of Belgrade, Kalemegdan, lies on the right banks of both rivers.
Yugoslavia was then invaded by German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgarian forces.
Outside of Kalemegdan, the oldest buildings date only from the 18th century, due to its geographic position and frequent wars and destructions.
In 2006, ''Financial Times''' magazine ''Foreign Direct Investment'' awarded Belgrade the title of ''City of the Future of Southern Europe''.
Apart from the first Christian Emperor of Rome who was born in the territory of modern Serbia in Naissus—Constantine I known as Constantine the Great—another early Roman Emperor was born in Singidunum: Flavius Iovianus (Jovian), the restorer of Christianity.
One of the most popular commercial broadcaster is B92, another media company, which has its own TV station, radio station, and music and book publishing arms, as well as the most popular website on the Serbian internet.
In 1961, the conference of Non-Aligned Countries was held in Belgrade under Tito's chairmanship.
One of the city's oldest kafanas is the Znak pitanja("?
Most of the subsequent Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade.
Just like Rotterdam, which was devastated twice, by both German and Allied bombing, Belgrade was bombed once more during World War II, this time by the Allies on 16 April 1944,  killing at least 1,100 people.
The first record of the name ''Belograd'' appeared on April, 16th, 878, in a Papal letter to Bulgarian ruler Boris I.
The Vinča culture is known for its very large settlements, one of the earliest settlements by continuous habitation and some of the largest in prehistoric Europe; anthropomorphic figurines such as the Lady of Vinča; the earliest known copper metallurgy in Europe; a proto-writing form developed prior to the Sumerians and Minoans, known as the Old European script, dating back to around 5300 BC.
Belgrade is the economic heart of Serbia and home to most major Serbian and international companies operating in the country.
According to the 2015 survey, 73% of the city's households owned a computer, 65.8% of households had a broadband internet connection and 73.9% pay television services.
They include Skadarlija, the National Museum and adjacent National Theatre, Zemun, Nikola Pašić Square, Terazije, Students' Square, the Kalemegdan Fortress, Knez Mihailova Street, the Parliament, the Church of Saint Sava, and the Old Palace.
Belgrade was the capital of Yugoslavia from its creation in 1918, to its final dissolution in 2006.
In recent years, Belgrade has also given rise to several world-class tennis players such as Ana Ivanović, Jelena Janković and Novak Đoković.
Belgrade has a special administrative status within Serbia and it is one of five statistical regions of Serbia.
Museum also houses Joseph Stalin's sabre with 260 brilliants and diamonds,donated by Stalin himself.
City of Belgrade covers 3.6% of Serbia's territory, and 22.5% of the country's population lives within its administrative limits.
Since Belgrade was decimated as the front-line city, Subotica overtook the title of the largest city in the Kingdom for a short while.
One of the most important prehistoric cultures of Europe, the Vinča culture, evolved within the Belgrade area in the 6th millennium BC.
, over 40% of Serbia's GDP is generated by the city, which also has 31.4% of Serbia's employed population.
The two projects of highest priority are the Belgrade bypass and the Pan-European Corridor X.
Among them, the Great War Island, at the confluence of Sava, stands out as an oasis of unshattered wildlife (especially birds).
As the capital city, Belgrade is seat of all Serbian state authorities – executive, legislative, judiciary, and the headquarters of all national political parties as well as 75 diplomatic missions.
Later, Grand vizier Sinan Pasha ordered the relics of Saint Sava to be publicly torched on the Vračar plateau; in the 20th century, the Temple of Saint Sava was built to commemorate this event.
The Ethnographic Museum, established in 1901, contains more than 150,000 items showcasing the rural and urban culture of the Balkans, particularly the countries of former Yugoslavia.
According to various media outlets, there were between 100,000 and 150,000 people on the streets.
These areas, along with nearby Small War Island, are protected by the city's government as a nature preserve.
Many people came to the city as economic migrants from smaller towns and the countryside, while tens of thousands arrived as refugees from Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, as a result of the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s.
Belgrade has received various domestic and international honors, including the French Légion d'honneur (proclaimed 21 December 1920; Belgrade is one of four cities outside France, alongside Liège, Luxembourg and Volgograd, to receive this honour), the Czechoslovak War Cross (awarded 8 October 1925), the Yugoslavian Order of the Karađorđe's Star (awarded 18 May 1939) and the Yugoslavian Order of the People's Hero (proclaimed on 20 October 1974, the 30th anniversary of the overthrow of Nazi German occupation during World War II).
In the Lonely Planet "1000 Ultimate Experiences" guide of 2009, Belgrade was placed at the 1st spot among the top 10 party cities in the world.
In September 2013, the average monthly net salary in Belgrade was 53,564 RSD ($635), while gross salary was 73,970 RSD ($877).
Basil II (976–1025) installed a garrison in Belgrade.
In 1927, Belgrade's first airport opened, and in 1929, its first radio station began broadcasting.
In antiquity, Thraco-Dacians inhabited the region, and after 279 BC Celts conquered the city, naming it ''Singidūn''.
File:Skupstina srbije posle renoviranja dva.jpg|House of the National Assembly of Serbia
In May 1868, Prince Mihailo was assassinated with his cousin Anka Konstantinović while riding in a carriage through the park of his country residence
On 25 March 1941, the government of regent Crown Prince Paul signed the Tripartite Pact, joining the Axis powers in an effort to stay out of the Second World War and keep Yugoslavia neutral during the conflict.
Following the victory of Serbia's representative Marija Šerifović at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, Belgrade hosted the Contest in 2008.
The BusPlus ticketing system based on contactless smart cards began operating in February 2012.
There are many foreign cultural institutions in Belgrade, including the Spanish Instituto Cervantes, the German Goethe-Institut and the French Institut français, which are all located in the central pedestrian area of Knez Mihailova Street.
FEST is an annual film festival that held since 1971, and, through 2013, had been attended by four million people and had presented almost 4,000 films.
Belgrade has an extensive public transport system based on buses (118 urban lines and more than 300 suburban lines), trams (12 lines), and trolleybuses (8 lines).
The Assembly of the City of Belgrade has 110 members, elected on four-year terms.
This includes the National Assembly, the Presidency, the Government of Serbia and all the ministries, Supreme Court of Cassation and the Constitutional Court.
Elite neighborhood of Dedinje is situated near the Topčider and Košutnjak parks.
Although there are several historic religious communities in Belgrade, the religious makeup of the city is relatively homogenous.
'', ''Kurir'' and ''Danas''.
The population growth rate between 1921 and 1948 averaged 4.08% a year.
Beovoz is operated by Serbian Railways.
Belgrade was made the seat of the district (Sanjak), becoming the second largest Ottoman town in Europe at over 100,000 people, surpassed only by Constantinople.
Ada Ciganlija is a former island on the Sava River, and Belgrade's biggest sports and recreational complex.
The first farming people to settle in the region are associated with the Neolithic Starčevo culture, which flourished between 6200 and 5200 BC.
Among the sites bombed were the buildings of several ministries, the RTS building, several hospitals, the Hotel Jugoslavija, the Central Committee building, the Avala Tower, and the Chinese embassy.
Many Middle Easterners, mainly from Syria, Iran, Jordan and Iraq, arrived in order to pursue their studies during the 1970s and 1980s, and have remained in the city.
Further, an "inner magistral semi-ring" is planned, including a new Ada Bridge across the Sava river, which is expected to ease commuting within the city and unload the Gazela and Branko's bridge.
Although the Ottomans captured most of the Serbian Despotate, Belgrade, known as Nándorfehérvár in Hungarian, was unsuccessfully besieged in 1440 and 1456.
Skadar Street (the centre of Skadarlija) and the surrounding neighbourhood are lined with some of Belgrade's best and oldest traditional restaurants (called kafanas in Serbian), which date back to that period.
Belgrade has wildly varying architecture, from the center of Zemun, typical of a Central European town, to the more modern architecture and spacious layout of New Belgrade.
Most of Serbia's film industry is based in Belgrade.
Consequently, the city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe on 6 April 1941, killing up to 24,000 people.
There are  of long beaches and sports facilities for various sports including golf, football, basketball, volleyball, rugby union, baseball, and tennis.
A more traditional Serbian nightlife experience, accompanied by traditional music known as ''Starogradska'' (roughly translated as ''Old Town Music''), typical of northern Serbia's urban environments, is most prominent in Skadarlija, the city's old bohemian neighborhood where the poets and artists of Belgrade gathered in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Some of these tools belong to the Mousterian industry, which are associated with Neanderthals rather than modern humans.
Belgrade was again named the capital of Serbia in 1841.
File:SIV Building, 20120506 2.jpg|Palace of Serbia
In 471, it was taken by Theodoric the Great, who continued into Greece.
Higher estimates from the former secret police place the victim count of political persecutions in Belgrade at 10,000.
On 9 March 1991, massive demonstrations led by Vuk Drašković were held in the city against Slobodan Milošević.
After the 2000 presidential elections, Belgrade was the site of major public protests, with over half a million people on the streets.
All of these decorations were received for the war efforts during the World War I and World War II.
Other cultural centers in Belgrade are American Corner, Austrian Cultural Forum, British Council, Chinese Confucius Institute, Canadian Cultural Center, Hellenic Foundation for Culture, Italian Istituto Italiano di Cultura, Iranian Culture Center, Azerbaijani Culture Center and Russian Center for Science and Culture.
Today, it is the center of the Serbian hip hop scene, with acts such as Beogradski Sindikat, Škabo, Marčelo, and most of the Bassivity Music stable hailing from or living in the city.
File:KnezMihailova ped.jpg|Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts
The city is placed along the Pan-European corridors X and VII.
It is run by GSP Beograd and SP Lasta, in cooperation with private companies on various bus routes.
Belgrade Fashion Week is on the list of ''40 most significant fashion weeks in the world''.
The University of Belgrade, founded in 1808 as the "Great School", is the oldest institution of higher learning in Serbia.
Microsoft Development Center located in Belgrade was at the time of its establishment fifth such center in the world.
In 1427, Stefan's successor Đurađ Branković had to return Belgrade to the Hungarian king, and Smederevo became the new capital.
After the Second Serbian Uprising in 1815, Serbia reached semi-independence, which was formally recognized by the Porte in 1830.
Ottoman rule also introduced Ottoman architecture, including numerous mosques, increasing the city's Oriental influences.
SKC is also the site of various art exhibitions, as well as public debates and discussions.
The Belgrade Stock Exchange is also located in New Belgrade and has a market capitalization of €6.5 billion (US$9 billion).
With around 95,000 copies of national and international films, the Yugoslav Film Archive is the largest in the region and among the 10 largest archives in the world.
For about four centuries, the city remained a battleground between the Byzantine Empire, the Kingdom of Hungary and the Bulgarian Empire.
It was conquered by the Romans during the reign of Augustus, and awarded city rights in the mid-2nd century.
The mountains of Avala () and Kosmaj () lie south of the city.
Following the battles at Maritsa (1371) and Kosovo field (1389), Serbia began to crumble as the Ottoman Empire conquered its southern territory.
In 577, some 100,000 Slavs poured into Thrace and Illyricum, pillaging cities and settling down.
The winner was Tazio Nuvolari.
As the city presented an obstacle to the Ottoman advance into Hungary and further, over 100,000 Ottoman soldiers besieged it in 1456, in which the Christian army led by the Hungarian General John Hunyadi successfully defended it.
During this period, the city experienced fast growth and significant modernisation.
The institution also operates the Museum of Yugoslav Film Archive, with movie theatre and exhibition hall.
Between 10,000 and 20,000 Chinese are estimated to live in Belgrade; they began immigrating in the mid-1990s.
Austro-Hungarian monitors shelled Belgrade on 29 July 1914, and it was taken by the Austro-Hungarian Army under General Oskar Potiorek on 30 November.
It is divided into 14 Secretariats, each having a specific portfolio such as traffic or health care, and several professional services, agencies and institutes.
After a prolonged battle which destroyed much of the city, between 6 and 9 October 1915, Belgrade fell to German and Austro-Hungarian troops commanded by Field Marshal August von Mackensen on 9 October 1915.
The secondary school system has 51 vocational schools, 21 gymnasiums, 8 art schools and 5 special schools.
The archive's long-standing storage problems were finally solved in 2007, when a new modern depository was opened.
It offers a range of facilities such as hotels, congress halls (Sava Centar), class A and class B office buildings, and business parks (Airport City Belgrade).
Belgrade was occupied by the German Army later the same month and Belgrade became the seat of the puppet Nedić regime, headed by General Milan Nedić.
Numerous Serbian and international designers and fashion brands have their shows on the fashion week.
A new free distribution daily, ''24 sata'', was founded in the autumn of 2006.
Böhme rigorously enforced the rule that for every German killed, 100 Serbs or Jews would be shot.
Belgrade is home to many ethnicities from all over the former Yugoslavia and wider Balkans region.
Two people were killed, 203 injured and 108 arrested during the protests, and later that day tanks were deployed onto the streets to restore order.
There once was a significant Jewish community in Belgrade, but following the World War II Nazi occupation of the city, and subsequent Jewish emigration, their numbers have fallen from over 10,000 to just 295.
File:Universiade Belgrade 2009 29.jpg|Belville (Belgrade)
After the war, Belgrade became the capital of the new ''Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes'', renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929.
Across the Sava from Singidunum was the Celtic city of Taurunum (Zemun); the two were connected with a bridge throughout Roman and Byzantine times.
Travel by coach is also popular, and the capital is well-served with daily connections to every town in Serbia and to many other European destinations through the central bus station.
The two major stadiums in Belgrade are the ''Marakana'' (Red Star Stadium) and the Partizan Stadium.
One of the most famous sites for alternative cultural happenings in the city is the SKC (Student Cultural Centre), located right across from Belgrade's highrise landmark, the Beograđanka.
The Avars under Bayan I conquered the whole region by 582.
The First World War began on 28 July 1914 when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
Belgrade has two state universities and several private institutions of higher education.
In 2014, Belgrade Waterfront , a catalytic development, has been initiated headed by the Government of Serbia aimed at improving Belgrade's cityscape and economy by revitalizing the Sava amphitheater, a neglected stretch of land on the right bank of the Sava river, between the Belgrade Fair and Belgrade Main railway station.
On top of this, there are many parks, monuments, museums, cafés, restaurants and shops on both sides of the river.
All-time peak, with over 4 million passengers, was accomplished in 2014, when Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport became the second fastest growing major airport in Europe.
The most prominent museum in Belgrade is the National Museum, founded in 1844 and currently closed for reconstruction.
These protests brought Zoran Đinđić to power, the first mayor of Belgrade since World War II who did not belong to the League of Communists of Yugoslavia or its later offshoot, the Socialist Party of Serbia.
The Belgrade Metro is considered the third most important project in the country, after work on roads and railways.
Belgrade's two opera houses are: National Theatre and Madlenianum Opera House.
As the Ostrogoths left for Italy, the Gepids took over the city.
Museum of Science and Technology moved to the building of the first city's power plant in Dorćol in 2005.
Western influence began in the 19th century, when the city completely transformed from an oriental town to the contemporary architecture of the time, with influences from neoclassicism, romanticism, and academic art.
The historic areas and buildings of Belgrade are among the city's premier attractions.
The resistance movement in Belgrade was led by Major Žarko Todorović from 1941 until his arrest in 1943.
Evidence of early knowledge about Belgrade's geographical location comes from ancient myths and legends.
Since the 19th century, the city has been expanding to the south and east; after World War II, Novi Beograd (''New Belgrade'') was built on the left bank of the Sava river, connecting Belgrade with Zemun.
Tourist income in 2012 amounted to nearly 500 million euros; in 2013, Belgrade was visited by 660,000 registered tourists, of which 520,000 were foreign.
In 1958, Belgrade's first television station began broadcasting.
Yet by 1905 the population had grown to more than 80,000, and by the outbreak of World War I in 1914, it had surpassed the 100,000 citizens, not counting Zemun which then belonged to Austria-Hungary.
In 539 it was retaken by the Byzantines.
Currently, over 1.2 million square meters of land is under construction in New Belgrade and the estimated value of construction in the next three years is over 1.5 billion euros.
In 34–33 BC the Roman army led by Silanus reached Belgrade.
Nearby, Josip Broz Tito's mausoleum, called ''The House of Flowers'', documents the life of the former Yugoslav president.
'''Belgrade''' (; ; ; names in other languages) is the capital and largest city of Serbia.
New Belgrade is the main business district in the country and one of the financial centers in Southeast Europe.
Belgrade also houses the Museum of African Art, founded in 1977, which has the large collection of art from West Africa.
In 395&nbsp;AD, the site passed to the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire.
During this time, Belgrade was a haven for many Balkan peoples fleeing Ottoman rule, and is thought to have had a population of 40,000 to 50,000 people.
There are also 195 primary (elementary) schools and 85 secondary schools.
The Nobel Prize winning author Ivo Andrić wrote his most famous work, The Bridge on the Drina, in Belgrade.
Other prominent Belgrade authors include Branislav Nušić, Miloš Crnjanski, Borislav Pekić, Milorad Pavić and Meša Selimović.
The 2014 Belgrade local elections were won by the Serbian Progressive Party, which formed a ruling coalition with the Socialist Party of Serbia.
There are numerous tracks on the island, where it is possible to ride a bike, go for a walk, or go jogging.
During the summer and fall of 1941, in reprisal for guerrilla attacks, the Germans carried out several massacres of Belgrade citizens; in particular, members of the Jewish community were subject to mass shootings at the order of General Franz Böhme, the German Military Governor of Serbia.
The Mayor of Belgrade is Siniša Mali, a political independent affiliated with the Serbian Progressive Party.
However, in the mid-1950s, the modernist trends took over, and still dominate the Belgrade architecture.
According to the European Arenas Association, the Belgrade Arena is one of the largest European indoor arena with capacity of 22,868.
The city is also served by Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport,  west of the city centre, near Surčin.
Following renewed growth in 2000, the number of passengers reached approximately 2 million in 2004 and 2005, over 2.6 million passengers in 2008, reaching over 3 million passengers.
