Three Maya groups now inhabit the country: The Yucatec (who came from Yucatán, Mexico, to escape the savage Caste War of the 1840s), the Mopan (indigenous to Belize but were forced out to Guatemala by the British for raiding settlements; they returned to Belize to evade enslavement by the Guatemalans in the 19th century), and Q'eqchi' (also fled from slavery in Guatemala in the 19th century).
The new government of Belize faces important challenges to economic stability.
Belize has about a dozen tertiary level institutions, the most prominent of which is the University of Belize, which evolved out of the University College of Belize founded in 1986.
Central American immigrants and expatriate Americans and Africans also began to settle in the country.
The Mestizo culture are people of mixed Spanish and Maya descent.
Trade is important and the major trading partners are the United States, Mexico, the European Union, and Central America.
The south contains the low mountain range of the Maya Mountains.
The judicial system includes local magistrates grouped under the Magistrates' Court, which hears less serious cases.
The 20th century saw the arrival of more Asian settlers from mainland China, South Korea, India, Syria, and Lebanon.
During the 1980s this included a battalion and No.
He improvised on this observation by creating a sporting event on the difficult terrain of the Western Highway, which was then poorly built.
The mixture of Latin and Maya foods like tamales, escabeche, chirmole, relleno, and empanadas came from their Mexican side and corn tortillas were handed down by their Mayan side.
In August 2009, the government of Belize nationalized Belize Telemedia Limited (BTL), which now competes directly with Speednet.
They encounter much more than they bargained for with murder, drug smuggling and assorted chaos.
The position of being "extra special" mahogany and logwood cutters undergirded the early ascriptions of the capacities (and consequently the limitations) of people of African descent in the colony.
The PUP under Price returned to power after elections in 1989.
On June 1, 1973 British Honduras was officially renamed Belize.
Most Russian Mennonites live in Mennonite settlements like Spanish Lookout, Shipyard, Little Belize, and Blue Creek.
The latter groups are chiefly found in the Toledo District.
When not serving or protecting, some of the police officers play for Police United FC (Belize).
Belize Estate's influence accounts in part for the colony's reliance on the mahogany trade throughout the rest of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century.
In 1978, Hurricane Greta caused more than US$25&nbsp;million in damages along the southern coast.
A profusion of languages and subcultures developed within the Maya core culture.
Bay Islanders and ethnic Jamaicans came in the late 19th century, further adding to these already varied peoples, creating this ethnic group.
The national team finished seventh of eight teams after winning only 1 game despite playing close all the way.
Belize's abundance of terrestrial and marine species and its diversity of ecosystems give it a key place in the globally significant Mesoamerican Biological Corridor.
Hinduism is followed by most Indian immigrants.
Belize is also home to three Mayan languages: Q’eqchi’, the endangered indigenous Belizean language of Mopan, and Yucatec Maya.
Another mosque, Masjid Al-Falah, officially opened in 2008 in Belize City.
Spain's last attempt occurred on September 10, 1798, when the Baymen repelled the Spanish fleet in a short engagement with no known casualties on either side.
With Price at the helm, the PUP won all national elections until 1984.
Of all the countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, Belize ranked 3rd from last and had the lowest female-to-male ratio for primary school enrolment.
The reserve was founded in 1990 as the first wilderness sanctuary for the jaguar and is regarded by one author as the premier site for jaguar preservation in the world.
They look quite similar to Old Order Amish, but are different from them.
Belize's social structure is marked by enduring differences in the distribution of wealth, power, and prestige.
Others have suggested that the name is derived from a Spanish pronunciation of the name of the Scottish buccaneer Peter Wallace, which was applied to an early settlement at the mouth of the Belize River.
The British first appointed a superintendent over the Belize area in 1786.
In 1836, after the emancipation of Central America from Spanish rule, the British claimed the right to administer the region.
In 1955, Hurricane Janet levelled the northern town of Corozal.
When a Creole language exists alongside its lexifier language, as is the case in Belize, a continuum forms between the Creole and the lexifier language.
Because Roatán was too small and infertile to support their population, the Garinagu petitioned the Spanish authorities of Honduras to be allowed to settle on the mainland coast.
Music comes mainly from the marimba, but they also play and sing with the guitar.
The Muslim population of today started the 1980s.
The Senate is responsible for debating and approving bills passed by the House.
The first election under universal suffrage was held in 1954 and was decisively won by the PUP, beginning a three-decade period in which the PUP dominated the country's politics.
Members of the independent judiciary are appointed.
Development costs are high, but the government of Belize has made tourism its second development priority after agriculture.
A number of kindergartens, secondary, and tertiary schools in Belize provide quality education for students—mostly funded by the government.
The team finished second in the 2009 COCABA tournament in Cancun, Mexico where it went 3–0 in group play.
As a country with a relatively high forest cover and a low deforestation rate, Belize has significant potential for participation in initiatives such as REDD.
The anniversary of the battle is a national holiday in Belize and is celebrated to commemorate the "first Belizeans" and the defence of their territory.
On October 9, 2001, Hurricane Iris made landfall at Monkey River Town as a  Category Four storm.
The tourist and construction sectors strengthened in early 1999, leading to a preliminary estimate of revived growth at 4%.
The Belize national basketball team is the only national team that has achieved major victories internationally.
Belize's national animal is the Baird's tapir, the largest land mammal of the American tropics.
Belize is an original member (1995) of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and participates actively in its work.
The race runs from San Ignacio to Belize City, a distance of .
Delgado recorded the names of three major rivers that he crossed while travelling north along the Caribbean coast: Rio Soyte, Rio Xibum, and Rio Balis.
Brukdown is a modern style of Belizean music related to calypso.
The flora is highly diverse considering the small geographical area.
In 2005, the maritime wing became part of the Belizean Coast Guard.
Spanish is the main language of most Mestizos and Spanish descendants, but many speak English and Belize Kriol fluently.
Creoles, also known as ''Kriols'', make up roughly 21% of the Belizean population and about 75% of the diaspora.
The two prevailing theories are that, in 1635, they were either the survivors of two recorded shipwrecks or somehow took over the ship they came on.
Because of the small size of Belize's population and the intimate scale of social relations, the social distance between the rich and the poor, while significant, is nowhere as vast as in other Caribbean and Central American societies, such as Jamaica and El Salvador.
According to the World Database on Protected Areas, 37% of Belize's land territory falls under some form of official protection, giving Belize one of the most extensive systems of terrestrial protected areas in the Americas.
It evolved out of the music and dance of loggers, especially a form called buru.
In 2007, 54% of the murders occurred in the Belize District.
Belize has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons, although there are significant variations in weather patterns by region.
Belize is also a leader in protecting biodiversity and natural resources.
The team won the 1998 CARICOM Men's Basketball Championship, held at the Civic Center in Belize City, and subsequently participated in the 1999 Centrobasquet Tournament in Havana.
Over half the population is bilingual, and many Belizeans are in fact multilingual.
In 2011, the government established a truce among many major gangs, lowering the murder rate.
These Mennonites attracted people from different Anabaptist backgrounds who formed a new community.
The other four banks are Heritage Bank, Atlantic Bank, FirstCaribbean International Bank, and Scotiabank (Belize).
English is the official language of Belize, a former British colony.
The structure of government is based on the British parliamentary system, and the legal system is modelled on the common law of England.
Throughout history they have been incorrectly labelled as Black Caribs.
Its substrate languages are the Native American language Miskito, and the various West African and Bantu languages brought into the country by slaves.
The origin of the name Belize is unclear, but the earliest record of the name is found in the journal of the Dominican priest Fray José Delgado, dating to 1677.
The people from this village used to cover long distances on their bicycles to attend the weekly game of cricket.
Seasonal differences in rainfall are greatest in the northern and central regions of the country where, between January and April or May, less than  of rainfall per month.
The 31 members of the House are popularly elected to a maximum five-year term and introduce legislation affecting the development of Belize.
After Belize achieved independence in 1981 the United Kingdom maintained a deterrent force (British Forces Belize) in the country to protect it from invasion by Guatemala (see Guatemalan claim to Belizean territory).
These minerals include dolomite, barite (source of barium), bauxite (source of aluminium), cassiterite (source of tin), and gold.
It shares a border on the north with the Mexican state of Quintana Roo, on the west a non-determined line which is called (buffer zone) with the Guatemalan department of Petén, and on the south with the Guatemalan department of Izabal.
Belize is bordered on the north by Mexico, on the south and west by Guatemala, and on the east by the Caribbean Sea.
Belize is shaped like a rectangle that extends about  north-south and about  east-west, with a total land boundary length of .
The Mestizos are found everywhere in Belize but most make their homes in the northern districts of Corozal and Orange Walk.
As a colony, Belize began to attract British investors.
The Garinagu eventually surrendered to the British in 1796.
The Maya civilisation spread across what is now Belize around 1500 BC, and flourished there until about 900 AD.
The area of the country totals , an area slightly larger than El Salvador, Israel, New Jersey or Wales.
The Garinagu settled in Seine Bight, Punta Gorda and Punta Negra, Belize, by way of Honduras as early as 1802.
At various times the issue has required mediation by the United Kingdom, Caribbean Community heads of government, the Organization of American States (OAS), Mexico, and the United States.
Local fruits are quite common, but raw vegetables from the markets less so.
Despite these protective measures, the reef remains under threat from oceanic pollution as well as uncontrolled tourism, shipping, and fishing.
However, the end of slavery did little to change the former slaves' working conditions if they stayed at their trade.
However, only about 2,500 of them survived the voyage to Roatán, an island off the coast of Honduras.
It is a member of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), and the Central American Integration System (SICA), the only country to hold full membership in all three regional organisations.
It was originally exported to the United Kingdom in the form of squared logs, but shipments now consist mainly of sawn lumber.
These names, which correspond to the Sittee River, Sibun River and Belize River, were provided to Delgado by his translator.
The western border follows no natural features and runs north-south through lowland forest and highland plateau.
'''Belize''' (), formerly British Honduras, is a country on the eastern coast of Central America.
Besides Independence Day and St. George's Caye Day, Belizeans also celebrate Carnival during September, which typically includes several events spread across multiple days.
The nation abounds with restaurants and fast food establishments selling fairly cheaply.
With 90% of the reef still to be researched, some estimate that only 10% of all species have been discovered.
The Garifuna language belongs to the Arawakan language family, but has a large number of loanwords from Carib languages and from English.
Belize's total fertility rate in 2009 was 3.6 children per woman.
Its mainland is about  long and  wide.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Belize.
Mealtime is a communion for families and schools and some businesses close at midday for lunch, reopening later in the afternoon.
The Mestizos are the largest ethnic group in Belize and make up approximately half of the population.
Hurricanes have played key—and devastating—roles in Belizean history.
For all intents and purposes, Creole is an ethnic and linguistic denomination.
The sizable middle group is composed of peoples of different ethnic backgrounds.
However, this ethnicity has become synonymous with the Belizean identity, and as a result it is now spoken by about 75% of Belizeans.
By contrast, Costa Rica only has 27% of its land territory protected.
Belize won its opening match in the Centrobasquet Tournament, 2010, defeating Trinidad and Tobago, but lost badly to Mexico in a rematch of the COCABA final.
Soon afterwards Esquivel announced the suspension of a pact reached with Guatemala during Price's tenure, claiming Price had made too many concessions to gain Guatemalan recognition.
In some areas of Belize, however, Carnival is celebrated at the traditional time before Lent (in February).
They are descendants of the Baymen slave owners, and slaves brought to Belize for the purpose of the logging industry.
Around 13.6% of Belize's territorial waters, which contain the Belize Barrier Reef, are also protected.
Midday meals vary, from foods such as rice and beans with or without coconut milk, tamales, "panades" (fried maize shells with beans or fish), and meat pies, escabeche (onion soup), chimole (soup), caldo, stewed chicken and garnaches (fried tortillas with beans, cheese, and sauce) to various constituted dinners featuring some type of rice and beans, meat and salad or coleslaw.
In May 2011, the Supreme Court of Belize granted BEL's application to prevent the PUC from taking any enforcement actions pending the appeal.
The UDP regained power in the 1993 national election, and Esquivel became prime minister for a second time.
Before then the British government had not recognized the settlement as a colony for fear of provoking a Spanish attack.
British soldiers were withdrawn in 1994, but the United Kingdom left behind a military training unit to assist with the newly created Belize Defence Force.
In the late Classic Era of Maya civilisation (600–1000 AD), as many as 1 million people may have lived in the area that is now Belize.
Belize is known to have a number of economically important minerals, but none in quantities large enough to warrant mining.
In 1997 the regular army numbered over 900, the reserve army 381, the air wing 45 and the maritime wing 36, amounting to an overall strength of approximately 1400.
The storm demolished most of the homes in the village, and destroyed the banana crop.
Belize's population was 324,528 in 2010.
The Maya civilisation emerged at least three millennia ago in the lowland area of the Yucatán Peninsula and the highlands to the south, in what is now southeastern Mexico, Belize, Guatemala, and western Honduras.
Reggae, dancehall, and soca imported from Jamaica and the rest of the West Indies, rap, hip-hop, heavy metal and rock music from the United States, are also popular among the youth of Belize.
The Spanish employed them as soldiers, and they spread along the Caribbean coast of Central America.
In 1842 Charles Darwin described it as "the most remarkable reef in the West Indies".
In 2001 the Caribbean Community heads of government voted on a measure declaring that the region should work towards replacing the UK's Judicial Committee of the Privy Council with the Caribbean Court of Justice.
Belize is a Commonwealth realm, with Queen Elizabeth II as its monarch and head of state.
Notably, both Guatemala and Belize participate in confidence-building measures approved by the OAS such as the Guatemala-Belize Language Exchange Project.
The Supreme Court (Chief Justice) hears murder and similarly serious cases, and the Court of Appeal, hears appeals from convicted individuals seeking to have their sentences overturned.
Under a new constitution Britain granted British Honduras self-government in 1964.
It is therefore difficult to substantiate or differentiate the number of Creole speakers compared to English speakers.
However, in Belize November 19, 1832 is the date officially recognized as "Garifuna Settlement Day" in Dangriga.
The designation is more racial than cultural, and is evident to physical appearance.
The largest integrated electric utility and the principal distributor in Belize is Belize Electricity Limited.
The Queen resides in the United Kingdom, and is represented in Belize by the Governor-General.
A tough win over Cuba set Belize in position to advance, but they fell to Puerto Rico in their final match and failed to qualify.
They lay two to four eggs, which both parents incubate.
It is also vital to its fishing industry.
The north of Belize consists mostly of flat, swampy coastal plains, in places heavily forested.
Being a small, multiethnic state, surrounded by Spanish-speaking nations, multilingualism is strongly encouraged.
Many aspects of this culture persist in the area despite nearly 500 years of European domination.
A robust complex of credit unions began in the 1940s under the leadership of Marion M. Ganey, S.J., and is a continuing resource for the betterment of the peoples across economic and cultural lines.
Shortly thereafter, Belize moved to the Central American region and won the Central American Games championship in 2001.
Belize and Guatemala have No definite Borders due to the previously described conflict that includes over 100 isles on Caribbean sea.
Breakfast typically consists of bread, flour tortillas, or fry jacks that are often homemade.
About 1,500 British troops remained in Belize to deter any possible incursions.
The Garinagu (singular ''Garifuna''), at around 4.5% of the population, are a mix of West/Central African, Arawak, and Island Carib ancestry.
Temperatures vary according to elevation, proximity to the coast, and the moderating effects of the northeast trade winds off the Caribbean.
Following the war, the colony's economy stagnated because of the pressures caused by the war's spending.
Education in Belize is compulsory between the ages of 6 and 14 years.
Local government in Belize comprises four types of local authorities: city councils, town councils, village councils and community councils.
Though none of these small political parties have ever won any significant number of seats and/or offices, their challenge has been growing over the years.
The PUP won a landslide victory in the 1998 national elections, and PUP leader Said Musa was sworn in as prime minister.
Between about 2500 BC and 250 AD, the basic institutions of Maya civilisation emerged.
Throughout Belize's history, Guatemala has claimed ownership of all or part of Belizean territory.
The wood yielded a fixing agent for clothing dyes that was vital to the European wool industry.
Belize is a full participating member of the United Nations, Commonwealth of Nations, Organization of American States (OAS), Central American Integration System (SICA), Caribbean Community (CARICOM), CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME), Association of Caribbean States (ACS), and the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ), which currently pertains only to Barbados, Belize and Guyana.
Approximately 50% of Belizeans self-identify as ''Mestizo'', ''Latino'', or ''Hispanic'' and 30% speak Spanish as a native language.
In 1862, Great Britain formally declared it a British Crown Colony, subordinate to Jamaica, and named it British Honduras.
In addition, the month of September is considered a special time of national celebration.
Overall, the seasons are marked more by differences in humidity and rainfall than in temperature.
In 2013, the UN gave Belize a Gender Inequality Index score of 0.435, ranking it 79th out of 148 countries.
The pact involves the Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM) subgroup of the Group of African, Caribbean, and Pacific states (ACP).
The vast majority are so-called Russian Mennonites of German descent who settled in the Russian Empire during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Prior to about 2500 BC, some hunting and foraging bands settled in small farming villages; they later domesticated crops such as corn, beans, squash, and chili peppers.
Belize lacks the violent class and racial conflict that has figured so prominently in the social life of its Central American neighbours.
While over 60% of Belize's land surface is covered by forest, some 20% of the country's land is covered by cultivated land (agriculture) and human settlements.
Cabinet ministers are members of the majority political party in parliament and usually hold elected seats within it concurrent with their cabinet positions.
As a result of the nationalisation process, the interconnection agreements are again subject to negotiations.
Belizean Creole might best be described as the lingua franca of the nation.
Political and economic power remain vested in the hands of the local elite, most of whom are either white, light-skinned Creole, or Mestizo.
Fortis took over the management of BEL in 1999, at the invitation of the government of Belize in an attempt to mitigate prior financial problems within the locally managed utility.
In 1990 limestone, used in road-building, was the only mineral resource being exploited for either domestic or export use.
The Maya use maize, beans, or squash for most meals, and the Garifuna are fond of seafood, cassava (particularly made into cassava bread or Ereba) and vegetables.
The British separated the more African-looking Garifunas from the more indigenous-looking ones.
The Belize Police Department began an Anti-Crime Christmas campaign targeting criminals; as a result, the crime rates dropped in that month.
Steak is also common.
The storm moved inland towards Belmopan, causing estimated damage of BZ$33.8&nbsp;million ($17.4&nbsp;million 2010&nbsp;USD), primarily from damage to crops and housing.
Belize is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy.
This middle group does not constitute a unified social class, but rather a number of middle-class and working-class groups, loosely oriented around shared dispositions toward education, cultural respectability, and possibilities for upward social mobility.
Economic conditions improved during World War II as many Belizean men entered the armed forces or otherwise contributed to the war effort.
It is also known as the mountain cow, although it is actually related to the horse and the rhinoceros.
Dances performed at village fiestas include the Hog-Head, Zapateados, the Mestizada, Paso Doble and many more.
"Kitchen Spanish" is an intermediate form of Spanish mixed with Belizean Creole, spoken in the northern towns such as Corozal and San Pedro.
Approximately 16,100 people speak the Arawakan-based Garifuna language, and 6,900 Mennonites in Belize speak mainly Plautdietsch while a minority of Mennonites speak Pennsylvania German.
During this period, a few successful settlers gained control of the local legislature, known as the Public Meeting, as well as of most of the settlement's land and timber.
The Belize Police Department has implemented many protective measures in hopes of decreasing the high number of crimes.
The surviving others fled across the borders into British territory.
