The two were arguably the greatest ball strikers golf has ever known; even Tiger Woods quoted them as the only players ever to have "owned their swings", in that they had total control of it and, as a result, the ball's flight.
The top players, who were not off fighting in World War II, participated and the largest purse of the year was awarded.
First, the PGA Championship was, until 1958, a match play event, and Hogan's particular skill was "shooting a number" — meticulously planning and executing a strategy to achieve a score for a round on a particular course (even to the point of leaving out the 7-iron in the U.S. Open at Merion, saying "there are no 7-iron shots at Merion").
AMF ''Ben Hogan'' golf clubs were sold continuously from 1960 to 1985 when AMF was bought by Minstar who sold The Ben Hogan company in 1988 to Cosmo World, who owned the club manufacturer until 1992, when it was sold to another independent investor, Bill Goodwin.
Your feet should be shoulder width apart, your front foot should be slightly opened towards the target and your back foot should be perpendicular to the target.
"Just before your hands reach hip level, the shoulders, as they turn, automatically start pulling the hips around.
Make sure to close your shoulders slightly to stay aligned with the target line.
"The right hand is a finger grip.
Moe Norman did the same, playing and practicing without gloves.
The club head reaches its maximum speed, not at impact, but right after, when both arms are fully extended.
In 1960, he sold the company to American Machine and Foundry (AMF), but stayed on as chairman of the board for several more years.
The grip is important because it is the only direct physical contact you have with the ball via your golf club.
"With the back of your left hand facing the target, place the club in the left hand so that, 1) The shaft is pressed up under the muscular pad at the inside heel of the palm, and 2) The shaft also lies directly across the top joint of the forefinger".
Hogan often declined to play in the PGA Championship, skipping it more and more often as his career wore on.
"Actually, the hands start the club head back a split second before the arms start back.
Furthermore, there should be a sense of fixed jointness between the two forearms and the wrists, and it should be maintained throughout the swing."
But when Hogan shocked and amazed the golf world by returning to tournament golf only 11 months after his accident, and took second place in the 1950 Los Angeles Open after a playoff loss to Sam Snead, he was cheered on by ecstatic fans.
This accident left Hogan, age 36, with a double-fracture of the pelvis, a fractured collar bone, a left ankle fracture, a chipped rib, and near-fatal blood clots: he would suffer lifelong circulation problems and other physical limitations.
In these interviews Hogan said that he was indeed a right-handed player who early on practiced/played with a left hand club that had been given to him because it was all that he had and that it was this issue that brought about the myth that he was left-handed.
The two fingers which should apply most of the pressure are the two middle fingers."
Many believed that although he played right-handed as an adult, Hogan was actually left-handed.
Spalding returned manufacturing to Hogan's Fort Worth, Texas roots before eventually including the company's assets in a bankruptcy sale of Spalding's Topflite division to Callaway in 2004.
Goodwin moved the company out of Fort Worth, and a union shop, to Virginia so it would be close to his home of operations for other AMF brands and, incidentally, a non-union shop in an effort to return the company to profitability.
As the hips begin to turn, they pull the left leg in to the right."
As you increase in club, your stance should widen for further stability.
Second, the PGA required several days of 36 holes per day competition, and after his 1949 auto accident, Hogan struggled to manage more than 18 holes a day.
"The elbows should be tucked in, not stuck out from the body.
Hogan's ball striking has also been described as being of near miraculous caliber by other very knowledgeable observers such as Jack Nicklaus, who only saw him play some years after his prime.
He returned to the PGA Tour to start the 1950 season, at the Los Angeles Open, where he tied with Sam Snead over 72 holes, but lost the 18-hole playoff.
By most accounts, Ben Hogan was the best golfer of his era, and still stands as one of the greatest of all time.
Goodwin sold to Spalding in 1997, closing the sale in January 1998.
Toward the end of his career, he often stood over the ball inordinately long before drawing his putter back.
It was compiled and printed in book form later that year and is currently in its 64th printing.
Hogan left the hospital on April 1, 59 days after the accident.
It was ranked by ''Sports Illustrated'' as one of the greatest sports photographs of the 20th century.
In the ''Five Lessons'', Hogan breaks down the swing into four parts: The Fundamentals, The Grip, Stance and Posture, and The Swing.
In his book "Five Lessons," in the chapter entitled "The Grip," Hogan said "I was born left-handed -- that was the normal way for me to do things.
It is a reference to his steely and seemingly nerveless demeanor, itself a product of a golf swing he had built that was designed to perform better the more pressure he put it under.
Instead of sudden death, they played another nine holes; Nelson sank another substantial putt on the final green to win by a stroke.
This ball flight was the result of his using a "draw" type swing in conjunction with a "weak" grip, a combination which all but negated the chance of hitting a hook.
It unwinds the shoulder, the arms and the hands in that order, the correct order.
Then his shoulders and arm follow after.
If you have a correct, powerful and repeating swing, then you can shoot in the 70s.
Hogan, 40, was unable to enter — and possibly win — the 1953 PGA Championship (to complete the Grand Slam) because its play (July 1–7) overlapped the play of the British Open at Carnoustie (July 6–10), which he won.
However, some mystery still remains about this since Hogan in subsequent interviews said that the belief of him being left-handed was actually a myth (noted in what was probably his last video interview and in his 1987 ''Golf Magazine'' interview).
During his peak years, he rarely if ever attempted a shot in competition which he had not thoroughly honed in practice.
While he suffered from the "yips" in his later years, Hogan was known as an effective putter from mid to short range on quick, U.S. Open style surfaces at times during his career.
I was switched over to doing things right-handed when I was a boy but I started golf as a left-hander because the first club I ever came into possession of, an old five-iron, was a left-handed stick."
The proper stance affects how controlled the backswing is, governs the amount of hip turn in the backswing, and allows for the hips to clear through the downswing.
His 8-under par score in the 1948 U.S. Open set a tournament record that was matched only by Jack Nicklaus in 1980, Hale Irwin in 1990, and Lee Janzen in 1993.
Hogan says, "Good golf begins with a good grip."
In 1948 alone, Ben Hogan won 10 tournaments, including the U.S. Open at Riviera Country Club, a course known as "Hogan's Alley" because of his success there.
They married in April 1935 at her parents' home.
In May 1967, the editor of Cary Middlecoff's 1974 book ''The Golf Swing'' watched every shot that 54-year-old Hogan hit in the Colonial National Invitational in Fort Worth, Texas.
His 14-under par at the 1953 Masters set a record that stood for 12 years, and he remains one of just nine golfers (Jack Nicklaus, Raymond Floyd, Ben Crenshaw, Tiger Woods, David Duval, Phil Mickelson, Charl Schwartzel and Jordan Spieth) to have recorded such a low score in the tournament.
Callaway now owns the rights to the Ben Hogan brand.
Many supporters of Hogan and some golf historians feel that his victory at the Hale America Open in 1942 should be counted as his fifth U.S. Open and 10th major championship, since the tournament was to be a substitute for the Open after its cancellation by the USGA.
This information was revealed in a 1955 ''Life'' magazine article.
"The Hawk" possessed fierce determination and an iron will, which combined with his unquestionable golf skills, formed an aura which could intimidate opponents into competitive submission.
His nine career professional major championships tie him with Gary Player for fourth all-time, trailing only Jack Nicklaus (18), Tiger Woods (14) and Walter Hagen (11).
Now-your left hand is already correctly affixed-place the club in your right hand so that the shaft lies across the top joint of the four fingers and definitely below the palm."
Nelson sank a 30-foot putt to tie on the ninth and final hole.
However, he proved to his critics (and to himself, especially) that he could still win by completing his famous comeback five months later, defeating Lloyd Mangrum and George Fazio in an 18-hole playoff at Merion Golf Club to win his second U.S. Open Championship.
Although it took a decade to secure his first victory, Hogan's wife Valerie believed in him, and this helped see him through the tough years when he battled a hook, which he later cured.
Of the 141, 139 were rated from well-executed to superbly executed.
However, many believed Hogan did not reveal all that he knew at the time.
''The Five Lessons'' were initially released as a five-part series in ''Sports Illustrated'' magazine, beginning with the issue of March 11, 1957.
On this matter, Hogan himself said, "You hear stories about me beating my brains out practicing, but...
There were two reasons for this.
"If he executes his backswing properly, as his arms are approaching hip level, they should be parallel with the plane and they should remain parallel with the plane, just beneath the glass, till they reach the top of the backswing.
Production began in the summer of 1954, with clubs targeted toward "the better player."
Older brother Royal quit school at age 14 to deliver office supplies by bicycle, and nine-year-old Ben sold newspapers after school at the nearby train station.
It still stands among the greatest single seasons in the history of professional golf.
The following describes the perfect golf grip in the eyes of Mr. Hogan:
I couldn't wait to get up in the morning, so I could hit balls.
This belief also seemed to be corroborated by Hogan himself in his earlier book "Power Golf."
Hogan was also highly respected by fellow competitors for his superb course management skills.
Born in Stephenville, Texas, he was the third and youngest child of Chester and Clara (Williams) Hogan.
The earliest theory is that the "secret" was a special wrist movement known as "cupping under".
"To obtain the proper grip with the right hand, hold it somewhat extended, with the palm facing your target.
He is also known to have spent years contemplating the golf swing, trying a range of theories and methods before arriving at the finished method which brought him his greatest period of success.
1 missed 54-hole cut at 1960 PGA Championship
In 1951, Hogan entered just five events, but won three of them - the Masters, the U.S. Open, and the World Championship of Golf, and finished second and fourth in his other two starts.
In 1922, when Hogan was nine, his father Chester committed suicide by self-inflicted gunshot at the family home.
Solid and sometimes spectacular in his early and peak years, Hogan by his later years deteriorated to the point of being an often poor putter by professional standards, particularly on slow greens.
This strong grip is what resulted in Hogan hitting the odd disastrous snap hook.
Think of the seat of the stick as being about two inches or so below your buttocks."
Further testimony to Hogan's (and Moe Norman's) status among top golfers is provided by Tiger Woods, who recently said that he wished to "own his (golf) swing" in the same way as Moe Norman and Hogan had.
His early years as a pro were very difficult, and Hogan went broke more than once.
The other four are Nicklaus, Woods, Player, and Gene Sarazen.
By some accounts, Chester committed suicide in front of him, which some (including Hogan biographer James Dodson) have cited as the cause of his introverted personality in later years.
The wrist bone is definitely raised.
"To gain a real acquaintance with this preparatory guide to correct gripping, I would suggest practicing it five or 10 minutes a day for a week until it begins to become second nature."
It was difficult, if not impossible to conceive of anybody hitting the ball better over a four-day span."
In golf, the sit-down motion is more like lowering yourself onto a spectator-sports-stick.
Hogan did this to prevent himself from ever hooking the ball off the tee.
It was not broken until Tiger Woods shot 12-under par in the tournament in 2000 (Jim Furyk also shot 8-under par in the 2003 U.S. Open, and Rory McIlroy set the current U.S. Open record with 16-under par in 2011).
"When you have turned your shoulders all the way, your back should face squarely toward your target."
Also, the backswing should be slightly steeper than the downswing.
One of his fellow caddies at Glen Garden was Byron Nelson, later a tour rival.
While in hospital, Hogan's life was endangered by a blood clot problem, leading doctors to tie off the vena cava.
This may be the reason that his early play with right-handed equipment found him using a cross-handed grip (right hand at the end of the club, left hand below it).
In 1967, at age 54, Hogan shot a record 30 on the back nine at the Masters; the record stood until 1992.
In May 2014, Terry Koehler of Eldolon Brands approached Perry Ellis International and got the rights to use Ben Hogan's name for a line of golf clubs.
He did not win his first pro tournament as an individual until March 1940, when he won three consecutive tournaments in North Carolina.
In 1945, Hogan set a PGA Tour record for a 72-hole event at the Portland Open Invitational by shooting 27-under-par.
A baseball player throws a ball by transferring his weight and rotates his hips.
By positioning his hands in this manner, he ensured that the club face would be slightly open upon impact, creating a fade (left to right ball flight) as opposed to a draw or hook (right to left ball flight).
With his British Open Championship victory, Hogan became just the second player, after Gene Sarazen, to win all four of the modern major championships—the Masters, U.S. Open, British Open, and PGA Championship.
"At that point just beyond impact where both arms are straight and extended the club head reaches its maximum speed."
At address, the left elbow should point directly at the left hipbone and the right elbow should point directly at the right hipbone.
The "glass" has a hole for your head while it rests on your shoulders and touches the ground on top of your ball.
Hogan is thought to have developed a "secret" which made his swing nearly automatic.
"You should bend your knees from the thighs down.
he played or practiced without wearing gloves.
He worked at Century as an assistant and then as the head pro until 1941, when he took the head pro job at Hershey Country Club in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
I was enjoying myself.
And the arms begin their movement a split second before the shoulders begin to turn."
The following spring, Nelson was granted the only junior membership offered by the members of Glen Garden.
In "The Search for the Perfect Golf Swing", researchers Cochran and Stobbs held the opinion that a left-handed person playing right-handed would be prone to hook the ball.
His doctors said he might never walk again, let alone play golf competitively.
"Hogan shot 281 for a third-place tie with George Archer.
A tip from a friend led him to caddying at the age of 11 at Glen Garden Country Club, a nine-hole course seven miles (11&nbsp;km) to the south.
Without a good grip, one cannot play to his or her potential.
Mr. Hogan advocates the use of a waggle not only because it helps you loosen your muscles, but also because it allows for your hands and arms to remember where to go for the first part of your backswing.
He even received a ticker-tape parade in New York City upon his return from winning the 1953 British Open Championship, the only time he played the event.
Although slight of build at 5'8½" and 145 pounds – attributes that earned him the nickname "Bantam", which he thoroughly disliked – he was very long off the tee early in his career, and even competed in long drive contests.
He is one of only five golfers to have won all four major championships currently open to professionals (the Masters Tournament, The Open (despite only playing once), the U.S. Open, and the PGA Championship).
It has been alleged that Hogan used a "strong" grip, with hands more the right of the club grip in tournament play prior to his accident in 1949, despite often practicing with a "weak" grip, with the back of the left wrist facing the target, and that this limited his success, or, at least, his reliability, up to that date.
Hogan remains the only golfer in history to win the Masters, U.S. Open, and British Open in the same calendar year (1953).
After regaining his strength by extensive walking, he resumed golf activities in November 1949.
Even today it continues to maintain a place at or near the top of the Amazon.com golf book sales rankings.
with, "No, no - Ben Hogan, easily".
Following his most successful season, Hogan started his golf club company in the fall of 1953 in Fort Worth.
It helps the swing so much it makes it almost automatic."
"The hips lead the shoulders all the way on the downswing."
Colonial Country Club in Fort Worth, a modern PGA Tour tournament venue, is also known as "Hogan's Alley" and may have the better claim to the nickname as it was his home course after his retirement, and he was an active member of Colonial as well for many years.
Your shoulders will be naturally open to the target line because your arms are not at equal length while holding the club.
The record stood until 1998, when it was broken by John Huston (it has since been surpassed by nine others, including most recently Phil Mickelson's 28-under in the 2013 Waste Management Phoenix Open).
His book ''Five Lessons: The Modern Fundamentals of Golf'' (written with Herbert Warren Wind) is perhaps the most widely read golf tutorial ever written, although Harvey Penick's ''Little Red Book'' would also have a claim to that title, and the principles therein are often parroted by modern "swing gurus".
There are many theories as to its exact nature.
Hogan played and practiced golf with only bare-hands i.e.
He would finish fourth on that season's money list, barely $6,000 behind the season's official money list leader Lloyd Mangrum, who played over 20 events.
He was also one of the first players to match particular clubs to yardages, or reference points around the course such as bunkers or trees, in order to improve his distance control.
The sixth hole at Carnoustie, a par five on which Hogan took a famously difficult line off the tee during each of his rounds in the 1953 Open Championship, has also recently been renamed Hogan's Alley.
Hogan never competed on the Senior PGA Tour, as that circuit did not exist until he was in his late sixties.
Always a perfectionist, Hogan is said to have ordered the entire first production run of clubs destroyed because they did not meet his exacting standards.
"Crook the forefinger around the shaft and you will discover that you can lift the club and maintain a fairly firm grip on it by supporting it just with the muscles of that finger and the muscles of the pad of the palm."
Hy Peskin, a staff photographer for ''Sports Illustrated'', took an iconic photo of Ben Hogan playing a 1-iron shot to the green at the 72nd hole of the 1950 U.S. Open.
Despite finishing 13th on the money list in 1938, Hogan had to take an assistant pro job at Century Country Club in Purchase, New York.
The book was co-authored by Herbert Warren Wind, and illustrated by artist Anthony Ravielli.
It was the only time that a golfer had won three major professional championships in a year until Tiger Woods won the final three majors in 2000 (and the first in 2001).
That year also saw the release of a biopic starring Glenn Ford as Hogan, called ''Follow the Sun: The Ben Hogan Story''.
The angle of the swing should feel like you are swinging under a slanting plane of glass.
1 Defeated Mangrum and Fazio in 18-hole playoff: Hogan 69 (-1), Mangrum 73 (+3), Fazio 75 (+5).
Hogan revealed later in life that the "secret" involved cupping the left wrist at the top of the back swing and using a weaker left hand grip (thumb more on top of the grip as opposed to on the right side).
Nicklaus once responded to the question, "Is Tiger Woods the best ball striker you have ever seen?"
"Now with the club held firmly on the fingers of your right hand, simply fold your right hand over your left thumb."
Jacobs alleges that Byron Nelson told him this information, and furthermore that Hogan developed and used the "strong" grip as a boy in order to be able to hit the ball as far as bigger, stronger contemporaries.
When I'm hitting the ball where I want, hard and crisply, it's a joy that very few people experience."
It points to the target and, at the moment the ball is contacted, it is out in front, nearer to the target than any part of the hand."
Hogan was known to practice more than any other golfer of his contemporaries and is said to have "invented practice".
After over a half century and numerous ownership changes, the Ben Hogan line was discontinued by Callaway in 2008.
Hogan went on to achieve what is perhaps the greatest sporting accomplishment in history, limping to 12 more PGA Tour wins (including six majors) before retiring.
A bad grip can cause dipping of the hands at the top of the swing and a decrease in club head speed.
"When you finish your backswing, your chin should be hitting against the top of your left shoulder."
At the top of his backswing, his left arm should be extended at the exact same angle (to the ball) as the glass."
"As you begin the backswing, you must restrain your hips from moving until the turning of the shoulders starts to pull the hips around…It is this increased tension that unwinds the upper part of the body.
Hogan thought that an individual's golf swing was "in the dirt" and that mastering it required plenty of practice and repetition.
Your front arm should be extended at all times to allow the club to travel in its maximum arc.
As your knees bend, the upper part of the trunk remains normally erect, just as it does when you sit down in a chair.
"At impact the right arm is still bent slightly."
Woods claimed that this pair were the only players ever to have "owned their swings", in that they had total control of it and, as a result, of the ball's flight.
Hogan explains that the average golfer underestimates himself.
This can cause a loss of power and accuracy.
He believes that beginners place too much emphasis on the long game.
Hogan thinks that the downswing is very similar to this action.
Although his ball striking was perhaps the greatest ever, Hogan is not particularly revered for his putting skills.
"The average golfer is entirely capable of building a repeating swing and breaking 80."
The remaining two were a drive that missed the fairway by some 5 yards and a 5-iron to a par-3 hole that missed the green by about the same distance.
At the top of your backswing, your back should be facing the target.
In Scotland, Hogan was known as "The Wee Ice Man", or, in some versions, "Wee Ice Mon," a moniker earned during his famous British Open victory at Carnoustie in 1953.
The downswing is at a slightly shallower angle and therefore the arms and hands should come from the inside-out on the downswing.
Club rules did not allow caddies age 16 and older, so after August 1928, Hogan took his game to three scrubby daily-fee courses: Katy Lake, Worth Hills, and Z-Boaz.
Hogan died in Fort Worth, Texas on July 25, 1997 at the age of 84, and is interred at Greenwood Memorial Park there.
Hogan rarely spoke during competition, and there are numerous anecdotes about Hogan's sparse but pithy remarks.
Ben believes the second part of the swing, the downswing, is initiated by the hips starting to turn.
Prior to the 1949 accident, Hogan never truly captured the hearts of his galleries, despite being one of the best golfers of his time.
Perhaps this was due to his perceived cold and aloof on-course persona.
Hogan dropped out of Central High School (R.L.
The Hale America Open was held in the same time slot and was run like the U.S. Open with more than 1,500 entries, local qualifying at 69 sites and sectional qualifying at most major cities.
Hogan met Valerie Fox in Sunday school in Fort Worth in the mid-1920s, and they reacquainted in 1932 when he landed a low-paying club pro job in Cleburne, where her family had moved.
"Now just close the left hand-close the fingers before you close the thumb-and the club will be just where it should be."
Hogan believed that a solid, repeatable golf swing involved only a few essential elements, which, when performed correctly and in sequence, were the essence of the swing.
"His legs simply were not strong enough to carry his heart any longer", famed sportswriter Grantland Rice said of Hogan's near-miss.
Paschal High School) during the final semester of his senior year, and became a professional golfer at the Texas Open in San Antonio in late January 1930, more than six months shy of his 18th birthday.
The young Hogan was badly afflicted by hooking the golf ball.
This is not something that would benefit all golfers, however, since many average golfers already slice or fade the ball.
The draw is more appealing to amateurs due to its greater distance.
Following his father's suicide, the family incurred financial difficulty and the children took jobs to help their seamstress mother make ends meet.
