The fact that Jonson was buried in an upright position was an indication of his reduced circumstances at the time of his death, although it has also been written that he asked for a grave exactly 18&nbsp;inches square from the monarch and received an upright grave to fit in the requested space.
Henslowe's diary indicates that Jonson had a hand in numerous other plays, including many in genres such as English history with which he is not otherwise associated.
On many of these projects he collaborated, not always peacefully, with designer Inigo Jones.
In this comparison, Jonson represents the cavalier strain of poetry, emphasising grace and clarity of expression; Donne, by contrast, epitomised the metaphysical school of poetry, with its reliance on strained, baroque metaphors and often vague phrasing.
He spent over a year there, and the best-remembered hospitality which he enjoyed was that of the Scottish poet, William Drummond of Hawthornden, in April 1619, sited on the River Esk.
This took place in October 1598, while Jonson was on remand in Newgate Gaol charged with manslaughter.
He is buried in the north aisle of the nave in Westminster Abbey, with the inscription "O Rare Ben Johnson" ''(sic)'' set in the slab over his grave.
After the plot's discovery he appears to have avoided further imprisonment; he volunteered what he knew of the affair to the investigator Robert Cecil and the Privy Council.
On the other hand, Jonson received less attention from the new critics than did some other playwrights and his work was not of programmatic interest to psychoanalytic critics.
The comedies of his middle career, from ''Eastward Ho'' to ''The Devil is an Ass'' are for the most part city comedy, with a London setting, themes of trickery and money, and a distinct moral ambiguity, despite Jonson's professed aim in the Prologue to ''Volpone'' to "mix profit with your pleasure".
In 1598 Jonson produced his first great success, ''Every Man in His Humour'', capitalising on the vogue for humorous plays which George Chapman had begun with ''An Humorous Day's Mirth''.
Jonson followed this in 1599 with ''Every Man out of His Humour'', a pedantic attempt to imitate Aristophanes.
All of them, including those like Herrick whose accomplishments in verse are generally regarded as superior to Jonson's, took inspiration from Jonson's revival of classical forms and themes, his subtle melodies, and his disciplined use of wit.
"Epigrams" (published in the 1616 folio) is an entry in a genre that was popular among late-Elizabethan and Jacobean audiences, although Jonson was perhaps the only poet of his time to work in its full classical range.
At the same time, Jonson pursued a more prestigious career, writing masques for James's court.
Coleridge, while more respectful, describes Jonson as psychologically superficial: “He was a very accurately observing man; but he cared only to observe what was open to, and likely to impress, the senses.” Coleridge placed Jonson second only to Shakespeare; other romantic critics were less approving.
While in jail Jonson converted to Catholicism, possibly through the influence of fellow-prisoner Father Thomas Wright, a Jesuit priest.
Earlier, Aphra Behn, writing in defence of female playwrights, had pointed to Jonson as a writer whose learning did not make him popular; unsurprisingly, she compares him unfavourably to Shakespeare.
As an actor, Jonson was the protagonist “Hieronimo” (Geronimo) in the play ''The Spanish Tragedy'' (ca.
Moreover, by 1597, he was a working playwright employed by Philip Henslowe, the leading producer for the English public theatre; by the next year, the production of ''Every Man in His Humour'' (1598) had established Jonson's reputation as a dramatist.
In 1616 Jonson received a yearly pension of 100 marks (about £60), leading some to identify him as England's first Poet Laureate.
''Underwood'', published in the expanded folio of 1640, is a larger and more heterogeneous group of poems.
In 2012, after more than two decades of research, Cambridge University Press published the first new edition for Jonson's complete works for 60 years.
This sign of royal favour may have encouraged him to publish the first volume of the folio collected edition of his works that year.
A consensus formed: Jonson was the first English poet to understand classical precepts with any accuracy, and he was the first to apply those precepts successfully to contemporary life.
Also when Shakespeare died, he said, "He was not of an age, but for all time."
Conviction, and certainly not expedience alone, sustained Jonson's faith during the troublesome twelve years he remained a Catholic.
It has been argued that Jonson helped to edit the First Folio, and he may have been inspired to write this poem by reading his fellow playwright's works, a number of which had been previously either unpublished or available in less satisfactory versions, in a relatively complete form.
Around mid-century, a number of critics and scholars followed Eliot's lead, producing detailed studies of Jonson's verbal style.
This poem, "To the Memory of My Beloved the Author, Mr. William Shakespeare and What He Hath Left Us", did a good deal to create the traditional view of Shakespeare as a poet who, despite "small Latine, and lesse Greeke", had a natural genius.
The disastrous failures of productions of ''Volpone'' and ''Epicoene'' in the early 1770s no doubt bolstered a widespread sense that Jonson had at last grown too antiquated for the contemporary public; if he still attracted enthusiasts such as Earl Camden and William Gifford, he all but disappeared from the stage in the last quarter of the century.
(See: Ben Jonson folios)
From Edinburgh he travelled west and lodged with the Duke of Lennox where he wrote a play based on Loch Lomond.
That this judgment was widely shared is indicated by the admitted influence he had on younger poets.
He recalls being told by certain actors that Shakespeare never blotted (i.e., crossed out) a line when he wrote.
:Yet must I not give Nature all: Thy Art,
It satirised both John Marston, who Jonson believed had accused him of lustfulness in ''Histriomastix'', and Thomas Dekker.
It contains ''A Celebration of Charis'', Jonson's most extended effort at love poetry; various religious pieces; encomiastic poems including the poem to Shakespeare and a sonnet on Mary Wroth; the ''Execration against Vulcan'' and others.
Critical judgment has tended to emphasise the very qualities that Jonson himself lauds in his prefaces, in ''Timber'', and in his scattered prefaces and dedications: the realism and propriety of his language, the bite of his satire, and the care with which he plotted his comedies.
As with other English Renaissance dramatists, a portion of Ben Jonson's literary output has not survived.
The proliferation of new critical perspectives after mid-century touched on Jonson inconsistently.
It may have been that Jonson, fearing that his trial would go against him, was seeking the unequivocal
After his military activity on the Continent, Jonson returned to England and worked as an actor and as a playwright.
This "War of the Theatres" appears to have ended with reconciliation on all sides.
Though only two acts are extant, this represents a remarkable new direction for Jonson: a move into pastoral drama.
A few other so-called epigrams share this quality.
Many critics since the 18th century have ranked Jonson below only Shakespeare among English Renaissance dramatists.
Arrest warrants for Jonson and Nashe were issued by Queen Elizabeth I's so-called interrogator, Richard Topcliffe.
But the poem itself qualifies this view:
Jonson died on 6 August 1637 and his funeral was held on 9 August.
''The Alchemist'' and ''Volpone'' were immediately successful.
The first draft of his play ''Sejanus'' was banned for "popery", and did not re-appear until some offending passages were cut.
He is best known for the satirical plays ''Every Man in His Humour'' (1598), ''Volpone, or The Fox'' (c. 1606), ''The Alchemist'' (1610) and ''Bartholomew Fair'' (1614) and for his lyric poetry; he is generally regarded as the second most important English playwright during the reign of James I after William Shakespeare.
Father Thomas Wright, who heard Fawkes's confession, was known to Jonson from prison in 1598 and Cecil may have directed him to bring the priest before the council, as a witness.
He planned to write comedies that revived the classical premises of Elizabethan dramatic theory—or rather, since all but the loosest English comedies could claim some descent from Plautus and Terence, he intended to apply those premises with rigour.
Charles de Saint-Évremond placed Jonson's comedies above all else in English drama, and Charles Gildon called Jonson the father of English comedy.
Jonson's most influential and revealing commentary on Shakespeare is the second of the two poems that he contributed to the prefatory verse that opens Shakespeare's First Folio.
absolution that Catholicism could offer if he were sentenced to death.
Two of the actors, Gabriel Spenser and Robert Shaw, were also imprisoned.
Regarding his marriage Jonson described his wife to William Drummond as "a shrew, yet honest".
Before the English Civil War, the "Tribe of Ben" touted his importance, and during the Restoration Jonson's satirical comedies and his theory and practice of "humour characters" (which are often misunderstood; see William Congreve's letters for clarification) was extremely influential, providing the blueprint for many Restoration comedies.
That same year he was questioned by the Privy Council about ''Sejanus'', a politically themed play about corruption in the Roman Empire.
Coleridge, for instance, claimed that ''The Alchemist'' had one of the three most perfect plots in literature.
However, Jonson explains, "He was, indeed, honest and of an open and free nature, had an excellent phantasy, brave notions and gentle expressions, wherein he flowed with that facility that sometimes it was necessary he should be stopped".
Jonson collaborated with Dekker on a pageant welcoming James I to England in 1603 although Drummond reports that Jonson called Dekker a rogue.
While his life during this period was apparently more settled than it had been in the 1590s, his financial security was still not assured.
Nicholas Rowe, to whom may be traced the legend that Jonson owed the production of ''Every Man in his Humour'' to Shakespeare's intercession, likewise attributed Jonson's excellence to learning, which did not raise him quite to the level of genius.
Heinrich Wilhelm von Gerstenberg translated parts of Peter Whalley's edition into German in 1765.
In "De Shakespeare Nostrat" in ''Timber'', which was published posthumously and reflects his lifetime of practical experience, Jonson offers a fuller and more conciliatory comment.
He set his plays in contemporary settings, peopled them with recognisable types, and set them to actions that, if not strictly realistic, involved everyday motives such as greed and jealousy.
Thomas Davies called ''Poetaster'' "a contemptible mixture of the serio-comic, where the names of Augustus Caesar, Maecenas, Virgil, Horace, Ovid and Tibullus, are all sacrificed upon the altar of private resentment."
Jonson's clergyman father died two months before his birth; his mother married a master bricklayer two years later.
Jonson largely avoided the debates about rhyme and meter that had consumed Elizabethan classicists such as Thomas Campion and Gabriel Harvey.
John Dryden offered a more common assessment in the "Essay of Dramatic Poesie," in which his Avatar Neander compares Shakespeare to Homer and Jonson to Virgil: the former represented profound creativity, the latter polished artifice.
A few attributions of anonymous plays, such as ''The London Prodigal'', have been ventured by individual researchers, but have met with cool responses.
A monument to Jonson was erected in about 1723 by the Earl of Oxford and is in the eastern aisle of Westminster Abbey's Poets' Corner.
Jonson's conversion came at a weighty time in affairs of state; the royal succession, from the childless Elizabeth, had not been settled and Essex's Catholic allies were hopeful that a sympathetic ruler might attain the throne.
Since the critics who made this comparison (Herbert Grierson for example), were to varying extents rediscovering Donne, this comparison often worked to the detriment of Jonson's reputation.
John Aubrey, in a more meticulous record than usual, notes that a passer-by, John Young of Great Milton, Oxfordshire, saw the bare grave marker and on impulse paid a workman eighteen pence to make the inscription.
Another early comedy in a different vein, ''The Case is Altered'', is markedly similar to Shakespeare's romantic comedies in its foreign setting, emphasis on genial wit and love-plot.
The lukewarm reception given that play was, however, nothing compared to the dismal failure of ''The New Inn''; the cold reception given this play prompted Jonson to write a poem condemning his audience (the ''Ode to Myself''), which in turn prompted Thomas Carew, one of the "Tribe of Ben," to respond in a poem that asks Jonson to recognise his own decline.
However, a series of setbacks drained his strength and damaged his reputation.
Jonson's biographer Ian Donaldson is among those who suggest that the conversion was instigated by Father Thomas Wright, a Jesuit priest who had resigned from the order over his acceptance of Queen Elizabeth's right to rule in England.
In May 1610 Henry IV of France was assassinated, purportedly in the name of the Pope; he had been a Catholic monarch respected in England for tolerance towards Protestants, and his murder seems to have been the immediate cause of Jonson's decision to rejoin the Church of England.
It is possible that the spelling of 'son' as 'Sonne' is meant to allude to the sonnet form, with which it shares some features.
''The Staple of News'', for example, offers a remarkable look at the earliest stage of English journalism.
In the next era, Swinburne, who was more interested in Jonson than most Victorians, wrote, "The flowers of his growing have every quality but one which belongs to the rarest and finest among flowers: they have colour, form, variety, fertility, vigour: the one thing they want is fragrance” – by “fragrance,” Swinburne means spontaneity.
They are of significant interest, however, for their portrayal of Charles I's England.
It was not until after 1710 that Shakespeare's plays (ordinarily in heavily revised forms) were more frequently performed than those of his Renaissance contemporaries.
Jonson attended school in St. Martin's Lane.
Notwithstanding this emphatically Protestant grounding, Jonson maintained an interest in Catholic doctrine throughout his adult life and, at a particularly perilous time while a religious war with Spain was widely expected and persecution of Catholics was intensifying, he converted to the faith.
Perhaps partly as a result of this new career, Jonson gave up writing plays for the public theatres for a decade.
Jonas Barish was the leading figure among critics who appreciated Jonson's artistry.
The best of Jonson's lyrics have remained current since his time; periodically, they experience a brief vogue, as after the publication of Peter Whalley's edition of 1756.
It includes a portrait medallion and the same inscription as on the gravestone.
Jonson has been called 'the first poet laureate'.
Jonson may have had a hand in ''Rollo, Duke of Normandy, or The Bloody Brother'', a play in the canon of John Fletcher and his collaborators.
:My gentle Shakespeare, must enjoy a part.
At the beginning of the reign of James I, King of England, in 1603 Jonson joined other poets and playwrights in welcoming the new king.
In 1623, historian Edmund Bolton named him the best and most polished English poet.
Alternatively, he could have been looking to personal advantage from accepting conversion since Father Wright's protector, the Earl of Essex, was among those who might hope to rise to influence after the succession of a new monarch.
''The Masque of Blackness'' was praised by Algernon Charles Swinburne as the consummate example of this now-extinct genre, which mingled speech, dancing and spectacle.
In the Romantic era, Jonson suffered the fate of being unfairly compared and contrasted to Shakespeare, as the taste for Jonson's type of satirical comedy decreased.
In 1597 a play which he co-wrote with Thomas Nashe, ''The Isle of Dogs'', was suppressed after causing great offence.
The principal factor in Jonson's partial eclipse was, however, the death of James and the accession of King Charles I in 1625.
The poem has traditionally been thought to exemplify the contrast which Jonson perceived between himself, the disciplined and erudite classicist, scornful of ignorance and sceptical of the masses, and Shakespeare, represented in the poem as a kind of natural wonder whose genius was not subject to any rules except those of the audiences for which he wrote.
The ''Hawthornden Manuscripts'' (1619), of the conversations between Ben Jonson and the poet William Drummond of Hawthornden (1585–1649), report that, when in Flanders, Jonson engaged, fought and killed an enemy soldier in single combat, and took for trophies the weapons of the vanquished soldier.
Jonson concludes that "there was ever more in him to be praised than to be pardoned."
He resumed writing regular plays in the 1620s, but these are not considered among his best.
In the 20th century, Jonson's status rose significantly.
In addition to ''The Isle of Dogs'' (1597), the records suggest these lost plays as wholly or partially Jonson's work: ''Richard Crookback'' (1602); ''Hot Anger Soon Cold'' (1598), with Porter and Henry Chettle; ''Page of Plymouth'' (1599), with Dekker; and ''Robert II, King of Scots'' (1599), with Chettle and Dekker.
Some of his better-known poems are close translations of Greek or Roman models; all display the careful attention to form and style that often came naturally to those trained in classics in the humanist manner.
He later told Drummond that he had made less than two hundred pounds on all his plays together.
The exact date of the ceremony is unknown.
Dekker responded with ''Satiromastix'', subtitled "the untrussing of the humorous poet".
Drummond reports that during their conversation, Jonson scoffed at two apparent absurdities in Shakespeare's plays: a nonsensical line in ''Julius Caesar'', and the setting of ''The Winter's Tale'' on the non-existent seacoast of Bohemia.
Whether Drummond is viewed as accurate or not, the comments fit well with Jonson's well-known theories about literature.
After having been an apprentice bricklayer, Ben Jonson went to the Netherlands and volunteered to soldier with the English regiments of Francis Vere (1560–1609) in Flanders.
Particularly in the tragedies, with their lengthy speeches abstracted from Sallust and Cicero, Augustan critics saw a writer whose learning had swamped his aesthetic judgment.
But there were also more negative spins on Jonson's learned art; for instance, in the 1750s, Edward Young casually remarked on the way in which Jonson's learning worked, like Samson's strength, to his own detriment.
This commitment entailed negations: after ''The Case is Altered'', Jonson eschewed distant locations, noble characters, romantic plots and other staples of Elizabethan comedy, focusing instead on the satiric and realistic inheritance of new comedy.
The minor early plays, particularly those written for boy players, present somewhat looser plots and less-developed characters than those written later, for adult companies.
Finally, there are questionable or borderline attributions.
Although it is included among the epigrams, "On My First Sonne" is neither satirical nor very short; the poem, intensely personal and deeply felt, typifies a genre that would come to be called "lyric poetry."
For the most part, the 18th century consensus remained committed to the division that Pope doubted; as late as the 1750s, Sarah Fielding could put a brief recapitulation of this analysis in the mouth of a "man of sense" encountered by David Simple.
He was again in trouble for topical allusions in a play, now lost, in which he took part.
In addition to his popularity on the public stage and in the royal hall, he enjoyed the patronage of aristocrats such as Elizabeth Sidney (daughter of Sir Philip Sidney) and Lady Mary Wroth.
Jonson's works, particularly his masques and pageants, offer significant information regarding the relations of literary production and political power, as do his contacts with and poems for aristocratic patrons; moreover, his career at the centre of London's emerging literary world has been seen as exemplifying the development of a fully commodified literary culture.
Some view this elegy as a conventional exercise, but others see it as a heartfelt tribute to the "Sweet Swan of Avon", the "Soul of the Age!"
His habit was to slip outside during the sacrament, a common routine at the time—indeed it was one followed by the royal consort, Queen Anne, herself—to show political loyalty while not offending the conscience.
One spindle is a diamond-shaped heraldic device shared with the Border-country Johnstone family of Annandale.
Concerning the family of Anne Lewis and Ben Jonson, the St. Martin's Church registers indicate that Mary Jonson, their eldest daughter, died in November 1593, at six months of age.
Of ''Epicoene'', Jonson told Drummond of a satirical verse which reported that the play's subtitle was appropriate, since its audience had refused to applaud the play (i.e., remained silent).
The condemnatory poems are short and anonymous; Jonson’s epigrams of praise, including a famous poem to Camden and lines to Lucy Harington, are longer and are mostly addressed to specific individuals.
In that time, rose to the prominence the Sons of Ben or the "Tribe of Ben" - those younger poets such as Robert Herrick, Richard Lovelace, and Sir John Suckling who took their bearing in verse from Jonson.
However, his interest in Catholic belief and practice remained with him until his death.
While there he was made an honorary citizen of Edinburgh.
A decisive quarrel with Jones harmed his career as a writer of court masques, although he continued to entertain the court on an irregular basis.
During the early 1630s he also conducted a correspondence with James Howell, who warned him about disfavour at court in the wake of his dispute with Jones.
''The Satyr'' (1603) and ''The Masque of Blackness'' (1605) are two of about two dozen masques which Jonson wrote for James or for Queen Anne, some of them performed at Apethorpe Palace when the King was in residence.
Hazlitt refers dismissively to Jonson's "laborious caution."
''Cynthia's Revels'' was produced by the Children of the Chapel Royal at Blackfriars Theatre in 1600.
He popularised the comedy of humours.
In that period, Ann Lewis and Ben Jonson lived separate lives for 5 years; their matrimonial arrangement cast Ann Lewis as the housewife Jonson, and Ben Jonson as the artist who enjoyed the residential hospitality of his patrons, Sir Robert Townshend and Lord Aubigny, Esme Stuart, 3rd Duke of Lennox.
Thomas Fuller relates stories of Jonson and Shakespeare engaging in debates in the Mermaid Tavern; Fuller imagines conversations in which Shakespeare would run rings around the more learned but more ponderous Jonson.
Drummond also reported Jonson as saying that Shakespeare "wanted art" (i.e., lacked skill).
At the same time, study of Elizabethan themes and conventions, such as those by E. E. Stoll and M. C. Bradbrook, provided a more vivid sense of how Jonson's work was shaped by the expectations of his time.
On Elizabeth's accession he was freed and was able to travel to London to become a clergyman.
For some critics, the temptation to contrast Jonson (representing art or craft) with Shakespeare (representing nature, or untutored genius) has seemed natural; Jonson himself may be said to have initiated this interpretation in the second folio, and Samuel Butler drew the same comparison in his commonplace book later in the century.
Marston dedicated ''The Malcontent'' to Jonson and the two collaborated with Chapman on ''Eastward Ho'', a 1605 play whose anti-Scottish sentiment briefly landed both authors in jail.
In this period, Alexander Pope is exceptional in that he noted the tendency to exaggeration in these competing critical portraits: "It is ever the nature of Parties to be in extremes; and nothing is so probable, as that because Ben Johnson had much the most learning, it was said on the one hand that Shakespear had none at all; and because Shakespear had much the most wit and fancy, it was retorted on the other, that Johnson wanted both."
Shortly after his release from a brief spell of imprisonment imposed to mark the authorities' displeasure at the work, in the second week of October 1605, he was present at a supper party attended by most of the Gunpowder Plot conspirators.
This connection with the Sidney family provided the impetus for one of Jonson's most famous lyrics, the country house poem ''To Penshurst''.
In accordance with the temper of his age, he was often so broad in his characterisation that many of his most famous scenes border on the farcical (as William Congreve, for example, judged ''Epicoene''.)
To this classical model Jonson applied the two features of his style which save his classical imitations from mere pedantry: the vividness with which he depicted the lives of his characters, and the intricacy of his plots.
Moreover, 32 years later, a second son, also named Benjamin Jonson, died in 1635.
Accepting both rhyme and stress, Jonson used them to mimic the classical qualities of simplicity, restraint and precision.
The romantic revolution in criticism brought about an overall decline in the critical estimation of Jonson.
Jonson's productivity began to decline in the 1620s, but he remained well-known.
This trend was by no means universal, however; William Gifford, Jonson's first editor of the 19th century, did a great deal to defend Jonson's reputation during this period of general decline.
Jonson's poetry continues to interest scholars for the light which it sheds on English literary history, such as politics, systems of patronage and intellectual attitudes.
An undated comedy, ''The Case is Altered'', may be his earliest surviving play.
As G. E. Bentley notes in ''Shakespeare and Jonson: Their Reputations in the Seventeenth Century Compared'', Jonson's reputation was in some respects equal to Shakespeare's in the 17th century.
Other volumes followed in 1640–41 and 1692.
But "artifice" was in the 17th century almost synonymous with "art"; Jonson, for instance, used "artificer" as a synonym for "artist" (''Discoveries,'' 33).
In his time Jonson was at least as influential as Donne.
Leading church figures, including John Overall, Dean of St Paul's, were tasked with winning Jonson back to orthodoxy, but these overtures were resisted.
In these respects Jonson may be regarded as among the most important figures in the prehistory of English neoclassicism.
They are, also, notably ill-tempered.
Within this general progression, however, Jonson's comic style remained constant and easily recognisable.
Several of Jonson's masques and entertainments also are not extant: ''The Entertainment at Merchant Taylors'' (1607); ''The Entertainment at Salisbury House for James I'' (1608); and ''The May Lord'' (1613–19).
A year later, Jonson was again briefly imprisoned, this time in Newgate Prison, for killing Gabriel Spenser in a duel on 22 September 1598 in Hogsden Fields (today part of Hoxton).
Jonson's other work for the theatre in the last years of Elizabeth I's reign was marked by fighting and controversy.
It has been claimed that the inscription could be read "Orare Ben Jonson" (pray for Ben Jonson), possibly in an allusion to Jonson's acceptance of Catholic doctrine during his lifetime (although he had returned to the Church of England) but the carving shows a distinct space between  "O" and "rare".
Jonson quickly adapted himself to the additional demand for masques and entertainments introduced with the new reign and fostered by both the king and his consort Anne of Denmark.
Jonson was at times greatly appreciated by the Romantics, but overall he was denigrated for not writing in a Shakespearean vein.
Jonson recounted that his father had been a prosperous Protestant landowner until the reign of "Bloody Mary" and had suffered imprisonment and the forfeiture of his wealth during that monarch's attempt to restore England to Catholicism.
For the general reader, Jonson's reputation rests on a few lyrics that, though brief, are surpassed for grace and precision by very few Renaissance poems: "On My First Sonne"; "To Celia"; "To Penshurst"; and the epitaph on boy player Solomon Pavy.
If Jonson's reputation as a playwright has traditionally been linked to Shakespeare, his reputation as a poet has, since the early 20th century, been linked to that of John Donne.
That the two men knew each other personally is beyond doubt, not only because of the tone of Jonson's references to him but because Shakespeare's company produced a number of Jonson's plays, at least two of which (''Every Man in His Humour'' and ''Sejanus His Fall'') Shakespeare certainly acted in.
Yet ''Epicoene'', along with ''Bartholomew Fair'' and (to a lesser extent) ''The Devil is an Ass'' have in modern times achieved a certain degree of recognition.
1586), by Thomas Kyd (1558–94), the first revenge tragedy in English literature.
Though his stature declined during the 18th century, Jonson was still read and commented on throughout the century, generally in the kind of comparative and dismissive terms just described.
Drummond undertook to record as much of Jonson's conversation as he could in his diary, and thus recorded aspects of Jonson's personality that would otherwise have been less clearly seen.
His stance received attention beyond the low-level intolerance to which most followers of that faith were exposed.
At the Restoration, this sensed difference became a kind of critical dogma.
Jonson delivers his opinions, in Drummond's terse reporting, in an expansive and even magisterial mood.
After the English theatres were reopened on the Restoration of Charles II, Jonson's work, along with Shakespeare's and Fletcher's, formed the initial core of the Restoration repertory.
For Lewis Theobald, too, Jonson "owed all his Excellence to his Art,” in contrast to Shakespeare, the natural genius.
(All we know of Jonson's father, who died a month before his son was born, comes from the poet's own narrative.)
Tried on a charge of manslaughter, Jonson pleaded guilty but was released by benefit of clergy, a legal ploy through which he gained leniency by reciting a brief bible verse (the neck-verse), forfeiting his 'goods and chattels' and being branded on his left thumb.
By 1616 he had produced all the plays on which his present reputation as a dramatist is based, including the tragedy ''Catiline'' (acted and printed 1611), which achieved limited success and the comedies ''Volpone'' (acted 1605 and printed in 1607), ''Epicoene, or the Silent Woman'' (1609), ''The Alchemist'' (1610), ''Bartholomew Fair'' (1614) and ''The Devil is an Ass'' (1616).
For example, Jones designed the scenery for Jonson's masque ''Oberon, the Faery Prince'' performed at Whitehall on 1 January 1611 in which Prince Henry, eldest son of James I, appeared in the title role.
Since the 17th century, the identity of Jonson's wife has been obscure, yet she sometimes is identified as "Ann Lewis", the woman who married a Benjamin Jonson in 1594, at the church of St Magnus-the-Martyr, near London Bridge.
In the event, the pupil and the master became friends, and the intellectual influence of Camden's broad-ranging scholarship upon Jonson's art and literary style remained notable, until Camden's death in 1623.
In February 1603 John Manningham reported that Jonson was living on Robert Townsend, son of Sir Roger Townshend, and "scorns the world."
Later, a family friend paid for his studies at Westminster School, where the antiquarian, historian, topographer and officer of arms, William Camden (1551–1623) was one of his masters.
In Edinburgh, Jonson is recorded as staying with a John Stuart of Leith.
Jonson attacked the two poets again in ''Poetaster'' (1601).
Jonson, whose reputation had survived, appears to have been less interesting to some readers than writers such as Thomas Middleton or John Heywood, who were in some senses "discoveries" of the 19th century.
