Arnold was rebuffed by Congress and by local authorities in requests for security details for himself and his in-laws.
Arnold received Jameson's letter while waiting for Washington, with whom he had planned to have breakfast.
In an ironic twist, Heron went into New York unaware of the significance of the letter and offered his own services to the British as a spy.
Arnold benefited from his relationship with Mansfield, who became a partner in his business and used his position as sheriff to shield Arnold from creditors.
Arnold then went to Cambridge, Massachusetts and suggested to George Washington a second expedition to attack Quebec City via a wilderness route through present-day Maine.
He was named after his great-grandfather Benedict Arnold, an early governor of the Colony of Rhode Island—as were his father and grandfather, as well as an older brother who died in infancy.
Eventually, a meeting was set for September 11 near Dobb's Ferry.
During the fighting in the second battle, Arnold operated against Gates' orders and took to the battlefield to lead attacks on the British defenses.
He returned to London to settle permanently in 1791, where he died ten years later.
On one of ''The Simpsons''' Halloween specials, ''Treehouse of Horror IV'', Arnold is included in a "jury of the damned" – along with other figures like John Wilkes Booth and Richard Nixon – deliberating the ownership of Homer Simpson's soul.
During this time, Benedict Arnold brought his sister Hannah to New Haven and established her in his apothecary to manage the business in his absence.
Meanwhile, André convinced the unsuspecting Colonel John Jameson, to whom he was delivered, to send him back to Arnold at West Point.
During the summer of 1778, he met Peggy Shippen, the 18-year-old daughter of Judge Edward Shippen, a Loyalist sympathizer who had done business with the British while they occupied the city.
Other attempts all failed to gain positions within the government or the British East India Company over the next few years, and he was forced to subsist on the reduced pay of non-wartime service.
He also began to insist on a face-to-face meeting, and suggested to Arnold that he pursue another high-level command.
He joined the growing army outside Boston and distinguished himself through acts of intelligence and bravery.
Word of the siege's disastrous outcome led the company to turn around; Arnold served for 13 days.
This meeting was thwarted when British gunboats in the river fired on his boat, not being informed of his impending arrival.
Arnold arrived before Quebec City in November, after a difficult passage in which 300 men turned back and another 200 died en route.
Arnold proposed to the Massachusetts Committee of Safety an action to seize Fort Ticonderoga in New York, which he knew was poorly defended.
Biblical themes were often invoked; Benjamin Franklin wrote that "Judas sold only one man, Arnold three millions", and Alexander Scammell described Arnold's actions as "black as hell".
As a result of a clerical error in the parish records, his remains were removed to an unmarked mass grave during church renovations a century later.
(Arnold did not know that this proposed invasion was a ruse intended to divert British resources.)
Even before Cornwallis' surrender in October, Benedict Arnold had requested permission from Clinton to go to England to give Lord George Germain his thoughts on the war in person.
The plan was exposed in September 1780, and he was commissioned into the British Army as a brigadier general.
Washington refused his offer to resign, and wrote to members of Congress in an attempt to correct this, noting that "two or three other very good officers" might be lost if they persisted in making politically motivated promotions.
When he reached Connecticut, Arnold arranged to sell his home there and began transferring assets to London through intermediaries in New York.
Arnold also faced financial ruin, falling £16,000 in debt, with creditors spreading rumors of his insolvency to the point where he took legal action against them.
The demonization of Arnold began immediately after his betrayal became public.
The faculty club at the University of New Brunswick, Fredericton has a Benedict Arnold Room in which framed original letters hang on the walls, written by Arnold.
Dan Gilbert, owner of the National Basketball Association's Cleveland Cavaliers, subtly invoked Arnold in 2010, upset over LeBron James's announcement of leaving the team.
This plan very nearly succeeded, but failed when Arnold changed living quarters prior to sailing for Virginia in December.
Cornwallis ignored advice proffered by Arnold to locate a permanent base away from the coast, advice that might have averted Cornwallis's later surrender at Yorktown.
In February 1777, he learned that he had been passed over by Congress for promotion to major general.
Clinton declared that he could ill afford any more such victories.
He was imprisoned by French authorities on Guadeloupe amid accusations of spying for the British, and narrowly eluded hanging by escaping to the blockading British fleet after bribing his guards.
Major André was captured near Tarrytown on Saturday, September 23 by three Westchester militiamen named John Paulding, Isaac Van Wart, and David Williams.
On August 13, Schuyler dispatched him with a force of 900 to relieve the siege of Fort Stanwix, where he succeeded in the use of a ruse to lift the siege.
The British gave Benedict Arnold a brigadier general's commission, with an annual income of several hundred pounds, but paid him only £6,315 plus an annual pension of £360 because his plot had failed.
On December 8, 1781, Arnold and his family left New York for England.
This activity brought out Virginia's militia, led by Colonel Sampson Mathews, and Arnold eventually retreated to Portsmouth to either be evacuated or reinforced.
He also had disagreements with John Brown and James Easton, two lower-level officers with political connections that resulted in ongoing suggestions of improprieties on his part.
Social historian Brian Carso notes that, as the 19th century progressed, the story of Arnold's betrayal was portrayed with near-mythical proportions as a part of the national creation story.
Arnold was buried at St. Mary's Church, Battersea in London, England.
Kenneth Roberts' ''Arundel'' series treats him more positively, covering his military campaigns.
On November 10, 1778, General Nathanael Greene wrote to General John Cadwalader, "I am told General Arnold is become very unpopular among you oweing to his associateing too much with the Tories."
A historical marker in Danvers, Massachusetts commemorates Benedict Arnold 1775 expedition to Quebec.
Benedict Arnold hastened to the shore and ordered bargemen to row him downriver to where HMS ''Vulture'' was anchored, which then took him to New York.
Arnold himself said that it would have been better had it been in the chest instead of the leg.
However, the deaths of his siblings two years later may have contributed to a decline in the family fortunes, since his father took up drinking.
Arnold initially took no part in any public demonstrations but, like many merchants, continued to trade as if the Stamp Act did not exist, in effect becoming a smuggler in defiance of the act.
In response to Arnold's valor at Saratoga, Congress restored his command seniority.
He was again severely wounded in the left leg late in the fighting.
Excited by the prospects, Clinton informed his superiors of his intelligence coup, but failed to respond to Arnold's July 7 letter.
However, an acrimonious dispute with Moses Hazen, commander of the 2nd Canadian Regiment, boiled over into a court martial of Hazen at Ticonderoga during the summer of 1776.
These letters were delivered by Samuel Wallis, another Philadelphia businessman who spied for the British, rather than by Stansbury.
Benedict Arnold left a small estate, reduced in size by his debts, which Peggy undertook to clear.
Arnold took the opportunity to visit his children while near his home in New Haven, and he spent much of the winter socializing in Boston, where he unsuccessfully courted a young belle named Betsy Deblois.
The court martial began meeting on June 1, 1779 to consider the charges against Benedict Arnold, but it was delayed until December 1779 by General Clinton's capture of Stony Point, New York, throwing the army into a flurry of activity to react.
It described a boy who stole eggs from birds' nests, pulled wings off insects, and engaged in other sorts of wanton cruelty, who then grew up to become a traitor to his country.
At the same time, he tried to drain West Point's supplies so that a siege would be more likely to succeed.
Early biographers attempted to describe Arnold's entire life in terms of treacherous or morally questionable behavior.
He was on his way home from Ticonderoga when he learned that his wife had died earlier in June.
His siblings were, in order of birth: Benedict (August 15, 1738April 30, 1739), Hannah (December 9, 1742August 11, 1803), Mary (June 4, 1745September 10, 1753), Absolom (April 4, 1747July 22, 1750), and Elizabeth (November 19, 1749September 29, 1755).
Major André returned victorious from the Siege of Charleston on June 18, and both he and General Clinton were immediately caught up in this news.
Discussions had not borne fruit between Schuyler and Washington by early June.
He had established decent relationships with George Washington, commander of the army, as well as Philip Schuyler and Horatio Gates, both of whom had command of the army's Northern Department during 1775 and 1776.
Benedict Arnold and John André finally met on September 21 at the Joshua Hett Smith House.
Benedict Arnold continued on to Philadelphia, where he met with members of Congress about his rank.
On the night of January 28, 1767, Arnold and members of his crew, watched by a crowd of Sons of Liberty, roughed up a man suspected of attempting to inform authorities of Arnold's smuggling.
He traveled extensively in the course of his business throughout New England and from Quebec to the West Indies, often in command of one of his own ships.
In the winter of 1782, Arnold moved to London with his second wife Margaret "Peggy" Shippen Arnold.
However, Major Benjamin Tallmadge, a member of the Culper Ring established under Washington's orders, insisted that Jameson order the prisoner to be intercepted and brought back.
Only Benedict and his sister Hannah survived to adulthood; his other siblings succumbed to yellow fever in childhood.
This initial letter opened a discussion on the types of assistance and intelligence that Arnold might provide, and included instructions for how to communicate in the future.
The latter act prompted Arnold to join the chorus of voices in opposition to those taxes, and also led to his entry into the Sons of Liberty, a secret organization that was not afraid to use violence to oppose implementation of those and other unpopular Parliamentary measures.
Congress investigated his accounts and found that he was indebted to Congress after having spent much of his own money on the war effort.
His funeral procession boasted "seven mourning coaches and four state carriages"; the funeral was without military honors.
In January 1801, Benedict Arnold's health began to decline.
They issued him a colonel's commission on May 3, 1775, and he immediately rode off to the west, arriving at Castleton in the disputed New Hampshire Grants (present-day Vermont) in time to participate with Ethan Allen and his men in the capture of Fort Ticonderoga.
By the time that he was fourteen, there was no money for private education.
Some theatrical treatments of the 19th century explored his duplicity, seeking to understand rather than demonize it.
Several members on the panel of judges were ill-disposed toward Arnold over actions and disputes earlier in the war, yet Arnold was cleared of all but two minor charges on January 26, 1780.
Benedict Arnold's father was a successful businessman, and the family moved in the upper levels of Norwich society.
The victory monument at Saratoga has four niches, three of which are occupied by statues of Generals Gates, Schuyler, and Morgan.
In 1764, he formed a partnership with Adam Babcock, another young New Haven merchant.
His apprenticeship with the Lathrops lasted seven years.Arnold was very close to his mother, who died in 1759.
Arnold commanded the army only until May 20, when Lord Cornwallis arrived with the southern army and took over.
A commonly accepted story that Arnold deserted from militia service in 1758 is based on uncertain documentary evidence.
Benedict Arnold learned of André's capture, the following morning, September 24, when he received Jameson's message that André was in his custody and that the papers which André was carrying had been sent to General Washington.
His father's alcoholism and ill health kept him from training Arnold in the family mercantile business, but his mother's family connections secured an apprenticeship for him with two of her cousins, brothers Daniel and Joshua Lathrop, who operated a successful apothecary and general merchandise trade in Norwich.
One particularly harsh critic said that Benedict Arnold was a "mean mercenary, who, having adopted a cause for the sake of plunder, quits it when convicted of that charge."
He was well received by King George III and the Tories, but frowned upon by the Whigs.
On June 16, Arnold inspected West Point while on his way home to Connecticut to take care of personal business, and he sent a highly detailed report through the secret channel.
While this is the case, no power in this country could suddenly place you in the situation you aim at under the East India Company."
Samuel Spring carried him to the makeshift hospital at the Hôtel Dieu.
This action did sufficient damage that she retreated downriver, forcing André to return to New York overland.
At first, he asked for indemnification of his losses and £10,000, an amount that the Continental Congress had given Charles Lee for his services in the Continental Army.
Some of this communication was effected through the services of Joseph Stansbury, a Philadelphia merchant.
The British withdrew from Philadelphia, in June 1778, and Washington appointed Arnold military commander of the city.
Washington Irving used it as part of an argument against dismemberment of the union in his 1857 ''Life of George Washington'', pointing out that the unity of New England and the southern states which led to independence was made possible in part by holding West Point.
When presented with evidence of Benedict Arnold's activities, it is reported that Washington remained calm.
General Clinton was pursuing a campaign to gain control of the Hudson River Valley, and was interested in plans and information on the defenses of West Point and other defenses on the Hudson River.
Canadian historians have treated Benedict Arnold as a relatively minor figure.
He wrote that he was "very much shocked" and wondered "good God, are the Americans all asleep and tamely giving up their liberties, or are they all turned philosophers, that they don't take immediate vengeance on such miscreants?"
He returned to the army at Valley Forge in May 1778 to the applause of men who had served under him at Saratoga.
While a general on the American side, he obtained command of the fortifications  at West Point, New York (future site of the U.S. Military Academy after 1802), overlooking the cliffs at the Hudson River (upriver from British-occupied New York City), and planned to surrender it to the British forces.
General Washington assigned Arnold to the defense of Rhode Island, following the British seizure of Newport in December 1776, where the militia were too poorly equipped to even consider an attack on the British.
The Sugar Act of 1764 and the Stamp Act of 1765 severely curtailed mercantile trade in the colonies.
It has reportedly been passed in each generation to the eldest male of the family.
Benedict Arnold was born in Connecticut and was a merchant operating ships on the Atlantic Ocean when the war broke out in 1775.
Arnold was a descendant of John Lothropp through his maternal grandmother, an ancestor of at least six U.S. presidents.
The Second Continental Congress authorized an invasion of Quebec, in part on the urging of Arnold—but he was passed over for command of the expedition.
His father's alcoholism worsened after the death of his wife, and the youth took on the responsibility of supporting his father and younger sister.
He was hardworking and successful, and was able to rapidly expand his business.
Their son Benedict was born the following year, and was followed by brothers Richard in 1769 and Henry in 1772.
In July 1780, he was awarded command of West Point.
In London, Benedict Arnold aligned himself, with the Tories, advising Germain and King George III to renew the fight against the Americans.
Benedict Arnold arrived in Schuyler's camp at Fort Edward, New York on July 24.
Brown was particularly vicious, publishing a handbill which claimed of Arnold, "Money is this man's God, and to get enough of it he would sacrifice his country".
Once Benedict Arnold established himself at West Point, Arnold began systematically weakening its defenses and military strength.
Among his bequests were considerable gifts to one John Sage, perhaps an illegitimate son or grandson.
His long woollen British scarlet military jacket with a buff lining continues to be owned by descendants; as of 2001, it was held in Saskatchewan.
The papers were found exposing the plot to capture West Point and sent to Gen. Washington, and Arnold's intentions came to light after Washington examined them.
He helped organize militia forces on British-held islands, receiving praise from the landowners for his efforts on their behalf.
By October 1779, the negotiations had ground to a halt.
In 1787, he returned to the merchant business with his sons Richard and Henry in Saint John, New Brunswick.
The connection between Benedict Arnold and treason continued, into the 20th and 21st centuries.
On one of his voyages, Arnold fought a duel in Honduras with a British sea captain who had called him a "damned Yankee, destitute of good manners or those of a gentleman".
The most serious of these was a slander suit which he won against a former business partner; and following this, townspeople burned him in effigy in front of his house, as Peggy and the children watched.
Arnold purchased large tracts of land in the Maugerville area, and acquired city lots in Saint John and Fredericton.
By July 1779, Benedict Arnold was providing the British with troop locations and strengths, as well as the locations of supply depots, all the while negotiating over compensation.
He did, however, investigate its extent, and suggested that he was willing to exchange André for Arnold during negotiations with General Clinton over the fate of Major André.
Delivery of his first ship the ''Lord Sheffield'' was accompanied by accusations from the builder that Arnold had cheated him; Arnold claimed that he had merely deducted the contractually agreed amount when the ship was delivered late.
A few days later, Greene received a letter from Arnold, where Arnold lamented over the "deplorable" and "horrid" situation of the country at that particular moment, citing the depreciating currency, disaffection of the army, and internal fighting in Congress for the country's problems, while predicting "impending ruin" if things would not soon change.
Arnold reopened the secret channels with the British, informing them of Schuyler's proposals and including Schuyler's assessment of conditions at West Point.
On his return to New York in June, Benedict Arnold made a variety of proposals for attacks on economic targets to force the Americans to end the war.
Stansbury said that he then "went secretly to New York with a tender of Arnold's services to Sir Henry Clinton."
Burgoyne surrendered ten days after the second battle, on October 17, 1777.
This was the beginning of a secret correspondence between Arnold and André, sometimes using his wife Peggy as a willing intermediary, that culminated over a year later with Arnold's change of sides.
The first major biography of Arnold was ''The Life and Treason of Benedict Arnold'', published in 1832 by historian Jared Sparks; it was particularly harsh in showing how Arnold's treacherous character was allegedly formed out of childhood experiences.
Arnold's command at West Point also gave him authority over the entire American-controlled Hudson River, from Albany down to the British lines outside New York City.
They bought three trading ships, using the profits from the sale of his homestead, and established a lucrative West Indies trade.
There are also historical markers bearing Arnold's name in Moscow, Maine, on the western bank of Lake Champlain, New York, and two in Skowhegan, Maine.
The pursuing American army included the Marquis de Lafayette, who was under orders from Washington to hang Arnold summarily if he was captured.
Clinton was uninterested in most of Arnold's aggressive ideas, but finally authorized Arnold to raid the port of New London, Connecticut.
Clinton was concerned that Washington's army and the French fleet would join in Rhode Island, and he again fixed on West Point as a strategic point to capture.
May God forgive me for ever having put on another," but this story may be apocryphal.
While en route to West Point, Arnold renewed an acquaintance with Joshua Hett Smith, who had spied for both sides and who owned a house near the western bank of the Hudson about 15 miles south of West Point.
André then drafted instructions to Stansbury and Arnold.
Jameson reluctantly recalled the lieutenant who had been delivering André into Arnold's custody, but then sent the same lieutenant as a messenger to notify Arnold of André's arrest.
On an episode of ''The Brady Bunch'', "Everyone Can't Be George Washington", Peter is assigned the role of Arnold in the school play, and is ostracized.
He followed up that action with a bold raid on Fort Saint-Jean on the Richelieu River north of Lake Champlain.
Four days later, Arnold sent a ciphered letter with similar content into New York through the services of the wife of a prisoner of war.
Upon learning of André's capture, Arnold fled down the Hudson River to the British sloop-of-war ''Vulture'', narrowly avoiding capture by the forces of George Washington, who had been alerted to the plot.
One plaque bears only a rank and a date ("major general...born 1740") but no name.
The captain was wounded after the first exchange of gunfire, and apologized after Arnold threatened to aim to kill on the second.
He also peppered Washington with complaints about the lack of supplies, writing, "Everything is wanting."
Stansbury ignored instructions from Arnold to involve no one else in the plot, and crossed the British lines and went to see Jonathan Odell in New York.
Some time early in May 1779, Arnold met with Joseph Stansbury (whose testimony before a British commission apparently erroneously placed his meeting with Arnold in June).
His company marched northeast the following month to assist in the siege of Boston that followed the outbreak of hostilities at Lexington and Concord.
One colonel wrote to Clinton of Arnold, "there are many officers who must wish some other general in command."
The name, "Benedict Arnold", quickly became a byword in the United States for treason or betrayal because he betrayed his countrymen by leading the British army in battle against the men whom he once commanded.
Such schemes were not exactly uncommon among American officers, but Arnold's schemes were sometimes frustrated by powerful local politicians who eventually amassed enough evidence to publicly air charges against him.
From the ship, Arnold wrote a letter to Washington, requesting that Peggy be given safe passage to her family in Philadelphia, a request that Washington granted.
He then distinguished himself in both Battles of Saratoga, even though General Gates removed him from field command after the first battle, following a series of escalating disagreements and disputes that culminated in a shouting match.
On August 30, Arnold sent a letter accepting Clinton's terms and proposing a meeting to André through yet another intermediary: William Heron, a member of the Connecticut Assembly whom he thought he could trust.
Odell was a Loyalist working with William Franklin, the last colonial governor of New Jersey and the son of Benjamin Franklin.
Jefferson Davis and other southern secessionist leaders were unfavorably compared to Arnold, implicitly and explicitly likening the idea of secession to treason.
His earlier legacy is recalled in the ambiguous nature of some of the memorials that have been placed in his honor.
It was invoked again as sectional conflicts increased in the years before the American Civil War.
Benedict Arnold was in the West Indies when the Boston Massacre took place on March 5, 1770.
Benedict Arnold began the war as a captain in Connecticut's militia, a position to which he was elected in March 1775.
Peggy and her circle of friends had found methods of staying in contact with paramours across the battle lines, despite military bans on communication with the enemy.
Margaret died early in the revolution on June 19, 1775, while Arnold was at Fort Ticonderoga following its capture.
In 1785, Benedict Arnold and his son, Richard moved to Saint John, New Brunswick, where they speculated in land and established a business doing trade with the West Indies.
Gilbert's company lowered the price of posters bearing James's likeness to $17.41, referring to the year of Arnold's birth.
There is a memorial to Benedict Arnold, on the Saratoga battlefield, now preserved within Saratoga National Historical Park, that does not mention his name, donated by Civil War General John Watts DePeyster.
In July 1792, Benedict Arnold fought a bloodless duel with the Earl of Lauderdale after the Earl impugned his honor in the House of Lords.
Reinforcements arrived in late March led by William Phillips (who served under Burgoyne at Saratoga), and Phillips led further raids across Virginia, including a defeat of Baron von Steuben at Petersburg, until his death of fever on May 12, 1781.
His action at Ridgefield, coupled with the death of Wooster due to wounds sustained in the action, resulted in Arnold's promotion to major general, although his seniority was not restored over those who had been promoted before him.
Furthermore, Patriot mobs were scouring Philadelphia for Loyalists, and Arnold and the Shippen family were being threatened.
Historian Barry Wilson points out that Arnold's descendants ended up establishing deep roots in the country, becoming leading settlers in Upper Canada and later in lands further west, where they established settlements in Saskatchewan.
Even before the Americans reoccupied Philadelphia, Arnold began planning to capitalize financially on the change in power there, engaging in a variety of business deals designed to profit from war-related supply movements and benefiting from the protection of his authority.
'''Benedict Arnold''' (June 14, 1801) was a general during the American Revolutionary War who originally fought for the American Continental Army but defected to the British Army.
He led British forces on raids in Virginia and against New London and Groton, Connecticut before the war effectively ended with the American victory at Yorktown.
Benedict Arnold established himself in business in 1762 as a pharmacist and bookseller in New Haven, Connecticut with the help of the Lathrops.
There are plaques on the grounds of the United States Military Academy at West Point commemorating all of the generals who served in the Revolution.
Benedict Arnold  received a commission as a brigadier general in the British Army, an annual pension of £360, and a lump sum of over £6,000.
After her first voyage, Arnold returned to London in 1786 to bring his family to Saint John.
On August 25, Peggy finally delivered to him Clinton's agreement to the terms.
On August 15, he received a coded letter from André with Clinton's final offer: £20,000 and no indemnification for his losses.
He decided to change sides and opened secret negotiations with the British.
During these actions, Benedict Arnold made a number of friends and a larger number of enemies within the army power structure and in Congress.
As early as 1778, there were signs that Arnold was unhappy with his situation and pessimistic about the country's future.
Arnold received a colonel's commission in the Continental Army for this expedition.
There he participated in the first recorded Oath of Allegiance along with many other soldiers, as a sign of loyalty to the United States.
He hoped that this work would earn him wider respect and a new command; instead, it earned him and his sons a land-grant of  in Upper Canada, near present-day Renfrew, Ontario.
Adversaries in military and political circles brought charges of corruption or other malfeasance, but most often he was acquitted in formal inquiries.
Arnold was buried at St Mary's Church, Battersea, England, which has a commemorative stained-glass window added between 1976 and 1982.
