The population size for the Bangladesh Sundarbans was estimated as 100–150 adult females or 335–500 tigers overall.
Titus, the Roman Emperor, had Bengal tigers compelled to fight the African lions, and the tigers always beat the lions.
* University of Missouri has a Bengal tiger as their mascot; students are known as tigers, their athletic team as Missouri Tigers, and their web space and email as Bengal-space and Bengal-mail.
Bangladeshi banknotes feature a tiger.
* The Bangladesh Cricket Board's logo features a royal Bengal tiger.
The United Provinces supported large numbers of tigers in the submontane Terai region, where man-eating had been uncommon.
Young have also been found in March, May, October and November.
The Indian subcontinent has served as a stage for intense human and tiger confrontations.
The tiger in India has no definite mating and birth seasons.
However, the Seringapatam medal depicted the British lion overcoming a prostrate tiger, the tiger being the dynastic symbol of Tipu Sultan's line.
Skulls and body weights of Sundarbans tigers were found to be distinct from other subspecies, indicating that they may have adapted to the unique conditions of the mangrove habitat.
These tigers were the old, the young and the disabled.
Funds and commitment were mustered to support the intensive program of habitat protection and rehabilitation under the project.
* Louisiana State University's Tigers are nicknamed the Bayou Bengals.
Marvel Comics also publishes several superheroes who go by the name White Tiger.
In Nepal a community-based tourism model has been developed with a strong emphasis on sharing benefits with local people and on the regeneration of degraded forests.
Several scientists indicated that adult male Bengal tigers from Nepal, Bhutan, and Assam, Uttarakhand and West Bengal in northern India (collectively, the tigers of the Terai) consistently attain more than  of body weight.
A Bengal comes into heat at intervals of about 3–9 weeks, and is receptive for 3–6 days.
At this time, they follow their mother on her hunting expeditions and begin to take part in hunting at 5–6 months of age.
Habitat losses and the extremely large-scale incidences of poaching are serious threats to the species' survival.
Most studies have focused on the tiger-human conflict in the area, but two studies in the Sundarbans East Wildlife sanctuary documented habitat-use patterns of tigers, and abundances of tiger prey, and another study investigated tiger parasite load.
Bengali revolutionary Jatindranath Mukherjee was called Bagha Jatin (Bengali for Tiger Jatin).
In 2006, India's Sariska Tiger Reserve lost all of its 26 tigers, mostly to poaching.
The weight of males ranges from , while that of the females ranges from .
The smallest recorded weights for Bengal tigers are from the Bangladesh Sundarbans, where adult females are .
The approach has been successful in reducing poaching, restoring habitats, and creating a local constituency for conservation.
The Forest Department had constituted a special task force to capture the animal with the assistance of a 10-member Special Tiger Protection Force and two trained elephants from the Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka.
In 1982, a sub-fossil right middle phalanx was found in a prehistoric midden near Kuruwita in Sri Lanka, which is dated to about 16,500 ybp and tentatively considered to be of a tiger.
* in the Eastern Ghats landscape there is a single population with an estimated population size of 49 to 57 individuals occupying  of habitat in three separate forest blocks located in the Srivenkateshwara National Park, Nagarjunasagar Tiger Reserve and the adjacent proposed Gundla Brahmeshwara National Park, and forest patches in the tehsils of Kanigiri, Baduel, Udayagiri and Giddalur;
Home ranges of both males and females are not stable.
The four tigers involved in this project have been confirmed to be crossbred Siberian–Bengal tigers, which should neither be used for breeding nor being released into the Karoo.
* The Detroit Tigers Major League Baseball team has used the likeness of a Bengal tiger for many of the team's logos.
The basic social unit of the tiger is the elemental one of mother and offspring.
The tail is typically  long, and on average, tigers are  in height at the shoulders.
* The 2007 film ''Maneater'' (the third film in the Maneater Series), based on Jack Warner's novel ''Shikar'', details the killing spree of an escaped Bengal tiger after it gets loose in a small town along the Appalachian Trail.
These village teams are made up of over 350 volunteers, who are also now supporting anti-poaching work and conservation education/awareness activities.
The animal has been chosen by the Reserve Bank of India as its emblem and Indian currency notes carry its portrait.
One of the two older female's weight  weighed slightly less than the mean because of her old age and relatively poor condition at the time of capture.
* In the fantasy adventure novel ''Life of Pi'' and in its 2012 film adaptation a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker is the lead character.
* in the Western Ghats landscape there are seven populations with an estimated population size of 336 to 487 individuals occupying  forest in three major landscape units Periyar-Kalakad-Mundathurai, Bandipur-Parambikulam-Sathyamangalam-Mudumalai-Anamalai-Mukurthi and Anshi-Kudremukh-Dandeli;
In 1973, Project Tiger was launched aiming at ensuring a viable population of tigers in the country and preserving areas of biological importance as a natural heritage for the people.
In the majority of cases, man-eating appeared to have been related to an intra-specific competition among male tigers.
In the 1990s, some tigers from this area were observed to have the typical appearance of Siberian tigers, namely a large head, pale fur, white complexion, and wide stripes, and were suspected to be Bengal-Siberian tiger hybrids.
Included in his home range were the much smaller home ranges of two females, a tigress with cubs and a sub-adult tigress.
* Trinity Tigers is the nickname for the sports teams of Trinity University in San Antonio, Texas.
The Indian hunter and naturalist Jim Corbett also described an incident of two tigers fighting and killing a large bull elephant.
Senior Tigers is the nickname of the 1st Battalion.
From October 2005 to January 2007, the first camera-trap survey was conducted across six sites in the Bangladesh Sundarbans to estimate tiger population density.
The average of these six sites provided an estimate of 3.7 tigers per .
To the west, the Chitwan population is isolated from the one in Bardia National Park and adjacent unprotected habitat farther west, extending to within  of the Shuklaphanta Wildlife Reserve, which harbours the smallest population.
This was symbolic of the British domination in India.
At the end of the 19th century, the Gaekwad of Baroda arranged a fight between a Barbary lion and a Bengal tiger before an audience of thousands.
Between 1994 and 2009, the Wildlife Protection Society of India has documented 893 cases of tigers killed in India, which is just a fraction of the actual poaching and trade in tiger parts during those years.
By 2011, the total population was estimated at fewer than 2,500 individuals with a decreasing trend.
However, the use of more reliable and independent censusing technology (including camera traps) for the 2007–2008 all-India census has shown that the numbers were in fact less than half than originally claimed by the Forest Department.
There are well-organised gangs of professional poachers, who move from place to place and set up camp in vulnerable areas.
Young males move further away from their mother's territory than young females.
Following the revelation that only 1,411 Bengal tigers existed in the wild in India, down from 3,600 in 2003, the Indian government set up eight new tiger reserves.
Information is lacking on many aspects of Sundarbans tiger ecology, including relative abundance, population status, spatial dynamics, habitat selection, life history characteristics, taxonomy, genetics, and disease.
In the 1960s, certain aspects of tiger behaviour at Kanha National Park indicated that the peak of sexual activity was from November to about February, with some mating probably occurring throughout the year.
Of 11 resident females, 7 were still alive at the end of the study period, 2 disappeared after losing their territories to rivals, and 2 died.
* Auburn University's athletic teams are called Tigers.
The shift or alteration of a home range by one animal is correlated with a shift of another.
In 1980 and 1984, scientists captured and tagged two male tigers in Chitwan National Park that weighed more than .
None of the ''Tiger Conservation Landscapes'' within the Bengal tiger range is large enough to support an effective population size of 250 individuals.
Typically there is partial overlap with neighbouring female residents.
Bengal tigers have been captive bred since 1880 and widely crossed with other tiger subspecies.
The government aims at doubling the country's tiger population by 2022, and in May 2010, decided to establish Banke National Park with a protected area of , which bears good potential for tiger habitat.It is protected in Chitwan National Park, Bardiya National Park, Sukla Phanta Wildlife Reserve, etc.
Skins are rough-cured in the field and handed over to dealers, who send them for further treatment to Indian tanning centres.
The Azad Hind Fauj also released postage stamps where the Tricolour’s ''charkha'' was replaced by the ''Springing Tiger''.
It is the national animal of both India and Bangladesh.
In fact, there is only one fully authenticated case of a true albino tiger, and none of black tigers, with the possible exception of one dead specimen examined in Chittagong in 1846.
* An episode in the TV series ''Minder'' was named "The Bengal Tiger".
The TCUs in tropical moist evergreen forests represent the less common tiger habitats, being largely limited to the upland areas and wetter parts of the Western Ghats, and include the tiger reserves of Periyar, Kalakad-Mundathurai, Bandipur and Parambikulam Wildlife Sanctuary.
A heavy male weighing  was shot in northern India in the 1930s.
The tiger population in the Terai of Nepal is split into three isolated subpopulations that are separated by cultivation and densely settled habitat.
By 2010, the number of adult tigers had reached 155.
They are thought to have followed back the herds of domestic livestock that wintered in the plains when they returned to the hills in the spring, and then being left without prey when the herds dispersed back to their respective villages.
At the age of 2–3 years, they slowly start to separate from the family group and become transient — looking out for an area, where they can establish their own territory.
In India, tiger has also found a place of prestige even in Vedic literatures.
It has been celebrated in Hindu consciousness from time immemorial as the divine vehicle of the Goddess of Power, Durga or Shakti.
TOM is the name of three Bengal tigers which have served as the mascot of the sports team since 1972.
In January 2008, the Government of India launched a dedicated anti-poaching force composed of experts from Indian police, forest officials and various other environmental agencies.
In June 2008, a tiger from Ranthambore was relocated to Sariska Tiger Reserve, where all tigers had fallen victim to poachers and human encroachments since 2005.
* The team representing Tollywood in Celebrity Cricket League is named Bengal Tigers.
In Bandipur National Park, gaur and sambar together also constituted 73% of their diet.
Sambar deer were the second most preferred and made up 28.6% of all tiger kills.
* The character Ezekiel in Image Comics' The Walking Dead has a pet Bengal tiger named Shiva.
After a gestation period of 104–106 days, 1–4 cubs are born in a shelter situated in tall grass, thick bush or in caves.
The iconography persisted and during the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Punch ran a political cartoon showing the Indian rebels as a tiger, attacking a victim, being defeated by the British forces shown by the larger figure of a lion.
Their stronghold appears to be the central belt of the country ranging in altitude between , between the Mo River in the west and the Kulong River in the east.
* South African politician Amichand Rajbansi was also nicknamed the Bengal Tiger.
* Royal Leicestershire Regiment was nicknamed Bengal Tigers or The Tigers.
These animals were pushed into marginal habitat, where tigers had formerly not been known, or where they existed only in very low density, by an expanding population of more vigorous animals that occupied the prime habitat in the lowlands, where there was high prey density and good habitat for reproduction.
The Forest Rights Act passed by the Indian government in 2006 grants some of India's most impoverished communities the right to own and live in the forests, which likely brings them into conflict with wildlife and under-resourced, under-trained, ill-equipped forest department staff.
* The Kolkata team in the Indian Cricket League was called the Royal Bengal Tigers (, formerly the Kolkata Tigers).
A survey conducted from December 2009 to March 2010 indicates that 125 adult tigers live in Chitwan National Park and its border areas covering .
As of 2010, Bengal tiger populations in India have been estimated at 1,706–1,909.
Shifts from less suitable habitat to better ones are made by animals that are already resident.
The '''Bengal tiger''', also called the '''royal Bengal tiger''' (''Panthera tigris tigris''), is the most numerous tiger subspecies.
An area of special interest lies in the ''Terai Arc Landscape'' in the Himalayan foothills of northern India and southern Nepal, where 11 protected areas comprising dry forest foothills and tall-grass savannas harbor tigers in a  landscape.
The remaining young lived long enough to reach dispersal age, 2 of them becoming residents in the study area.
However, samples of two hybrid specimens constituted a too small sample base to conclusively assume that ''Tara'' was the source of the Siberian tiger genes.
From February to June 2013, a camera trapping survey was carried out in the Terai Arc Landscape, covering an area of  in 14 districts.
None of the ''Tiger Conservation Landscapes'' within the Bengal tiger's range is considered large enough to support an effective population size of 250 adult individuals.
This is consistent with the lack of tiger fossils from the Indian subcontinent prior to the late Pleistocene and the absence of tigers from Sri Lanka, which was separated from the subcontinent by rising sea levels in the early Holocene.
Since 2001, afforestation has continued on a small scale in newly accreted lands and islands of the Sundarbans.
Those sharing the same ground are well aware of each other’s movements and activities.
It has to decide if it is worthwhile to keep its National Symbol, its icon, representing wildlife.
* Clemson University's athletic teams are called Tigers.
Over the past century tiger numbers have fallen dramatically, with a decreasing population trend.
Then they drag the carcass into cover, occasionally over several hundred meters, to consume it.
The pattern of genetic variation in the Bengal tiger corresponds to the premise that they arrived in India approximately 12,000 years ago.
Tigers occur from an altitude of  in the subtropical Himalayan foothills in the south along the border with India to over  in the temperate forests in the north, and are known from 17 of 18 districts.
The two collared tigresses were weighed using  scales, and the tigress killed by villagers was weighed using a balance scale and weights.
Some of them are mentioned below:
The Ranthambore National Park is often cited as a major success by Indian officials against poaching.
* The 1959 West German-French-Italian adventure film ''Der Tiger von Eschnapur'' is also titled ''Tiger of Bengal''.
Mike the Tiger is the official mascot of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge; by tradition the tiger is a live Bengal tiger.
As of 2014, they had reputedly increased to an estimated 2,226 individuals, but the method used in the census may not be accurate.
Resident adults of either sex tend to confine their movements to a definite area of habitat within which they satisfy their needs, and in the case of tigresses, those of their growing cubs.
Some major threats to tigers have been identified.
A tiger that belonged to the King of Oude killed thirty lions, and destroyed another after being transferred to the zoological garden in London.
The school mascot is LeeRoy, a Bengal tiger.
In 2007, police in Allahabad raided a meeting of suspected poachers, traders and couriers.
For at least a thousand years, tiger bones have been an ingredient in traditional medicines that are prescribed as a muscle strengthener and treatment for rheumatism and body pain.
* Many people have been nicknamed Tiger or Bengal Tiger.
* Canna 'Bengal Tiger' is an Italian Group canna cultivar with variegated foliage.
* The flag of the Azad Hind Fauj and the Indian Legion both carried the ''Springing Tiger'' on the Indian Tricolour.
* The Richmond Tigers Australian football team was founded in 1885.
The region affording habitat where tigers have achieved their highest densities is also one which has housed one of the most concentrated and rapidly expanding human populations.
The TCUs in tropical moist deciduous forest are probably some of the most productive habitats for tigers and their prey, and include Kaziranga-Meghalaya, Kanha-Pench, Simlipal and Indravati Tiger Reserves.
Female home ranges, recorded using Global Positioning System collars, were some of the smallest recorded for tigers, indicating that the Bangladesh Sundarbans could have one of the highest densities and largest populations of tigers anywhere in the world.
They establish and maintain home ranges.
* The Calgary Tigers, often nicknamed the ''Bengals'', were an ice hockey team based in Calgary, Alberta, Canada from 1920 until 1927 as members of the Big Four League, Western Canada Hockey League and Prairie Hockey League.
New animals become residents only as vacancies occur when a former resident moves out or dies.
The famed 18th-century automaton, Tipu's Tiger was also created for him.
In areas where opportunistic man-eaters were found, the killing of humans was correlated with their availability, most victims being claimed during the honey gathering season.
Gaurs were the most preferred choice of prey by tigers in Nagarahole, making up 44.8% of all tiger kills.
Latter tiger habitat once covered a huge swath of grassland and riverine and moist semi-deciduous forests along the major river system of the Gangetic and Brahmaputra plains, but has now been largely converted to agricultural land or severely degraded.
* The Marvel Comics character Bengal wears the costume of a Bengal tiger.
However, the heaviest known tiger was a huge male killed in 1967 that weighed  and measured  in total length between pegs, and  over curves.
Tiger densities in these TCUs are high, in part because of the extraordinary biomass of ungulate prey.
In the Indian subcontinent, tigers inhabit tropical moist evergreen forests, tropical dry forests, tropical and subtropical moist deciduous forests, mangroves, subtropical and temperate upland forests, and alluvial grasslands.
* Royal Bengals were an American basketball team based in Trenton, New Jersey that was a member of the American Basketball League.
One juvenile tiger was presumed dead after being photographed with severe injuries from a deer snare.
The country’s tiger population was estimated at 163–235 breeding adults comprising 102–152 tigers in the Chitwan-Parsa protected areas, 48–62 in the Bardia-Banke National Parks and 13–21 in the Shuklaphanta Wildlife Reserve.
Experts are of the opinion that the Bengal tiger shall emerge victorious.
The Bengal tigers in the Sundarbans in India and Bangladesh are the only tigers in the world inhabiting mangrove  forests.
Prior censuses placed the population of tigers in Bhutan at around 65-75 individuals, however, the latest census estimated that 103 wild Bengal tigers are living in the country.
In May 2008, forest officials spotted 14 tiger cubs in Rajasthan's Ranthambore National Park.
* German heavy tank Tiger II was informally known as ''Königstiger'' (German for Bengal tiger.)
For over 100 years people, tigers, and livestock have been injured and killed in the conflict; in recent decades up to 50 people, 80 livestock, and 3 tigers have been killed in a year.
As of 2009, an estimated 121 breeding tigers lived in Nepal.
In the Sundarbans, 10 out of 13 man-eaters recorded in the 1970s were males, and they accounted for 86% of the victims.
Because of the encroachment of humans into their habitat, they also prey on domestic livestock.
Bengal is traditionally fixed as the typical locality for the binomen ''Panthera tigris'', to which the British taxonomist Reginald Innes Pocock subordinated the Bengal tiger in 1929 under the trinomen ''Panthera tigris tigris''.
All three tigers were female, two of which were collared, captured and sedated, but the other one had been killed by local villagers.
The governments of these countries have failed to implement adequate enforcement response, and wildlife crime remained a low priority in terms of political commitment and investment for years.
In November 2011, two tigers were found dead in Maharashtra: a male tiger was trapped and killed in a wire snare; a tigress died of electrocution after chewing at an electric cable supplying power to a water pump; another tigress was found dead in Kanha Tiger Reserve landscape — poisoning is suspected to be the cause of her death.
Tipu Sultan, who ruled Mysore in late 18th-century India, was also a great admirer of the animal.
The 1997 International Tiger Studbook lists the global captive population of Bengal tigers at 210 individuals that are all kept in Indian zoos, except for one female in North America.
A voluntary if controversial resettlement is underway with the aid of the Karnataka Tiger Conservation Project led by K. Ullas Karanth of the Wildlife Conservation Society.
These landscapes comprise the following:
The tigers living in the Sundarbans are threatened by habitat destruction, prey depletion, highly aggressive and rampant intraspecific competition, tiger-human conflict, and direct tiger loss.
Males reach maturity at 4–5 years of age, and females at 3–4 years.
Today, the tiger is the national animal of India.
More than 1100 tigers were estimated to inhabit the reserves by 1984.
In the following few years, 13 people have been killed and eaten in the park and its environs.
This survey measures changes in the frequency of tiger track sets along the sides of tidal waterways as an index of relative tiger abundance across the Sundarbans landscape.
These man-eaters have been grouped into the ''confirmed'' or dedicated ones who go hunting especially for human prey; and the ''opportunistic'' ones, who do not search for humans but will, if they encounter a man, attack, kill and devour him.
The political party Muslim League of Pakistan uses the tiger as its election symbol.
Because of dwindling tiger numbers, the Indian government has pledged US$153 million to further fund the Project Tiger initiative, set up a Tiger Protection Force to combat poachers, and fund the relocation of up to 200,000 villagers to minimize human-tiger interaction.
It became the official policy to encourage the killing of tigers as rapidly as possible, rewards being paid for their destruction in many localities.
They suckle for 3–6 months, and begin to eat small amounts of solid food at about 2 months of age.
As of 2014, adult and subadult tigers at 1.5 years or older are estimated to number 408 in Karnataka, 340 in Uttarakhand, 308 in Madhya Pradesh, 229 in Tamil Nadu, 190 in Maharashtra, 167 in Assam, 136 in Kerala, and 117 in Uttar Pradesh.
Tiger scientists in India, such as Raghu Chundawat and Ullas Karanth have called for use of technology in the conservation efforts.
His home range was about  in summer and  in winter.
Tigers that are not genetically pure will not be able to participate in the tiger Species Survival Plan, as they are not used for breeding, and are not allowed to be released into the wild.
The nature of the tiger's hunting method and prey availability results in a "feast or famine" feeding style: they often consume  of meat at one time.
Bengal tigers are defined by three distinct mitochondrial nucleotide sites and 12 unique microsatellite alleles.
Males from northern India are nearly as large as Siberian tigers with a greatest length of skull of .
In October 2011, 18 Bengal tigers were among the exotic animals shot by the local sheriff's department after the 2011 Ohio exotic animal release.
* The main antagonist of ''The Jungle Book'', Shere Khan, is a Bengal tiger.
Since the Bangladesh Sundarbans is an area of  it was inferred that the total tiger population comprised approximately 200 individuals.
In 2010, camera traps recorded a pair of tigers at altitudes of .
The tiger crest is the emblem on the Chola coins.
Among the medium-sized prey species they frequently kill wild boar, and occasionally hog deer, muntjac and grey langur.
The challenge in the Western Ghats forest complex in western South India, an area of  stretching across several protected areas is that people live within its borders.
Adult animals congregate only on an ''ad hoc'' and transitory basis when special conditions permit, such as plentiful supply of food.
* The Trenton Bengals were an American basketball team based in the Bronx, New York that was a member of the American Basketball League.
The population increased to 1,706 in 2011 and 2,226 in 2014.
Using that methodology, the government observed a steady population increase, reaching 3,700 tigers in 2002.
Small prey species such as porcupines, hares and peafowl form a very small part in their diet.
The most significant immediate threat to the existence of wild tiger populations is the illegal trade in poached skins and body parts between India, Nepal and China.
* in the Sundarbans National Park tigers occupy about  of mangrove forest.
They rarely attack adult elephants and rhinoceroses but such extraordinarily rare events have been recorded.
The white tiger is a recessive mutant of the Bengal tiger, which is reported in the wild from time to time in Assam, Bengal, Bihar and especially from the former State of Rewa.
* in the Central Indian highlands there are 17 populations with an estimated population size of 437 to 661 individuals occupying  of forested habitats, which are located in the landscapes of Kanha-Pench, Satpura-Melghat, Sanjay-Palamau, Navegaon-Indravati; isolated populations are supported in the tiger reserves of Bandhavgarh, Tadoba, Simlipal and the national parks of Panna, Ranthambore–Kuno–Palpur–Madhav and Saranda;
The goals are to manage tigers as a single metapopulation, the dispersal of which between core refuges can help maintain genetic, demographic, and ecological integrity, and to ensure that species and habitat conservation becomes mainstreamed into the rural development agenda.
