An example of this is the Municipal palace built in 1924, which stands in Maydan al-Hurriya (Freedom Square).
From 26 February to 26 August, Benghazi was the temporary headquarters of the National Transitional Council which is led by the former justice minister, Mustafa Abdul Jalil, until Tripoli was liberated.
The oil industry drives the city's commerce.
In the north of the city lies the Mediterranean-climate 'Jabal Al-Akhdar' (Green Mountains), and in the south the climate is becoming desert-like.
President Ronald Reagan justified the attacks by claiming Libya was responsible for terrorism directed at the USA, including the bombing of La Belle discothèque in West Berlin ten days before.
The city has an important port which is vital to the economy, as Libya imports many foodstuffs and manufactured products.
The industry is however growing in importance in Benghazi.
An increase in consumer prices has been coupled with an increase in the importance of the retail sector to the city's economy.
On 1 June, explosives were detonated in a car near the Tibesti Hotel, with a rebel spokesman calling the bombing a "cowardly act".
Some sections have become more popular as residential areas in recent years (such as Qanfuda).
No longer a residential bishopric, Berenice is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.
Different architectural styles attest to the different empires that have controlled the city throughout history.
Sports City was recently closed down for a complete redevlopment of the site.
As with other cities in Libya, there is a reasonable amount of ethnic diversity in Benghazi.
There are also several contact sport clubs in the city&nbsp;–judo and taekwondo are popular men's sports in Benghazi.
Food processing is based on local fish, imported goods, and the produce of irrigated coastal lowlands and the nearby Jabal al-Akdhar Mountains, including cereal, dates, olives, wool and meat.
Alcohol is banned by law in Benghazi and throughout Libya in accordance with Islamic principles.
To the north, below the steep cliffs of the plateau, lies a narrow belt of Mediterranean farmland.
Jews lived in Benghazi as they did elsewhere in Libya, from Roman times until 1967 when most were airlifted out after a series of riots in the years after the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.
The central business district was built mostly in the 1960s and 1970s with Libya's new found oil wealth.
in the 1930s, with a new railway station and promenade.
Under the governorships of Generals Ernesto Mombelli and Attilio Teruzzi in the 1920s, the buildings commissioned in Benghazi had an eclectic architectural language that embodied a Western conception of Eastern architecture.
An inscription found there and dated around the middle of the 4th century BC states that the city had a constitution similar to that of Cyrene, with a board of chief magistrates (''ephors'') and a council of elders (''gerontes'').
There are even a few Italian-related families, left from the colonial times before World War II.
Benghazi has hosted many national sports events throughout the years, as well as more significant international competitions such as the African Cup of Nations.
The name may have also referred to green oases in low-lying areas in the nearby coastal plain.
It was initially housed in the royal Al Manar Palace before receiving its own campus in 1968.
The different neighbourhoods vary in their levels of economic prosperity, as well as their cultural, historic and social atmosphere.
Benghazi continues to hold institutions and organizations normally associated with a national capital city, such as the country's parliament, national library, and the headquarters of Libyan Airlines, the national airline, and of the National Oil Corporation.
* British School in Benghazi
The Jebel Akhdar, literally, "the Green Mountain", just north of Benghazi, rises to the east.
For Egyptian Copts, there is a Coptic Orthodox church (which was formerly the grand synagogue) with two serving priests.
Major manufactured goods include processed food, textiles, tanning, processed salt and construction materials, particularly cement; a large cement factory is located in al-Hawari.
It was found that while the number of road traffic accidents had decreased during the period of the war, the morbidity and mortality of the injured had increased significantly.
Annual rainfall is low at  per year.
The city's local water supply is supplemented by groundwater transported from the aquifers of southern Libya along the Great Manmade River.
International schools include:
The conservative Islamic nature of Benghazi creates a strong sense of family life in the city –  practically all teenagers and young adults live at home until they get married.
Sirocco winds are not uncommon in the city, and as such, many of Benghazi's smaller streets and buildings can be quite dusty.
On 15 April 1986, US Air Force and Navy planes bombed Benghazi and Tripoli.
On 20 November, Benghazi was captured by the British Eighth Army and thereafter held by the British.
It was this fertile site northeast of Benghazi that the Greeks chose for their settlement.
The revolts spread by 17 February to Al Bayda, Tobruk, Ajdabya, Al Marj in the East and Zintan, Zawiya in the West, calling for the end of the Gaddafi Regime.
There is also a small Christian community in the city.
In recent times, rugby sevens has seen great success with three clubs in the vicinity.
Until the 1960s there were two small railways, built by the Italians, departing from Benghazi and served with classical ''Littorine'': Benghazi-Barce and Benghazi-Soluch.
One of the Cyrenean kings whose fate is connected with the city is Arcesilaus IV.
The former Libyan flag used in the Kingdom of Libya was used by many protesters as an opposition flag.
There are no Jews remaining in Libya today.
The home was recently restored, remodeled and converted into the Bait-al Medina al-Thaqafi museum.
After the marriage around the middle of the 3rd century BC of Ptolemy III to Berenice, daughter of the Cyrenean Governor Magas, many Cyrenaican cities were renamed to mark the occasion.
Benghazi was taken by Gaddafi opponents on 21 February, who founded the National Transitional Council.
Summers in Benghazi are hot and rainless, but with high levels of humidity.
There is a trace of the 3rd century BC wall built by the Greeks, four Roman peristyle houses, six wine vats.
The soil in Benghazi is a rich red colour and very clayey.
The city was in hostile territory and was surrounded by inhospitable tribes.
Benghazi and its surrounding areas were controlled by Barghathi tribe.
The complex also has a sports hall for indoor sports, a tennis stadium and several small tennis courts.
The facility was built in the 1950s and is therefore quite outdated; the stadia have nonetheless undergone maintenance work in recent years.
The park surrounds a natural lake, and is more rugged in nature than the city parks.
The Greek colony had lasted from the 6th to the mid-3rd centuries BC.
The violence urged the people to fight back and start and uprise to withdraw Ghadafi from power The Libyan Revolution.
The majority of tourists that visit Eastern Libya use Benghazi as a base for which to explore the Greek ruins in Cyrene or to make desert excursions south in Kufra.
That city was traditionally founded in 446 BC (different sources give different dates like 347 BC or 249 BC), by a brother of the king of Cyrene, but got the name Berenice only when it was refounded in the 3rd century BC under the patronage of Berenice (''Berenike''), the daughter of Magas, king of Cyrene, and wife of Ptolemy III Euergetes, the ruler of Egypt.
The country's largest library containing over 300,000 volumes is affiliated with the university.
In recent years, more people are beginning to practice Salafism with the spread of literalist inclined Islamic television channels.
Perhaps the most famous is the zoological garden and theme park in Al-Fuwayhat; the park is referred to locally as ''al-Bosco'', a colloquial Italian name for zoo/forest.
Skanska built a good connection of speedways and flyovers in the decades after the Libyan revolution in 1969; this has made the transport of goods between Benghazi and other cities easier.
The predominant religion in Benghazi is Islam.
In recent times, however, there has been an influx of African immigrants into Benghazi.
The city's road network is generally well designed.
At the time, this area may have been deep enough to receive small sailing vessels.
In April 2012, the Libyan economy ministry announced plans for creating a Free trade area in Benghazi.
The heart of the medina is Maydan al-Hurriya (Freedom Square); to the northeast of this is the covered Souq al-Jareed.
Ancient architectural remains of the Greek and later Roman settlement of Berenice can be found by the Italian lighthouse.
There is no systemised public transport system in Benghazi despite the city's size and significance.
The city has various sporting centres of different standards, such as football stadia, beach clubs (where many water sports are played), as well as several other public and private facilities.
In 1578, the Turks invaded Benghazi and it was ruled from Tripoli by the Karamanlis from 1711 to 1835; it then passed under direct Ottoman rule until 1911.
In the future, a rail link may be built to both Tunisia and Egypt forming a North African coastal rail network.
These areas are still primarily recreational however, and many beach condominium resorts (known locally as chalets) have been built in previous years such as those at al-Nakheel beach, and the Nayrouz condominiums.
The highest building in Benghazi is the Tibesti Hotel on Gamal Abdel Nasser Street built in 1989.
This has influenced the city, and as such, the cultural atmosphere in Benghazi is more Arab in nature than that in Tripoli.
It was later split and became known as University of Benghazi.
It is not uncommon therefore to see woman wearing black niqabs and men with full beards in Benghazi because of the existence of such schools, although not exclusively for that purpose.
National and international bus services also leave from Al-Fudnuq from the central bus station.
Virtually all of Benghazi's theatres, libraries, best clothing stores, markets and old mosques can be found there.
Education in Benghazi, as is throughout Libya, is compulsory and free.
Here the vegetation and climate is more Mediterranean in feel with none of the desert landscapes found further south.
Thus Benghazi has always been seen as a welcoming city, a city which the local Bedouins refer to as 'Benghazi rabayit al thayih' which can be translated as, 'Benghazi raises the lost' as many immigrants who arrived from the Western Maghreb or the former Al Andalus came with little money, clothes or food and were looked after very generously by the local Bedouin population as well as those arriving following the Italian war from Western Libya.
On 15 February 2011,  an uprising against the government of Muammar Gaddafi occurred in the city.
A small Greek community also exists in Benghazi.
There are some private universities such as Libyan International Medical University.
Benghazi came under Italian rule in the early part of the 20th century.
Road accidents are also on the rise because of the increase in vehicles and the subsequent lax in attention given by authorities to dangerous driving.
Benghazi is one of the cultural centres of Libya and is a base for tourists, visitors and academics in the region.
Throughout its history, Benghazi has developed with a certain level of independence from the more Maghreb oriented capital Tripoli.
A popular system of microbuses has developed in recent years; bus journeys run on fixed routes and passengers can embark and disembark anywhere on the route.
There are also many Egyptian immigrants in Benghazi.
On 19 March, pro-Gaddafi forces almost defeated the rebellion when they began attacking the city of Benghazi in a major offensive, but were forced back the next day when NATO forces began implementing United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973.
Further east is the second level of the Jebel Akhdar, between  and over  above sea level, often thickly wooded and cut by ravines.
Important colonial buildings designed during Italian rule include the Berenice Cinema (currently under renovation) which was designed Marcello Piacentini and Luigi Piccinato in 1928.
Large national companies such as the Al-Brega Oil Marketing Company and the Arabian Gulf Oil Company are important to the city's economy and employ many people.
Modern Benghazi, on the Gulf of Sidra, lies a little southwest of the site of the ancient Greek city of ''Berenice'' or ''Berenicis'' or ''Bernici''.
Other large banks include the Central Bank of Libya office in the city centre.
The roads are not always well-maintained however, and often have incorrect, poorly visible or no road markings, as well as potholes in some roads and inner-city streets.
Although Benghazi does not have a high percentage of green space per resident, there are a few public parks and green recreational areas in the city.
On Gamal Abdel Nasser Street is 23 July Park, another large green space which faces the Tibesti Hotel and borders the waterfront.
The coast at Jeliana is home to the Milaha Beach Club amongst others.
The city is divided into many neighbourhoods, some of which were founded during Italian Colonial rule and many which have developed as a result of modern urban sprawl.
Heavily bombed in World War II, Benghazi was later rebuilt with the country's newly found oil wealth as a gleaming showpiece of modern Libya.
In recent years, international franchises such as United Colors of Benetton, H&M and Nike have opened in Benghazi.
Dathes was at the First Council of Nicaea in 325, and Probatius at a synod held in Constantinople in 394.
In its more prosperous period, Berenice became a Christian bishopric.
This was emphasized by real or perceived injustices from the government towards the people of Benghazi, including the demolition in the year 2000 of the arena of football club Alahly Benghazi S.C., following anti-government protests.
The largest colonial building from this Italian period is the Benghazi Cathedral in Maydan El Catedraeya (Cathedral Square), which was built in the 1920s and has two large distinct domes.
It is one of the most popular parks in Benghazi, and is very busy on public holidays, as well as amongst school children and scouts on outings.
University education is also free for all Libyan citizens in Benghazi.
Benghazi has a warm semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification ''BSh'').
Residents organised to direct traffic and collect refuse.
This creates a constant atmosphere of rivalry and sensitivities between Benghazi and Tripoli, and between Cyrenaica and Tripolitania.
Benghazi, as the principal city of eastern Libya, is one of Libya's major economic centres.
To the south, the forest and farmland gives way to juniper bush maquis and pre-desert scrub with some winter grazing.
In a rare RTA conflict health study, road traffic accidents were studied during the period of the 2011 armed conflict, in which Benghazi was a focal point of events.
A Byzantine church also exists on the site, with a mosaic still intact.
The largest Ottoman architectural monument in Benghazi is the late 19th-century Ottoman palace in El-Berka; built during the rule of Rashid Pasha II.
On 11 September 2012, the U.S.
A large section of the western Jebel Akhdar is taken up by the fertile Marj plain.
Benghazi is the second largest city in Libya, and as such, has some of the best sports facilities in the country.
The Greek island of Crete is a short distance from Benghazi and many families in Benghazi today bear Cretan surnames.
* International School Benghazi
Tourism is still in its very early stages in Libya.
* Benghazi European School
An efficient system of highways, flyovers, ringroads and underpasses serve the city, and allow for the transport of goods and vehicles.
The Greek historian Thucydides mentions a siege of the city in 414 BC, by Libyans who were probably the Nasamones: Euesperides was saved by the unexpected arrival of the Spartan general Gylippus and his fleet, who were blown to Libya by contrary winds on their way to Sicily.
The Italian quarter is also located in the centre.
Annual rainfall here, especially around Cyrene, can reach .
Compulsory education continues up until ninth grade.
This quarter stretches out from the Northern shores of the harbour, and covers an area roughly bounded by Ahmed Rafiq al-Mahdawi Street to the North-west, al-Jezayir Street to the South-east and 23 July Street to the South-west.
The oldest university in Libya is the University of Libya, founded by royal decree in 1955.
Benghazi is also an industrial and commercial centre in Libya.
A section of al-Buduzira is also a water park with large slides, whilst the southern part of the park has picnic areas which are popular in the summers.
Ten others were injured.
Olives and other mediterranean fruits and vegetables are grown here.
The park is a combination of a zoo full of trees built during Italian rule (which contains wild cats, primates, elephants, birds and other animals) and a small theme park of electric rides, added later in the 1980s as part of a redevelopment of the entire site.
Many Muslims in Benghazi adhere to the traditional Maliki school of religious law, however much less so than in decades past.
As a consequence, there was in Cyrenaica and mostly in Benghazi a huge economic development in the second half of the 1930s.
Euesperides was most likely founded by people from Cyrene or Barce, which was located on the edge of a lagoon which opened from the sea.
Handicrafts are found in the many souks in the city, but are of little significance to the economy.
There are many other foreign schools such as Benghazi European School & private schools but G.International is the best for the wards.
The other side is an engraving of a silphium plant, once the symbol of trade from Cyrenaica because of its use as a rich seasoning and as a medicine.
As a district, Benghazi borders Hizam Al Akhdar, which surrounds it on land.
Finance is also important to the city's economy, with the Libyan Bank of Commerce and Development maintaining branches in Benghazi; the Bank's headquarters is a high office tower on Gamal Abdel Nasser Street in el-Berka.
The new city was later given the name '''''Hesperides''''', in reference to the Hesperides, the guardians of the mythic western paradise.
Another large and popular park is al-Buduzira in North Benghazi on the al-'Uruba Road in al-Kwayfiya.
The coinage suggests that the city must have enjoyed some autonomy from Cyrene in the early 5th century BC, when the issues of Euesperides had their own types with the legend EU(ES), distinct from those of Cyrene.
Generally, the city is roughly divided into the following areas: Central Benghazi (colloquially referred to as al-Blaad by locals) – includes the medina, and the old quarter, Central Districts which circle the downtown – Al-Sabri, Sidi Abayd, Sidi Hsayn, Al-Berka, Al-Salmani, Al-Hadaa'ik, Al-Fuwayhat and Al-Keesh, Central Suburbs – Al-Laythi, Bu Atni, Al-Quwarsha, Al-Hawari, Coastal Districts – Al-Kwayfiya (North), Garyounis, Bu-Fakhra and Jarrutha (South), and the Distant Suburbs – Gimeenis, Benina and Sidi Khalifa.
The city centre contains a few local theatres, as well as the Dar al-Kutub National Library in Al-Funduq, where the works of popular local novelists like Sadeq Naihoum and Khalifa al-Fakhri can be found.
On 19 March, the city was the site of the turning point of the Libyan Civil War, when the Libyan Army attempted to score a decisive victory against the NTC by attacking Benghazi, but was forced back by local resistance and intervention from the French Air Force authorized by UNSC Resolution 1973 to protect civilians, allowing the rebellion to continue.
In the 11th century, the Sa'ada tribe from the Bani Salim migrated to Cyrenaica; each sub tribe from the Sa'adi historically controlled a section of Cyrenaica.
The Senussi order from which the royal dynasty sprang has traditionally enjoyed strong support in Benghazi and the Cyrenaica.
The name was attributed to the fertility of the neighborhood, which gave rise to the mythological associations of the garden of the Hesperides The ancient city existed on a raised piece of land opposite of what is now the Sidi-Abayd graveyard in the Northern Benghazi suburb of Sbikhat al-Salmani (al-Salmani Marsh).
Sport is also important in the city; two of Libya's most successful football clubs are based in Benghazi.
The city hosted six group games and a semifinal in the March 28 Stadium, Libya's second-largest stadium.
''Euesperides'' became '''''Berenice''''' and the change of name also involved a relocation.
Football is the most-popular sport in Benghazi, and two of Libya's most-successful football clubs, Al-Ahly Benghazi and Al-Nasr Benghazi, are based in the city.
The city will very likely be the scene of more games when Libya re-hosts the African Cup of Nations in 2013.
Wind surfing and swimming are two of the most popular water sports.
For Muslims, there are many mosques throughout Benghazi; the oldest and best known such as the Atiq and Osman mosques are located in and around the medina.
There are many public primary and secondary schools scattered throughout the city as well as some private schools.
Later in the 4th century BC, during the unsettled period which followed Alexander's death, the city backed the losing side in a revolt by the Spartan adventurer Thibron; trying to create an empire for himself, he was defeated by the Cyreneans and their allies.
The building combines Moorish arches with Italianate motifs on the façade.
In recent years, a rapid increase in car ownership has meant that traffic jams, lack of parking spaces and overcrowding are also not uncommon, especially on smaller streets.
The Roman Catholic Franciscan Church of the Immaculate Conception serves Benghazi's Catholic community of roughly 4,000; there is also a disused cathedral church.
The white and green structure houses 360 rooms; and is on a tract of land where Gamal Abdel Nasser Street meets al-Saqzali Street; south of the 28 March football stadium.
It became the capital city of Emirate of Cyrenaica (1949–1951) under Idris Senussi I.
, earthworks were underway in the city for a rail network which will traverse northern Libya.
The population was 670,797 at the 2006 census.
Diplomatic Mission in Benghazi was attacked by a heavily armed group of 125-150 gunmen, whose trucks bore the logo of Ansar al-Sharia, a group of Islamist militants, also known as Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, working with the local government to manage security in Benghazi.
The two teams have won the Libyan Premier League five times; Al Ahly four and Al Nasr only one.
Practically all of the city's inhabitants are Sunni Muslims.
This proved ineffective, since when the King fled to Euesperides during the anticipated revolution (around 440 BC), he was assassinated, thus terminating the almost 200-year rule of the Battiad dynasty.
Russian Railways is responsible for the three-year contract.
Gyms have also become more popular in the city in recent years, because of a greater concern for healthy living amongst Libyans.
The coastal districts (especially the southern districts) are where Benghazi's beaches can be found.
In February 2011, peaceful protests erupted in Benghazi those were brutally suppressed by Ghadafi's armed kalb forces and loyalists.
An efficiently designed system of roads, bridges and underpasses cover Benghazi, however traffic jams and poorly maintained streets are not uncommon.
At least 500 people were killed in the protests against the government.
Benghazi grew to be a modern city with a new airport, new railways station, new seaplane station, an enlarged port and many facilities.
The city superseded Cyrene and Barca as the chief center of Cyrenaica after the 3rd century AD and during the Persian attacks; in 642–643, it had dwindled to an insignificant village among magnificent historic ruins.
The central suburbs are almost entirely residential and more like little towns in their own right; Al-Quwarsha is a good example of this.
These ruins formed the northern part of the ancient city, which extended south and east but now lies buried beneath the modern city.
Italians even did the first architectural plan of Benghazi.
The widely loathed mayor, Huda Ben Amer, nicknamed "the Executioner", fled the city for Tripoli.
The park is popular amongst teenagers, and families on Thursday nights (as Friday is a day off work throughout Libya).
The Benghazi port is a vital terminal for the region, and allows for the import and export of national and international goods and food products.
On 19 May 2012, residents of Benghazi voted in historic local elections; this was the first time such elections have been held in the city since the 1960s, and turnout was high.
The largest sporting centre in Benghazi is the Medina al-Riyadhia (Sports City).
An influx immigrants including Egyptian, Iraqi, Palestinian, Sudanese and Syrian immigrants have also influenced the city's culture to a certain extent in recent years.
Most microbuses stop at Al-Funduq or have the end of Souq Al-Jarid in Al-Funduq as their final destination.
It was suspected that an officer was killed, and many people started to shout out anti-Gaddafi chants while the Tibesti was cordoned off.
