Southeast Bengal refers to the hilly and coastal Bengali-speaking areas of Chittagong Division in southeastern Bangladesh and the Indian state of Tripura.
US$1,284 per person
The Pakistani military responded by launching a genocide that caused the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
At times an independent regional empire, or a bastion of larger empires, the historical region was a leading power of the Indian subcontinent and the Islamic East.
The current President of India, Pranab Mukherjee, is a native of West Bengal and a leader of the Indian National Congress.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) was founded in Dhaka in 1985.
Since then, Bangladesh has largely alternated between the premierships of Sheikh Hasina of the Awami League and Khaleda Zia of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party, as well as technocratic caretaker governments.
Other key crops include jute, tea, sugarcane and wheat.
Since the 2000s, West Bengal has experienced an economic rejuvenation, particularly in its IT industry.
It has a history stretching back to the 3rd century BCE, when the main language was Sanskrit written in the brahmi script .
Ancient Bengal was divided between the regions of Varendra, Suhma, Anga, Vanga, Samatata and Harikela.
Since 1990s, it was administered by non-political technocratic caretaker governments on four occasions, the last being under military-backed emergency rule in 2007 and 2008.
In addition, there are several minority ethnolinguistic groups native to the region.
Estuaries on the Bay of Bengal allowed for maritime trade.
In 1997, this region was declared endangered.
The fishing cat is the state animal of West Bengal.
According to provisional results of 2011 Bangladesh census, population of Bangladesh was 142,319,000; however, CIA's ''The World Factbook'' gives 163,654,860 as its population in a July 2013 estimate.
The Barak Valley joined the union of India after its partition from Sylhet in 1947 and has been a part of the state of Assam.
The predominant ethno-linguistic group are the Bengali people, who speak the Indo-Aryan Bengali language.
For example, the first recorded king of Sri Lanka was a Bengali prince called Vijaya.
Rice and fish are traditional favourite foods, leading to a saying that "fish and rice make a Bengali".
In 1540, Sher Shah Suri was crowned Emperor of the northern subcontinent in the Bengali capital Gaur.
It is an eastern Indo-Aryan language and one of the easternmost branches of the Indo-European language family.
Calcutta was named the capital of British India in 1772.
Bengali culture has had a significant influence on other cultures, especially in the fields of literature, music, art, architecture, sports, commerce, politics and cuisine.
Bengali is the main language spoken in Bengal.
The liberation war commander Ziaur Rahman emerged as Bangladesh's leader in the late 1970s.
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was assassinated in 1975 during a military coup that ushered sixteen years of pro-free market presidential governments and military dictatorships.
Other regional groupings include the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Forum for Regional Cooperation (BCIM) and the Bangladesh Bhutan India Nepal (BBIN) Initiative.
At least nine districts in West Bengal and 42 districts in Bangladesh have arsenic levels in groundwater above the World Health Organization maximum permissible limit of 50&nbsp;µg/L (micro gram per litre) or 50 parts per billion and the untreated water is unfit for human consumption.
Bengali binds together a culturally diverse region and is an important contributor to regional identity.
Country boats are a central element of Bengali culture and have inspired generations of artists and poets, including the ivory artisans of the Mughal era.
Cox's Bazaar in southeastern Bangladesh is home to the longest natural beach in the world and a growing surfing destination.
Above an elevation of 1,000 metres (3,300&nbsp;ft), the forest becomes predominantly subtropical, with a predominance of temperate-forest trees such as oaks, conifers and rhododendrons.
Bengali has greatly influenced other languages in the region, including Odia, Assamese, Chakma, Nepali and Rohingya.
The Governor appoints the Chief Minister on the nomination of the legislative assembly.
The Bangladeshi part includes the Khulna Division and Barisal Division.
It developed the subcontinent's relations with China, Egypt, the Timurid Empire and East Africa.
In the 18th-century, the Mughal Court rapidly disintegrated due to Nader Shah's invasion and internal rebellions, allowing European colonial powers to set up trading posts across the territory.
Following the death of Maharaja Bir Bikram Kishore Debbarman, the princely state acceded to the Union of India on 15 October 1949 under the Tripura Merger Agreement signed by Maharani Regent Kanchan Prava Devi.
The Lawachara National Park is a rainforest in northeastern Bangladesh.
File:Bengal gazetteer 1907-9.jpg|Colonial Eastern Bengal and Assam, early 20th century
Bengal's trade and wealth impressed the Mughals so much that it was described as the ''Paradise of the Nations'' by the Mughal Emperors.
Early Indian literature described the region as a thalassocracy, with colonies in Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean.
Chars are temporary islands formed by the deposition of sediments eroded off the banks of the Ganges in West Bengal which often disappear in the monsoon season.
Politically, Bengal is divided between the sovereign republic of Bangladesh, which covers two-thirds of the region, and West Bengal, which is a part of the Republic of India, in the western part of the region.
Along with its Bengali population, it is also home to Tibeto-Burman  ethnic groups, including the Chakma, Marma, Tanchangya, Tripuri and Bawm peoples.
Men also wear traditional costumes such as the ''kurta'' with ''dhoti'' or ''pyjama'', often on religious occasions.
Rice, jute, mustard and sugarcane plantations are a common sight.
File:A Canvas- Mustard field and Date Trees (11923934543).jpg|A mustard and date palm farm in West Bengal
The Awami League and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) are the two largest political parties in Bangladesh.
It is part of the Bengali-Assamese languages.
The Portuguese established a settlement in Chittagong with permission from the Bengal Sultanate in 1528, but were later expelled by the Mughals in 1666.
During the Bengal Renaissance of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Bengali literature was modernised through the works of authors such as Michael Madhusudan Dutta, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, Rabindranath Tagore, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay and Kazi Nazrul Islam.
The Mother Bengal is a female personification of Bengal which was created during the Bengali renaissance and later adopted by the Bengali nationalists.
West Bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of India, stretching from the Himalayas in the north to the Bay of Bengal in the south.
He reoriented the country's foreign policy towards the West and restored free markets and the multiparty polity.
Remnants of Copper Age settlements date back 4,300 years.
Bangladesh is a prominent member of the United Nations, being the largest contributor of peacekeeping forces in the world and a key promoter of multilateral diplomacy.
The erstwhile Pakistani military junta refused to accept election results which triggered civil disobedience across East Pakistan.
Bengali villages are buried among groves of mango, jack fruit, betel nut and date palm.
The partition of India severed the once strong economic links which integrated the region.
The Portuguese referred to the region as ''Bengala'' in the Age of Discovery.
Darjeeling Hills are also part of North Bengal.
During the medieval period, the region was ruled by the Sultanate of Bengal, the Kingdom of Tripura, the Kingdom of Mrauk U, the Portuguese Empire and the Mughal Empire, prior to the advent of British rule.
Bangladesh-India relations began on a high note in 1971 when India played a major role in the liberation of Bangladesh, with the Indian Bengali populace and media providing overwhelming support to the independence movement in the former East Pakistan.
This was followed by the design of the Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban by the renowned American architect Louis Kahn in the 1960s, which was based on the aesthetic heritage of Bengali architecture and geography.
The British Royal Navy later utilized Bengali shipyards in the 19th-century, including for the Battle of Trafalgar.
The western part went to India (and was named West Bengal) while the eastern part joined Pakistan as a province called East Bengal (later renamed East Pakistan, giving rise to Bangladesh in 1971).
St. Martin's Island, off the coast of Chittagong Division, is home to the sole coral reef in Bengal.
The Bengali language developed between the 7th and 10th centuries from Apabhraṃśa and Magadhi Prakrit.
Consequently, no identification documents are issued to char-dwellers who cannot benefit from health care, barely survive because of very poor sanitation and are prevented from emigrating to the mainland to find jobs when they have turned 14.
File:Burishwar River in Barguna, Bangladesh (2).jpg|A river in Bangladesh
Northeast Bengal refers to the Sylhet Division of Bangladesh and the Barak Valley in the Indian state of Assam.
India and Bangladesh are the world's second and eighth most populous countries respectively.
The State of Pakistan was subjected to years of military rule due to fears of Bengali political supremacy under democracy.
Life expectancy is around 70.36 years for Bangladesh and 63.4 for West Bengal.
An insurgency by indigenous people affected the state for several years.
Bengalis make distinctive sweetmeats from milk products, including ''Rôshogolla'', ''Chômchôm'', and several kinds of ''Pithe''.
The princely state of Hill Tippera, that was under the suzerainty of British India, was ruled by a Bengali-speaking monarchy.
The endonym of the region is Srihatta.
In more recent years, a consensus has evolved in both countries on the importance of developing good relations, as well as a strategic partnership in South Asia and beyond.
The Chief Minister is the traditionally the leader of the party or coalition with most seats in the assembly.
It is also a member of SAARC, the Developing 8 Countries, BIMSTEC, the World Trade Organization, NAM, the OIC and the Commonwealth of Nations.
North Bengal is divided into Terai and Dooars regions.
Each state nominates members to the Indian upper house of parliament, the Rajya Sabha.
In the coastal southeast lies Cox's Bazaar, the longest beach in the world at 125&nbsp;km (78&nbsp;mi).
After the 1970 national election, Rahman's party, the Awami League, had emerged as the largest party in Pakistan's parliament.
The water causes arsenicosis, skin cancer and various other complications in the body.
The two countries had a twenty five year friendship treaty between 1972 and 1996.
Bengali literature in the medieval age was often either religious (e.g.
The Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sylhet regions are home to most of the mountains in Bangladesh.
The Bengal region also has a rich heritage of Indo-Saracenic architecture, including numerous zamindar palaces and mansions.
Awami League premier Sheikh Mujibur Rahman became the country's strongman and implemented many socialist policies.
The country has a thriving and internationally acclaimed contemporary art scene.
It was granted full statehood with an elected legislature in July 1963.
The legacy of Magadha includes the invention of chess, the concept of zero and the theory of solar and lunar eclipses and the Earth orbiting the Sun.
He was eventually succeeded by his army chief Hussain Muhammad Ershad.
The region was annexed by the Delhi Sultanate.
The Ganges Delta arises from the confluence of the rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna rivers and their respective tributaries.
File:Tea Garden near Srimangal, Sylhet, Bangladesh.jpg|A tea garden in Bangladesh
Classical Bengali architecture features terracotta buildings.
Among men, European dressing has greater acceptance.
An Indo-Bangladesh ''Bengali Games'' has been organised among the athletes of the Bengali speaking areas of the two countries.
A major part of the coastline comprises a marshy jungle, the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest in the world and home to diverse flora and fauna, including the royal Bengal tiger.
Most parts of Bangladesh are within  above the sea level, and it is believed that about 10% of the land would be flooded if the sea level were to rise by .
Secular Sanskrit, or standard Old Indo-Aryan, was spoken across Bengal.
However, tensions between East and West Pakistan grew rapidly over political exclusion, economic neglect and ethnic and linguistic discrimination.
In Amar Sonar Bangla, the national anthem of Bangladesh, Rabindranath Tagore has used the word "Maa" (Mother) numerous times to refer to the motherland i.e.
The 1952 Bengali Language Movement in East Pakistan is commemorated by UNESCO as International Mother Language Day, as part of global efforts to preserve linguistic identity.
The invasion army of Alexander the Great was deterred by the accounts of Gangaridai's power in 325 BCE.
Most of the Bengal region lies in the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta, but there are highlands in its north, northeast and southeast.
A'Tong, Chak, Koch, Garo, Megam, Meitei Manipuri, Mizo, Mru, Pangkhua, Rakhine/Marma, Kok Borok, Riang, Tippera, Usoi, various Chin languages), Austroasiatic languages (e.g.
The flat and fertile Bangladesh Plain dominates the geography of Bangladesh.
The Mughal Empire conquered Bengal in the 16th century.
Bengali Muslims are the world's second largest Muslim ethnicity (after Arab Muslims), and Bangladesh is the world's third largest Muslim-majority country (after Indonesia and Pakistan).
Other major festivities include the Bengali New Year, the Bengali Spring Festival, Nobanno and Poush Parbon.
After independence, Bangladesh adopted a secular democracy under its new constitution in 1972.
Elected Bengali-led governments at the federal and provincial levels, which were led by statesmen such as A. K. Fazlul Huq and H. S. Suhrawardy, were deposed.
The Bengali language and script evolved circa 1000 CE from Magadhi Prakrit.
The Bangladesh High Commission in New Delhi operates a Deputy High Commission in Kolkata and a consular office in Agartala.
Hason Raja is a renowned folk poet of the Sylhet region.
So, the Bengal region, as of 2011, has at least 233 million people.
The Chittagong Hill Tracts in southeastern Bangladesh is noted for its high degree of biodiversity.
In terms of literacy, West Bengal leads with 77% literacy rate, in Bangladesh the rate is approximately 59.82%.
Culturally, Bengal is significant for its huge Hindu and Muslim populations.
The Bengal region is located at the crossroads of two huge economic blocs, the SAARC and ASEAN.
The region has over 89 species of mammals, 628 species of birds and numerous species of fish.
In spite of a last-ditch effort to form a United Bengal, when India gained independence in 1947, Bengal was partitioned along religious lines.
In the north lies the greater Mymensingh and Tangail regions.
Major industries include textiles, leather goods, pharmaceuticals, shipbuilding, banking and information and communication technology.
By the 11th century BCE, the people of the area lived in systemically-aligned housing, used human cemeteries and manufactured copper ornaments and fine black and red pottery.
Bengal played a major role in the Indian independence movement, in which revolutionary groups were dominant.
Khasi, Koda, Mundari, Pnar, Santali, War), and Dravidian languages (e.g.
The city of Sylhet is its largest urban center, and the most spoken vernacular language in the region is the Sylheti dialect of Bengali.
Politically, West Bengal's part comprises of Jalpaiguri Division (Alipurduar, Cooch Behar, Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri, North Dinajpur, South Dinajpur and Malda) together and Bihar's parts include Kishanganj district.
There are significant reserves of limestone, natural gas and coal.
In the 14th and 15th centuries, the Bengal Sultanate was a major diplomatic, economic and military power in the subcontinent.
However, differences over river sharing, border security and access to trade have long plagued the relationship.
They vary in design and size.
Between 1905 and 1912, an abortive attempt was made to divide the province of Bengal into two zones, that included the short-lived province of Eastern Bengal and Assam based in Dacca and Shillong.
The Surma and Barak rivers are the geographic markers of the area.
Prominent contemporary Bengali writers in English include Amitav Ghosh, Tahmima Anam, Jhumpa Lahiri and Zia Haider Rahman among others.
West Bengal, Tripura and Assam (home to the Barak Valley) are provincial states of the Republic of India, with local executives and assemblies- features shared with other states in the Indian federal system.
In the 9th century, Arab Muslim traders frequented Bengali seaports and found the region to be a thriving seafaring kingdom with well-developed coinage and banking.
The early Iron Age saw the development of metal weaponry, coinage, permanent field agriculture and irrigation.
West Bengal politics underwent a major change when the Left Front won the 1977 assembly election, defeating the incumbent Indian National Congress.
The Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna rivers were natural arteries for communication and transportation.
Central Bengal refers to the Dhaka Division of Bangladesh.
A popular uprising restored parliamentary democracy in 1991.
The highest point in Bangladesh is in Mowdok range at .
Bengal was also home to the largest mosque in South Asia at
The region is one of the largest rice producing areas in the world, with West Bengal being India's largest rice producer and Bangladesh being the world's fourth largest rice producer.
Hindu nationalism was also strong in Bengal, which was home to groups like the Hindu Mahasabha.
This region contains Sandakfu ()—the highest peak of the state.
The narrow Terai region separates this region from the plains, which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards the south.
Arsenic is four times as poisonous as mercury.
Bengali women commonly wear the ''shaŗi'' and the salwar kameez, often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs.
Wooden boats are made of timber such as ''Jarul''  (dipterocarpus turbinatus),'' sal'' (shorea robusta), ''sundari'' (heritiera fomes), and ''Burma teak'' (tectons grandis).
The Bay of Bengal Initiative, based in Dhaka, brings together Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Thailand, Nepal, Bhutan and Sri Lanka to promote economic integration in the subregion.
The flat Bengal Plain, which covers most of Bangladesh and West Bengal, is one of the most fertile areas on Earth, with lush vegetation and farmland dominating its landscape.
Commercial, cultural and defense cooperation have expanded since 2010, when Prime Ministers Sheikh Hasina and Manmohan Singh pledged to reinvigorate ties.
East Bengal, which was later renamed to East Pakistan in 1955, was home to Pakistan's demographic majority and played an instrumental role in the founding of the new state.
Bengali Muslims are the majority in Bangladesh.
Ancient Bengali kingdoms laid the foundations of the region's architectural heritage through the construction of monasteries and temples (for example, the Somapura Mahavihara).
Decades later, frequent air, rail and bus services are increasingly connecting cities in Bangladesh and West Bengal, as well as the wider region, including Northeast India, Nepal and Bhutan.
Many phonological, lexical, and structural differences from the standard variety occur in peripheral varieties of Bengali; these include Sylheti, Chittagonian, Chakma, Rangpuri/Rajbangshi, Hajong, Rohingya, and Tangchangya.
Bengali Hindus make up the second largest linguistic community in India.
North Bengal is a term used for the north-western part of Bangladesh and northern part of West Bengal.
Because of this low elevation, much of this region is exceptionally vulnerable to seasonal flooding due to monsoons.
Strategically, Pakistan joined the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization under the Bengali prime minister Mohammad Ali of Bogra as a bulwark against communism.
North Bengal is also noted for its rich cultural heritage, including two UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
The Jatiya Party government made Islam the state religion in 1988.
In 1924-25, while researching at the University of Dhaka, Prof Satyendra Nath Bose well known for his works in quantum mechanics, provided the foundation for Bose–Einstein statistics and the theory of the Bose–Einstein condensate.
Bengal was the leader of scientific endeavors in the subcontinent during the British Raj.
The region is the crossroads of Bengal and northeast India.
Theories on the origin of the term Banga point to the Proto-Dravidian ''Bong'' tribe that settled in the area circa 1000 BCE and the Austric word ''Bong'' (Sun-god).
The Bengali language evolved from Old Indo-Aryan Sanskrit dialects.
The inhabitants of the chars are not recognised by the Government of West Bengal on the grounds that it is not known whether they are Bengalis or Bangladeshi refugees.
By the 1950s, the region had a Bengali majority population due to the influx of Hindus from East Pakistan after partition.
It later became a district of the Mughal Empire.
The Rarh region intervenes between the Ganges delta in the east and the western plateau and high lands.
Bengali literature has a rich heritage.
Dense woodlands, including hilly rainforests, cover Bengal's northern and eastern areas; while an elevated forested plateau covers its central area.
Armed attempts to overthrow the British Raj began with the rebellion of Titumir, and reached a climax when Subhas Chandra Bose led the Indian National Army against the British.
The Chittagonian dialect of Bengali is prevalent in coastal areas of southeast Bengal.
Other folk music forms include Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya.
Bengali Hindus are the majority in West Bengal.
It became a Union Territory of India in November 1953.
Folk music in Bengal is often accompanied by the ektara, a one-stringed instrument.
Southeast Bengal is considered a bridge to Southeast Asia.
The Darjeeling Himalayan hill region in the northern extreme of the state belongs to the eastern Himalaya.
Despite her popularity in patriotic songs and poems, her physical representations and images are rare.
The Bangladeshi part comprises of Rajshahi Division and Rangpur Division.
They are made of very fertile soil.
The educational reforms during this period gave birth to many distinguished scientists in the region.
Most Islamic buildings were small and highly artistic terracotta mosques with multiple domes and no minarets.
Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose pioneered the investigation of radio and microwave optics, made very significant contributions to plant science, and laid the foundations of experimental science in the Indian subcontinent.
The most prominent example of this style is the Victoria Memorial, Kolkata.
President's rule is often imposed in Indian states as a direct intervention of the union government led by the Prime Minister of India.
