Fascist loyalist Achille Starace was captured and sentenced to death and then taken to the Piazzale Loreto and shown the body of Mussolini.
As a young boy, Mussolini would spend some time helping his father in his smithy.
By contrast, reflecting the far larger size of the German economy, the total Italian military expenditure in 1936 was equal to only 27% of the total German military expenditure for 1936.
The concept of ''spazio vitale'' was first announced in 1919, when the entire Mediterranean, especially so-called Julian March, was redefined to make it appear a unified region that had belonged to Italy from the times of the ancient Roman province of Italia, and was claimed as Italy's exclusive sphere of influence.
In fact, although France and Britain had already colonized parts of Africa and committed atrocities in their colonies, the Scramble for Africa had finished by the beginning of the twentieth century.
In September 1911, Mussolini participated in a riot, led by socialists, against the Italian war in Libya.
At the center of his vision lay the dream to forge a new Roman Empire in Africa and the Balkans, vindicating the so-called "mutilated victory" of 1918 imposed by the "plutodemocracies" (Britain and France) that betrayed the Treaty of London and usurped the supposed "natural right" of Italy to achieve supremacy in the Mediterranean basin.
Meanwhile, Operation Marita took place in Yugoslavia to end the Greco-Italian War, resulting in an Axis victory and the Occupation of Greece by Italy and Germany.
Mussolini later confessed that a few resolute men could have altered public opinion and started a coup that would have swept fascism away.
By now, he was one of Italy's most prominent socialists.
The physical German presence in Italy had sharply turned public opinion against Mussolini; for example, when the Allies invaded Sicily, the majority of the public there welcomed them as liberators.
Mussolini was expelled from the PSI due to withdrawing his support for the party's stance on neutrality in World War I.
The body of Starace was subsequently hung up next to the body of Mussolini.
At the Munich Conference in September 1938, Mussolini continued to pose as a moderate working for European peace, while helping Nazi Germany annex the Sudetenland.
The Lateran treaties, by which the Italian state was at last recognized by the Roman Catholic Church, and the independence of Vatican City was recognized by the Italian state, was so much appreciated by the ecclesiastic hierarchy that Pope Pius XI acclaimed Mussolini as "the Man of Providence".
This town was the first of what Mussolini hoped would have been thousands of new agricultural settlements across the country.
In 1937, the Muslims of Libya presented Mussolini with the "Sword of Islam" while Fascist propaganda pronounced him as the "Protector of Islam."
On 11 July 1936 an Austro-German treaty was signed under which Austria declared itself to be a "German state" whose foreign policy would always be aligned with Berlin, and allowed for pro-Nazis to enter the Austrian cabinet.
In January 1936, Mussolini told the German Ambassador Ulrich von Hassell that: "If Austria were in practice to become a German satellite, he would have no objection".
German historian Ernst Nolte says:
Hence, the importance of natalism to Mussolini, since only by increasing the birth rate could Italy ensure that its future as a great power that would win its ''spazio vitale'' would be assured.
Mussolini is also depicted in the films ''Tea with Mussolini'', ''Lion of the Desert'' (also with Steiger) and the award-winning Italian film ''Vincere''.
Though many ''gerarchi'' like Balbo were not keen on closer relations with Berlin, Mussolini's control of the foreign-policy machinery meant this dissidence counted for little.
His father's political outlook combined views of anarchist figures like Carlo Cafiero and Mikhail Bakunin, the military authoritarianism of Garibaldi, and the nationalism of Mazzini.
According to Denis Mack Smith, "In Nietzsche he found justification for his crusade against the Christian virtues of humility, resignation, charity, and goodness."
Overall, he totaled about nine months of active, front-line trench warfare.
The piazza had been renamed "Piazza Quindici Martiri" in honor of 15 anti-Fascists recently executed there.
If the laws still in force hinder you, this will be no problem, as we will draw up new laws."
After Adolf Hitler came into power, threatening Italian interests in Austria and the Danube basin, Mussolini proposed the Four Power Pact with Britain, France and Germany in 1933.
While Italy occupied former Austro-Hungarian areas between years 1918 and 1920, five hundred "Slav" societies (for example Sokol), and slightly smaller number of libraries ("reading rooms") had been forbidden, and specifically so later with the Law on Associations (1925), the Law on Public Demonstrations (1926) and the Law on Public Order (1926), the closure of the classical lyceum in Pazin, of the high school in Voloska (1918), the closure of the five hundred Slovene and Croatian primary schools followed.
On 24 October 1940, Mussolini sent the Italian Air Corps to Belgium, where the air force took part in the Blitz for around two months.
Plato was an idealist, focused on achieving justice and morality, while Mussolini and fascism were realist, focused on achieving political goals.
Known as ''Il Duce'' (The Leader), Mussolini was the founder of Italian Fascism.
We remain neutral."
On 11 February 1929, he signed a concordat and treaty with the Roman Catholic Church.
At this time, the Fascists did not have an integrated set of policies and the movement was small, ineffective in its attempts to hold mass meetings, and was regularly harassed by government authorities and orthodox socialists.
This was done both to discourage any Fascists from continuing the fight and as an act of revenge for the hanging of many partisans in the same place by Axis authorities.
All teachers in schools and universities had to swear an oath to defend the fascist regime.
Confident of having been given free hand by French Premier Pierre Laval, and certain that the British and French would be forgiving because of his opposition to Hitler's revisionism within the Stresa front, Mussolini received with disdain the League of Nations' economic sanctions imposed on Italy by initiative of London and Paris.
Italy's refusal to comply with German demands of Jewish persecution influenced other countries.
He made a significant effort to include the previously alienated Catholic element.
Furthermore, the costs of occupying Ethiopia was to cost the Italian treasury another 21.1 billion lire between 1936-1940.
Only two months after Mussolini had been dismissed and arrested, he was rescued from his prison at the Hotel Campo Imperatore in the Gran Sasso raid by a special Fallschirmjäger unit on 12 September 1943; present was Otto Skorzeny.
After the concordat, "he confiscated more issues of Catholic newspapers in the next three months than in the previous seven years."
By early 1942, Italy's military position had become untenable.
Mussolini had applied strong pressure on the Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg to sign the treaty in order to improve his relations with Hitler.
Also unlike fascism, it promoted very communist-like views on property.
Mussolini also survived a failed assassination attempt in Rome by anarchist Gino Lucetti, and a planned attempt by the Italian anarchist Michele Schirru, which ended with Schirru's capture and execution.
As a compromise with his mother, Mussolini was sent to a boarding school run by Salesian monks.
This led Hitler to summon Mussolini to a meeting in Feltre on 19 July 1943.
Along with his autobiographical writings of 1928, these writings would be combined and published by Da Capo Press as ''My Rise and Fall''.
On his 60th birthday, Mussolini received a gift from Hitler of a complete twenty-four volume set of the works of Nietzsche.
In an interview in January 1945 by Madeleine Mollier, a few months before he was captured and executed by Italian anti-fascist partisans, he stated flatly: "Seven years ago, I was an interesting person.
The Grand Council had been created five years earlier as a party body but was "constitutionalized" and became the highest constitutional authority in the state.
As a result, he was rewarded the editorship of the Socialist Party newspaper ''Avanti!''
In 1915, he had a son with Ida Dalser, a woman born in Sopramonte, a village near Trento.
By 1938, the enormous influence Hitler now had over Mussolini became clear with the introduction of the ''Manifesto of Race''.
Mussolini was first married to Ida Dalser in Trento in 1914.
The British wanted Italy on their side against Germany as it had been in World War I. French government opinion was more geared towards action against Italy; they were eager to attack Italy in Libya.
One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.
These basic political views and principles formed the basis of Mussolini's newly formed political movement, the ''Fasci Rivoluzionari d'Azione Internazionalista'' in 1914, who called themselves ''Fascisti'' (Fascists).
Despite making such attacks, Mussolini tried to win popular support by appeasing the Catholic majority in Italy.
He began to criticize the Italian Socialist Party and socialism itself for having failed to recognize the national problems that had led to the outbreak of the war.
Its announcement five days later threw Italy into chaos; German troops rushed in to take over Italy in Operation Achse.
In December 1904, he returned to Italy to take advantage of an amnesty for desertion, for which he had been convicted ''in absentia''.
Thus when World War II in Europe began on 1 September 1939 with the German invasion of Poland eliciting the response of the United Kingdom and France declaring war on Germany, Italy did not become involved in the conflict.
In January 1939, the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain visited Rome, during which visit, Mussolini learned that though Britain very much wanted better relations with Italy, and was prepared to make concessions, that Britain would not sever all ties with France for the sake of an improved Anglo-Italian relationship.
As the Germans approached Rome, Badoglio and the king fled Rome, leaving the Italian Army without orders.
In January 1937, Britain signed a "Gentleman's Agreement" with Mussolini intended to limit Italian intervention in Spain, and was seen by the British Foreign Office as the first step towards creating an Anglo-Italian alliance.
Third, he developed a cult of one-man leadership that focused media attention and national debate on his own personality.
He claimed that the fall of Hohenzollern and Habsburg monarchies and the repression of "reactionary" Turkey would create conditions beneficial for the working class.
After the sanctions against Italy ended in July 1936, the French tried hard to revive the Stresa Front, displaying "...an almost humiliating determination to retain Italy as an ally".
The blackshirts clashed with communists, socialists, and anarchists at parades and demonstrations; all of these factions were also involved in clashes against each other.
Informers betrayed their neighbors, ''squadristi'' seized Jews and delivered them to the German SS, and Italian journalists seemed to compete in the virulence of their anti-Semitic diatribes.
Pope Pius XI praised Mussolini, and the official Catholic newspaper pronounced "Italy has been given back to God and God to Italy."
After his death and the display of his corpse in Milan, Mussolini was buried in an unmarked grave in the Musocco cemetery, to the north of the city.
Mussolini also reached out to the Muslims in his empire and in the predominantly Arab countries of the Middle East.
During the Fascist era, Predappio was dubbed "Duce's town", and Forlì was "Duce's city".
He wanted to persuade Catholics that "fascism was Catholic and he himself a believer who spent some of each day in prayer&nbsp;..." The Pope began referring to Mussolini as "a man sent by Providence."
Mussolini believed that conquering Ethiopia would cost 4 to 6 billion lire, but the true costs of the invasion proved to be 33.5 billion lire.
He was no longer responsible to Parliament and could be removed only by the king.
After Mussolini left the palace, he was arrested by Carabinieri on the king's orders.
It also granted a two-thirds majority of the seats in Parliament to the party or group of parties that received at least 25% of the votes.
Furthermore, Italy was criticized for its use of mustard gas and phosgene against its enemies and also for its zero tolerance approach to enemy guerrillas, authorized by Mussolini.
In an effort to conceal his location from the Germans, Mussolini was moved around before being imprisoned at Campo Imperatore, a mountain resort in Abruzzo where he was completely isolated.
He believed that science had proven there was no god, and that the historical Jesus was ignorant and mad.
Later that year, Mussolini issued several edicts to further control the economy, e.g.
His favorites in European philosophy included Sorel, the Italian Futurist Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, French Socialist Gustave Hervé, and Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta.
From 1936 through 1939, Mussolini provided huge amounts of military support to the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War.
Also in March, some of the major factories in Milan and Turin stopped production to secure evacuation allowances for workers' families.
Alessandra Mussolini, daughter of Romano Mussolini, Benito Mussolini's fourth son, and of Anna Maria Scicolone, Sophia Loren's sister, has been a member of the European Parliament for the far-right Social Alternative movement, a deputy in the Italian lower chamber and  served in the Senate as a member of Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia party.
The initiative had a mixed success; while projects such as the draining of the Pontine Marsh in 1935 for agriculture were good for propaganda purposes, provided work for the unemployed and allowed for great land owners to control subsidies, other areas in the Battle for Land were not very successful.
Additionally, there was a chronic shortage of food, and what food was available was being sold at nearly confiscatory prices.
During this time, he published ''Il Trentino veduto da un Socialista'' (''Trentino as seen by a Socialist'') in the radical periodical ''La Voce''.
Additionally, Italy was to lose 4,000 men killed fighting in the Spanish Civil War (a number adjusted to Italy's population was proportionally twice the American losses in Vietnam) while Italian intervention in Spain cost Italy another 12 to 14 billion lire.
Adone Zoli, the prime minister of the day, contacted Donna Rachele, the dictator's widow, to tell her he was returning the remains, as he needed the support of the far-right in parliament, including Leccisi himself.
When Mussolini tried to tell the king about the meeting, Victor Emmanuel cut him off and told him that he was being replaced by Marshal Pietro Badoglio.
He fully demonstrated his transformation in a speech that acknowledged the nation as an entity, a notion he had rejected prior to the war, saying:
Historically, the largest neo-fascist party was the Italian Social Movement (''Movimento Sociale Italiano''), which disbanded in 1995 and was replaced by National Alliance, a conservative party that distanced itself from Fascism (its founder, former foreign minister Gianfranco Fini, declared during an official visit to Israel that Fascism was "an absolute evil" ).
Marriage between Jews and non-Jews was prohibited.
Reflecting his obsession with demography, Mussolini went on to say that Italy did not at the present possess sufficient manpower to win a war against Britain and/or France, and that the time for war would come sometime in the mid-1930s, when Mussolini calculated the high Italian birth rate would finally give Italy the necessary numbers to win.
Although he insisted in public that he was in full control, he knew that he was little more than a puppet ruler under the protection of his German liberators—for all intents and purposes, the ''Gauleiter'' of Lombardy.
That afternoon, he was summoned to the royal palace by King Victor Emmanuel III, who had been planning to oust Mussolini earlier.
He claimed that for Italy the war would complete the process of ''Risorgimento'' by uniting the Italians in Austria-Hungary into Italy and by allowing the common people of Italy to be participating members of the Italian nation in what would be Italy's first national war.
Mussolini continued to promote the need of a revolutionary vanguard elite to lead society.
The conflict between his parents about religion meant that, unlike most Italians, Mussolini was not baptized at birth and would not be until much later in life.
He was also head of the all-powerful Fascist Party and the armed local fascist militia, the MVSN or "Blackshirts", who terrorized incipient resistances in the cities and provinces.
In Predappio the dictator was buried in a crypt (the only posthumous honor granted to Mussolini).
In the power vacuum that existed during the first three or four months of the occupation, the semi-autonomous bands were virtually uncontrollable.
Mussolini publicly reconciled with the Pope Pius XI in 1932, but "took care to exclude from the newspapers any photography of himself kneeling or showing deference to the Pope."
In February 1939, Mussolini gave a speech before the Fascist Grand Council, during which he proclaimed his belief that a state's power is "proportional to its maritime position" and that Italy was a "prisoner in the Mediterranean and the more populous and powerful Italy becomes, the more it will suffer from its imprisonment.
Mussolini was raised by a devoutly Catholic mother and an anti-clerical father.
Dumini was imprisoned for two years.
Emperor Haile Selassie was forced to flee the country, with Italy entering the capital city, Addis Ababa to proclaim an empire by May 1936, making Ethiopia part of Italian East Africa.
As Head of State and Minister of Foreign Affairs for the Italian Social Republic, Mussolini used much of his time to write his memoirs.
The Fascisti, led by one of Mussolini's close confidants, Dino Grandi, formed armed squads of war veterans called Blackshirts (or ''squadristi'') with the goal of restoring order to the streets of Italy with a strong hand.
"He was sent to the zone of operations where he was seriously injured by the explosion of a grenade."
Pilgrims went to Predappio and Forlì, to see the birthplace of Mussolini.
The Allied invasion of Sicily brought the war to the nation's very doorstep.
On 29 April 1945, the bodies of Mussolini, Petacci, and the other executed Fascists were loaded into a moving van and trucked south to Milan.
The American historian Barry Sullivan wrote that both the British and the French very much wanted a rapprochment with Italy to undo the damage caused by the League of Nations sanctions, and "That Mussolini chose to ally with Hitler, rather than being forced...".
''The Republic'' expounded a number of ideas that fascism promoted, such as rule by an elite promoting the state as the ultimate end, opposition to democracy, protecting the class system and promoting class collaboration, rejection of egalitarianism, promoting the militarization of a nation by creating a class of warriors, demanding that citizens perform civic duties in the interest of the state, and utilizing state intervention in education to promote the development of warriors and future rulers of the state.
The Italian government rarely interfered with the blackshirts' actions, owing in part to a looming threat and widespread fear of a communist revolution.
During this socialist period of his life Mussolini sometimes used the pen name "Vero Eretico" ("sincere heretic").
In June 1923, the government passed the Acerbo Law, which transformed Italy into a single national constituency.
His father never attended.
He tried to combat economic recession by introducing a "Gold for the Fatherland" initiative, encouraging the public to voluntarily donate gold jewelry to government officials in exchange for steel wristbands bearing the words "Gold for the Fatherland".
The very fact that Italy was suffering from overpopulation was seen as proving the cultural and spiritual vitality of the Italians, who were thus justified in seeking to colonize lands that Mussolini argued - on a historical basis - belonged to Italy anyway, which was the heir to the Roman Empire.
They could not own land over a certain value, serve in the armed forces, employ non-Jewish domestics, or belong to the Fascist party.
Within a few days of the Allied landings on Sicily in July 1943, it was obvious Mussolini's army was on the brink of collapse.
The collected gold was melted down and turned into gold bars, which were then distributed to the national banks.
To help cover the huge debts run up during the Ethiopian war, Mussolini devalued the lire by 40% in October 1936.
Unsure what to do, the authorities held the remains in a kind of political limbo for 10 years, before agreeing to allow them to be re-interred at Predappio in Romagna, his birthplace.
During this time Clara's brother posed as a Spanish consul.
He was influenced by anti-Austrian Italian nationalist sentiments, believing that the war offered Italians in Austria-Hungary the chance to liberate themselves from rule of the Habsburgs.
As such, Mussolini believed that an alliance with Germany was preferable to an alignment with Britain and France as it was better to be allied with the strong instead of the weak.
The idea behind Mussolini's foreign policy was that of ''spazio vitale'' (vital space), a concept in Fascism that was analogous to ''Lebensraum'' in German National Socialism.
Further funding for Mussolini's Fascists during the war came from French sources, beginning in May 1915.
Italian Fascists, sometimes government employees but more often fanatic civilians or paramilitary volunteers, hastened to curry favor with the Nazis.
Charlie Chaplin's 1940 film ''The Great Dictator'' satirizes Mussolini as "Benzino Napaloni", portrayed by Jack Oakie.
On his release Dumini allegedly told other people that Mussolini was responsible, for which he served further prison time.
In 1929, a concordat with the Vatican was signed, ending decades of struggle between the Italian state and the Papacy that dated back to the 1870 takeover of the Papal States by the House of Savoy during the unification of Italy.
He also wrote several essays about German literature, some stories, and one novel: ''L'amante del Cardinale: Claudia Particella, romanzo storico'' (''The Cardinal's Mistress'').
His tomb is flanked by marble fasces, and a large idealized marble bust of him is above the tomb.
A comic strip ran in the British comic ''The Beano'' entitled "Musso the Wop".
Mussolini opposed egalitarianism.
Mussolini opposed any territorial reductions of the Italian state and told his associates "I am not here to renounce even a square meter of state territory.
Antagonism between the interventionists, including the Fascists, versus the anti-interventionist orthodox socialists resulted in violence between the Fascists and socialists.
At a meeting with Hitler in August, Mussolini offered and Hitler accepted the commitment of further Italian troops to fight the Soviet Union.
The British Foreign Office understood that it was the Spanish Civil War that was pulling Rome and Berlin closer together, and believed if Mussolini could be persuaded to disengage from Spain, then he would return to the Allied camp.
Mussolini for a period of time continued strictly opposing any German attempt to obtain Anschluss and promoted the ephemeral Stresa Front against Germany in 1935.
In the meantime, from about 1911 until 1938, Mussolini had various affairs with the Jewish author and academic Margherita Sarfatti, called the "Jewish Mother of Fascism" at the time.
General Mario Robotti, Commander of the Italian 11th division in Slovenia and Croatia, issued an order in line with a directive received from Mussolini in June 1942: "I would not be opposed to all (''sic'') Slovenes being imprisoned and replaced by Italians.
With that, Mussolini grew more interested in the German offer of a military alliance, which had first been made in May 1938.
He was negotiating an Armistice with the Allies, which was signed on 3 September 1943.
With the assassination of Dollfuss, Mussolini attempted to distance himself from Hitler by rejecting much of the racialism (particularly Nordicism and Germanicism) and antisemitism espoused by the German radical.
In late November 1939, Adolf Hitler declared:
In his summary, the Inspector also noted:
The trade unions were also deprived of any independence and were integrated into what was called the "corporative" system.
Owing to his father's political leanings, Mussolini was named ''Benito'' after Mexican Leftist President Benito Juárez, while his middle names "Andrea" and "Amilcare" were from Italian Socialists Andrea Costa and Amilcare Cipriani.
Like most of his generation he dramatised human affairs in incurably geographical patches, and like most of the masterful men of his time his belief in his power to mould the life about him carried him beyond sanity.
His military exploits ended in 1917 when he was wounded accidentally by the explosion of a mortar bomb in his trench.
Marinetti expressed his disdain for "the by now prehistoric and troglodyte Ancient Greek and Latin courses," arguing for their replacement with exercise modelled on those of the Arditi soldiers ("learning to advance on hands and knees in front of razing machine gun fire; to wait open-eyed for a crossbeam to move sideways over their heads etc.").
On 24 July 1943, soon after the start of the Allied invasion of Italy, the Grand Council of Fascism voted against him, and the King had him arrested the following day.
He stated in a September 1920 speech:
On the loose for months—and a cause of great anxiety to the new Italian democracy—Il Duce's body was finally "recaptured" in August, hidden in a small trunk at the Certosa di Pavia, just outside Milan.
Mussolini was an admirer of Friedrich Nietzsche.
In the telegram, Mussolini wrote to Mori:
"In addition to my&nbsp;... order of the commander of the Greater German Reich in Italy and the organisation of the occupied Italian area from 10 September 1943 I determine:The supreme commanders in the Operational Zone Adriatic Coast consisting of the provinces of Friaul, Görz, Triest, Istrien, Fiume, Quarnero, Laibach, and in the Prealpine Operations Zone consisting of the provinces of Bozen, Trient and Belluno receive the fundamental instructions for their activity from me.
Three days following his rescue in the Gran Sasso raid, Mussolini was taken to Germany for a meeting with Hitler in Rastenburg at his East Prussian headquarters.
Such was the extent of Mussolini's belief that it was Italy's ''destino'' to rule the Mediterranean because of Italy's high birth rate that Mussolini neglected much of the serious planning and preparations necessary for a war with the Western powers.
A piece of evidence regarding Mussolini's response to the attack on Pearl Harbor comes from the diary of his Foreign Minister Ciano:
Government control of business was part of Mussolini's policy planning.
The German influence on Italian policy upset the established balance in Fascist Italy and proved highly unpopular to most Italians, to the extent that Pope Pius XII sent a letter to Mussolini protesting against the new laws.
forcing banks, businesses, and private citizens to surrender all foreign-issued stock and bond holdings to the Bank of Italy.
By Mussolini's reckoning, the Italian population had to reach 60 million to enable Italy to fight a major war—hence his relentless demands for Italian women to have more children in order to reach that number.
In this way he succeeded in keeping power in his own hands and preventing the emergence of any rival.
In December 1943, Mussolini made a confession to Bruno Spampanato that seems to indicate that he regretted the Manifesto of Race:
An exception was the bombardment and occupation of Corfu in 1923, following an incident in which Italian military personnel charged by the League of Nations to settle a boundary dispute between Greece and Albania were assassinated by Greek bandits.
After joining a new school, Mussolini achieved good grades, and qualified as an elementary schoolmaster in 1901.
Mussolini admired Plato's ''The Republic'', which he often read for inspiration.
Hitler dismissed Ciano's comment, predicting that instead that Britain and the other Western countries would back down, and he suggested that Italy should invade Yugoslavia.
The new course was not without its critics.
Despite Mussolini's efforts to appear pious, by order of his party, pronouns referring to him "had to be capitalized like those referring to God&nbsp;..."
He also did office work for the local Socialist Party, and edited its newspaper ''L'Avvenire del Lavoratore'' (''The Future of the Worker'').
The Christmas Eve law ended this practice, and also made Mussolini the only person competent to determine the body's agenda.
In December 1915, Mussolini married Rachele Guidi, his mistress since 1910, and with his following political ascendency the information about his first marriage was suppressed and both his first wife and son were later persecuted.
The Italian home front was also in bad shape as the Allied bombings were taking their toll.
Despite this sharp rebuke, Mussolini showed up for work the next day as usual.
The right to colonize the neighboring Slovene ethnic areas and the Mediterranean, being inhabited by what were alleged to be less developed peoples, was justified on the grounds that Italy was allegedly suffering from overpopulation.
The shootings took place in the small village of Giulino di Mezzegra and were conducted by a partisan leader who used the nom de guerre of ''Colonnello Valerio''.
In May 1938, during Hitler's visit to Italy, Mussolini told the ''Führer'' that Italy and France were deadly enemies fighting on  "opposite sides of the barricade" concerning  the Spanish Civil War, and the Stresa Front was "dead and buried".
Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it.
He declared that the ideas of eugenics and the racially charged concept of an Aryan nation were not possible.
His real identity is unknown.
Second, the movement claimed to represent the entire national community, not a fragment such as the working class or the aristocracy.
He no longer advocated a proletarian vanguard, but instead a vanguard led by dynamic and revolutionary people of any social class.
During this time, he contracted paratyphoid fever.
Under the Lateran Pact, Vatican City was granted independent statehood and placed under Church law—rather than Italian law—and the Catholic religion was recognized as Italy's state religion.
Since a condition for being pardoned was serving in the army, on 30 December 1904, he joined the corps of the Bersaglieri in Forlì.
