Matthews judges the piece the crowning masterpiece of Britten's early years.
Hemmings later said, "In all of the time that I spent with him he never abused that trust", and Crawford wrote "I cannot say enough about the kindness of that great man&nbsp;... he had a wonderful patience and affinity with young people.
Britten was also impressed by Delius, and thought ''Brigg Fair'' "delicious" when he heard it in 1931.
''Albert Herring'' played at the Jubilee Hall, and Britten's new cantata for tenor, chorus and orchestra, ''Saint Nicolas'', was presented in the parish church.
Edith gave the young Britten his first lessons in piano and notation.
At that time Mahler's music was little regarded and rarely played in English concert halls.
The composers whose works, other than his own, he most often played were Mozart and Schubert; the latter, in Murray Perahia's view, was Britten's greatest idol.
Among Britten's later song cycles with piano accompaniment is the ''Songs and Proverbs of William Blake'', composed for the baritone Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau.
The 830-seat Snape Maltings hall was opened by the Queen at the start of the twentieth Aldeburgh Festival on 2 June 1967; it was immediately hailed as one of the best concert halls in the country.
The third Quartet was Britten's last major work; the critic Colin Anderson said of it in 2007, "one of Britten's greatest achievements, one with interesting allusions to Bartók and Shostakovich, and written with an economy that opens out a depth of emotion that can be quite chilling."
During 1937 Britten composed a ''Pacifist March'' to words by Ronald Duncan for the Peace Pledge Union, of which, as a pacifist, he had become an active member; the work was not a success and was soon withdrawn.
Auden was, as David Matthews puts it, "cheerfully and guiltlessly promiscuous"; Britten, puritanical and conventional by nature, was sexually repressed.
With the premiere of ''Peter Grimes'' in 1945, he leapt to international fame.
These "realisations" brought Purcell, who was then neglected, to a wider public, but have themselves been neglected since the dominance of the trend to authentic performance practice.
Pears joined Sadler's Wells Opera Company, whose artistic director, the singer Joan Cross, announced her intention to re-open the company's home base in London with Britten's opera, casting herself and Pears in the leading roles.
Apart from the Bergs, Stravinskys, Schoenbergs & Bridges one is a bit stumped for names, isn't one?"
Works commemorating Britten include ''Cantus in Memoriam Benjamin Britten'' an orchestral piece written in 1977 by Arvo Pärt, and Sally Beamish's ''Variations on a Theme of Benjamin Britten'', based on the second Sea Interlude from ''Peter Grimes''; she composed the work to mark Britten's centenary.
It fails because it is neither picturesquely nor formally symphonic".
He discovered the music of Debussy and Ravel which, Matthews writes, "gave him a model for an orchestral sound".
Robert Britten, supported by Thomas Sewell, doubted the wisdom of pursuing a composing career; a compromise was agreed by which Britten would, as planned, go on to his public school the following year but would make regular day-trips to London to study composition with Bridge and piano with his colleague Harold Samuel.
He was not always confident that he was the genius others declared him to be, and though he was hypercritical of his own works, he was acutely, even aggressively sensitive to criticism from anybody else.
He did not complete the score of the new opera until August 1970.
The early operetta ''Paul Bunyan'' stands apart from Britten's later operatic works.
At the end the two elements are combined, as the last line of Owen's "Strange meeting" mingles with the ''In paradisum'' of the mass.
Music was the principal means by which Edith Britten strove to maintain the family's social standing, inviting the pillars of the local community to musical soirées at the house.
As a pianist and conductor in other composers' music, Britten made many recordings for Decca.
When his ''Simple Symphony'', based on these juvenilia, was recorded in 1956, Britten wrote this pen-portrait of his young self for the sleeve note:
As a conductor, Britten's repertory included Purcell, Bach, Haydn, Mozart and Schubert, and occasional less characteristic choices including Schumann's ''Scenes from Goethe's Faust''; Elgar's ''The Dream of Gerontius'' and ''Introduction and Allegro''; Holst's ''Egdon Heath'' and short pieces by Percy Grainger.
But I think in a sense I never forgave them for having led me astray in my own particular thinking and natural inclinations".
State honours awarded to Britten included Companion of Honour (Britain) in 1953; Commander of the Royal Order of the Polar Star (Sweden) in 1962; the Order of Merit (Britain) in 1965; and a life peerage  (Britain) in July 1976.
The tour lost money heavily, and Christie announced that he would underwrite no more tours.
He won the Sullivan Prize for composition, the Cobbett Prize for chamber music, and was twice winner of the Ernest Farrar Prize for composition.
The opera administrator Lord Harewood called it "the first genuinely successful British opera, Gilbert and Sullivan apart, since Purcell."
In the US the centennial events were described as "coast to coast," with a Britten festival at Carnegie Hall, and performances at the New York Philharmonic, the Metropolitan Opera and Los Angeles Opera.
Nicholas Maw said of Britten's vocal music: "His feeling for poetry (not only English) and the inflexions of language make him, I think, the greatest musical realizer of English".
He made his first attempts at composition when he was five.
While in hospital Britten became friendly with a senior nursing sister, Rita Thomson; she moved to Aldeburgh in 1974 and looked after him until his death.
The Royal Mint issued a 50-pence piece, to mark the centenary – the first time a composer has featured on a British coin.
Physically, Britten was never robust.
''Owen Wingrave'' was based, like ''The Turn of the Screw'', on a ghost story by Henry James.
Another Ireland pupil, the composer Humphrey Searle, said that Ireland could be "an inspiring teacher to those on his own wavelength"; Britten was not, and learned little from him.
Britten decided that his work would commemorate the dead of both World Wars in a large-scale score for soloists, chorus, chamber ensemble and orchestra.
The Variations, an affectionate tribute to Britten's teacher, range from comic parodies of Italian operatic clichés and Viennese waltzes to a strutting march, reflecting the rise of militarism in Europe, and a Mahlerian funeral march; the piece ends with an exuberant fugal finale.
Having arrived in Britain, Britten and Pears applied for recognition as conscientious objectors; Britten was initially allowed only non-combatant service in the military, but on appeal he gained unconditional exemption.
When redundant Victorian maltings buildings in the village of Snape, six miles inland, became available for hire, Britten realised that the largest of them could be converted into a concert hall and opera house.
Britten's technique in this cycle ranges from atonality in the first song to firm tonality later, with a resolute B major chord at the climax of "Death, be not proud".
''Owen Wingrave'', written for television, was first presented live by the Royal Opera at Covent Garden in 1973, two years after its broadcast premiere.
A month after the opening of ''Peter Grimes'', Britten and Yehudi Menuhin went to Germany to give recitals to concentration camp survivors.
His 1948 revision of ''The Beggar's Opera'' amounts to a wholesale recomposition, retaining the original melodies but giving them new, highly sophisticated orchestral accompaniments.
In the end nothing was done.
'''Edward Benjamin Britten, Baron Britten''',  (22 November 1913&nbsp;– 4 December 1976) was an English composer, conductor and pianist.
Centenary performances of the ''War Requiem'' were given at eighteen locations in Britain.
It became, and remained, his most often played and popular work.
The Red House in Aldeburgh, where Britten and Pears lived and worked together from 1957 until Britten's death in 1976, is now the home of the Britten-Pears Foundation, established to promote their musical legacy.
The younger sister, Ethel, gave him piano lessons; in later life he said that he remained grateful for the excellence of her teaching.
He studied at the Royal College of Music in London and privately with the composer Frank Bridge.
Perhaps, says Brett, "the tide that swept away serialism, atonality and most forms of musical modernism and brought in neo-Romanticism, minimalism and other modes of expression involved with tonality carried with it renewed interest in composers who had been out of step with the times".
New works by Britten featured in almost every festival until his death in 1976, including the premieres of his operas ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' at the Jubilee Hall in 1960 and ''Death in Venice'' at Snape Maltings Concert Hall in 1973.
The work has never been popular; in 1948 the critic Colin Mason lamented its neglect and called it one of Britten's greatest works.
Before Britten left the US, Koussevitzky, always generous in encouraging new talent, offered him a $1,000 commission to write the opera.
In defining his mission as a composer of opera, Britten wrote: "One of my chief aims is to try to restore to the musical setting of the English Language a brilliance, freedom and vitality that have been curiously rare since the death of Purcell".
Britten later wrote of how the scoring of this work impressed him: "...&nbsp;entirely clean and transparent&nbsp;... the material was remarkable, and the melodic shapes highly original, with such rhythmic and harmonic tension from beginning to end".
The Piano Concerto (1938) was at first criticised for being too light-hearted and virtuoso.
The illness left him with a damaged heart, and doctors warned his parents that he would probably never be able to lead a normal life.
Over the 28 years between ''Peter Grimes'' and ''Death in Venice'' Britten's musical style changed, as he introduced elements of atonalism – though remaining essentially a tonal composer – and of eastern music, particularly gamelan sounds but also eastern harmonies.
Whittall believes that one reason for Britten's enduring popularity is the "progressive conservatism" of his music.
Singers and players admired Britten's conducting, and David Webster rated it highly enough to offer him the musical directorship of the Covent Garden Opera in 1952.
Also in that year he heard Stravinsky's ''The Rite of Spring'', which he found "bewildering and terrifying", yet at the same time "incredibly marvellous and arresting".
After the 1976 Aldeburgh Festival, Britten and Pears travelled to Norway, where Britten began writing ''Praise We Great Men'', for voices and orchestra based on a poem by Edith Sitwell.
His best-known works include the opera ''Peter Grimes'' (1945), the ''War Requiem'' (1962) and the orchestral showpiece ''The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra'' (1945).
While in the US, Britten had his first encounter with Balinese gamelan music, through transcriptions for piano duo made by the Canadian composer Colin McPhee.
The Violin Concerto (1940) has virtuoso elements, but they are balanced by lyrical and elegiac passages, "undoubtedly reflecting Britten's growing concern with the escalation of world hostilities."
Colin Matthews comments that the next two works Britten composed after his return, the song-cycle ''The Holy Sonnets of John Donne'' and the Second String Quartet, contrast strongly with earlier, lighter-hearted works such as ''Les Illuminations''.
At one of these, during the triennial Norfolk and Norwich Festival in October 1924,  he heard Frank Bridge's orchestral poem ''The Sea'', conducted by the composer.
The group's express purpose was to produce and commission new English operas and other works, presenting them throughout the country.
Robert Britten's youthful ambition to become a farmer had been thwarted by lack of capital, and he had instead trained as a dentist, a profession he practised successfully but without pleasure.
Britten was later to assert that his initial development as a composer was stifled by reverence for these masters: "Between the ages of thirteen and sixteen I knew every note of Beethoven and Brahms.
In 1967 the BBC commissioned Britten to write an opera specially for television.
He started piano lessons when he was seven years old, and three years later began to play the viola.
What they saw, at Belsen most of all, so shocked Britten that he refused to talk about it until towards the end of his life, when he told Pears that it had coloured everything he had written since.
In 1928, when he was 14, he composed an orchestral cycle, ''Quatre chansons françaises'', setting words by Victor Hugo and Paul Verlaine.
The Aldeburgh Festival was launched in June 1948, with Britten, Pears and Crozier directing it.
Carpenter's 1992 biography closely examined the evidence, as do later studies of Britten, most particularly John Bridcut's ''Britten's Children'' (2006), which concentrates on Britten’s friendships and relationships with various children and adolescents.
The Maltings gave the festival a venue that could comfortably house large orchestral works and operas.
The earliest substantial works Britten composed while studying with Bridge are the String Quartet in F, completed in April 1928, and the ''Quatre Chansons Françaises'', a song-cycle for high voice and orchestra.
Culshaw wrote, "The happiest hours I have spent in any studio were with Ben, for the basic reason that it did not seem that we were trying to make records or video tapes; we were just trying to make music."
In September 1928 Britten went as a boarder to Gresham's School, in Holt, Norfolk.
He was determined to finish the opera and worked urgently to complete it before going into hospital for surgery.
The festival was an immediate success and became an annual event that has continued into the 21st century.
A memorial service was held at the Abbey on 10 March 1977, at which the congregation was headed by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.
Britten declined; he was not confident of his ability as a conductor and was reluctant to spend too much time performing rather than composing.
He intended postgraduate study in Vienna with Alban Berg, Arnold Schoenberg's student, but was eventually dissuaded by his parents, on the advice of the RCM staff.
He took a great interest in writing music for children and amateur performers, including the opera ''Noye's Fludde'', a ''Missa Brevis'', and the song collection ''Friday Afternoons''.
The school had no musical tradition, and Britten continued to study the piano with Ethel Astle.
The Benjamin Britten Music Academy in Lowestoft, founded in the composer's honour, was completed in 1979; it is an 11-18 co-educational day school, with ties to the Britten-Pears Foundation.
The downbeat story of Elizabeth I in her decline, and Britten's score – reportedly thought by members of the premiere's audience "too modern" for such a gala – did not overcome what Matthews calls the "ingrained philistinism" of the ruling classes.
Among the events were the release of a feature film ''Benjamin Britten – Peace and Conflict'', and a centenary exhibition at the British Library.
An increasingly important influence on Britten was the music of the East, an interest that was fostered by a tour there with Pears in 1956, when Britten once again encountered the music of the Balinese gamelan and saw for the first time Japanese Noh plays, which he called "some of the most wonderful drama I have ever seen."
The film-maker Tony Palmer   thought that Tippett's temporary ascendancy might have been a question of the two composers' contrasting personalities: Tippett had more warmth and had made fewer enemies.
Humphrey Carpenter and Michael Oliver judge that Britten's abilities as an orchestrator were essentially self-taught; Donald Mitchell considers that Bridge had an important influence on the cycle.
The first of Britten's compositions to attract wide attention were composed while at the RCM: the Sinfonietta, Op.
Britten became a member of the film unit's small group of regular contributors, another of whom was W. H. Auden.
The fourth Canticle, premiered in 1971 is based on T. S. Eliot's poem "Journey of the Magi".
Among the best known of these is ''The Turn of the Screw'' (1954).
He remained there for two years and in 1930, he won a composition scholarship at the Royal College of Music (RCM) in London; his examiners were the composers John Ireland and Ralph Vaughan Williams and the college's harmony and counterpoint teacher, S P Waddington.
He told Pears that he always voted either Liberal or Labour and could not imagine ever voting Conservative, but he was never a member of any party, except the Peace Pledge Union.
Britten recovered his ''joie de vivre'' for ''The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra'' (1945), written for an educational film, ''Instruments of the Orchestra'', directed by Muir Mathieson and featuring the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by Malcolm Sargent.
It intersperses the Latin requiem mass, sung by soprano and chorus, with settings of works by the First World War poet Wilfred Owen, sung by tenor and baritone.
It was later recognised as one of Britten's finer operas.
Besides his growing attachments to the works of 20th century masters, Britten – along with his contemporary Michael Tippett – was devoted to the English music of the late 17th and early 18th centuries, in particular the work of Purcell.
''Paul Bunyan'' met with wholesale critical disapproval, and the ''Sinfonia da Requiem'' (already rejected by its Japanese sponsors because of its overtly Christian nature) received a mixed reception when Barbirolli and the New York Philharmonic premiered it in March 1941.
To his mother's great delight he was an outstandingly musical child, unlike his sisters, who inherited their father's indifference to music, while his brother, though musically talented, was interested only in ragtime.
Opera productions included ''Owen Wingrave'' at Aldeburgh, ''Billy Budd'' at Glyndebourne, ''Death in Venice'' by English National Opera, ''Gloriana'' by The Royal Opera, and ''Peter Grimes'', ''Death in Venice'' and ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' by Opera North.
In Tippett's view Walton and others were convinced that Britten and Pears were leaders of a homosexual conspiracy in music, a belief Tippett dismisses as ridiculous, inspired by jealousy at Britten's postwar successes.
When the Second World War began, Britten and Pears turned for advice to the British embassy in Washington and were told that they should remain in the US as artistic ambassadors.
The final Canticle was another Eliot setting, his juvenile poem "Death of Saint Narcissus".
Audrey Alston encouraged Britten to go to symphony concerts in Norwich.
Britten's early musical life was dominated by the classical masters; his mother's ambition was for him to become the "Fourth B" – after Bach, Beethoven and Brahms.
They are written for a variety of voices (tenor in all five; counter-tenor or alto in II and IV and baritone in IV) and accompaniments (piano in I to IV, horn in III and harp in V).
He had been asked four years earlier to write a work for the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral, a modernist building designed by Basil Spence.
Despite his large number of works on Christian themes, Britten has sometimes been thought of as agnostic.
Internationally, the anniversary was marked by performances of the ''War Requiem'', ''Peter Grimes'' and other works in four continents.
Keller likens the innovatory skill of the Quartet to that of Walton's Viola Concerto.
Britten's close friendship with Rostropovich inspired the Cello Sonata (1961) and three suites for solo cello (1964–71).
(1969), setting 12 verses by William Soutar, is among the grimmest of Britten's cycles.
At an early stage in composition Britten was told by his doctors that a heart operation was essential if he was to live for more than two years.
He was a central figure of 20th-century British classical music, with a range of works including opera, other vocal music, orchestral and chamber pieces.
The latter said in 1949, "He has sometimes told me, jokingly, that one day I would join the ranks of his 'corpses' and I have always recognized that any ordinary person must soon outlive his usefulness to such a great creative artist as Ben."
He returned to Aldeburgh in August, and wrote ''Welcome Ode'' for children's choir and orchestra.
The conductor Sir Charles Mackerras believed that the term was invented by Lord Harewood.
In 1942 Britten read the work of the poet George Crabbe for the first time.
One of the best known of Britten's works, the ''War Requiem'', was premiered in 1962.
In the 1960s Britten called himself a dedicated Christian, though sympathetic to the radical views propounded by the Bishop of Woolwich in ''Honest to God''.
In 1945 Britten revised it, replacing a skittish third movement with a more sombre passacaglia that, in Matthews's view, gives the work more depth, and makes the apparent triumph of the finale more ambivalent.
Matthews writes, "With the ''War Requiem'' Britten reached the apex of his reputation: it was almost universally hailed as a masterpiece."
The same can already be said today, as far as the modern British – perhaps not only British – field goes, of Britten".
Though Britten described the cycle as "not important stuff, but quite pleasant, I think", it was immediately greeted as a masterpiece, and together with ''Peter Grimes'' it established him as one of the leading composers of his day.
Britten conducted the first performance outside Russia of Shostakovich's Fourteenth Symphony at Snape in 1970.
He himself rarely fell foul of Sewell, a mathematician, in which subject Britten was a star pupil.
Among his best-known Decca recordings are Purcell's ''The Fairy-Queen'', Bach's ''Brandenburg concertos'', Cantata 151, Cantata 102 and ''St John Passion'', Elgar's ''The Dream of Gerontius'' and Mozart's last two symphonies.
The hall was destroyed by fire in 1969, but Britten was determined that it would be rebuilt in time for the following year's festival, which it was.
Tony Palmer made three documentary films about Britten: ''Benjamin Britten & his Festival'' (1967); ''A Time There Was'' (1979); and ''Nocturne'' (2013).
His most frequent and important muse was his personal and professional partner, the tenor Peter Pears; others included Kathleen Ferrier, Jennifer Vyvyan, Janet Baker, Dennis Brain, Julian Bream, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and Mstislav Rostropovich.
Shostakovich told Rostropovich that he believed it to be "the greatest work of the twentieth century".
I remember receiving the full score of ''Fidelio'' for my fourteenth birthday&nbsp;...
Britten described his family as "very ordinary middle class", but there were aspects of the Brittens that were not ordinary: Edith's father was illegitimate, and her mother was an alcoholic; Robert Britten was an agnostic and refused to attend church on Sundays.
The ''Sea Interludes'', adapted by Britten from the full score of ''Peter Grimes'', make a concert suite depicting the sea and the Borough in which the opera is set; the character of the music is strongly contrasted between "Dawn", "Sunday Morning", "Moonlight" and "Storm".
In 1941 Britten produced his first music drama, ''Paul Bunyan'', an operetta, to a libretto by Auden.
''Nocturne'' (1958) is the last of the orchestral cycles.
This musical encounter bore fruit in several Balinese-inspired works later in Britten's career.
Though usually too nervous to play piano solos, Britten often performed piano duets with Clifford Curzon or Richter, and chamber music with the Amadeus Quartet.
The latter was his last large-scale collaboration with Auden.
In September 2012, to mark the composer's forthcoming centenary, the Britten-Pears Foundation launched "Britten 100", a collaboration of leading organisations in the performing arts, publishing, broadcasting, film, academia and heritage.
Dame Janet Baker said in 1981, "I think he was quite entitled to take what he wanted from others&nbsp;...
In July 1976, the last year of his life, Britten accepted a life peerage – the first composer so honoured – becoming Baron Britten of Aldeburgh in the County of Suffolk.
In ''The Times'', Richard Morrison praised the rest of Kildea's book, and hoped that its reputation would not be "tarnished by one sensational speculation&nbsp;... some second-hand hearsay&nbsp;... presenting unsubstantiated gossip as fact".
Unlike his English predecessors such as Elgar and Vaughan Williams, and composers from mainland Europe whom he admired, including Mahler and Shostakovich, Britten was not a classical symphonist.
Kildea continued to maintain, "When all the composer's symptoms are considered there can be only one cause".
Pears was inclined to disregard the advice and go back to England; Britten also felt the urge to return, but accepted the embassy's counsel and persuaded Pears to do the same.
In September 1970 Britten asked Myfanwy Piper, who had adapted the two Henry James stories for him, to turn another prose story into a libretto.
Britten died of congestive heart failure on 4 December 1976.
Although ''Gloriana'' did well at the box office, there were no further productions in Britain for another 13 years.
By the time of Britten's next cycle, ''Seven Sonnets of Michelangelo'' (1942) for tenor and piano, Pears had become his partner and muse; in Matthews's phrase, Britten wrote the cycle as "his declaration of love for Peter".
Britten was born in the fishing port of Lowestoft in Suffolk, on the east coast of England on 22 November 1913, the feast day of Saint Cecilia.
He continued to study privately with Bridge, although he later praised Ireland for "nursing me very gently through a very, very difficult musical adolescence".
The consensus among biographers of Britten is that his father was a loving but somewhat stern and remote parent.
It was a success in North America, with performances in Toronto, New York, Boston, Chicago and San Francisco, under conductors including John Barbirolli and Serge Koussevitzky.
He developed a particular animosity towards Brahms, whose piano music he had once held in great esteem; in 1952 he confided that he played through all Brahms's music from time to time, "to see if I am right about him; I usually find that I underestimated last time how bad it was!"
Christopher Headington calls the work "exuberant and uncomplicated music, scored with clarity and vigour that fits well into Britten's ''oeuvre''."
In addition to large-scale operas for Sadler's Wells and Covent Garden, he wrote "chamber operas" for small forces, suitable for performance in venues of modest size.
Dismayed by the in-fighting among the company, Cross, Britten and Pears severed their ties with Sadler's Wells in December 1945, going on to found what was to become the English Opera Group.
This brought his career as a performer to an end.
In 2013, to mark the anniversary of Britten's birth, Decca released a set of 65 CDs and one DVD, "Benjamin Britten – Complete Works".
''The Turn of the Screw'' the following year was an unqualified success; together with ''Peter Grimes'' it became, and at 2013 remained, one of the two most frequently performed of Britten's operas.
There are memorial plaques to him at three of his London homes: 173 Cromwell Road, 45a St John's Wood High Street, and 8 Halliford Street in Islington.
Britten and Pears returned to England in April 1942.
For Osian Ellis, Britten wrote the Suite for Harp (1969), which Joan Chissell in ''The Times'' described as "a little masterpiece of concentrated fancy".
Pears said that when they met in 1937 he was not sure whether or not Britten would have described himself as a Christian.
Other creative artists have celebrated Britten.
A Pushkin cycle, ''The Poet's Echo'' (1965), was written for Galina Vishnevskaya, and shows a more robust and extrovert side of the composer.
As a conductor he recorded a wide range of composers, from Purcell to Grainger.
He generally avoided the avant garde, and did not challenge the conventions in the way that contemporaries such as Tippett did.
He loved music, and loved youngsters caring about music."
In the decade after Britten's death, his standing as a composer in Britain was to some extent overshadowed by that of the still-living Tippett.
From 1958 Britten conducted Decca recordings of many of his operas and vocal and orchestral works, including the ''Nocturne'' (1959), the ''Spring Symphony'' (1960) and the ''War Requiem'' (1963).
Bridge impressed on Britten the importance of scrupulous attention to the technical craft of composing and the maxim that "you should find yourself and be true to what you found."
They had several reasons for leaving England, including the difficult position of pacifists in an increasingly bellicose Europe; the success that Frank Bridge had enjoyed in the US; the departure of Auden and his friend Christopher Isherwood to the US from England three months previously; hostile or belittling reviews of Britten's music in the English press; and under-rehearsed and inadequate performances.
In May 1944 he conducted the Boyd Neel string orchestra, Dennis Brain and Pears in the first recording of the ''Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings'', which has frequently been reissued, most recently on CD.
Britten's subsequent operas range from large-scale works written for full-strength opera companies, to chamber operas for performance by small touring opera ensembles or in churches and schools.
The old cathedral had been left in ruins by an air-raid on the city in 1940 in which hundreds of people died.
It too finds the sensuality of the verses it sets, though in its structure it resembles a conventional 19th-century song cycle.
After the completion of the opera Britten went into the National Heart Hospital and was operated on in May 1973 to replace a failing heart valve.
Moving to the US did not relieve Britten of the nuisance of hostile criticism: although Olin Downes, the doyen of New York music critics, and Irving Kolodin took to Britten's music, Virgil Thomson was, as the music scholar Suzanne Robinson puts it, consistently "severe and spiteful".
Matthews describes it as one of the composer's most serene works, which "ends in a mood of untroubled happiness that would soon become rare in Britten's music".
He walked and swam regularly and kept himself as fit as he could, but Carpenter in his 1992 biography mentions 20 illnesses, a few of them minor but most fairly serious, suffered over the years by Britten before his final heart complaint developed.
The replacement was successful, but he suffered a slight stroke, affecting his right hand.
The best known of his compositions from this period is probably ''Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge'' for string orchestra, described by Matthews as the first of Britten's works to become a popular classic.
Two other Russian musicians who were close to Britten and regularly performed at the festival were the pianist Sviatoslav Richter and the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich.
Edith Britten was a talented amateur musician and secretary of the Lowestoft Musical Society.
''Billy Budd'' (1951) was well received at its Covent Garden premiere and was regarded by reviewers as an advance on ''Peter Grimes''.
