Disraeli's overall purpose was to enact policies which would benefit the working classes, making his party more attractive to them.
He sent a copy to Disraeli, who called it "vindictive and ill-written&nbsp;... of all the Bulgarian horrors perhaps the greatest".
He was defeated by 19 votes on the second reading, with many Liberals crossing the aisle against him.
The tour was cut short suddenly by Meredith's death from smallpox in Cairo in July 1831.
Disraeli hoped, unrealistically, for ministerial office.
It sold well, but caused much offence in influential circles when the authorship was discovered.
Gladstone, in the 1874 election, had been returned for Greenwich, finishing second behind a Conservative in the two-member constituency, a result he termed more like a defeat than a victory.
Through 1872 the eighty-year-old peeress was suffering from stomach cancer.
The Queen sent for Disraeli, and he became Prime Minister for the second time.
In 1867, the Conservatives introduced a Reform Bill.
The election was a massive defeat for the Whigs across the country, and Peel became Prime Minister.
His speech of three hours was quickly seen as a parliamentary masterpiece.
But the young MP had attacked his leader as early as 1843 on Ireland and then on foreign policy interventions.
He did not defeat the incumbent Whig member, Henry Labouchere, but the Taunton constituency was regarded as unwinnable by the Tories.
Nevertheless, the Cyprus Convention ceding the island to Britain was announced during the congress, and again made Disraeli a sensation.
There was intense public interest in the former Prime Minister's struggles for life.
In the event of another rebellion in India, or of a Russian invasion, the time saved at Suez might be crucial.
The British then proposed to send their own mission, insisting that the Russians be sent away.
The Congress of Berlin was held in June and July 1878, the central relationship in it that between Disraeli and Bismarck.
Russell and Disraeli's future rival Gladstone thought it brave of him to speak as he did;  the speech was badly received by his own party.
In the following weeks, Disraeli served as Leader of the House (with Derby as Prime Minister in the Lords) and as Chancellor.
The writer R. W. Stewart observed that there have always been two criteria for judging Disraeli's novels—one political and the other artistic.
Without a majority in the Commons, the Conservatives had little choice but to accept amendments that considerably liberalised the legislation, though Disraeli refused to accept any from Gladstone.
Nevertheless, his biographer Robert Blake doubts that his subject had specific ideas about foreign policy when he took office in 1874.
Gladstone resigned, and the Queen sent for Disraeli, who refused to take office.
As it became clear that this might be his final sickness, friends and opponents alike came to call.
An alliance of free-trade Conservatives (the "Peelites"), Radicals, and Whigs carried repeal, and the Conservative Party split: the Peelites moved towards the Whigs, while a "new" Conservative Party formed around the protectionists, led by Disraeli, Bentinck, and Lord Stanley (later Lord Derby).
The Reform Act 1867 passed that August, extending the franchise by 938,427—an increase of 88%—by giving the vote to male householders and male lodgers paying at least £10 for rooms.
As MPs prepared to divide, Gladstone rose to his feet and began an angry speech, despite the efforts of Tory MPs to shout him down.
In later years, the German chancellor would show visitors to his office three pictures on the wall: "the portrait of my Sovereign, there on the right that of my wife, and on the left, there, that of Lord Beaconsfield".
Of the peers, five of them had been in Disraeli's 1868 cabinet; the sixth, Lord Salisbury, was reconciled to Disraeli after negotiation and became Secretary of State for India.
He became involved with the financier J. D. Powles, who was prominent among those encouraging the mining boom.
His other novel of this period is ''Venetia'', a romance based on the characters of Shelley and Byron, written quickly to raise much-needed money.
This act was unpopular with the right wing of the Conservative Party, most notably Lord Cranborne (as Robert Cecil was by then known), who resigned from the government and spoke against the bill, accusing Disraeli of "a political betrayal which has no parallel in our Parliamentary annals".
In 1858, Baron Lionel de Rothschild became the first MP to profess the Jewish faith.
Gladstone, Disraeli stated, dominated the scene and "alternated between a menace and a sigh".
He had already turned his attention to politics in 1832, during the great crisis over the Reform Bill.
At the request of the French ambassador, Palmerston put forward amendments to the conspiracy to murder statute, proposing to make creating an infernal device a felony rather than a misdemeanour.
Furthermore, Murray and Lockhart, men of great influence in literary circles, believed that Disraeli had caricatured them and abused their confidence—an accusation denied by the author but repeated by many of his biographers.
''Venetia'' (1837) was a minor work, written to raise much-needed cash.
On the recommendation of the Carlton Club, Disraeli was adopted as a Tory parliamentary candidate at the ensuing General Election.
But it is on his novels that Disraeli's literary achievements are generally judged.
My father's refrain always was 'Philip Carteret Webb', who was the most eminent solicitor of his boyhood and who was an MP.
The Suez Canal, opened in 1869, cut weeks and thousands of miles off the journey between Britain and India; in 1875, approximately 80% of the ships using the canal were British.
In the past, the farmer had the consolation of higher prices at such times, but with bumper crops cheaply transported from the United States, grain prices remained low.
He wrote regular reports on proceedings in the Commons to Victoria, who described them as "very curious" and "much in the style of his books".
With Gladstone conducting a massive speaking campaign, his Liberals bested Disraeli's Conservatives in the 1880 election.
In December 1878, he was offered the Liberal nomination at the next election for Edinburghshire, a constituency popularly known as Midlothian.
Nevertheless, Disraeli made fewer peers (only 22, and one of those one of Victoria's sons) than had Gladstone—the Liberal leader had arranged for the bestowal of 37 peerages during his just over five years in office.
His singular and complex personality has provided historians and biographers with a particularly stiff challenge.
Public support for Disraeli was shown by cheering at a thanksgiving service in 1872 on the recovery of the Prince of Wales from illness, while Gladstone was met with silence.
In Berlin, word spread of Bismarck's admiring description of Disraeli, "''Der alte Jude, das ist der Mann!
''Henrietta Temple'' (1837) was Disraeli's next major success.
Parliament was prorogued on 1 July 1852 as the Tories could not govern for long as a minority; Disraeli hoped that they would gain a majority of about 40.
He favoured Low church clergymen in promotion, disliking other movements in Anglicanism for political reasons.
Russell became Prime Minister again, with Gladstone clearly the Liberal Party's leader-in-waiting, and as Leader of the House Disraeli's direct opponent.
In the aftermath of the debate Bentinck resigned the leadership and was succeeded by Lord Granby; Disraeli's own speech, thought by many of his own party to be blasphemous, ruled him out for the time being.
Disraeli took no public part in the electioneering, it being deemed improper for peers to make speeches to influence Commons elections.
Among the conspirators were Lord Robert Cecil, a young Conservative MP who would a quarter century later become Prime Minister as Lord Salisbury; he wrote that having Disraeli as leader in the Commons decreased the Conservatives' chance of holding office.
The governor of Cape Colony, Sir Bartle Frere, believing that the federation could not be accomplished until the native tribes acknowledged British rule, made demands on the Zulu and their king, Cetewayo, which they were certain to reject.
Parliaments were then for a seven-year term, and it was the custom not to go to the country until the sixth year unless forced to by events.
Other Ottoman possessions in Europe would become independent; additional territory was to be ceded directly to Russia.
Disraeli wrote a personal letter to Gladstone, asking him to place the good of the party above personal animosity: "Every man performs his office, and there is a Power, greater than ourselves, that disposes of all this."
But until 1858 MPs were required to take the oath of allegiance "on the true faith of a Christian", necessitating at least nominal conversion.
Disraeli's sister and brothers adopted the new version of the name; Isaac and his wife retained the older form.
In November 1821, shortly before his seventeenth birthday, Disraeli was articled as a clerk to a firm of solicitors—Swain, Stevens, Maples, Pearse and Hunt—in the City of London.
While these intrigues played out, Disraeli was working with the Bentinck family to secure the necessary financing to purchase Hughenden Manor, in Buckinghamshire.
The other great party, the Whigs, were anathema to Disraeli: "Toryism is worn out & I cannot condescend to be a Whig."
As the constituencies voted, it became clear that the result would be a Conservative majority, the first since 1841.
The Conservatives remained a minority in the House of Commons and the passage of the Reform Bill required the calling of a new election once the new voting register had been compiled.
He resigned, and the Queen reluctantly sent for Palmerston again.
The war divided the British, but the Russian success caused some to forget the atrocities and call for intervention on the Turkish side.
His father left Judaism after a dispute at his synagogue; young Benjamin became an Anglican at the age of 12.
His most autobiographical novel was ''Contarini Fleming'' (1832), an avowedly serious work that did not sell well.
Before the Reform Act 1867, the working class did not possess the vote and therefore had little political power.
Suffering from asthma and gout, Disraeli went out as little as possible, fearing more serious episodes of illness.
The President of the Board of Trade, William Gladstone, resigned from the cabinet over the Maynooth Grant.
He was replaced by the Peelite Earl of Aberdeen, with Gladstone as his Chancellor.
There is also a memorial to him in the chancel in the church, erected in his honour by Queen Victoria.
Blake comments that Disraeli "produced an epic poem, unbelievably bad, and a five-act blank verse tragedy, if possible worse.
With Gladstone's Liberal majority dominant in the Commons, Disraeli could do little but protest as the government advanced legislation.
When Cecil's father objected, Lord Robert stated, "I have merely put into print what all the country gentlemen were saying in private."
In this, he came into disagreement with the Queen, who out of loyalty to her late husband, Albert, Prince Consort, preferred Broad church teachings.
Disraeli and the cabinet reluctantly backed him, and in early January 1879 resolved to send reinforcements.
Disraeli went to Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, where the Queen asked him to form a government.
Others have identified a strongly pragmatic aspect to his policies.
Disraeli had supported efforts to allow Jews to sit in Parliament—the oaths required of new members could only be made in good faith by a Christian.
Protocol forbade her attending Disraeli's funeral (this would not be changed until 1965, when Elizabeth II attended the rites for the former Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill) but she sent primroses ("his favourite flowers") to the funeral, and visited the burial vault to place a wreath of china blooms four days later.
It authorised an early version of nationalisation, having the Post Office buy up the telegraph companies.
Once this was secretly agreed, Disraeli was prepared to allow Russia's territorial gains.
He wrote to Lady Bradford that it was just as much work to end a government as to form one, without any of the fun.
Under Palmerston, the war went better, and was ended by the Treaty of Paris in early 1856.
The party truce ended in 1864, with Tories outraged over Palmerston's handling of the territorial dispute between the German Confederation and Denmark known as the Schleswig-Holstein Question.
In the 1840s Disraeli wrote a trilogy of novels with political themes.
A work of fiction by a former Prime Minister was a new thing for Britain, and the book became a best seller.
Moreover, at the time ''Gallomania'' was published, Disraeli was electioneering in High Wycombe in the Radical interest.
His father, the elder Benjamin, was a prominent and devout member; it was probably from respect for him that Isaac did not leave when he fell out with the synagogue authorities in 1813.
''Endymion'', despite having a Whig as hero, is a last exposition of the author's economic policies and political beliefs.
He is the only British Prime Minister of Jewish birth.
Despite this, Parry sees Disraeli, rather than Peel, as the founder of the modern Conservative party.
The Government of India Act 1858 ended the role of the East India Company in governing the subcontinent.
Derby knew that his "attacks of illness would, at no distant period, incapacitate me from the discharge of my public duties"; doctors had warned him that his health required his resignation from office.
Disraeli was now firmly in the Tory camp.
They conditioned his attitude toward some of the most important political problems which faced him in his later years—especially the Eastern Question; they also coloured many of his novels."
Disraeli was born on 21&nbsp;December 1804 at 6&nbsp;King's Road, Bedford Row, Bloomsbury, London, the second child and eldest son of Isaac D'Israeli, a literary critic and historian, and Maria (Miriam), ''née'' Basevi.
When the American Civil War began in 1861, Disraeli said little publicly, but like most Englishmen expected the South to win.
The Tories and the Anglican establishment were hostile to the bill.
He angered British farmers by refusing to reinstitute the Corn Laws in response to poor harvests and cheap imported grain.
Amendments to the school law, the Scottish legal system, and the railway laws were passed.
Disraeli's last confirmed words before dying in the early morning of 19 April were "I had rather live but I am not afraid to die".
Conversion to Christianity enabled Disraeli to contemplate a career in politics.
One of Russell's early priorities was a Reform Bill, but the proposed legislation that Gladstone announced on 12 March 1866 divided his party.
She died on 15 December.
''Contarini Fleming'' (1832) was avowedly a self-portrait.
The Tories tended to support King and Church, and sought to thwart political change.
At the start of the next session, affairs were handled by a triumvirate of Granby, Disraeli, and John Charles Herries—indicative of the tension between Disraeli and the rest of the party, who needed his talents but mistrusted him.
To roaring approval, he compared the Liberal front bench to "a range of exhausted volcanoes.
Disraeli's last completed novels were ''Lothair'' (1870) and ''Endymion'' (1880).
His literary executor was his private secretary, Lord Rowton.
The final result gave the Liberals an absolute majority of about 50.
By one account, the British ambassador in Berlin, Lord Odo Russell, hoping to spare the delegates Disraeli's awful French accent, told Disraeli that the congress was hoping to hear a speech in the English tongue by one of its masters.
In this, he was backed by his party, hungry for office and its emoluments after almost thirty years with only brief spells in government.
Lord John Manners, in 1843 at the time of Young England, wrote, "could I only satisfy myself that D'Israeli believed all that he said, I should be more happy: his historical views are quite mine, but does he believe them?"
In some of his early fiction Disraeli also portrayed himself and what he felt to be his Byronic dual nature: the poet and the man of action.
His two younger brothers were sent there, and it is not clear why Isaac D'Israeli chose to send his eldest son to a much less prestigious school.
Disraeli was born in London.
Returning to Hughenden, Disraeli brooded over his electoral dismissal, but also resumed work on ''Endymion'', which he had begun in 1872 and laid aside before the 1874 election.
He neglected to notify either the Prince of Wales or the opposition, and was met by irritation from the prince and a full-scale attack from the Liberals.
He enrolled as a student at Lincoln's Inn and joined the chambers of his uncle, Nathaniel Basevy, and then those of Benjamin Austen, who persuaded Isaac that Disraeli would never make a barrister and should be allowed to pursue a literary career.
This was grudgingly agreed to by the House of Lords, with a minority of Conservatives joining with the opposition to pass it.
The fall of Plevna was a major story for weeks in the newspapers, and Disraeli's warnings that Russia was a threat to British interests in the eastern Mediterranean were deemed prophetic.
He articulated an imperial role for Britain that would last into World War II and brought an intermittently self-isolated Britain into the concert of Europe."
The Russians were willing to make changes to the big Bulgaria, but were determined to retain their new possessions Bessarabia in Europe and Batum and Kars on the east coast of the Black Sea.
Disraeli made his maiden speech in Parliament on 7 December 1837.
He had been recommended for it by Lord Derby, the university's Chancellor.
In Blake's words, "Disraeli found himself almost the only figure on his side capable of putting up the oratorical display essential for a parliamentary leader."
The cabinet discussed Disraeli's proposal to position Indian troops at Malta for possible transit to the Balkans and call out reserves.
The Conservative politician and writer Douglas Hurd wrote in 2013, "Disraeli was not a one-nation Conservative—and this was not simply because he never used the phrase.
On Gorst's advice, Disraeli gave a speech to a mass meeting in Manchester that year.
Though many commented on how healthy he looked, it took him great effort to appear so, and when he told the audience he expected to speak to the dinner again the following year, attendees chuckled—Gladstone was then in the midst of his campaign.
Although biographers including Robert Blake and Bradford comment that such a post was incompatible with Disraeli's romantic and ambitious nature, he reportedly gave his employers satisfactory service, and later professed to have learned a good deal from his time with the firm.
At the door of 10 Downing Street, Disraeli received flowers sent by the Queen.
Gladstone refused to join the government.
Disraeli became a major figure in the party.
His brief first premiership, and the first year of his second, gave him little opportunity to make his mark in foreign affairs.
''The Wondrous Tale of Alroy'' the following year portrayed the problems of a medieval Jew in deciding between a small, exclusively Jewish state and a large empire embracing all.
Disraeli continued to the last to pillory his enemies in barely disguised caricatures: the character St Barbe in ''Endymion'' is widely seen as a parody of Thackeray, who had offended Disraeli more than thirty years earlier by lampooning him in ''Punch'' as "Codlingsby".
Roberts undertook a successful punitive expedition against the Afghans over the next six weeks.
When Parliament assembled, Derby's government was defeated by 13 votes on an amendment to the Address from the Throne.
The paper survived for only six months, partly because the mining bubble burst in late 1825, and partly because, according to Blake, the paper was "atrociously edited", and would have failed regardless.
Disraeli's first novel, ''Vivian Grey'', published anonymously in four volumes in 1826–27, was a thinly veiled re-telling of the affair of ''The Representative''.
The negotiations were complicated by Bentinck's sudden death on 21 September 1848, but Disraeli obtained a loan of £25,000 from Bentinck's brothers Lord Henry Bentinck and Lord Titchfield.
An old enemy of Disraeli, former Liberal Chancellor Robert Lowe, alleged during the debate in the Commons that two previous Prime Ministers had refused to introduce such legislation for the Queen.
In April 1835 Disraeli fought a by-election at Taunton as a Tory.
In the 1847 general election, Disraeli stood, successfully, for the Buckinghamshire constituency.
This came about in part because Disraeli's own views stemmed that way, in part because he saw advantage for the Conservatives, and partially in reaction against Gladstone, who disliked the expense of empire.
The journey encouraged his self-consciousness, his moral relativism, and his interest in Eastern racial and religious attitudes."
Disraeli's term as Prime Minister, which began in February 1868, would therefore be short unless the Conservatives won the general election.
The monarch wrote to her daughter, Prussian Crown Princess Victoria, "Mr. Disraeli is Prime Minister!
In responding to Disraeli, Gladstone denied that personal feelings played any role in his decisions then and previously whether to accept office, while acknowledging that there were differences between him and Derby "broader than you may have supposed".
During his lifetime Disraeli's opponents, and sometimes even his friends and allies, questioned whether he sincerely held the views he propounded, or whether they were adopted by him as essential to one who sought to spend his life in politics, and were mouthed by him without conviction.
Parliament opened in February 1877, with Disraeli now in the Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield.
Disraeli had little help from Derby, who was ill, but he united the party enough on a no-confidence vote to limit the government to a majority of 18—Tory defections and absentees kept Palmerston in office.
With no money of his own, Disraeli borrowed money to invest.
There was at the time a boom in shares in South American mining companies.
Disraeli gained wide acclaim and became a hero to his party for the "marvellous parliamentary skill" with which he secured the passage of Reform in the Commons.
Disraeli clashed with Peel in the Commons.
Disraeli gained agreement that Turkey should retain enough of its European possessions to safeguard the Dardanelles.
The Queen had offered to ennoble him as early as 1868; he had then declined.
Although Disraeli forged a personal friendship with John Bright, a Lancashire manufacturer and leading Radical, Disraeli was unable to persuade Bright to sacrifice his distinct position for parliamentary advancement.
Disraeli carried on a long correspondence with Mrs. Willyams, writing frankly about political affairs.
In advance of the meeting, confidential negotiations took place between Britain and Russia in April and May 1878.
Lord Stanley (who had succeeded his father, the former Prime Minister, as Earl of Derby) became Foreign Secretary and Sir Stafford Northcote the Chancellor.
The year after joining Maples's firm, Benjamin changed his surname from D'Israeli to Disraeli.
Disraeli's biographer, Adam Kirsch, suggests that Disraeli's obsequious treatment of his queen was part flattery, part belief that this was how a queen should be addressed by a loyal subject, and part awe that a middle-class man of Jewish birth should be the companion of a monarch.
The British military efforts were marked by bungling, and in 1855 a restive Parliament considered a resolution to establish a committee on the conduct of the war.
He was close to his sister, and on affectionate but more distant terms with his surviving brothers.
In 1873, Gladstone brought forward legislation to establish a Catholic university in Dublin.
She also saw an imperial title as proclaiming Britain's increased stature in the world.
This diplomatic victory over Russia established Disraeli as one of Europe's leading statesmen.
Disraeli would spend three-quarters of his 44-year parliamentary career in opposition.
To make his budget revenue-neutral, as funds were needed to provide defences against the French, he doubled the house tax and continued the income tax.
Without a general election, a Conservative government would be another minority, dependent for survival on the division of its opponents.
The split in the Tory party over the repeal of the Corn Laws had profound implications for Disraeli's political career: almost every Tory politician with experience of office followed Peel, leaving the rump bereft of leadership.
By the time of his second premiership, Disraeli had built a strong relationship with Victoria, probably closer to her than any of her Prime Ministers except her first, Lord Melbourne.
With the fall of the government, Disraeli and the Conservatives returned to the opposition benches.
This was unacceptable to the British, who protested, hoping to get the Russians to agree to attend an international conference which German Chancellor Bismarck proposed to hold at Berlin.
He immediately resigned, and Lord Derby returned to office.
Some historians have commented on a romantic impulse behind Disraeli's approach to Empire and foreign affairs: Abbott writes, "To the mystical Tory concepts of Throne, Church, Aristocracy and People, Disraeli added Empire."
The Whigs were wracked by internal dissensions during the second half of 1851, much of which Parliament spent in recess.
On their return to England he left the solicitors, at the suggestion of Maples, with the aim of qualifying as a barrister.
Disraeli and the cabinet sent Salisbury as lead British representative to the Constantinople Conference, which met in December 1876 and January 1877.
One controversial appointment had occurred shortly before the 1868 election.
"Dizzy married me for my money", his wife said later, "But, if he had the chance again, he would marry me for love."
In the event, the speech was a model of its kind, in which he avoided comment on Disraeli's politics, while praising his personal qualities.
In August 1876, Disraeli was elevated to the House of Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield and Viscount Hughenden.
Over a thousand British and colonial troops were killed.
British policy in South Africa was to encourage federation between the British-run Cape Colony and Natal, and the Boer republics, the Transvaal (annexed by Britain in 1877) and the Orange Free State.
The school chosen for him was run by Eliezer Cogan at Higham Hill in Walthamstow.
Despite this pessimism, Conservatives hopes were buoyed in early 1880 with successes in by-elections the Liberals had expected to win, concluding with victory in Southwark, normally a Liberal stronghold.
