The Body of B. Franklin Printer; Like the Cover of an old Book, Its Contents torn out, And stript of its Lettering and Gilding, Lies here, Food for Worms.
I should prefer to an ordinary death, being immersed with a few friends in a cask of Madeira, until that time, then to be recalled to life by the solar warmth of my dear country!
Although it was no secret that Franklin was the author, his Richard Saunders character repeatedly denied it.
It did not mention many of the Puritan ideas as regards belief in salvation, the divinity of Jesus, and indeed most religious dogma.
Along with the regular issue stamps Franklin however only appears on a few commemorative stamps.
He began in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1731.
When he first arrived, he worked in several printer shops around town, but he was not satisfied by the immediate prospects.
On July 26, 1775, the Second Continental Congress established the United States Post Office and named Benjamin Franklin as the first United States Postmaster General.
But even after Franklin had achieved fame as a scientist and statesman, he habitually signed his letters with the unpretentious 'B.
As deputy postmaster, Franklin became interested in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns.
Ireland's economy was affected by the same trade regulations and laws of Britain that governed America.
"Advice to a Friend on Choosing a Mistress" is a letter written by Benjamin Franklin, dated June 25, 1745, in which Franklin gives advice to a young man about channeling sexual urges.
Franklin was an advocate of free speech from an early age.
Franklin was a prodigious inventor.
The elder Franklin could never accept William's position.
I therefore beg leave to move – that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this Assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the Clergy of this City be requested to officiate in that service.
Josiah wanted Ben to attend school with the clergy, but only had enough money to send him to school for two years.
I have lived, Sir, a long time and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth – that God governs in the affairs of men.
Franklin became a successful newspaper editor and printer in Philadelphia, the leading city in the colonies, publishing the ''Pennsylvania Gazette'' at the age of 23.
In 1787, Franklin served as a delegate to the Philadelphia Convention.
As time went on, Franklin depended less on his literary conventions, and more on his own native humor.
As a young man he rejected Christian dogma in a 1725 pamphlet ''A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain'', which he later saw as an embarrassment, while simultaneously asserting that God is "all wise, all good, all powerful."
As the first United States Ambassador to France, he exemplified the emerging American nation.
In June 1773 Franklin obtained private letters of Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver, governor and lieutenant governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, that proved they were encouraging the Crown to crack down on the rights of Bostonians.
Franklin retained a lifelong commitment to the Puritan virtues and political values he had grown up with, and through his civic work and publishing, he succeeded in passing these values into the American culture permanently.
He was promoted to deputy postmaster-general for the British colonies in 1753, having been Philadelphia postmaster for many years, and this enabled him to set up the first national communications network.
...&nbsp;when the pain and difficulty of breathing entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with the hopes of his recovery, when an imposthume, which had formed itself in his lungs, suddenly burst, and discharged a quantity of matter, which he continued to throw up while he had power; but, as that failed, the organs of respiration became gradually oppressed; a calm, lethargic state succeeded; and on the 17th instant (April 1790), about eleven o'clock at night, he quietly expired, closing a long and useful life of eighty-four years and three months.
Franklin quickly did away with all this when he took over the ''Instructor'' and made it ''The Pennsylvania Gazette''.
In 1731, Franklin was initiated into the local Masonic Lodge.
Franklin published all of Whitefield's sermons and journals, thereby earning a lot of money and boosting the Great Awakening.
In a 1751 pamphlet on demographic growth and its implications for the colonies, he called the Pennsylvania Germans "Palatine Boors" who could never acquire the "Complexion" of the English settlers and to "Blacks and Tawneys" as weakening the social structure of the colonies.
The George Pocock in the book ''A TREATISE on The Aeropleustic Art, or Navigation in the Air, by means of Kites, or Buoyant Sails'' noted being inspired by Benjamin Franklin's traction of his body by kite power across a waterway.
He became Grand Master in 1734, indicating his rapid rise to prominence in Pennsylvania.
It contained ideas for sea anchors, catamaran hulls, watertight compartments, shipboard lightning rods and a soup bowl designed to stay stable in stormy weather.
Federal court decisions from the mid-to-late twentieth century cited the document as a reason for overturning obscenity laws, using it to make a case against censorship.
Although Franklin's parents had intended for him to have a career in the Church, Franklin as a young man adopted the Enlightenment religious belief in deism, that God's truths can be found entirely through nature and reason.
In 1757, he was sent to England by the Pennsylvania Assembly as a colonial agent to protest against the political influence of the Penn family, the proprietors of the colony.
Pennsylvanians were outraged, believing that he had supported the measure all along, and threatened to destroy his home in Philadelphia.
When he returned home in 1785, Franklin occupied a position only second to that of George Washington as the champion of American independence.
Franklin appears on the $1,000 Series EE Savings bond.
He received honorary degrees from Harvard and Yale universities (his first).
Franklin strongly supported the right to freedom of speech:
And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid?
The cgs unit of electric charge has been named after him: one ''franklin'' (Fr) is equal to one statcoulomb.
In his letter ''Cooling by Evaporation'', Franklin noted that, "One may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summer's day."
In that capacity he served as host to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 in Philadelphia.
He surmised that this could help protect buildings from lightning by attaching "upright Rods of Iron, made sharp as a Needle and gilt to prevent Rusting, and from the Foot of those Rods a Wire down the outside of the Building into the Ground;&nbsp;... Would not these pointed Rods probably draw the Electrical Fire silently out of a Cloud before it came nigh enough to strike, and thereby secure us from that most sudden and terrible Mischief!"
He took with him as secretary his 16-year-old grandson, William Temple Franklin.
Franklin solicited, printed in 1752, and promoted an American textbook of moral philosophy from the American Dr. Samuel Johnson titled ''Elementa Philosophica'' to be taught in the new colleges to replace courses in denominational divinity.
Her father was "the sort of rebel destined to transform colonial America"; as clerk of the court, he was jailed for disobeying the local magistrate in defense of middle-class shopkeepers and artisans in conflict with wealthy landowners.
In 1741 Franklin began publishing ''The General Magazine and Historical Chronicle for all the British Plantations in America'', the first such monthly magazine of this type published in America.
Moreover, because of his proposal that prayers be said in the Constitutional Convention of 1787, many have contended that in his later life Franklin became a pious Christian.
Benjamin Franklin and Dashkova met only once, in Paris in 1781.
Their argument against slavery was backed by the Pennsylvania Abolitionist Society and its president, Benjamin Franklin.
After 1767, he was associated with the ''Pennsylvania Chronicle'', a newspaper that was known for its revolutionary sentiments and criticisms of the British policies.
Franklin posted paid ads for the sale of slaves and for the capture of runaway slaves and allowed the sale of slaves in his general store.
"He waged a public relations campaign, secured secret aid, played a role in privateering expeditions, and churned out effective and inflammatory propaganda."
In December 1776, Franklin was dispatched to France as commissioner for the United States.
In 1781, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
When Franklin met Voltaire in Paris and asked his fellow member of the Enlightenment vanguard to bless his grandson, Voltaire said in English, "God and Liberty", and added, "this is the only appropriate benediction for the grandson of Monsieur Franklin."
Franklin formulated a presentation of his beliefs and published it in 1728.
He was playing chess by around 1733, making him the first chess player known by name in the American colonies.
The boy's mother was never identified, and he was placed in foster care.
Neither James nor the ''Courant'''s readers were aware of the ruse, and James was unhappy with Ben when he discovered the popular correspondent was his younger brother.
After his return to the colony, Franklin led the "anti-proprietary party" in the struggle against the Penn family, and was elected Speaker of the Pennsylvania House in May 1764.
He defended his rejection of religious dogma with these words: "I think opinions should be judged by their influences and effects; and if a man holds none that tend to make him less virtuous or more vicious, it may be concluded that he holds none that are dangerous, which I hope is the case with me."
"If an ''Indian'' injures me", he asked, "does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all ''Indians''?"
The Franklin Mercantile Chess Club in Philadelphia, the second oldest chess club in the U.S., is named in his honor.
"Puritanism&nbsp;... and the epidemic evangelism of the mid-eighteenth century, had created challenges to the traditional notions of social stratification" by preaching that the Bible taught all men are equal, that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior, not his class, and that all men can be saved.
Undoubtedly his paper contributed to the broader culture that distinguished Pennsylvania from her neighbors before the Revolution.
He developed a much-improved version of the glass harmonica, in which the glasses rotate on a shaft, with the player's fingers held steady, instead of the other way around; this version soon found its way to Europe.
He regularly attended Old Slaughter's Coffee House in London for chess and socializing, making many important personal contacts.
By 1761, efficiencies lead to the first profits for the colonial post office.
He clarified himself as a deist in his 1771 autobiography, although he still considered himself a Christian.
Benjamin, their eighth child, was Josiah Franklin's 15th child and tenth and last son.
At one point, he wrote to Thomas Paine, criticizing his manuscript, ''The Age of Reason'':
The Junto was a discussion group for issues of the day; it subsequently gave rise to many organizations in Philadelphia.
Despite his own moral lapses, Franklin saw himself as uniquely qualified to instruct Americans in morality.
Franklin was busy with a hundred matters outside of his printing office, and never seriously attempted to raise the mechanical standards of his trade.
He was able to improve his playing standard by facing more experienced players during this period.
When Ben was 15, James founded ''The New-England Courant'', which was the first truly independent newspaper in the colonies.
He is the only Founding Father who is a signatory of all four of the major documents of the founding of the United States: the Declaration of Independence, the Treaty of Alliance with France, the Treaty of Paris and the United States Constitution.
In the 18th century Newton's corpuscular theory was held to be true; only after Young's well known slit experiment in 1803 were most scientists persuaded to believe Huygens' theory.
Franklin did not try to work on them all at once.
One of Franklin's notable characteristics was his respect, tolerance and promotion of all churches.
There is still a possibility that I may have to hold an inquest."
Franklin was foundational in defining the American ethos as a marriage of the practical values of thrift, hard work, education, community spirit, self-governing institutions, and opposition to authoritarianism both political and religious, with the scientific and tolerant values of the Enlightenment.
– Our prayers, Sir, were heard, and they were graciously answered.
In June 1753, Johnson, Franklin, and Smith met in Stratford.
Franklin reorganized the service's accounting system, then improved speed of delivery between Philadelphia, New York and Boston.
Franklin profited from both the international and domestic slave trade, even criticizing slaves who had run off to join the British Army during the colonial wars of the 1740s and 1750s.
The Pennsylvania Assembly unanimously chose Franklin as their delegate to the Second Continental Congress.
Although he initially owned and dealt in slaves, by the 1750s he argued against slavery from an economic perspective and became one of the most prominent abolitionists.
In October 1748, he was selected as a councilman, in June 1749 he became a Justice of the Peace for Philadelphia, and in 1751 he was elected to the Pennsylvania Assembly.
When I have thus got them all together in one View, I endeavour to estimate their respective Weights; and where I find two, one on each side, that seem equal, I strike them both out: If I find a Reason ''pro'' equal to some two Reasons ''con'', I strike out the three.
With this, Franklin suddenly emerged as the leading spokesman for American interests in England.
His call for a change from proprietary to royal government was a rare political miscalculation, however: Pennsylvanians worried that such a move would endanger their political and religious freedoms.
Between 1771 and 1788, he finished his autobiography.
Franklin's autobiography, begun in 1771 but published after his death, has become one of the classics of the genre.
The ''Gazette'' soon became Franklin's characteristic organ, which he freely used for satire, for the play of his wit, even for sheer excess of mischief or of fun.
According to David Morgan, Franklin was a proponent of religion in general.
He remained there for five years, striving to end the proprietors' prerogative to overturn legislation from the elected Assembly, and their exemption from paying taxes on their land.
On the other hand, his advertisements of books show his very great interest in popularizing secular literature.
Franklin feared that America could suffer the same effects should Britain's "colonial exploitation" continue.
In 1743, he first devised a scheme for The Academy, Charity School, and College of Philadelphia.
He was the first to label them as positive and negative respectively, and he was the first to discover the principle of conservation of charge.
Unable to prevent its passage, he made another political miscalculation and recommended a friend to the post of stamp distributor for Pennsylvania.
Franklin also served as American minister to Sweden, although he never visited that country.
In his later years he suggested using the technique for pulling ships.
The family attended the Old South Church, the most liberal Puritan congregation in Boston, where Benjamin Franklin was baptized in 1706.
Wisdom in folk society meant the ability to provide an apt adage for any occasion, and Franklin's readers became well prepared.
Franklin's first pen name, Silence Dogood, paid homage both to the book and to a widely known sermon by Mather.
Franklin was, for example, a corresponding member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, which included such other scientific and industrial luminaries as Matthew Boulton, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood and Erasmus Darwin; on occasion he visited them.
He became wealthy publishing this and ''Poor Richard's Almanack'', which he authored under the pseudonym "Richard Saunders".
In his later years, as Congress was forced to deal with the issue of slavery, Franklin wrote several essays that stressed the importance of the abolition of slavery and of the integration of blacks into American society.
Rodgers's fate was unknown, and because of bigamy laws, Deborah was not free to remarry.
In 1976, as part of a bicentennial celebration, Congress dedicated a  marble statue in Philadelphia's Franklin Institute as the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial.
He was interred in Christ Church Burial Ground in Philadelphia.
Franklin started exploring the phenomenon of electricity in 1746 when he heard of the Leyden Jar.
Franklin became a national hero in America when, as an agent for several colonies, he spearheaded an effort in London to have the Parliament of Great Britain repeal the unpopular Stamp Act.
The Library Company is now a great scholarly and research library.
Max Weber considered Franklin's ethical writings a culmination of the Protestant ethic, which ethic created the social conditions necessary for the birth of capitalism.
In 1766 he made a case for paper money to the British House of Commons.
Franklin spent two months in German lands in 1766, but his connections to the country stretched across a lifetime.
...&nbsp;my Way is, to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two Columns, writing over the one ''Pro'', and over the other ''Con''.
Special balloting conducted October 18, 1785, unanimously elected Franklin the sixth president of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, replacing John Dickinson.
Franklin never patented his inventions; in his autobiography he wrote, "...&nbsp;as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours; and this we should do freely and generously."
He was influential in the more restrained and thus successful monetary experiments in the Middle Colonies, which stopped deflation without causing excessive inflation.
Their second child, Sarah Franklin, familiarly called Sally, was born in 1743.
In 1762, Oxford University awarded Franklin an honorary doctorate for his scientific accomplishments.
Franklin bequeathed £1,000 (about $4,400 at the time, or about $112,000 in 2011 dollars) each to the cities of Boston and Philadelphia, in trust to gather interest for 200 years.
While Franklin was in London, his trip was extended, and there were problems with Sir William's promises of support.
On June 15 Franklin may possibly have conducted his well known kite experiment in Philadelphia, successfully extracting sparks from a cloud.
At this time, many members of the Pennsylvania Assembly were feuding with William Penn's heirs, who controlled the colony as proprietors.
He also managed to secure an appointed post for his illegitimate son, William Franklin, by then an attorney, as Colonial Governor of New Jersey.
Franklin proposed that "vitreous" and "resinous" electricity were not different types of "electrical fluid" (as electricity was called then), but the same electrical fluid under different pressures.
I never doubted, for instance, the existence of the Deity; that He made the world, and governed it by His providence; that the most acceptable service of God was the doing good to man; that our souls are immortal; and that all crime will be punished, and virtue rewarded, either here or hereafter.
These Puritan values included his devotion to egalitarianism, education, industry, thrift, honesty, temperance, charity and community spirit.
In 1753, both Harvard and Yale awarded him honorary degrees.
He was one of seventeen children born to Josiah Franklin, and one of ten born by Josiah's second wife, Abiah Folger; the daughter of Peter Foulger and Mary Morrill.
He stated that Americans already contributed heavily to the defense of the Empire.
The merchantmen had a longer and more complex voyage because they left from London, while the packets left from Falmouth in Cornwall.
The design that was produced was never acted upon by Congress, and the Great Seal's design was not finalized until a third committee was appointed in 1782.
He had never been to Ireland before, and met and stayed with Lord Hillsborough, who he believed was especially attentive.
It was Ben Franklin who, at a critical impasse during the Constitutional Convention in June 1787, attempted to introduce the practice of daily common prayer with these words:
From 1908 through 1923 the U.S. Post Office issued a series of postage stamps commonly referred to as the Washington-Franklin Issues where, along with George Washington, Franklin was depicted many times over a 14-year period, the longest run of any one series in U.S. postal history.
The trust began in 1785 when the French mathematician Charles-Joseph Mathon de la Cour, who admired Franklin greatly, wrote a friendly parody of Franklin's "Poor Richard's Almanack" called "Fortunate Richard".
Deborah's fear of the sea meant that she never accompanied Franklin on any of his extended trips to Europe, despite his repeated requests.
In London, his house at 36 Craven Street, which is the only surviving former residence of Benjamin Franklin, was first marked with a blue plaque and has since been opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House.
In 1732, Ben Franklin published the first German language newspaper in America – ''Die Philadelphische Zeitung'' – although it failed after only one year, because four other newly founded German papers quickly dominated the newspaper market.
Franklin owned as many as seven slaves, two males of whom worked in his household and his shop.
Reading was a great pastime of the Junto, but books were rare and expensive.
He met with the Paxton leaders and persuaded them to disperse.
While Franklin did not live completely by his virtues, and by his own admission he fell short of them many times, he believed the attempt made him a better man contributing greatly to his success and happiness, which is why in his autobiography, he devoted more pages to this plan than to any other single point; in his autobiography Franklin wrote, "I hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example and reap the benefit."
He studied the effects at Clapham Common, London on a large pond there.
The main character leaves a smallish amount of money in his will, five lots of 100 ''livres'', to collect interest over one, two, three, four or five full centuries, with the resulting astronomical sums to be spent on impossibly elaborate utopian projects.
However, the motion met with resistance and was never brought to a vote.
Franklin did not subscribe to Whitefield's theology, but he admired Whitefield for exhorting people to worship God through good works.
According to Michael Faraday, Franklin's experiments on the non-conduction of ice are worth mentioning, although the law of the general effect of liquefaction on electrolytes is not attributed to Franklin.
Pennsylvania Hospital was the first hospital in what was to become the United States of America.
He settled in London, never to return to North America.
When his brother was jailed for three weeks in 1722 for publishing material unflattering to the governor, young Franklin took over the newspaper and had Mrs. Dogood (quoting ''Cato's Letters'') proclaim: "Without freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech."
Franklin's Boston trust fund accumulated almost $5,000,000 during that same time; at the end of its first 100 years a portion was allocated to help establish a trade school that became the Franklin Institute of Boston, and the whole fund was later dedicated to supporting this institute.
Between 1750 and 1753, the "educational triumvirate" of Dr. Benjamin Franklin, the American Dr. Samuel Johnson of Stratford, Connecticut, and the immigrant Scottish schoolteacher Dr. William Smith built on Franklin's initial scheme and created what Bishop James Madison, president of the College of William & Mary, called a "new-model" plan or style of American college.
In addition, they had two children together.
''Le Globe'', created by professor Jacques Charles and Les Frères Robert, was watched by a vast crowd as it rose from the Champ de Mars (now the site of the Eiffel Tower).
The classical authors read in the Enlightenment period taught an abstract ideal of republican government based on hierarchical social orders of king, aristocracy and commoners.
After the Icelandic volcanic eruption of Laki in 1783, and the subsequent harsh European winter of 1784, Franklin made observations connecting the causal nature of these two separate events.
He worked for his father for a time, and at 12 he became an apprentice to his brother James, a printer, who taught Ben the printing trade.
The ''Gazette'' gave Franklin a forum for agitation about a variety of local reforms and initiatives through printed essays and observations.
In the preliminary peace talks in 1782 with Britain, "...&nbsp;Benjamin Franklin insisted that loyalists who had borne arms against the United States would be excluded from this plea (that they be given a general pardon).
She eventually married Richard Bache, had seven children, and cared for her father in his old age.
Franklin's advocacy for religious tolerance in France contributed to arguments made by French philosophers and politicians that resulted in Louis XVI's signing of the Edict of Versailles in November 1787.
In 1754, he headed the Pennsylvania delegation to the Albany Congress.
Franklin was able to play chess more frequently against stronger opposition during his many years as a civil servant and diplomat in England, where the game was far better established than in America.
Hopes for a peaceful solution ended as he was systematically ridiculed and humiliated by Solicitor-General Alexander Wedderburn, before the Privy Council on January 29, 1774.
That same year, he edited and published the first Masonic book in the Americas, a reprint of James Anderson's ''Constitutions of the Free-Masons''.
Franklin wrote a scathing attack against the racial prejudice of the Paxton Boys.
In 1756, Franklin organized the Pennsylvania Militia (see "Associated Regiment of Philadelphia" under heading of Pennsylvania's 103rd Artillery and 111th Infantry Regiment at Continental Army).
Franklin, who was 79 years old at the time, wrote thanking him for a great idea and telling him that he had decided to leave a bequest of 1,000&nbsp;pounds each to his native Boston and his adopted Philadelphia.
Franklin's proposal (which was not adopted) featured the motto: "Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God" and a scene from the Book of Exodus, with Moses, the Israelites, the pillar of fire, and George III depicted as pharaoh.
Franklin became the American spokesman in highly publicized testimony in Parliament in 1766.
In 1853, the oceanographer and cartographer Matthew Fontaine Maury noted that Franklin only charted and codified the Gulf Stream, he did not discover it:
The British edition of the chart, which was the original, was so thoroughly ignored that everyone assumed it was lost forever until Phil Richardson, a Woods Hole oceanographer and Gulf Stream expert, discovered it in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris in 1980.
"I soon became a thorough Deist."
From then he was known as "Doctor Franklin".
To understand this phenomenon more clearly Franklin conducted experiments.
He provided an early response to British surveillance through his own network of counter-surveillance and manipulation.
Eventually, his sympathies for the rebel cause in the American Revolution led to his dismissal on January 31, 1774.
The College was to become influential in guiding the founding documents of the United States: in the Continental Congress, for example, over one third of the college-affiliated men who contributed the ''Declaration of Independence'' between September 4, 1774, and July 4, 1776, were affiliated with the College.
In 1730, at the age of 24, Franklin publicly acknowledged the existence of William, his son, who was deemed 'illegitimate' as he was born out of wedlock, and raised him in his household.
He organised and was the first secretary of the American Philosophical Society and was elected president in 1769.
His death is described in the book ''The Life of Benjamin Franklin'', quoting from the account of Dr. John Jones:
This meeting of several colonies had been requested by the Board of Trade in England to improve relations with the Indians and defense against the French.
Franklin helped to organize a local militia to defend the capital against the mob.
Franklin put the question to his cousin Timothy Folger, a Nantucket whaler captain, who told him that merchant ships routinely avoided a strong eastbound mid-ocean current.
Franklin was careful to stand on an insulator, keeping dry under a roof to avoid the danger of electric shock.
In the 1730s and 1740s, Franklin began taking notes on population growth, finding that the American population had the fastest growth rates on earth.
His mother's identity is not known.
He used Tun Tavern as a gathering place to recruit a regiment of soldiers to go into battle against the Native American uprisings that beset the American colonies.
