Having grown up in a Whig household, he favored that party's politics while young.
Representative William McKinley and Senator Nelson W. Aldrich framed the McKinley Tariff that would raise the tariff even higher, including making some rates intentionally prohibitive.
Because Harrison was in office when Congress eliminated the circuit courts in favor of the courts of appeals, he and Grover Cleveland were the only two Presidents to have appointed judges to both bodies.
He was nominated as the party's presidential candidate on the eighth ballot, by a count of 544 to 108 votes.
Harrison also successfully asked the congress to enact the Meat Inspection Act to eliminate the accusations of product compromise.
In 1890, John Wanamaker joined with other Philadelphia devotees of the Harrisons and made a gift to them of a summer cottage at Cape May.
Harrison took his party's side and advocated for generous pensions for veterans and their widows.
Harrison neither defended nor repudiated Dudley, but allowed him to remain on the campaign for the remaining few days.
On July 2, perhaps a little tardily to avoid suspicion, Harrison gave Wanamaker a check for $10,000 to pay for the cottage.
The Senate failed to act, and President Cleveland withdrew the treaty shortly after taking office.
In 1884, Harrison and Gresham competed for influence at the 1884 Republican National Convention.
Historian George H. Ryden's research indicates Harrison played a key role in determining the status of this Pacific outpost by taking a firm stand on every aspect of Samoa conference negotiations; this included selection of the local ruler, refusal to allow an indemnity for Germany, as well as the establishment of a three power protectorate, a first for the U.S..
Harrison had been elected a companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in 1882, and was elected as commander (president) of the Ohio Commandery on May 3, 1893.
By September 1891 Germany relented, and was soon followed by Denmark, France and Austria-Hungary.
During the hot Washington summers, the Harrisons took refuge in Deer Park, Maryland and Cape May Point, New Jersey.
He commanded the brigade at the battles of Resaca, Cassville, New Hope Church, Lost Mountain, Kennesaw Mountain, Marietta, Peachtree Creek and Atlanta.
In San Francisco, while on tour of the United States in 1891, Harrison proclaimed that the United States was in a "new epoch" of trade and that the expanding navy would protect oceanic shipping and increase American influence and prestige abroad.
As the law's drafting was finalized, Section 24 was added at the behest of Harrison by his Secretary of the Interior John Noble, which read as follows:
He wrote a series of articles about the Federal government and the presidency which were republished in 1897 as a book titled ''This Country of Ours''.
In response to the diplomatic bust, Harrison and Blaine pivoted diplomatically  and initiated a crusade for tariff reciprocity with Latin American nations; the Harrison administration concluded eight reciprocity treaties among these countries.
The initial favorite for the Republican nomination was the previous nominee, James G. Blaine of Maine.
Raum was also accused of accepting loan payments in return for expediting pension cases.
The initial Congressional delegations from all six states were solidly Republican.
He was the incarnation of duty and he teaches us today this great lesson: that those who would associate their names with events that shall outlive a century can only do so by high consecration to duty.
Harrison was thereby defeated in his bid for reelection; this resulted after a deadlock in the state senate, with the legislature eventually choosing Democrat David Turpie.
After the Expo, Harrison returned to his home in Indianapolis.
Harrison and his wife joined and assumed leadership positions at the First Presbyterian Church.
However, his appointment of a silverite Treasury Secretary, William Windom, encouraged the free silver supporters.
Harrison appointed four justices to the Supreme Court of the United States.
In 1889, the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany were locked in a dispute over control of the Samoan Islands.
The Navy was also placed on a high level of preparedness.
Harrison was sworn into office on Monday, March 4, 1889 by Chief Justice Melville Fuller.
Following his defeat, Harrison was able to build on his new prominence in the state.
Many believed the cottage gift appeared to be improper and amounted to a bribe for a cabinet position.
For a few months in 1894, Harrison lived in San Francisco, California, where he gave law lectures at Stanford University.
Following the Panic of 1893, Harrison became more popular in retirement.
Harrison was seven years old when his grandfather was elected President, but he did not attend the inauguration.
That same year, he inherited $800 after the death of an aunt, and used the funds to move with Caroline to Indianapolis, Indiana, in 1854.
It did succeed in establishing an information center that became the Pan American Union.
In fact, other than Blaine, the only Republican boss initially nominated was Redfield Proctor, as Secretary of War.
Harrison's two adult children, Russell, 41 years old at the time, and Mary (Mamie) McKee, 38, disapproved of the marriage and did not attend the wedding.
Morton asked Harrison if he could help recruit a regiment, although he would not ask him to serve.
Other areas were so designated by Harrison, bringing the first forest reservations total to 22 million acres in his term.
His legacy among historians is scant, and "general accounts of his period inaccurately treat Harrison as a cipher".
He died from pneumonia at his home on Wednesday, March 13, 1901, at the age of 67.
The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs Manuel Matta replied that Harrison's message was "erroneous or deliberately incorrect," and said that the Chilean government was treating the affair the same as any other criminal matter.
In 1850, Harrison transferred to Miami University in Oxford, Ohio and graduated in 1852.
The Republicans campaigned heavily in favor of protective tariffs, turning out protectionist voters in the important industrial states of the North.
The effects of the suppression of the Homestead Strike rebounded against the Republicans as well, although the federal government did not take action.
On January 2, 1864, Harrison was promoted to command the 1st Brigade of the 1st Division of the XX Corps.
President Grant appointed him to represent the federal government in a civil claim brought by Lambdin P. Milligan, whose wartime conviction for treason had been reversed by the Supreme Court.
Two years later, Harrison successfully ran as the Republican candidate for reporter of the Indiana Supreme Court.
This prompted Harrison to urge Congress to pass legislation that would "secure all our people a free exercise of the right of suffrage and every other civil right under the Constitution and laws."
Harrison appointed Theodore Roosevelt and Hugh Smith Thompson, both reformers, to the Civil Service Commission, but otherwise did little to further the reform cause.
The silver coinage issue had not been much discussed in the 1888 campaign and Harrison is said to have favored a bimetallist position.
Following the failure to pass the bill, Harrison continued to speak in favor of African American civil rights in addresses to Congress.
The issue cut across party lines, with western Republicans and southern Democrats joining together in the call for the free coinage of silver, and both parties' representatives in the northeast holding firm for the gold standard.
When Harrison took office, no new states had been admitted in more than a decade, owing to Congressional Democrats' reluctance to admit states that they believed would send Republican members.
Theodore Roosevelt later applauded Harrison for his use of the "big stick" in the matter.
Although he had made no political bargains, his supporters had given many pledges upon his behalf.
That  was originally made on a wax phonograph cylinder in 1889 by Gianni Bettini.
Self-seeking has no public observance or anniversary."
During Harrison's administration, the Lakota Sioux, previously confined to reservations in South Dakota, grew restive under the influence of Wovoka, a medicine man, who encouraged them to participate in a spiritual movement called the Ghost Dance.
In July 1890, Senator Sherman achieved passage of a bill, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act, in both houses.
He was also a member of Delta Chi, a law fraternity which permitted dual membership.
When is that quality of influence which our form of government was intended to secure to the electors to be restored?
Harrison recruited throughout northern Indiana to raise a regiment.
The first was David Josiah Brewer, a judge on the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.
Clarkson himself stated, "I am simply on detail from the Republican Committee...I am most anxious to get through this task and leave."
Mrs. Harrison's terminal illness and the fact that both candidates had served in the White House called for a low key campaign, and resulted in neither of the candidates actively campaigning personally.
The Democrats renominated former President Cleveland, making the 1892 election a rematch of the one four years earlier.
In all Harrison has been honored on six U.S. Postage stamps, more than most other U.S. Presidents.
Despite the family's meager resources, Harrison's boyhood was enjoyable, much of it spent outdoors fishing or hunting.
His speech was brief – half as long as that of his grandfather, William Henry Harrison, whose speech holds the record for the longest inaugural address of a U.S. president.
In his speech, Benjamin Harrison credited the nation's growth to the influences of education and religion, urged the cotton states and mining territories to attain the industrial proportions of the eastern states and promised a protective tariff.
Harrison then returned to Indianapolis and his law practice, but stayed active in state and national politics.
The President typically made his best impression speaking before large audiences, as opposed to more intimate settings.
Once mustered, the regiment left Indiana to join the Union Army at Louisville, Kentucky.
The president also partnered with Agriculture Secretary Rusk to threaten Germany with retaliation – by initiating an embargo in the U.S. against Germany's highly demanded beet sugar.
Blaine's persistent medical problems warranted more of a hands-on effort by Harrison in the conduct of foreign policy.
The Blaine supporters shifted their support among candidates they found acceptable, and when they shifted to Harrison, they found a candidate who could attract the votes of many other delegations.
During Harrison's time in office, the United States was continuing to experience advances in science and technology.
In congressional elections, the Republicans increased their membership in the House of Representatives by nineteen seats.
There should be an executive office building, not too far away, but wholly distinct from the dwelling house.
Harrison opposed the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which his party supported, as he thought it violated existing treaties with China.
The United States consul in Hawaii John L. Stevens recognized the new government on February 1, 1893 and forwarded their proposals to Washington.
Although not politically powerful, the position provided Harrison a steady income.
The treasury surplus had evaporated and the nation's economic health was worsening – precursors to the eventual Panic of 1893.
Harrison, though appreciative, was uncomfortable with the appearance of impropriety; a month later, he paid Wanamaker $10,000 as reimbursement to the donors.
Benjamin and Mary had one child together, Elizabeth (February 21, 1897&nbsp;– December 26, 1955).
The effect of the bill, however, was the increased depletion of the nation's gold supply, a problem that would persist until the second Cleveland administration resolved it.
Within a month of the enactment of this law Harrison authorized the first forest reserve, to be located on public domain adjacent to Yellowstone Park, in Wyoming.
Although many have praised Harrison's commitment to African Americans' voting rights, scholars and historians generally regard his administration as below-average, and rank him in the bottom half among U.S. presidents.
He gave speeches in favor of Garfield in Indiana and New York, further raising his profile in the party.
After Garfield's election as president in 1880, his administration offered Harrison a cabinet position which he declined in favor of continued service as senator.
Clarkson, who had expected a full cabinet position, began sabotaging the appointment from the outset, gaining the reputation for "decapitating a fourth class postmaster every three minutes".
Harrison's Attorney General, William H. H. Miller, through the Justice Department, ordered the prosecutions for violation of voting rights in the South; however, white juries often failed to convict or indict violators.
Congress was widely divided on the issue and Harrison was reluctant to address the issue in hope of preventing the alienation of either side.
During the American Civil War, he served the Union as a colonel and on February 14, 1865 was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a brevet brigadier general of volunteers to rank from January 23, 1865.
In 1891, a diplomatic crisis emerged in Chile, otherwise known as the ''Baltimore'' Crisis.
On another front, Harrison sent Frederick Douglass as ambassador to Haiti, but failed in his attempts to establish a naval base there.
Although some of the civil service had been classified under the Pendleton Act by previous administrations, Harrison spent much of his first months in office deciding on political appointments.
Democrats wished to reduce the tariff and limit the amount of money the government took in; Republicans instead wished to spend the money on internal improvements and pensions for Civil War veterans.
In 1896, Harrison at age 62 remarried, to Mary Scott Lord Dimmick, the widowed 37-year-old niece and former secretary of his deceased wife.
Harrison also was featured on the five-dollar National Bank Notes from the third charter period, beginning in 1902.
For the third vacancy, which arose in 1892, Harrison nominated George Shiras.
While visiting Governor Oliver Morton, Harrison found him distressed over the shortage of men answering the latest call.
Classmates included John Alexander Anderson, who became a six-term congressman, and Whitelaw Reid who ran as Harrison's vice presidential candidate in his presidential reelection campaign.
The Act passed by wide margins in both houses, and Harrison signed it into law.
Fort Benjamin Harrison, located in Lawrence, Indiana, a northeastern suburb of Indianapolis, was constructed in 1903 to 1908 and named in his honor.
Historians, however, have not questioned Harrison's commitment to personal and official integrity.
This legislation resulted from a bipartisan desire to initiate reclamation of surplus lands that had been, up to that point, granted from the public domain, for potential settlement or use by railroad syndicates.
Jackson's nomination was indeed successful, but he died after only two years on the Court.
He was treated with steam vapor inhalation and oxygen, but his condition worsened.
He was later elected to the U.S. Senate by the Indiana legislature.
In 1942, a Liberty Ship, the ''SS Benjamin Harrison'', was named in his honor.
After moving into the White House, Harrison noted, quite prophetically, "There is only a door – one that is never locked – between the president's office and what are not very accurately called his private apartments.
He also endorsed a proposed constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court ruling in the ''Civil Rights Cases'' (1883) that declared much of the Civil Rights Act of 1875 unconstitutional.
The conference failed to achieve any diplomatic breakthrough, due in large part to an atmosphere of suspicion fostered by the Argentinian delegation.
He severely questioned the states' civil rights records, arguing that if states have the authority over civil rights, then "we have a right to ask whether they are at work upon it."
John Philip Sousa's Marine Corps band played at the Inaugural Ball inside the Pension Building with a large crowd attending.
Nevertheless, Harrison with these choices had alienated pivotal Republican operatives from New York to Pennsylvania to Iowa and prematurely compromised his political power and future.
Harrison and Cleveland split these four states, with Harrison winning in New York and Indiana.
Harrison was interested in expanding American influence in Hawaii and in establishing a naval base at Pearl Harbor but had not previously expressed an opinion on annexing the islands.
Before ascending to the presidency, Harrison established himself as a prominent local attorney, Presbyterian church leader and politician in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Hallmarks of his administration included unprecedented economic legislation, including the McKinley Tariff, which imposed historic protective trade rates, and the Sherman Antitrust Act; Harrison facilitated the creation of the National Forests through an amendment to the Land Revision Act of 1891.
Harrison's support for African American voting rights and education would be the last significant attempts to protect civil rights until the 1930s.
'''Benjamin Harrison''' (August 20, 1833&nbsp;&ndash; March 13, 1901) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the 23rd President of the United States from 1889 to 1893; he was the grandson of the ninth president, William Henry Harrison.
When the Republicans retook the state legislature, Harrison's election to the Senate was threatened by his intra-party rival Judge Walter Q. Gresham, but Harrison was ultimately chosen.
Senator Shelby Cullom's comment symbolizes Harrison's steadfast aversion to use federal positions for patronage: "I suppose Harrison treated me as well as he did any other Senator; but whenever he did anything for me, it was done so ungraciously that the concession tended to anger rather than please."
The Sherman Act was the first Federal act of its kind, and marked a new use of federal government power.
After the war, he unsuccessfully ran for the governorship of Indiana.
Benjamin was a grandson of President William Henry Harrison and the great-grandson of Benjamin Harrison V, a Virginia governor and signer of the Declaration of Independence.
Harrison had campaigned as a supporter of the merit system, as opposed to the spoils system.
That the President of the United States may, from time to time, set apart and reserve, in any State or Territory having public land bearing forests, in any part of the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber or undergrowth, whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations, and the President shall, by public proclamation, declare the establishment of such reservations and the limits thereof.
Early in Harrison's term, however, the lame duck Congress passed bills that admitted four states to the union: North Dakota and South Dakota on November 2, 1889, Montana on November 8, and Washington on November 11.
Voter turnout was 79.3%, reflecting  a large interest in the campaign; nearly eleven million votes were cast.
However, the government successfully concluded a case during Harrison's time in office (against a Tennessee coal company), and had initiated several other cases against trusts.
Harrison, having accepted a dissenting Congressional Republican investigation report that exonerated Raum, kept him in office for the rest of his administration.
In 1899 Harrison attended the First Peace Conference at The Hague.
Even with the reductions and reciprocity, the McKinley Tariff enacted the highest average rate in American history, and the spending associated with it contributed to the reputation of the Billion-Dollar Congress.
The First International Conference of American States met in Washington in 1889; Harrison set an aggressive agenda including customs and currency integration and  named a bipartisan delegation to the conference, led by John B. Henderson and Andrew Carnegie.
The tariff revisions of the past four years had made imported goods so expensive that now many voters shifted to the reform position.
In the last days of his administration, Harrison dealt with the issue of Hawaiian annexation.
Harrison endorsed the proposed Federal Elections Bill written by Representative Henry Cabot Lodge and Senator George Frisbie Hoar in 1890, but the bill was defeated in the Senate.
The president also remarked, "If the dignity as well as the prestige and influence of the United States are not to be wholly sacrificed, we must protect those who in foreign ports display the flag or wear the colors."
Due in large part to surplus revenues from the tariffs, federal spending reached one billion dollars for the first time during his term.
He joined the fraternity Phi Delta Theta, which he used as a network for much of his life.
Harrison returned to live on his father's farm while finishing his law studies.
A Republican, Harrison was elected to the presidency in 1888, defeating the Democratic incumbent Grover Cleveland.
Shortly after Brewer's nomination, Justice Matthews died, creating another vacancy.
He attended the college for two years  and while there met his future wife, Caroline Lavinia Scott, one of the daughters of the science professor, John Witherspoon Scott.
None of these measures gained congressional approval.
This policy, known as the allotment system and embodied in the Dawes Act, was favored by liberal reformers at the time, but eventually proved detrimental to American Indians as they sold most of their land at low prices to white speculators.
Former governor Oliver Morton favored his opponent, Thomas M. Browne, and Harrison lost his bid for statewide office.
Shiras also drew the opposition of Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania because they were in different factions of the Pennsylvania Republican party, but his nomination was nonetheless approved.
Benjamin Harrison's early schooling took place in a one-room schoolhouse near his home, but his parents later arranged for a tutor to help him with college preparatory studies.
Concerning commerce, he said, "If our great corporations would more scrupulously observe their legal obligations and duties, they would have less call to complain of the limitations of their rights or of interference with their operations."
On October 31 the ''Indiana Sentinel'' published a letter allegedly written by Harrison's friend and supporter, William Wade Dudley, to bribe voters in "blocks of five" to ensure Harrison's election.
After the election Harrison never spoke to Dudley again.
The spending issue in part led to the defeat of the Republicans in the 1890 mid-term elections.
The administration faced challenges throughout the hemisphere, in the Pacific, and in relations with the European powers, involvements that would be taken for granted in the twentieth century.
He returned to his law practice and, despite the Panic of 1873, he was financially successful enough to build a grand new home in Indianapolis in 1874.
Harrison placed fourth on the first ballot, with Sherman in the lead, and the next few ballots showed little change.
Some party leaders still hoped to draft Blaine into running, and speculation increased when he resigned at the 11th hour as Secretary of State in June.
After he left office, Harrison visited the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in June 1893.
Over the course of his administration Harrison marshaled the country's technology to clothe the nation with a credible naval power.
Harrison was defeated by Cleveland in his bid for re-election in 1892, due to the growing unpopularity of the high tariff and high federal spending.
Throughout the 1880s various European countries had imposed a ban on importation of United States pork out of an unconfirmed concern of trichinosis; at issue was over one billion pounds of pork products with a value of $80 million (annually).
The high tariff rates had created a surplus of money in the Treasury, which led many Democrats (as well as the growing Populist movement) to call for lowering them.
Cleveland ultimately won the election by 277 electoral votes to Harrison's 145, and also won the popular vote by 5,556,918 to 5,176,108; this was the most decisive presidential election in 20 years.
Nevertheless, Harrison's opponents made the gift the subject of national ridicule, and Mrs. Harrison and the president were vigorously criticized.
Their daughter Mary Harrison McKee  assumed the role of First Lady after her mother's death.
An international trial was agreed upon; he filed an 800-page brief and traveled to Paris where he spent more than 25 hours in court on their behalf.
Many in Washington did not understand the predominantly religious nature of the Ghost Dance, and thought it was a militant movement being used to rally Native Americans against the government.
The tariff levels had been a major political issue since before the Civil War, and they became the most dominant matter of the 1888 election.
With just one month left before leaving office, the administration signed a treaty on February 14 and submitted it to the Senate the next day with Harrison's recommendation.
These arrangements facilitated the future dominant power of the U.S. in the Pacific; Secretary of State Blaine was absent due to complication of lumbago.
He was initially commissioned as a captain and company commander on July 22, 1862.
Harrison's paternal ancestors were the Virginia Harrisons.
The following year two more states held constitutional conventions and were admitted – Idaho on July 3 and Wyoming on July 10, 1890.
Brewer, the nephew of Justice Field, had previously been considered for a cabinet position.
; the delegation ended up supporting James G. Blaine, the eventual nominee.
John Scott Harrison spent much of his farm income on his children's education.
Harrison was the earliest President whose voice is known to be preserved.
In 1900, Harrison served as an attorney for the Republic of Venezuela in their British Guiana boundary dispute with the United Kingdom.
A recuperated Blaine made brief conciliatory overtures to the Chilean government which had no support in the administration; he then reversed course, joined the chorus for unconditional concessions and apology by the Chileans, who ultimately obliged, and war was averted.
At 5' 6" tall, he was only slightly taller than Madison, the shortest president, but much heavier; he was the fourth (and last) president to sport a full beard Harrison's Inauguration ceremony took place during a rainstorm in Washington D.C..
Harrison's Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy spearheaded the rapid construction of vessels, and within a year congressional approval was obtained for building of the warships , ,  and .
The ''Baltimore's'' captain, Winfield Schley, based on the nature of the sailors' wounds, insisted the sailors had been bayonet-attacked by Chilean police without provocation.
Harrison, who privately believed that appointing Tanner had been a mistake, due to his apparent loose management style and tongue, asked Tanner to resign and replaced him with Green B. Raum.
The issue became a political football of the time and was immortalized in a cartoon captioned "What can I do when both parties insist on kicking?"
In 1885, the Democrats redistricted the Indiana state legislature, which resulted in an increased Democratic majority in 1886, despite an overall Republican majority statewide.
Harrison was known as the Centennial President because his inauguration celebrated the centenary of the first inauguration of George Washington in 1789.
In 2012, a dollar coin with his image, part of the Presidential $1 Coin Program, was issued.
He reprised a more traditional front-porch campaign, abandoned by his immediate predecessors; he received visiting delegations to Indianapolis and made ninety plus pronouncements from his home town.
Morton offered him the command, but Harrison declined, as he had no military experience.
When Boss Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania, who rebuffed for a Cabinet position for his political support during the convention, heard that Harrison ascribed his narrow victory to Providence, Quay exclaimed that Harrison would never know "how close a number of men were compelled to approach...the penitentiary to make him President."
This failed to facilitate a compromise between the factions.
The statue occupies a site in University Park overlooking the Birch Bayh Federal Building and United States Courthouse across New York Avenue.
