Goodman and Krupa played in a trio with Teddy Wilson on piano.
In the Southern states, racial segregation was enforced by the Jim Crow laws.
Benny Goodman's musical papers were donated to Yale University after his death.
Hammond recommended him to Benny Goodman, but the band leader wasn't interested.
"When I look back, they seem like a life sentence."
His stay there extended to six months and his popularity was cemented by nationwide radio broadcasts over NBC affiliate stations.
His early influences were New Orleans jazz clarinetists working in Chicago, notably Johnny Dodds, Leon Roppolo and Jimmie Noone.
An experienced businessman, Goodman helped Henderson in 1934 when the Henderson band disbanded.
"Used to just playing rhythm on the tune, he was unprepared for a turn in the spotlight, but what came out of his fingers was a graceful, impressionistic marvel with classical flourishes, yet still managed to swing.
Other recordings of classical repertoire by Goodman are:
He also recorded musical soundtracks for movie shorts; fans believe that Benny Goodman's clarinet can be heard on the soundtrack of ''One A. M.'', a Charlie Chaplin comedy re-released to theaters in 1934.
"Goodman's popularity was such that he could remain financially viable without touring the South, where he would have been subject to arrest for violating Jim Crow laws."
In 1942 to 1944 and 1948, the musicians' union went on strike against the major record labels in the United States, and singers acquired the popularity that the big bands had once enjoyed.
He made his first record under his own name for Vocalion two years later.
Bard College, Columbia University, Yale University, and Harvard University.
After his bop period, Goodman furthered his interest in classical music written for the clarinet, and frequently met with top classical clarinetists of the day.
In August 2014, WordPress, the free and open source blogging tool and a content management system (CMS) named Version 4.0 “Benny” in his honor.
News reports spread word of the enthusiastic dancing and exciting new music that was happening.
On top of the ''Let's Dance'' airplay, Al Jarvis had been playing Goodman records on KFWB radio, and Los Angeles fans were primed to hear him in person.
In 1936, he added Lionel Hampton on vibes to form the Benny Goodman Quartet; in 1939 he added pioneering jazz guitarist Charlie Christian to his band and small ensembles, who played with him until his death from tuberculosis less than three years later.
Goodman enjoyed the bebop and cool jazz that was beginning to arrive in the 1940s.
... Bop was mostly publicity and people figuring angles."
The crowd broke into cheers and applause.
Slingerland Drum Company had been calling Krupa the "King of Swing" as part of a sales campaign, but shortly after Goodman and crew left Chicago in May 1936 to spend the summer filming ''The Big Broadcast of 1937'' in Hollywood, the title "King of Swing" was applied to Goodman by the media.
Goodman was regarded by some as a demanding taskmaster, by others an arrogant and eccentric martinet.
Benny had recently joined the Pollack band and was urging his father to retire, since he and his brother (Harry) were now doing well as professional musicians.
This performance featured playing by tenor saxophonist Babe Russin, trumpeter Harry James, and Benny Goodman, backed by drummer Gene Krupa.
It sold out weeks in advance, with the capacity 2,760 seats going for the top price of US$2.75 a seat, for the time a very high price.
He played with the nationally known studio and performing bands of Ben Selvin, Red Nichols, Ted Lewis and Isham Jones, although he is not on any of Jones' records.
There were also a number of commercial studio sides recorded for Melotone Records between late 1930 and mid-1931 under Goodman's name.
But Hammond's tendency to interfere in the musical affairs of Goodman's and other bands led to Goodman pulling away from him.
Both combinations were well-received, and Wilson stayed on.
He also gave premiere performances of other works written by leading composers in addition to the pieces he commissioned, namely ''Contrasts'' by Béla Bartók, ''Clarinet Concerto No.
Reportedly, Hammond personally installed Christian onstage during a break in a Goodman concert in Beverly Hills.
He had those boots, and he'd come home at the end of the day exhausted, stinking to high heaven, and when he walked in it made me sick.
"Maybe bop has done more to set music back for years than anything ... Basically it's all wrong.
In 1934 Goodman auditioned for NBC's ''Let's Dance'', a well-regarded three-hour weekly radio program that featured various styles of dance music.
Goodman appeared on a 1975 PBS salute to Hammond but remained at a distance.
Goodman started the evening with stock arrangements, but after an indifferent response, began the second set with the arrangements by Fletcher Henderson and Spud Murphy.
Goodman's bands launched the careers of many major names in jazz.
Goodman made his professional debut in 1921 at the Central Park Theater on Chicago's West Side and entered Harrison High School in Chicago in 1922.
His familiar theme song by that title was based on ''Invitation to the Dance'' by Carl Maria von Weber.
In 1932, his career officially began with Fletcher Henderson.
By the 1940s, some jazz musicians were borrowing advanced ideas from classical music, while others, such as Charlie Parker, were broadening the rhythmic, harmonic and melodic vocabulary of Swing, creating Bebop (bop).
By the mid-1940s, however, big bands had lost much of their popularity.
115'' by Malcolm Arnold, ''Derivations for Clarinet and Band'' by Morton Gould, Sonata for clarinet and piano by Francis Poulenc, and Aaron Copland's Clarinet Concerto.
"At the Carnegie Hall concert, after the usual theatrics, Jess Stacy was allowed to solo and, given the venue, what followed was appropriate," wrote David Rickert.
This led to a feud with Armstrong which spilled into the public arena when Armstrong left Goodman hanging during a joint performance where Goodman called Armstrong back onstage to wrap up the show.
The screenplay was heavily fictionalized, but the music was the real draw.
There, Goodman and his artists Gene Krupa, Bunny Berigan, and Helen Ward found a large crowd of young dancers, raving and cheering the hot music they had heard on the ''Let's Dance'' radio show.
Then came a jam session on "Honeysuckle Rose" featuring members of the Count Basie and Duke Ellington bands as guests.
During the Depression, Fletcher disbanded his orchestra as he was in financial debt.
Some members of this band were: jazz trombonist Jimmy Knepper, saxophonist Jerry Dodgion, and guitarist Turk Van Lake (Vanig Hovsepian).
Goodman's success story was told in the 1955 motion picture ''The Benny Goodman Story'' with Steve Allen and Donna Reed.
His father, David Goodman (1873–1926), came to America in 1892 from Warsaw in the partitioned Poland, and became a tailor.
I like the piece and I like the way he played it.
Guitarist Allan Reuss incurred the maestro's displeasure on one occasion, and Goodman relegated him to the rear of the bandstand, where his contribution would be totally drowned out by the other musicians.
Goodman continued to perform to nearly the end of his life, while exploring an interest in classical music.
Many musicians spoke of "The Ray", Goodman's trademark glare that he bestowed on a musician who failed to perform to his demanding standards.
During the 1942–44 strike, the War Department approached the union and requested the production of V-Discs, a set of records containing new recordings for soldiers to listen to, thereby augmenting the rise of new artists Also, by the late 1940s, swing was no longer the dominant mode of jazz musicians.
He also recorded the clarinet concertos of Weber and Carl Nielsen.
He also received two years of instruction from the classically trained clarinetist Franz Schoepp.
* Clarinet Sonata No.
After years of work by musicians from all over the country, jazz had finally been accepted by mainstream audiences.
They had two daughters, Benjie and Rachel; they also raised Alice's three daughters from her first marriage: she was previously married to British politician Arthur Duckworth, from whom she obtained a divorce.
The encore forced Goodman to make his only audience announcement for the night, stating that they had no encore prepared but that Martha would return shortly with another number.
Goodman learned quickly, becoming a strong player at an early age and soon playing professionally in various bands.
During an era of segregation he also led one of the first well-known integrated jazz groups.
(He was awarded an honorary LL.D.
"Benny described his father's death as 'the saddest thing that ever happened in our family.'"
(The surprise of the session: Goodman handing a solo to Basie's guitarist Freddie Green who was never a featured soloist but earned his reputation as the best rhythm guitarist in the genre—he responded with a striking round of chord improvisations.)
These "Rhythm Club" concerts at the Congress Hotel included sets in which Goodman and Krupa sat in with Fletcher Henderson's band, perhaps the first racially integrated big band appearance before a paying audience in the United States.
Goodman notably also premiered Francis Poulenc's Clarinet sonata, notorious for its difficulty on 10 April 1963.
Goodman is also responsible for a significant step in racial integration in America.
Vocalists Anita O'Day and Helen Forrest spoke bitterly of their experiences singing with Goodman.
Since he needed new arrangements every week for the show, John Hammond suggested that he purchase "hot" (swing) arrangements from Fletcher Henderson, a black musician from Atlanta who had New York's most popular African-American band in the 1920s and early 1930s.
The recordings Goodman made in bop style for Capitol Records were highly praised by jazz critics.
He gave up several dates and insisted on holding rehearsals inside Carnegie Hall to familiarize the band with the lively acoustics."
He recorded sides for Brunswick under the name Benny Goodman's Boys, a band that featured Glenn Miller.
The same year, Goodman was honored with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.
They then played a history of jazz, starting with a Dixieland quartet performing "Sensation Rag", originally recorded by the Original Dixieland Jazz Band in 1918.
In early 1998, the aluminum masters were rediscovered and a new CD set of the concert was released based on these masters.
These recordings have not been out of print since they were first issued.
By the time the band got to the climactic piece "Sing, Sing, Sing (With a Swing)", success was assured.
In the early 1930s, black and white jazz musicians could not play together in most clubs or concerts.
Some later trio and quartet numbers were well-received, and a vocal on "Loch Lomond" by Martha Tilton provoked five curtain calls and cries for an encore.
On December 10, 1926, David Goodman was killed in a traffic accident.
What followed amazed everyone who heard the 45-minute performance.
Irritated to see Christian among the band, Goodman struck up "Rose Room", not expecting the guitarist to know the tune.
According to ''Jazz'' by Ken Burns, when someone asked him why he "played with that nigger" (referring to Teddy Wilson), Goodman replied, "I'll knock you out if you use that word around me again".
Periodically he would organize a new band and play a jazz festival or go on an international tour.
To do so, he had to change his entire technique: instead of holding the mouthpiece between his front teeth and lower lip, as he had done since he first took a clarinet in hand 30 years earlier, Goodman learned to adjust his embouchure to the use of both lips and even to use new fingering techniques.
The next night, August 21, 1935, at the Palomar Ballroom in Los Angeles, Goodman and his band began a three-week engagement.
"The twenty or so months I spent with Benny felt like twenty years," said Forrest.
Recordings were made of this concert, but even by the technology of the day the equipment used was not of the finest quality.
The Bolshoi Ballet came to the US, and the Benny Goodman Orchestra toured the USSR.
If this concert were to take place, then Benny Goodman would be the first jazz bandleader to perform at Carnegie Hall.
Herb Caen wrote that "from the first note, the place was in an uproar."
The album released based on those masters, ''The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert'', went on to be one of the best selling live jazz albums of all time.
When Benny was 10, his father enrolled him and two of his older brothers in music lessons at the Kehelah Jacob Synagogue.
The side sessions produced scores of sides recorded for the various dimestore record labels under an array of group names, including Mills' Musical Clowns, Goody's Good Timers, the Hotsy Totsy Gang, Jimmy Backen's Toe Ticklers, Dixie Daisies, and Kentucky Grasshoppers.
When Goodman finished his solo, he unexpectedly gave a solo to pianist Jess Stacy.
In 1962, the Benny Goodman Orchestra toured the Soviet Union, as part of a cultural exchange program between the two nations after the Cuban missile crisis and the end of that phase of the Cold War; both visits were part of then-current efforts to normalize relations between the USA and USSR.
Once again, initial crowd reaction, though polite, was tepid.
He and his band remained on ''Let's Dance'' until May of that year when a strike by employees of the series' sponsor, Nabisco, forced the cancellation of the radio show.
Goodman's father, David, was a working-class immigrant about whom Benny said (interview, ''Downbeat'', February 8, 1956); "...Pop worked in the stockyards, shoveling lard in its unrefined state.
Goodman's portion of the program from New York, at 12:30&nbsp;a.m. Eastern Time, aired too late to attract a large East Coast audience.
Charlie Christian was playing at the Ritz in Oklahoma City where ... John Hammond heard him in 1939.
2 in E flat by Johannes Brahms
Goodman recorded with the regular Pollack band and smaller groups drawn from the orchestra through 1929.
He had his old finger calluses removed and started to learn how to play his clarinet again—almost from scratch.
At the end of June 1936, Goodman went to Hollywood, where, on June 30, 1936, his band began CBS's "Camel Caravan," its third, and, according to Connor and Hicks, its greatest of them all, sponsored radio show, co-starring Goodman and his old boss Nathaniel Shilkret.
A small private funeral for family members only was held in Stamford, Connecticut, where he had been a long-time resident; in accordance with Goodman's wishes, no clergy officiated, and family members conducted the ceremony.
This concert is regarded as one of the most significant in jazz history.
Goodman hired Henderson's band members to teach his musicians how to play the music.
An engagement was booked at Manhattan's Roosevelt Grill (filling in for Guy Lombardo), but the crowd there expected 'sweet' music and Goodman's band was unsuccessful.
However, unknown to him, the time slot gave him an avid following on the West Coast (they heard him at 9:30&nbsp;p.m. Pacific Time).
They lived in the Maxwell Street neighborhood.
His parents met in Baltimore, Maryland, and moved to Chicago before Benny was born.
He let Henderson write arrangements, that Fletcher, his brother Horace and wife Leora usually copied from his own records, as Fletcher had almost no scores left.
In 1941, ASCAP had a licensing war with music publishers.
Goodman left for New York City and became a successful session musician during the late 1920s and early 1930s, mostly with Ben Pollack's band between 1926 and 1929.
The Palomar engagement was such a marked success it is often described as the beginning of the Swing era.
They played chamber music together (Brahms, Milhaud, Hindemith, Debussy) and in 1948 Goodman played in the world premiere performance of Dahl's ''Concerto a Tre''.
As the concert went on, things livened up.
While Leonard Bernstein's ''Prelude, Fugue, and Riffs'' was commissioned for Woody Herman's big band, it was premiered by Goodman.
When a friend once asked him why, he reportedly said, "Well, if they knew about it, everyone would come to me with their hand out."
In 1946, he met Ingolf Dahl, an emigre classical composer on the faculty of the University of Southern California, who was then musical director of the Victor Borge show.
The band set out on a tour of the United States in May 1935, but was still poorly received.
This integration in music happened ten years before Jackie Robinson became the first black American to enter Major League Baseball.
Goodman's first classical recording dates from April 25, 1938, when he recorded Mozart's Clarinet Quintet in A major, K. 581, with the Budapest Quartet.
In early 1935, Goodman's band was one of three bands (the others were Xavier Cugat and "Kel Murray" r.n.
The idea of an electrified guitar didn't appeal, and Goodman didn't care for Christian's flashy style of dressing.
Charlie Christian's recordings and rehearsal dubs made with Benny Goodman in the early forties are widely known and were released by Columbia.
John Hammond had encouraged Goodman to integrate his band, persuading him to employ pianist Teddy Wilson.
Donald Clarke wrote "It is clear in retrospect that the Swing Era  had been waiting to happen, but it was Goodman and his band that touched it off."
He joined the musicians’ union in 1923 and by 14 was in a band that featured Bix Beiderbecke.
Woody Herman was the dedicatee (1945) and first performer (1946) of Igor Stravinsky's ''Ebony Concerto'', but many years later Stravinsky made another recording, this time with Benny Goodman as the soloist.
Southern Illinois University Edwardsville,
By spring 1936, bandleader Fletcher Henderson was writing arrangements for Goodman's band.
Collier continues: "It was an unhappy choice.
He made a further recording of Mozart's Clarinet Quintet, in July 1956 with the Boston Symphony String Quartet, at the Berkshire Festival; on the same occasion he also recorded Mozart's Clarinet Concerto in A major, K. 622, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra under Charles Munch.
When Goodman was 16, he joined one of Chicago's top bands, the Ben Pollack Orchestra, with which he made his first recordings in 1926.
By August 1935, Goodman found himself with a band that was nearly broke, disillusioned and ready to quit.
In 1928, Benny Goodman and Glenn Miller wrote the instrumental "Room 1411", which was released as a Brunswick 78.
He did, however, practice and perform classical clarinet pieces and commissioned compositions for clarinet.
One night later, at Pismo Beach, the show was another flop, and the band thought the overwhelming reception in Oakland had been a fluke.
In late 1937, Goodman's publicist Wynn Nathanson attempted a publicity stunt by suggesting Goodman and his band should play Carnegie Hall in New York City.
In general Goodman continued to play in the swing style he was most known for.
* ''Premiere Rhapsodie for Clarinet'' by Claude Debussy
Despite increasing health problems, he continued to play until his death from a heart attack in New York City in 1986 at the age of 77, in his home at Manhattan House, 200 East 66th Street.
Goodman also played three special concerts produced by jazz aficionado and Chicago socialite Helen Oakley.
The Goodman band and quartet took over the stage and performed the numbers that had already made them famous.
In July 1935, a record of the Goodman band playing the Henderson arrangements of "King Porter Stomp" backed with "Sometimes I'm Happy" had been released by RCA Victor to ecstatic reviews in both ''Down Beat'' and ''Melody Maker''.
His music was featured in the 2010 documentary ''Jews and Baseball: An American Love Story'', narrated by Academy Award winner Dustin Hoffman.
Benson later appeared on several tracks of a Goodman album released as "Seven Come Eleven."
* Rondo from ''Grand Duo Concertant in E flat'' by Weber, and
Clarinetists all over the world are indebted to Goodman for his being singly responsible for having commissioned many major works of twentieth century chamber music for clarinet and small ensembles as well as compositions for clarinet and symphony orchestra that are now standard repertoire in the field of classical performance.
* An arrangement by Simeon Bellison of Beethoven's ''Variations on a theme from Mozart's "Don Giovanni"''.
He never regained consciousness and died in the hospital the next day.
Goodman continued his success throughout the late 1930s with his big band, his trio and quartet, and the sextet formed in August 1939, the same month Goodman returned to Columbia Records after four years with RCA Victor.
Goodman was born in Chicago, the ninth of twelve children of poor Jewish immigrants from the lands ruled by the Russian Empire.
Armstrong refused to perform alongside Goodman, which led essentially to the end of their friendship, cordial or otherwise.
The all-star Columbia sides featured Jack Teagarden, Joe Sullivan, Dick McDonough, Arthur Schutt, Gene Krupa, Teddy Wilson, Coleman Hawkins (for 1 session), and vocalists Jack Teagarden and Mildred Bailey, and the first two recorded vocals by a young Billie Holiday.
When Goodman was starting a bebop band, he hired Buddy Greco, Zoot Sims, Wardell Gray and a few other modern players.
I couldn't stand it.
Charlie was a hit on the electric guitar and remained in the Benny Goodman Sextet for two years (1939–1941).
On June 25, 1985, Goodman appeared at Avery Fisher Hall in New York City for "A Tribute to John Hammond".
It's not even knowing the scales.
By 1953, Goodman had completely changed his mind about bebop.
I think he's got a sense of humor and he's got some good things there."
According to Willard Alexander, the band's booking agent, Krupa said "If we're gonna die, Benny, let's die playing our own thing."
Benny Goodman broke with tradition by hiring Teddy Wilson to play with him and drummer Gene Krupa in the Benny Goodman Trio.
A notable Victor recording session on March 21, 1928, found Goodman alongside Glenn Miller, Tommy Dorsey and Joe Venuti in the All-Star Orchestra, directed by Nathaniel Shilkret.
A Universal-International production, it was a follow up to 1954's successful ''The Glenn Miller Story''.
In November 1935 Goodman accepted an invitation to play in Chicago at the Joseph Urban Room at the Congress Hotel.
According to James Lincoln Collier, "Pop looked Benny in the eye and said, 'Benny, you take care of yourself, I'll take care of myself.'"
Goodman's daughter Rachel became a classically trained pianist; she sometimes performed in concert with him, beginning when she was sixteen.
Reports were that in Pittsburgh at the Stanley Theater some of the kids danced in the aisles, but in general these arrangements had made little impact on the band's tour until August 19 when they arrived in Oakland to play at McFadden's Ballroom.
The concert was the evening of January 16, 1938.
Murray Kellner) featured on ''Let's Dance'' where they played arrangements by Henderson along with hits such as "Get Happy" and "Limehouse Blues" from composer and arranger Spud Murphy.
I couldn't stand the idea of Pop every day standing in that stuff, shoveling it around".
He attended Lewis Institute (now Illinois Institute of Technology) in 1924 as a high school sophomore, while also playing the clarinet in a dance hall band.
Goodman received honorary doctorates from Union College, University of Illinois,
A special appearance was made by New Orleans jazz legend Kid Ory, who was pleased that Goodman remembered him.
It was the best thing he ever did, and it's ironic that such a layered, nuanced performance came at the end of such a chaotic, bombastic tune."
Acetate recordings of the concert were made, and aluminum studio masters were also cut.
He was buried next to his wife in the Long Ridge Cemetery there.
While in Chicago, the band recorded ''If I Could Be With You'', ''Stompin' At The Savoy'', and ''Goody, Goody''.
When Goodman heard Thelonious Monk, a celebrated pianist and accompanist to bop players Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and Kenny Clarke, he remarked, "I like it, I like that very much.
He is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in the radio division.
At Columbia, John Hammond, his future brother-in-law, produced most of his sessions.
In 1953 they had another falling-out during Goodman's ill-fated tour with Louis Armstrong, which was produced by John Hammond.
At the same time, there are reports that he privately funded several college educations and was sometimes very generous, though always secretly.
It was a bitter blow to the family, and it haunted Benny to the end that his father had not lived to see the success he, and some of the others, made of themselves."
The concert began with three contemporary numbers from the Goodman band—"Don't Be That Way," "Sometimes I'm Happy," and "One O'Clock Jump."
Although Henderson’s orchestra was at its climax of creativity, it had not reached any peaks of popularity.
His mother, Dora (''née'' Grisinsky; 1873–1964), came from Kaunas, Lithuania.
"Benny Goodman was initially hesitant about the concert, fearing for the worst; however, when his film ''Hollywood Hotel'' opened to rave reviews and giant lines, he threw himself into the work.
The sextet made him famous and provided him with a steady income while Charlie worked on legitimizing, popularizing, revolutionizing, and standardizing the electric guitar as a jazz instrument.
