However, drowsiness and tolerance become problems with continued use and none are now considered first-line choices for long-term epilepsy therapy.
While the definitive studies are lacking, the former view received support from a 2004 meta-analysis of 13 small studies.
Since the release of nonbenzodiazepines in 1992 in response to safety concerns, individuals with insomnia and other sleep disorders have increasingly been prescribed nonbenzodiazepines (2.3% in 1993 to 13.7% of Americans in 2010), less often prescribed benzodiazepines (23.5% in 1993 to 10.8% in 2010).
GABAA receptors that are made up of different combinations of subunit subtypes have different properties, different distributions in the brain and different activities relative to pharmacological and clinical effects.
Protracted symptoms tend to resemble those seen during the first couple of months of withdrawal but usually are of a sub-acute level of severity.
These impressive clinical findings led to its speedy introduction throughout the world in 1960 under the brand name ''Librium''.
Unlike other positive allosteric modulators that increases ligand binding, benzodiazepine binding acts as a positive allosteric modulator by increasing the total conduction of chloride ions across the neuronal cell membrane when GABA is already bound to its receptor.
Long-term use is controversial because of concerns about adverse psychological and physical effects, decreasing effectiveness, and physical dependence and withdrawal.
This often results in increased sedation, impaired motor coordination, suppressed breathing, and other adverse effects that have potential to be lethal.
'', α1, α2, α3, and α5 containing GABAA receptors).
The choice of treatment between benzodiazepines, SSRIs, serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and psychotherapy should be based on the patient's history, preference, and other individual characteristics.
Although they are second-line agents, benzodiazepines can be used for a limited time to relieve severe anxiety and agitation.
Additionally, because tolerance to benzodiazepine sedating effects develops more quickly than does tolerance to brainstem depressant effects, those taking more benzodiazepines to achieve desired effects may suffer sudden respiratory depression, hypotension or death.
Although antidepressants with anxiolytic properties have been introduced, and there is increasing awareness of the adverse effects of benzodiazepines, prescriptions for short-term anxiety relief have not significantly dropped.
Withdrawal of benzodiazepines from long-term users, in general, leads to improved physical and mental health particularly in the elderly; although some long term users report continued benefit from taking benzodiazepines, this may be the result of suppression of withdrawal effects.
For each subunit, many subtypes exist (α1–6, β1–3, and γ1–3).
Benzodiazepines have robust efficacy in the short-term management of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), but were not shown to be effective in producing long-term improvement overall.
Alcohol is also cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and more toxic and thus caution is needed to avoid replacing one dependence with another.
This meta-analysis found that long-term use of benzodiazepines was associated with moderate to large adverse effects on all areas of cognition, with visuospatial memory being the most commonly detected impairment.
Benzodiazepines are sometimes used in the treatment of acute anxiety, as they bring about rapid and marked or moderate relief of symptoms in most individuals; however, they are not recommended beyond 2–4 weeks of use due to risks of tolerance and dependence and a lack of long-term effectiveness.
They questioned the accuracy of studies that were not placebo-controlled.
A benzodiazepine can be placed into one of three groups by its elimination half-life, or time it takes for the body to eliminate half of the dose.
Tolerance manifests itself as diminished pharmacological effect and develops relatively quickly to the sedative, hypnotic, anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant actions of benzodiazepines.
Fortunately, for those with benzodiazepine-induced problems, functioning significantly improves within 1 year of discontinuation.
The first such drug, chlordiazepoxide (Librium), was discovered accidentally by Leo Sternbach in 1955, and made available in 1960 by Hoffmann–La Roche, which, since 1963, has also marketed the benzodiazepine diazepam (Valium).
In general, benzodiazepines are well-tolerated and are safe and effective drugs in the short term for a wide range of conditions.
Most reports of disinhibition involve high doses of high-potency benzodiazepines.
Not everyone, however, experiences problems with long-term use.
A goal of less than six months has been suggested, but due to factors such as dosage and type of benzodiazepine, reasons for prescription, lifestyle, personality, environmental stresses, and amount of available support, a year or more may be needed to withdraw.
The efficacy of these two groups of medications is similar.
Likewise, Canadian Psychiatric Association (CPA) recommends benzodiazepines alprazolam, bromazepam, lorazepam, and diazepam only as a second-line choice, if the treatment with two different antidepressants was unsuccessful.
Dependence and tolerance, often coupled with dosage escalation, to benzodiazepines can develop rapidly among drug misusers; withdrawal syndrome may appear after as little as three weeks of continuous use.
They are widely used in small and large animals (including horses, swine, cattle and exotic and wild animals) for their anxiolytic and sedative effects, as pre-medication before surgery, for induction of anesthesia and as adjuncts to anesthesia.
Examples are brotizolam, midazolam, and triazolam.
The benzodiazepine class of drugs also interact with peripheral benzodiazepine receptors.
Heavy alcohol use also increases mortality among poly-drug users.
A slow and gradual withdrawal customised to the individual and, if indicated, psychological support is the most effective way of managing the withdrawal.
Benzodiazepines are categorized as either short-, intermediate-, or long-acting.
The various benzodiazepines differ in their toxicity; temazepam appears to be most toxic in overdose and when used with other drugs.
Decreased libido and erection problems are a common side effect.
However, this advantage is offset by the possibility of developing benzodiazepine dependence.
Tolerance to anti-anxiety effects develops more slowly with little evidence of continued effectiveness beyond four to six months of continued use.
In terms of the mechanism of action of benzodiazepines, their similarities are too great to separate them into individual categories such as anxiolytic or hypnotic.
Rebound symptoms are the return of the symptoms for which the patient was treated but worse than before.
This led some doctors to require a signed consent form from their patients and to recommend that all patients be adequately warned of the risks of dependence and withdrawal before starting treatment with benzodiazepines.
It is not clear as to whether the new nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics (Z-drugs) are better than the short-acting benzodiazepines.
A further benefit is that it is available in liquid form, which allows for even smaller reductions.
When benzodiazepines were first introduced, they were enthusiastically adopted for treating all forms of epilepsy.
Binding also requires that alpha subunits contain a histidine amino acid residue, (''i.e.
For example, a hypnotic administered in low doses will produce anxiety-relieving effects, whereas a benzodiazepine marketed as an anti-anxiety drug will at higher doses induce sleep.
Nonbenzodiazepines are contraindicated during benzodiazepine withdrawal as they are cross tolerant with benzodiazepines and can induce dependence.
Opinion as to the time needed to complete withdrawal ranges from four weeks to several years.
Benzodiazepines and, in particular, temazepam are sometimes used intravenously, which, if done incorrectly or in an unsterile manner, can lead to medical complications including abscesses, cellulitis, thrombophlebitis, arterial puncture, deep vein thrombosis, and gangrene.
The benefits of benzodiazepines are least and the risks are greatest in the elderly.
And, based on the findings of placebo-controlled studies, they do not recommend use of benzodiazepines beyond two to four weeks, as tolerance and physical dependence develop rapidly, with withdrawal symptoms including rebound anxiety occurring after six weeks or more of use.
The less frequent effects are irritability, sweating, depersonalization, derealization, hypersensitivity to stimuli, depression, suicidal behavior, psychosis, seizures, and delirium tremens.
These factors, combined with other possible secondary effects after prolonged use such as psychomotor, cognitive, or memory impairments, limit their long-term applicability.
While the nonbenzodiazepines are by definition structurally unrelated to the benzodiazepines, both classes of drugs possess a common pharmacophore (see figure to the lower-right), which explains their binding to a common receptor site.
Nevertheless, benzodiazepines continue to be prescribed for the long-term treatment of anxiety disorders, although specific antidepressants and psychological therapies are recommended as the first-line treatment options with the anticonvulsant drug pregabalin indicated as a second- or third-line treatment and suitable for long-term use.
The elderly are at an increased risk of dependence and are more sensitive to the adverse effects such as memory problems, daytime sedation, impaired motor coordination, and increased risk of motor vehicle accidents and falls, and an increased risk of hip fractures.
The symptoms include tremors, hypertonia, hyperreflexia, hyperactivity, and vomiting and may last for up to three to six months.
The only medications NICE recommends for the longer term management of GAD are antidepressants.
For treatment of insomnia, benzodiazepines are now less popular than nonbenzodiazepines, which include zolpidem, zaleplon and eszopiclone.
Temazepam abuse reached epidemic proportions in some parts of the world, in particular, in Europe and Australia, and is a major drug of abuse in many Southeast Asian countries.
Examples are diazepam, clorazepate, chlordiazepoxide, and flurazepam.
Benzodiazepines are also misused intranasally, which may have additional health consequences.
In the community, intravenous administration is not practical and so rectal diazepam or (more recently) buccal midazolam are used, with a preference for midazolam as its administration is easier and more socially acceptable.
Anxiety, insomnia and irritability may be temporarily exacerbated during withdrawal, but psychiatric symptoms after discontinuation are usually less than even while taking benzodiazepines.
However, controversy exists as to tolerance to the anxiolytic effects with some evidence that benzodiazepines retain efficacy and opposing evidence from a systematic review of the literature that tolerance frequently occurs and some evidence that anxiety may worsen with long-term use.
In major depression, they may precipitate suicidal tendencies and are sometimes used for suicidal overdoses.
They improve sleep-related problems by shortening the time spent in bed before falling asleep, prolonging the sleep time, and, in general, reducing wakefulness.
Disposal of expired stock must be witnessed by a designated inspector (either a local drug-enforcement police officer or official from health authority).
If used in pregnancy, those benzodiazepines with a better and longer safety record, such as diazepam or chlordiazepoxide, are recommended over potentially more harmful benzodiazepines, such as temazepam or triazolam.
However, there is disagreement among expert bodies regarding the long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder.
A major disadvantage of benzodiazepines that tolerance to therapeutic effects develops relatively quickly while many adverse effects persist.
GABA controls the excitability of neurons by binding to the GABAA receptor.
Long-term use of benzodiazepines has been associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment, but its relationship with dementia remains inconclusive.
Another view maintains that cognitive deficits in chronic benzodiazepine users occur only for a short period after the dose, or that the anxiety disorder is the cause of these deficits.
Internationally, benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV controlled drugs, apart from flunitrazepam which is a Schedule III drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
Symptoms may also occur during a gradual dosage reduction, but are typically less severe and may persist as part of a protracted withdrawal syndrome for months after cessation of benzodiazepines.
On the international scene, benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV controlled drugs by the INCB, apart from flunitrazepam which is a Schedule III drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
Discontinuation of benzodiazepines or abrupt reduction of the dose, even after a relatively short course of treatment (three to four weeks), may result in two groups of symptoms—rebound and withdrawal.
Because of their effectiveness, tolerability, and rapid onset of anxiolytic action, benzodiazepines are frequently used for the treatment of anxiety associated with panic disorder.
Peripheral benzodiazepine receptors are present in peripheral nervous system tissues, glial cells, and to a lesser extent the central nervous system.
Temazepam formulations containing 20&nbsp;mg or greater of the drug are placed on List 1, thus requiring prescriptions to be written in the List 1 format.
They are the main sign of physical dependence.
As for insomnia, they may also be used on an irregular/"as-needed" basis, such as in cases where said anxiety is at its worst.
CPA guidelines note that after 4–6 weeks the effect of benzodiazepines may decrease to the level of placebo, and that benzodiazepines are less effective than antidepressants in alleviating ruminative worry, the core symptom of GAD.
However, combining these drugs with alcohol, opiates or tricyclic antidepressants markedly raises the toxicity.
The GABAA receptor is a heteromer composed of five subunits, the most common ones being two ''α''s, two ''β''s, and one ''γ'' (α2β2γ).
However, they occur with greater frequency in recreational abusers, individuals with borderline personality disorder, children, and patients on high-dosage regimes.
Benzodiazepines have been found to mimic protein reverse turns structurally which enable them with their biological activity in many cases.
Previously only brotizolam, flunitrazepam and triazolam were classed as dangerous drugs.
The introduction of benzodiazepines led to a decrease in the prescription of barbiturates, and by the 1970s they had largely replaced the older drugs for sedative and hypnotic uses.
Different GABAA receptor subtypes have varying distributions within different regions of the brain and, therefore, control distinct neuronal circuits.
* Short-acting compounds have a median half-life of 1–12 hours.
However, the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence did not find any convincing evidence in favor of Z-drugs.
Oxazepam and lorazepam are often used in patients at risk of drug accumulation, in particular, the elderly and those with cirrhosis, because they are metabolized differently from other benzodiazepines, through conjugation.
According to National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), benzodiazepines can be used in the immediate management of GAD, if necessary.
Benzodiazepines can be taken in overdoses and can cause dangerous deep unconsciousness.
This may explain why patients commonly increase doses over time and many eventually take more than one type of benzodiazepine after the first loses effectiveness.
Paradoxical reactions are rare in the general population, with an incidence rate below 1% and similar to placebo.
Their use by expectant mothers shortly before the delivery may result in a floppy infant syndrome, with the newborns suffering from hypotonia, hypothermia, lethargy, and breathing and feeding difficulties.
Clobazam was approved for use in the United States in 2011.
In contrast, drugs that induce cytochrome P450 enzymes, such as St John's wort, the antibiotic rifampicin, and the anticonvulsants carbamazepine and phenytoin, accelerate elimination of many benzodiazepines and decrease their action.
Nonbenzodiazepines also bind to the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABAA receptor and possess similar pharmacological properties.
Withdrawal is best managed by transferring the physically dependent patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam because it has the longest half-life of all of the benzodiazepines, is metabolised into long-acting active metabolites and is available in low-potency tablets, which can be quartered for smaller doses.
Many of the pharmacologically active "classical" benzodiazepine drugs contain the 5-phenyl-1''H''-benzo''e'' 1,4diazepin-2(3''H'')-one substructure (see figure to the right).
Tapering down the dose during pregnancy may lessen its severity.
Withdrawal symptoms are the new symptoms that occur when the benzodiazepine is stopped.
Overall, anecdotal evidence suggests that temazepam may be the most psychologically habit-forming (addictive) benzodiazepine.
Clobazam also has a useful role for very short-term seizure prophylaxis and in catamenial epilepsy.
Under Hantzsch–Widman nomenclature, a diazepine is a heterocycle with two nitrogen atoms, five carbon atom and the maximum possible number of cumulative double bonds.
* Long-acting compounds have a half-life of 40–250 hours.
There is controversy concerning the safety of benzodiazepines in pregnancy.
Such symptoms do gradually lessen over time, eventually disappearing altogether.
Antacids can slow down absorption of some benzodiazepines; however, this effect is marginal and inconsistent.
These long-acting metabolites are partial agonists.
One advantage of benzodiazepines is that they alleviate the anxiety symptoms much faster than antidepressants, and therefore may be preferred in patients for whom rapid symptom control is critical.
These peripheral receptors are not structurally related or coupled to GABAA receptors.
Additionally an altered perception of self, environment and relationships may occur.
Desmethyldiazepam has a half-life of 36–200 hours, and flurazepam, with the main active metabolite of desalkylflurazepam, with a half-life of 40–250 hours.
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 326 patients, 4 patients suffered serious adverse events and 61% became resedated following the use of flumazenil.
They modulate the immune system and are involved in the body response to injury.
Caution is required when benzodiazepines are used in people with personality disorders or intellectual disability because of frequent paradoxical reactions.
However, like antidepressants, they have little evidence of effectiveness, although antipsychotics have shown some benefit.
For that reason, they are contraindicated in people with myasthenia gravis, sleep apnea, bronchitis, and COPD.
Some evidence suggests that partial tolerance does develop, and that, "memory impairment is limited to a narrow window within 90 minutes after each dose".
However, researchers hold contrary opinions regarding the effects of long-term administration.
The high potency benzodiazepines alprazolam and triazolam and long-acting benzodiazepines are not recommended in the elderly due to increased adverse effects.
Prolonged convulsive epileptic seizures are a medical emergency that can usually be dealt with effectively by administering fast-acting benzodiazepines, which are potent anticonvulsants.
Withdrawal from long term benzodiazepines is beneficial for most individuals.
For this reason, benzodiazepines show no affinity for GABAA receptors containing α4 and α6 subunits with an arginine instead of a histidine residue.
According to the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, indirect comparison indicates that side-effects from benzodiazepines may be about twice as frequent as from nonbenzodiazepines.
It is contraindicated in patients with a history of long-term use of benzodiazepines, those having ingested a substance that lowers the seizure threshold or may cause an arrhythmia, and in those with abnormal vital signs.
The pharmacological properties of the compounds prepared initially were disappointing, and Sternbach abandoned the project.
Some variation in drug scheduling exists in individual countries; for example, in the United Kingdom, midazolam and temazepam are Schedule III controlled drugs
Once benzodiazepine dependence has been established, a clinician usually converts the patient to an equivalent dose of diazepam before beginning a gradual reduction program.
The subset of GABAA receptors that also bind benzodiazepines are referred to as benzodiazepine receptors (BzR).
Adverse effects on cognition can be mistaken for the effects of old age.
In the Netherlands, since October 1993, benzodiazepines, including formulations containing less than 20&nbsp;mg of temazepam, are all placed on List 2 of the Opium Law.
Sharing syringes and needles for this purpose also brings up the possibility of transmission of hepatitis, HIV, and other diseases.
Psychological therapies and other pharmacological therapies are recommended for the long-term treatment of generalized anxiety disorder.
They include drowsiness, dizziness, and decreased alertness and concentration.
NICE review pointed out that short-acting Z-drugs were inappropriately compared in clinical trials with long-acting benzodiazepines.
Benzodiazepines share a similar chemical structure, and their effects in humans are mainly produced by the allosteric modification of a specific kind of neurotransmitter receptor, the GABAA receptor, which increases the overall conductance of these inhibitory channels; this results in the various therapeutic effects as well as adverse effects of benzodiazepines.
Compared to other pharmacological treatments, benzodiazepines are twice as likely to lead to a relapse of the underlying condition upon discontinuation.
Nonbenzodiazepines are molecularly distinct, but nonetheless, they work on the same benzodiazepine receptors and produce similar sedative effects.
Benzodiazepines bind at the interface of the α and γ subunits on the GABAA receptor.
Other drawbacks of hypnotics, including benzodiazepines, are possible tolerance to their effects, rebound insomnia, and reduced slow-wave sleep and a withdrawal period typified by rebound insomnia and a prolonged period of anxiety and agitation.
Chlordiazepoxide is the most commonly used benzodiazepine for alcohol detoxification, but diazepam may be used as an alternative.
A 2015 review found a larger effect with medications than talk therapy.
The elderly are more sensitive to the side effects of benzodiazepines, and poisoning may even occur from their long-term use.
Some countries, such as Sweden, banned the drug outright.
Benzodiazepines are considered to be major drugs of abuse.
There have been no trials comparing short-acting Z-drugs with appropriate doses of short-acting benzodiazepines.
It has been suggested that some of their anticonvulsant, anxiolytic, and muscle relaxant effects may be in part mediated by this action.
Using the lowest effective dose for the shortest period of time minimizes the risks to the unborn child.
As a result of adverse effects associated with the long-term use of benzodiazepines, withdrawal from benzodiazepines, in general, leads to improved physical and mental health.
The court case against the drug manufacturers never reached a verdict; legal aid had been withdrawn and there were allegations that the consultant psychiatrists, the expert witnesses, had a conflict of interest.
As a result, the difference between resting potential and threshold potential is increased and firing is less likely.
Although major concerns about benzodiazepine tolerance and withdrawal have been raised, there is no evidence for significant dose escalation in patients using benzodiazepines long-term.
Some experts suggest using nonbenzodiazepines preferentially as a first-line long-term treatment of insomnia.
For many such patients stable doses of benzodiazepines retain their efficacy over several years.
Mortality is higher among poly-drug misusers that also use benzodiazepines.
The new group of drugs was initially greeted with optimism by the medical profession, but gradually concerns arose; in particular, the risk of dependence became evident in the 1980s.
Abrupt withdrawal can be dangerous, therefore a gradual reduction regimen is recommended.
The College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia recommends discontinuing the usage of benzodiazepines in those on opioids and those who have used them long term.
The largest group consists of those that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes and possess significant potential for interactions with other drugs.
While they are not major teratogens, uncertainty remains as to whether they cause cleft palate in a small number of babies and whether neurobehavioural effects occur as a result of prenatal exposure; they are known to cause withdrawal symptoms in the newborn.
Benzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia.
This syndrome may be hard to recognize, as it starts several days after delivery, for example, as late as 21 days for chlordiazepoxide.
The authors of the meta-analysis and a later reviewer noted that the applicability of this meta-analysis is limited because the subjects were taken mostly from withdrawal clinics; the coexisting drug, alcohol use, and psychiatric disorders were not defined; and several of the included studies conducted the cognitive measurements during the withdrawal period.
They may have some residual effects in the first half of the day if used as a hypnotic.
Expecting the pharmacology results to be negative and hoping to publish the chemistry-related findings, researchers submitted it for a standard battery of animal tests.
In a hospital environment, intravenous clonazepam, lorazepam, and diazepam are first-line choices, clonazepam due to its stronger and more potent anticonvulsant action, diazepam due to its faster onset and lorazepam for its longer duration of action.
Individual benzodiazepines may have different interactions with certain drugs.
The American Psychiatric Association (APA) guidelines note that, in general, benzodiazepines are well tolerated, and their use for the initial treatment for panic disorder is strongly supported by numerous controlled trials.
Benzodiazepine abuse ranges from occasional binges on large doses, to chronic and compulsive drug abuse of high doses.
While BZD therapeutic effects disappear with tolerance, depression and impulsivity with high suicidal risk commonly persist.
Many drugs, including oral contraceptives, some antibiotics, antidepressants, and antifungal agents, inhibit cytochrome enzymes in the liver.
The views range from those that hold that benzodiazepines are not effective long-term  and that they should be reserved for treatment-resistant cases to that they are as effective in the long term as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
At the same time, 117 general practitioners and 50 health authorities were sued by patients to recover damages for the harmful effects of dependence and withdrawal.
This led authorities of various countries to place temazepam under a more restrictive legal status.
Benzodiazepines are used in veterinary practice in the treatment of various disorders and conditions.
The association of a past history of benzodiazepine use and cognitive decline is unclear, with some studies reporting a lower risk of cognitive decline in former users, some finding no association and some indicating an increased risk of cognitive decline.
This increases the frequency of the opening of the associated chloride ion channel and hyperpolarizes the membrane of the associated neuron.
The first benzodiazepine, chlordiazepoxide (''Librium''), was synthesized in 1955 by Leo Sternbach while working at Hoffmann–La Roche on the development of tranquilizers.
Exposure to benzodiazepines during pregnancy has been associated with a slightly increased (from 0.06 to 0.07%) risk of cleft palate in newborns, a controversial conclusion as some studies find no association between benzodiazepines and cleft palate.
However, in some cases, a prolonged treatment with benzodiazepines as the add-on to an antidepressant may be justified.
The term ''benzodiazepine'' is the chemical name for the heterocyclic ring system (see figure to the right), which is a fusion between the benzene and diazepine ring systems.
All benzodiazepines are categorized as Schedule IV substances under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
However, they should not usually be given for longer than 2–4 weeks.
NICE stated that long-term use of benzodiazepines for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia is an unlicensed indication, does not have long-term efficacy, and is, therefore, not recommended by clinical guidelines.
All GABAA receptors contain an ion channel that conducts chloride ions across neuronal cell membranes and two binding sites for the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), while a subset of GABAA receptor complexes also contain a single binding site for benzodiazepines.
Therefore, benzodiazepines are unlikely to be effective long-term treatments for sleep and anxiety.
Antidepressants have higher remission rates and are, in general, safe and effective in the short and long term.
Safe custody requirements ensures that pharmacists and doctors holding stock of temazepam must store it in securely fixed double-locked steel safety cabinets and maintain a written register, which must be bound and contain separate entries for temazepam and must be written in ink with no use of correction fluid (although a written register is not required for temazepam in the United Kingdom).
High doses of many shorter-acting benzodiazepines may also cause  anterograde amnesia and dissociation.
Benzodiazepines have a unique history in that they were responsible for the largest-ever class-action lawsuit against drug manufacturers in the United Kingdom, involving 14,000 patients and 1,800 law firms that alleged the manufacturers knew of the dependence potential but intentionally withheld this information from doctors.
