However, scholars disagree about whether the metrical phenomena described by Kaluza's Law prove an early date of composition or are evidence of a longer prehistory of the Beowulf meter; B.R.
Scholarly discussion about ''Beowulf'' in the context of the oral tradition was extremely active throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
This would have been a burial fitting a king who was famous for his wealth in Old Norse sources.
Hutcheson, for instance, does not believe Kaluza's Law can be used to date the poem, while claiming that "the weight of all the evidence Fulk presents in his book tells strongly in favor of an eighth-century date."
Considerably more than one-third of the total vocabulary is alien from ordinary prose use.
Many retellings of ''Beowulf'' for children also appeared around the beginning of the 20th century.
Beowulf descends to do battle with the dragon but finds himself outmatched.
It is this fact that leads some scholars to believe that ''Beowulf'' has endured a long and complicated transmission through all the main dialect areas.
These are important in helping historians understand the ''Beowulf'' manuscript, as possible source-texts or influences would suggest time-frames of composition, geographic boundaries within which it could be composed, or range (both spatial and temporal) of influence (i.e.
In the letter to Wanley, Hickes responds to an apparent charge against Smith, made by Wanley, that Smith had failed to mention the ''Beowulf'' script when cataloguing Cotton MS. Vitellius A. XV.
Friedrich Panze attempted to contextualise ''Beowulf'' and other Scandinavian works, including ''Grettis saga'', under the international folktale type 301B, or "The Bear's Son" tale.
When Grendel enters the hall, Beowulf, who has been feigning sleep, leaps up to clench Grendel's hand.
When Eadgils' mound (to the left in the photo) was excavated in 1874, the finds supported ''Beowulf'' and the sagas.
While the recovery of at least 2000 letters can be attributed to them, their accuracy has been called into question, and the extent to which the manuscript was actually more readable in Thorkelin's time is uncertain.
Crowne have proposed the idea that the poem was passed down from reciter to reciter under the theory of oral-formulaic composition, which hypothesises that epic poems were (at least to some extent) improvised by whoever was reciting them, and only much later written down.
''Beowulf'' was written in England, but is set in Scandinavia; its dating has attracted considerable scholarly attention.
Beowulf, a young warrior from Geatland, hears of Hrothgar's troubles and with his king's permission leaves his homeland to assist Hrothgar.
The poem is set in Scandinavia.
The location of the composition of the poem is also deeply disputed.
Similarly, in 1971, Alistair Campbell stated that the apologue technique used in ''Beowulf'' is so rare in epic poetry aside from Virgil that the poet who composed ''Beowulf'' could not have written the poem in such a manner without first coming across Virgil's writings.
Beowulf decides to follow the dragon to its lair at Earnanæs, but only his young Swedish relative Wiglaf, whose name means "remnant of valour", dares to join him.
One hundred and fifty more occur with the prefix ''ge''- (reckoning a few found only in the past-participle), but of these one hundred occur also as simple verbs, and the prefix is employed to render a shade of meaning which was perfectly known and thoroughly familiar except in the latest Anglo-Saxon period.
In addition, the two halves are divided by a caesura: "Oft '''Sc'''yld '''Sc'''efing \\ '''sc'''eaþena þreatum" (l. 4).
''Beowulf'' channels the books of ''Genesis'', ''Exodus'', and ''Daniel'' in its inclusion of references to the Genesis creation narrative, the story of Cain and Abel, Noah and the flood myth, the Devil, Hell, and the Last Judgment.
There are five main categories in which potential sources and/or analogues are included: Scandinavian parallels, early Irish literature sources and analogues, classical sources, ecclesiastical sources, and echoes in other Old English texts.
However, opinion differs as to whether the composition of the poem is nearly contemporary with its transcription, whether it was first written in the 8th century, or if a proto-version of the poem was perhaps composed at an even earlier time (possibly as one of the Bear's Son Tales) and orally transmitted for many years, then transcribed in its present form at a later date.
Instead, he proposed that other pieces of Germanic literature contain "kernels of tradition" from which ''Beowulf'' borrows and expands upon.
Albert Lord felt strongly that the manuscript represents the transcription of a performance, though likely taken at more than one sitting.
This exhaustive analysis is in itself sufficient to prove that Beowulf was composed orally."
Larry Benson argued that the interpretation of ''Beowulf'' as an entirely formulaic work diminishes the ability of the reader to analyze the poem in a unified manner, and with due attention to the poet's creativity.
The dating of the events in the poem has been confirmed by archaeological excavations of the barrows indicated by Snorri Sturluson and by Swedish tradition as the graves of Ohthere (dated to c. 530) and his son Eadgils (dated to c. 575) in Uppland, Sweden.
The poet has a choice of epithets or formulae to use in order to fulfill the alliteration.
Although the poem begins with Beowulf's arrival, Grendel's attacks have been an ongoing event.
Finally, in the view of Ursula Schaefer, the question of whether the poem was "oral" or "literate" becomes something of a red herring.
Three halls, each about  long, were found during the excavation.
Beowulf and his warriors come to fight the dragon, but Beowulf tells his men that he will fight the dragon alone and that they should wait on the barrow.
After his death, his attendants cremate his body and erect a tower on a headland in his memory.
Stanley B. Greenfield has suggested that references to the human body throughout ''Beowulf'' emphasise the relative position of thanes to their lord.
He made one himself, and had another done by a professional copyist who knew no Anglo-Saxon.
The voicing of these characters echoes that of  and .
Some scholars see ''Beowulf'' as a product of these early tales along with ''Gesta Danorum'' and ''Hrólfs saga kraka'', and some early scholars of the poem proposed that the latter saga and ''Beowulf'' share a common legendary ancestry, ''Beowulf''s Hrothulf being identified with Hrólf Kraki.
The script of the second scribe is archaic.
The majority view appears to be that people such as King Hroðgar and the Scyldings in ''Beowulf'' are based on real historical people from 6th-century Scandinavia.
Beowulf and his men spend the night in Heorot.
The poem also begins ''in medias res'' or simply, "in the middle of things", which is a characteristic of the epics of antiquity.
The full poem survives in the manuscript known as the Nowell Codex, located in the British Library.
The poem also makes extensive use of elided metaphors.
On the other hand, one might posit a poem which is composed by a literate scribe, who acquired literacy by way of learning Latin (and absorbing Latinate culture and ways of thinking), probably a monk and therefore profoundly Christian in outlook.
Translating ''Beowulf'' is one of the subjects of the 2012 publication ''Beowulf at Kalamazoo'', containing a section with 10 essays on translation, and a section with 22 reviews of Heaney's translation (some of which compare Heaney's work with that of Anglo-Saxon scholar Roy Liuzza).
On the other hand, some scholars argue that linguistic, paleographical, metrical, and onomastic considerations align to support a date of composition in the first half of the eighth century; in particular, the poem's regular observation of etymological length distinctions (Kaluza's law) has been thought to demonstrate a date of composition in the first half of the eighth century.
Robert F. Yeager notes the facts that form the basis for these questions:
Hrothgar, Beowulf and their men track Grendel's mother to her lair under a lake.
In the late 1920s, Heinzer Dehmer suggested ''Beowulf'' as contextually based in the folktale type "The Hand and the Child," due to the motif of the "monstrous arm"—a motif that distances ''Grettis saga'' and ''Beowulf'' and further aligns ''Beowulf'' with Irish parallelism.
There are many kennings in ''Beowulf'', and the device is typical of much of classic poetry in Old English, which is heavily formulaic.
The events prompt a long reflection by the king, sometimes referred to as "Hrothgar's sermon", in which he urges Beowulf to be wary of pride and to reward his thegns.
The ''Beowulf'' manuscript was transcribed from an original by two scribes, one of whom wrote the first 1939 lines and a second who wrote the remainder, with a difference in handwriting noticeable after line 1939.
The Reverend Thomas Smith (1638–1710) and Humfrey Wanley (1672–1726) both catalogued the Cotton library (in which the Nowell Codex was held).
''Beowulf'' survives in a single manuscript dated on paleographical grounds to the late 10th or early 11th century.
While both scribes appear to proofread their work, there are nevertheless many errors.
Thomas Gardner agreed with Watts, arguing that the ''Beowulf'' text is of too varied a nature to be completely constructed from set formulae and themes.
This does not only concern people (e.g., Healfdene, Hroðgar, Halga, Hroðulf, Eadgils and Ohthere), but also clans (e.g., Scyldings, Scylfings and Wulfings) and some of the events (e.g., the Battle on the Ice of Lake Vänern).
Swedish folklorist Carl Wilhelm Von Sydow argued against both Scandinavian translation and source material due to his theory that ''Beowulf'' is fundamentally Christian and written at a time when any Norse tale would have most likely been pagan.
Unferth, a warrior who had doubted him and wishes to make amends, presents Beowulf with his sword Hrunting.
It has no title in the original manuscript, but has become known by the name of the story's protagonist.
Hrothgar gives Beowulf many gifts, including the sword Nægling, his family's heirloom.
The warriors form a kind of brotherhood linked by loyalty to their lord.
In this model, the poem is created, and is interpretable, within both noetic horizons.
The poem is composed orally and extemporaneously, and the archive of tradition on which it draws is oral, pagan, Germanic, heroic, and tribal.
A date of composition is a matter of contention among scholars; the only certain dating pertains to the manuscript, which was produced between 975 and 1025.
The poem has been dated to between the 8th and the early 11th centuries, with some recent scholarship offering what has been called "a cohesive and compelling case for Beowulf’s early composition."
In his landmark work, ''The Singer of Tales'', Albert Lord refers to the work of Francis Peabody Magoun and others, saying "the documentation is complete, thorough, and accurate.
However, the late tenth-century manuscript "which alone preserves the poem" originated in the kingdom of the West Saxons – as it is more commonly known.
Later, Peter Jørgensen, looking for a more concise frame of reference, coined a "two-troll tradition" that covers both ''Beowulf'' and ''Grettis saga'': "a Norse 'ecotype' in which a hero enters a cave and kills two giants, usually of different sexes".
Kennings are also a significant technique in ''Beowulf''.
It cannot be denied that Biblical parallels occur in the text, whether seen as a pagan work with "Christian colouring" added by scribes or as a "Christian historical novel, with selected bits of paganism deliberately laid on as 'local colour'," as Margaret E. Goldsmith did in "The Christian Theme of ''Beowulf,''".
Beowulf, finding that Hrunting cannot harm his foe, puts it aside in fury.
Others have associated this poem with the court of King Alfred the Great or with the court of King Cnut the Great.
Grendel's mother, angry that her son has been killed, sets out to get revenge.
Greenfield notes that Unferð is described as "at the king's feet" (line 499).
There is a third view that sees merit in both arguments above and attempts to bridge them, and so cannot be articulated as starkly as they can; it sees more than one Christianity and more than one attitude towards paganism at work in the poem; it sees the poem as initially the product of a literate Christian author with one foot in the pagan world and one in the Christian, himself perhaps a convert (or one whose forbears had been pagan), a poet who was conversant in both oral and literary composition and was capable of a masterful "repurposing" of poetry from the oral tradition.
Beowulf is again saved from his opponent's attack by his armour.
Both  and  vary in pronunciation depending on their phonetic environment.
Seamus Heaney's 1999 translation of the poem (referred to by Howell Chickering and many others as "Heaneywulf") was widely publicized.
Grendel and Beowulf battle each other violently.
Eadgils was buried at Uppsala according to Snorri Sturluson.
Rebinding efforts, though saving the manuscript from much degeneration, have nonetheless covered up other letters of the poem, causing further loss.
Frederick Klaeber, among others, argued for a connection between ''Beowulf'' and Virgil near the start of the 20th century, claiming that the very act of writing a secular epic in a Germanic world represents Virgilian influence.
He argues that the term "shoulder-companion" could refer to both a physical arm as well as a thane (Aeschere) who was very valuable to his lord (Hrothgar).
Since then, parts of the manuscript have crumbled along with many of the letters.
He was dressed in a costly suit made of Frankish cloth with golden threads, and he wore a belt with a costly buckle.
There are in ''Beowulf'' more than thirty-one hundred distinct words, and almost thirteen hundred occur exclusively, or almost exclusively, in this poem and in the other poetical texts.
A great number of translations are available, in poetry and prose.
This verse form maps stressed and unstressed syllables onto abstract entities known as metrical positions.
Between vowels or voiced consonants, they are voiced, sounding like modern  and , respectively.
Grendel's mother and Grendel are described as descendants of Cain, a fact which some scholars link to the Cain tradition.
At first, Grendel's mother appears to prevail.
Later in his life, Beowulf becomes king of the Geats, and finds his realm terrorized by a dragon, some of whose treasure had been stolen from his hoard in a burial mound.
In 1926, Albert Stanburrough Cook suggested a Homeric connection due to equivalent formulas, metonymies, and analogous voyages.
Work also supported the Homeric influence, stating that encounter between Beowulf and Unferth was parallel to the encounter between Odysseus and Euryalus in Books 7–8 of the ''Odyssey,'' even to the point of both characters giving the hero the same gift of a sword upon being proven wrong in their initial assessment of the hero's prowess.
However, scholars such as D.K.
'''''Beowulf''''' (; ) is an Old English epic poem consisting of 3182 alliterative lines.
One of his men, however, Wiglaf, who finds great distress in seeing Beowulf's plight, comes to Beowulf's aid.
Early studies into Scandinavian sources and analogues proposed that ''Beowulf'' was a translation of an original Scandinavian work, but this idea has been discarded.
In 1731, the manuscript was badly damaged by a fire that swept through Ashburnham House in London that had a collection of medieval manuscripts assembled by Sir Robert Bruce Cotton.
Schaefer's concept of "vocality" offers neither a compromise nor a synthesis of the views which see the poem as on the one hand Germanic, pagan, and oral and on the other Latin-derived, Christian, and literate, but, as stated by Monika Otter: "...&nbsp;a 'tertium quid', a modality that participates in both oral and literate culture yet also has a logic and aesthetic of its own."
With Aeschere's death, Hrothgar turns to Beowulf as his new "arm."
Hrothgar and his people, helpless against Grendel, abandon Heorot.
In 1815, Grímur Jónsson Thorkelin published the first complete edition in Latin.
Beowulf, a hero of the Geats, comes to the aid of Hrothgar, the king of the Danes, whose mead hall in Heorot has been under attack by a monster known as Grendel.
The debate might be framed starkly as follows: on the one hand, we can hypothesise a poem put together from various tales concerning the hero (the Grendel episode, the Grendel's mother story, and the fire drake narrative).
when it was "popular" and where its "popularity" took it).
Victorious, Beowulf goes home to Geatland (Götaland in modern Sweden) and later becomes king of the Geats.
The poem retains a complicated mix of the following dialectical forms: Mercian, Northumbrian, Early West Saxon, Kentish and Late West Saxon.
For example, a poet might call the sea the "swan-road" or the "whale-road"; a king might be called a "ring-giver."
Icelandic scholar Grímur Jónsson Thorkelin made the first transcriptions of the manuscript in 1786 and published the results in 1815, working as part of a Danish government historical research commission.
The claim to an early 11th-century date depends in part on scholars who argue that, rather than the transcription of a tale from the oral tradition by an earlier literate monk, ''Beowulf'' reflects an original interpretation of an earlier version of the story by the manuscript's two scribes.
R. D. Fulk, of Indiana University, published the first facing-page edition and translation of the entire manuscript in the Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library series in 2010.
Like the ''Finnesburg Fragment'' and several shorter surviving poems, ''Beowulf'' has consequently been used as a source of information about Scandinavian personalities such as Eadgils and Hygelac, and about continental Germanic personalities such as Offa, king of the continental Angles.
There were four cameos from the Middle East which were probably part of a casket.
The work of the second scribe bears a striking resemblance to the work of the first scribe of the Blickling homilies, and so much so that it is believed they derive from the same scriptorium.
Grendel, a troll-like monster said to be descended from the biblical Cain, is pained by the sounds of a joy he cannot share, attacks the hall, and kills and devours many of Hrothgar's warriors while they sleep.
There is a wide array of linguistic forms in the ''Beowulf'' manuscript.
Moorman, the first professor of English Language at Leeds University, claimed the ''Beowulf'' was composed in Yorkshire, but E. Talbot Donaldson claimed that it was probably composed more than twelve hundred years ago, during the first half of the eighth century, and that the writer was a native of what was then called West Mercia, located in the Western Midlands of England.
The events in the poem take place in the late fifth century after the Anglo-Saxons had started their journey to England and before the beginning of the seventh century, a time when the Anglo-Saxons were either newly arrived or were still in close contact with their Germanic kinsmen in Northern Germany.
When the dragon sees that the cup has been stolen, it leaves its cave in a rage, burning everything in sight.
The author was an anonymous Anglo-Saxon poet, referred to by scholars as the "''Beowulf'' poet".
Virgil was seen as the pinnacle of Latin literature, and Latin was the dominant literary language of England at the time, therefore making Virgilian influence highly likely.
At the same time, Richard North argues that the ''Beowulf'' poet interpreted "Danish myths in Christian form" (as the poem would have served as a form of entertainment for a Christian audience), and states: "As yet we are no closer to finding out why the first audience of ''Beowulf'' liked to hear stories about people routinely classified as damned.
Several English scholars and churchmen are described by Bede as being fluent in Greek due to being taught by him; Bede claims to be fluent in Greek himself.
Some letters which are no longer found in modern English, such as thorn, , and eth, &nbsp;– representing both pronunciations of modern English , as  in ''thing'' and  ''this''&nbsp;– are used extensively both in the original manuscript and in modern English editions.
A few years later, Ann Watts argued against the imperfect application of one theory to two different traditions: traditional, Homeric, oral-formulaic poetry and Anglo-Saxon poetry.
In it he, his wife Wealhtheow, and his warriors spend their time singing and celebrating.
He is cremated and a burial mound by the sea is erected in his honor.
The nouns number sixteen hundred.
They showed that a powerful man was buried in a large barrow, c 575, on a bear skin with two dogs and rich grave offerings.
This also includes Tolkien's own retelling of the story of Beowulf in his tale, ''Sellic Spell''.
This was followed in 1814 by John Josias Conybeare who published an edition "in English paraphrase and Latin verse translation."
(''Beowulf'' lines 2712–3182).
During the early 20th century, Frederick Klaeber's ''Beowulf and The Fight at Finnsburg'' (which included the poem in Old English, an extensive glossary of Old English terms, and general background information) became the "central source used by graduate students for the study of the poem and by scholars and teachers as the basis of their translations."
It suffered damage in the Cotton Library fire at Ashburnham House in 1731.
This question is pressing, given... that Anglo-Saxons saw the Danes as 's' rather than as foreigners."
When speaking or reading Old English poetry, it is important to remember for alliterative purposes that many of the letters are not pronounced in the same way as  in modern English.
One day, fifty years after Beowulf's battle with Grendel's mother, a slave steals a golden cup from the lair of an unnamed dragon at Earnanæs.
The question suggests that the conversion from the Germanic pagan beliefs to Christian ones was a very slow and gradual process over several centuries, and it remains unclear the ultimate nature of the poem's message in respect to religious belief at the time it was written.
The manuscript measures 245 × 185&nbsp;mm.
Tales concerning the Skjöldungs, possibly originating as early as the 6th century were later used as a narrative basis in such texts as ''Gesta Danorum'' by Saxo Grammaticus and ''Hrólfs saga kraka''.
Examination of ''Beowulf'' and other Old English literature for evidence of oral-formulaic composition has met with mixed response.
Anglo-Saxon poets typically used alliterative verse, a form of verse in which the first half of the line (the a-verse) is linked to the second half (the b-verse) through similarity in initial sound.
They are evocative poetic descriptions of everyday things, often created to fill the alliterative requirements of the metre.
Ongentheow's barrow has not been excavated.
The ''Beowulf'' manuscript is known as the Nowell Codex, gaining its name from 16th-century scholar Laurence Nowell.
The next night, after celebrating Grendel's defeat, Hrothgar and his men sleep in Heorot.
Otherwise they are unvoiced, like modern  in ''fat'' and  in ''sat''.
On this view, the pagan references would be a sort of decorative archaising.
J. R. R. Tolkien believed that the poem retains too genuine a memory of Anglo-Saxon paganism to have been composed more than a few generations after the completion of the Christianisation of England around AD 700, and Tolkien's conviction that the poem dates to the 8th century has been defended by Tom Shippey, among others.
Seven hundred of them, including those formed with prefixes, of which fifty (or considerably more than half) have ''ge''-, are simple nouns, at the highest reckoning not more than one-fourth is absent in prose.
The poem is known only from a single manuscript, which is estimated to date from close to AD 1000, in which it appears with other works.
It may be the oldest surviving long poem in Old English and is commonly cited as one of the most important works of Old English literature.
In 1909, Francis Barton Gummere's full translation in "English imitative meter" was published, and was used as the text of Gareth Hinds's graphic novel based on ''Beowulf'' in 2007.
Beowulf returns home and eventually becomes king of his own people.
This theory of Homer's influence on ''Beowulf'' remained very prevalent in the 1920s, but started to die out in the following decade when a handful of critics stated that the two works were merely "comparative literature", although Greek was known in late 7th century England: Bede states that Theodore of Tarsus, a Greek, was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 668, and he taught Greek.
Kevin Kiernan, in preparing his electronic edition of the manuscript, used fibre-optic backlighting and ultraviolet lighting to reveal letters in the manuscript lost from binding, erasure, or ink blotting.
Donaldson wrote that "the poet who put the materials into their present form was a Christian and&nbsp;... poem reflects a Christian tradition".
Hickes replies to Wanley "I can find nothing yet of Beowulph."
While "themes" (inherited narrative subunits for representing familiar classes of event, such as the "arming the hero", or the particularly well-studied "hero on the beach" theme) do exist across Anglo-Saxon and other Germanic works, some scholars conclude that Anglo-Saxon poetry is a mix of oral-formulaic and literate patterns, arguing that the poems both were composed on a word-by-word basis and followed larger formulae and patterns.
Since that time, however, the manuscript has crumbled further, making these transcripts a prized witness to the text.
His men, upon seeing this and fearing for their lives, creep back into the woods.
John Miles Foley wrote, referring to the ''Beowulf'' debate, that while comparative work was both necessary and valid, it must be conducted with a view to the particularities of a given tradition; Foley argued with a view to developments of oral traditional theory that do not assume, or depend upon, ultimately unverifiable assumptions about composition, and instead delineate a more fluid continuum of traditionality and textuality.
Scholars generally agree that many of the personalities of ''Beowulf'' also appear in Scandinavian sources (specific works designated in the following section).
These remains include a Frankish sword adorned with gold and garnets and a tafl game with Roman pawns of ivory.
Puhvel supported the "Hand and the Child" theory through such motifs as (in Andersson's words) "the more powerful giant mother, the mysterious light in the cave, the melting of the sword in blood, the phenomenon of battle rage, swimming prowess, combat with water monsters, underwater adventures, and the bear-hug style of wrestling."
There is no fixed number of beats per line: the first one cited has three (Oft SCYLD SCEFING, with ictus on the suffix -ING) whereas the second has two (SCEAþena ÞREATum).
''Beowulf'' is considered an epic poem in that the main character is a hero who travels great distances to prove his strength at impossible odds against supernatural demons and beasts.
Both are voiced (as in ''this'') between other voiced sounds: ''oðer'', ''laþleas'', ''suþern''.
It is used in conjunction with Unferð (a man described by Beowulf as weak, traitorous, and cowardly).
In Denmark, recent archaeological excavations at Lejre, where Scandinavian tradition located the seat of the Scyldings, i.e., Heorot, have revealed that a hall was built in the mid-6th century, exactly the time period of ''Beowulf''.
He attacks the dragon with the help of his ''thegns'' or servants, but they do not succeed.
Andy Orchard, in ''A Critical Companion to Beowulf'', lists 33 "representative" translations in his bibliography, and it has been translated into at least 23 other languages.
The second scribe toiled over the poem for many years "with great reverence and care to restoration".
Attempts to find classical or Late Latin influence or analogue in ''Beowulf'' are almost exclusively linked with Homer's ''Odyssey'' or Virgil's ''Aeneid''.
She violently kills Æschere, who is Hrothgar's most loyal fighter.
Beowulf finally slays the dragon, but is mortally wounded in the struggle.
''Beowulf'' begins with the story of Hrothgar, who constructed the great hall Heorot for himself and his warriors.
The earliest extant reference to the first foliation of the Nowell Codex was made sometime between 1628 and 1650 by Franciscus Junius (the younger).
The letter , for example, is always pronounced (''Hroðgar'': ), and the digraph  is pronounced , as in the word ''edge''.
After stipulating a number of conditions to Hrothgar in case of his death (including the taking in of his kinsmen and the inheritance by Unferth of Beowulf's estate), Beowulf jumps into the lake at the bottom of which he finds a cavern containing Grendel's body and the remains of men that the two have killed, Grendel's mother and Beowulf engage in fierce combat.
The ''Beowulf'' manuscript itself is identified by name for the first time in an exchange of letters in 1700 between George Hickes, Wanley's assistant, and Wanley.
Scholars who favored Irish parallels directly spoke out against pro-Scandinavian theories, citing them as unjustified.
It has been suggested that ''Beowulf'' was first composed in the 7th century at Rendlesham in East Anglia, as the Sutton Hoo ship-burial also shows close connections with Scandinavia, and also that the East Anglian royal dynasty, the Wuffingas, may have been descendants of the Geatish Wulfings.
The ownership of the codex before Nowell remains a mystery.
In 1895, William Morris & A. J. Wyatt published the ninth English translation.
J. R. R. Tolkien argued that the poem is an elegy.
Afterwards, a barrow, visible from the sea, is built in his memory.
These fragments would have been told for many years in tradition, and learned by apprenticeship from one generation of illiterate poets to the next.
From knowledge of books held in the library at Malmesbury Abbey and available as source works, and from the identification of certain words particular to the local dialect found in the text, the transcription may have been made there.
19th-century archeological evidence may confirm elements of the ''Beowulf'' story.
After Beowulf slays him, Grendel's mother attacks the hall and is then also defeated.
However, although this folkloristic approach was seen as a step in the right direction, "The Bear's Son" tale was seen as too universal.
Finally, Beowulf tears Grendel's arm from his body at the shoulder and Grendel runs to his home in the marshes where he dies.
Other scholars disagree, however, as to the meaning and nature of the poem: is it a Christian work set in a Germanic pagan context?
