For their part, women look after the family and handicrafts - first for their personal use, and secondly for sale in the souqs in their locality.
A long-term cause of Punic instability, there was no melding of the peoples.
The mountains became a stronghold of the rebel movement, and were a focal point of the conflict, with much fighting occurring between rebels and loyalists for control of the region.
There is some variation in the presentation of the order, but the ''astara'' always begins, and the ''tabbayt'' always ends.
He was born around 1670 in the village of al-Qasaba in the region of Sous, Maghreb and died in 1748/9 (1162 of the Egira).
When Micipsa died in 118 BC, he was succeeded jointly by his two sons Hiempsal I and Adherbal and Masinissa's illegitimate grandson, Jugurtha, of Berber origin, who was very popular among the Numidians.
He took the title of ''amir al-muslimin'' (''commander of the Muslims'') after visiting the Caliph of Baghdad 'amir al-moumineen" ("commander of the faithful") and officially receiving his support.
He is one of the most outspoken converts in the world, he hosts a weekly live call-in show on Al-Hayat channel where he compares Islam and Christianity as well as debating with Islamic scholars.
Yet in times of stress at Carthage, when a foreign force might be pushing against the city-state, some Berbers would see it as an opportunity to advance their interests, given their otherwise low status in Punic society.
"Thousands of rebels streamed down from the mountains and invaded Punic territory, carrying the serfs of the countryside along with them.
Berbers set up communities In Mauritania near the Malian imperial capital of Timbuktu.
The Muslim Mahdia was founded by the Fatimids under the Caliph Abdallah al-Mahdi in 921 and made the capital city of Ifriqiya, by caliph Abdallah El Fatimi.
Therefore, the root required to verify this endonym would be "(a)zigh", free, this however is also missing from Tamazight's lexicon, but may be related to the well attested "aze" strong, "Tizzit" bravery, or "jeghegh" to be brave/courageous.
There evolved a population of mixed ancestry, Berber and Punic.
She was born in the early seventh century and died around the end of the seventh century in modern Algeria.
It was located on the eastern border of modern Algeria, bordered by the Roman province of Mauretania (in modern Algeria and Morocco) to the west, the Roman province of Africa (modern Tunisia) to the east, the Mediterranean to the north, and the Sahara Desert to the south.
The areas of North Africa that have retained the Berber language and traditions best have been, in general, Morocco and the highlands of Algeria (Kabylie, Aurès et cetera), most of which in Roman and Ottoman times remained largely independent.
Carthage was faulted by her ancient rivals for the "harsh treatment of her subjects" as well as for "greed and cruelty".
As the centuries passed there naturally grew a Punic society of Phoenician-descent but born in Africa, called ''Libyphoenicians''.
Several Berber dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages in the Maghreb and Al-Andalus.
Other groups include the Riffians of northern Morocco, the Chaoui people of eastern Algeria, the Chenouas in western Algeria, the Berbers of Tripolitania and the Tuaregs of the Sahara scattered through several countries.
Ziri ibn Manad (died 971), founder of the Zirid dynasty in the Maghreb.
For the historian Abraham Isaac Laredo the name Amazigh could be derived from the name of the ancestor Mezeg which is the translation of biblical ancestor Dedan son of Sheba in the ''Targum''.
While benefitting from Punic material culture and political-military institutions, these peripheral Berbers (also called Libyans) maintained their own identity, culture and traditions, continued to develop their own agricultural and village skills, while living with the newcomers from the east in an asymmetric symbiosis.
Of all the fathers of the church, St. Augustine was the most admired and the most influential during the Middle Ages&nbsp;... Augustine was an outsider—a native North African whose family was not Roman but Berber&nbsp;...
Prehistorical Tifinagh scripts were also found in the Oran region.
Berbers made up as much as 20% of the population of the occupied territory.
Moderns fault Carthage for failure "to bind her subjects to herself, as Rome did" her Italians.
Fadhma was born in a Kabylie village, the illegitimate daughter of a widow.
There are some twenty-five to thirty million Berber speakers in North Africa.
Through both exclusivities of Pan-Arabism and Islamism, their issue of identity is due to the pan-Arabist ideology of the former Egyptian president, Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Regarding the remaining populations that speak a Berber language in the Maghreb, they account from 50% to 60% of the Moroccan population and from to 15% to 35% of the Algerian population, besides smaller communities in Libya and Tunisia and very small groups in Egypt and Mauritania.
The ancient Taforalt individuals carried the mtDNA haplogroups U6, H, JT and V, which points to population continuity in the region dating from the Iberomaurusian period.
Augustine of Hippo (Hippo being the modern Algerian city of Annaba), may have been of Berber ancestry on his mother's side, although his father was a Roman colonist.
This type of life, richly depicted in the Tassili n'Ajjer cave paintings of south-eastern Algeria, predominated in the Maghreb until the classical period.
Historically, they spoke Berber languages, which together form the Berber branch of the Afro-Asiatic family.
The Rustamid imams failed, by choice or by neglect, to organize a reliable standing army.
The Ibadin had been fighting Umayyad rule in the East, and many Berbers were attracted by the sect's seemingly egalitarian precepts.
The Roman officials, allegedly due to bribes but perhaps more likely because of a desire to quickly end conflict in a profitable client kingdom, settled the fight by dividing Numidia into two parts.
Some of the ancient Berber beliefs still exist today subtly within the Berber popular culture and tradition.
Muhammad al-Jazuli - From the tribe of Jazulah which was settled in the Sous area of Maghreb between the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlas Mountains.
The instruments used are the bendir (large drums) and Gambra (a lute), which accompanying songs and dances.
"In Mali, the Tuareg, another Berber people, have armed themselves and are declaring a homeland in large swatches of the north."
Among these idioms are Riff, Kabyle, Shilha, Siwa, Zenaga, Sanhaja, Tazayit (Central Atlas Tamazight), Tumẓabt (Mozabite), and Tamasheq, as well as the ancient Guanche language.
''Tamazight'' is a generic name for all of the Berber languages.
Interactions with neighboring Sudanic empires, traders, and nomads from other parts of Africa also left impressions upon the Berber people.
File:TapisKabyle2.jpg|The berber carpet
Ethnic rivalry was one of the most important factors driving Andalusi politics.
Most of these populations belong to the E1b1b paternal haplogroup, with Berber speakers having among the highest frequencies of this lineage.
The Carthaginians were obliged to withdraw within their walls and were besieged."
He himself chose the place where it was built in 1070 and later made it the capital of his Empire.
She met another Kabyle Catholic convert, Antoine-Belkacem Amrouche, whom she married in 1898.
Since the Muslim conquest of North Africa in the seventh century, a large number of Berbers inhabiting the Maghreb have acquired different degrees of knowledge of varieties of the languages of North Africa.
This term is common in Morocco, especially among Central Atlas, Rifian and Shilah speakers in 1980, but elsewhere within the Berber homeland sometimes a local, more particular term, such as Kabyle or Chaoui, is more often used instead in Algeria.
They supposedly helped the Umayyad caliph Abd ar-Rahman I in Al-Andalus, because his mother was a Berber.
This may have accelerated the existing process of Arabization of Berbers, especially in already bilingual areas, such as among the Chaouis of Algeria.
In fact for a time their numerical and military superiority (the best horse riders of that time) enabled some Berber kingdoms to impose a tribute payable by Carthage, a condition that continued into the 5th century BC.
Some groups, such as the Chaouis, practiced transhumance.
The name "Ibn Tumart" comes from the Berber language and means "son of the earth."
In this regard, perhaps the legend about Dido, the foundress of Carthage (see above), as related by Trogus is apposite.
The majority of North Africa's population is believed to be Berber in origin, although due to Arabization most ethnic Berbers identify as Arabized Berbers.
What is known of Sabellius is drawn mostly from the polemical writings of his opponents.
These areas have been affected by some of the many invasions of North Africa, most recently that of the French.
In 1125, he began an open revolt against Almoravid rule.
The Tuareg have a king who decides the fate of the tribe and is known as Amenokal.
Basil and others call him a Libyan from Pentapolis, but this seems to rest on the fact that Pentapolis was a place where the teachings of Sabellius thrived, according to Dionysius of Alexandria, c. 260.
In Morocco, after the constitutional reforms of 2011, Berber has become an official language, and is now taught as a compulsory language in all schools regardless of the area or the ethnicity.
He was either a cousin or nephew of Abu-Bakr Ibn-Umar, the founder of the Almoravid dynasty.
Traditional Kabyle music consists of vocalists accompanied by a rhythm section, consisting of e'ṯbel (tambourine) and bendir (frame drum), and a melody section, consisting of a ghaita (bagpipe) and ajouag (flute).
The first Arabian military expeditions into the Maghreb, between 642 and 669, resulted in the spread of Islam.
Instruments include flutes and drums.
Malika Oufkir is a Moroccan writer and former "disappeared" person.
Until then, the Almoravids had been desert nomads, but the new capital marked their settling into a more urban way of life.
The Muslims who invaded the Iberian Peninsula in 711 were mainly Berbers, and were led by a Berber, Tariq ibn Ziyad, though under the suzerainty of the Arab Caliph of Damascus Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan and his North African Viceroy, Musa ibn Nusayr.
Her Libyan Berber sharecroppers, for example, were required to pay one-half of their crops as tribute to the city-state during the emergency of the First Punic War.
Nonetheless, therein they persisted largely unassimilated, as a separate, submerged entity, as a culture of mostly passive urban and rural poor within the civil structures created by Punic rule.
For their part, most Berbers maintained their independence as farmers or semi-pastorals although, due to the exemplar of Carthage, their organized politics increased in scope and acquired sophistication.
Foreign languages, mainly French and to some degree Spanish, inherited from former European colonial powers, are used by most educated Berbers in Algeria and Morocco in some formal contexts, such as higher education or business.
He is also known as El-Mahdi (المهدي) in reference to his prophesied redeeming.
Before the eleventh century, most of North-West Africa was a Berber-speaking Muslim area.
Thus, when the Greeks under Agathocles (361-289 BC) of Sicily landed at Cape Bon and threatened Carthage (in 310 BC), there were Berbers under Ailymas who went over to the invading Greeks.
Perhaps these newly arrived sea traders were not at first particularly interested in doing much business with the Berbers, for reason of the little profit regarding the goods the Berbers had to offer.
The ruling Arabs alienated the Berbers by taxing them heavily; treating converts as second-class Muslims; and, worst of all, by enslaving them.
After the fall of the Caliphate, the Taifa kingdoms of Toledo, Badajoz, Málaga and Granada had Berber rulers.
The imams gained a reputation for honesty, piety, and justice.
The Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and Byzantines mentioned various tribes with similar names living in Greater "Libya" (North Africa) in the areas where Berbers were later found.
The Roman era authors Apuleius and St. Augustine were born in the Roman province of Africa; claims that they had Berber ancestry are unproven.
Political tensions have arisen between some Berber groups (especially the Kabyle) and North African governments over the past few decades, partly over linguistic and social issues; for instance, in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, and Libya, giving children Berber names was banned.
The Phoenicians worked to keep their cultural cohesion and ethnic solidarity, and continuously refreshed their close connection with Tyre, the mother city.
Upon landing, Tariq is said to have burned his ships then made the following speech, well known in the Muslim world, to his soldiers:
During the first part of the Second Punic War, the eastern Massylii under their king Gala were allied with Carthage, while the western Masaesyli under king Syphax were allied with Rome.
Now, Berber is a "national" language in Algeria and is taught in some Berber-speaking areas as a noncompulsory language.
The nomadic and semi-nomadic lifestyle of the Berbers is very suitable for weaving kilims.
Additional decorations such as sequins or fringes, are typical of Berber weave in Morocco.
These Berber speakers are mainly concentrated in Morocco and Algeria, followed by Mali, Niger and Libya.
However, the majority of Arabized Berbers, particularly in Morocco and Algeria, claim an Arabian heritage; this is a consequence of the Arab nationalism of the early twentieth century.
It was chosen as the capital because of its proximity to the sea, and the promontory on which an important military settlement had been since the time of the Phoenicians.
According to an estimate from 2004, there were about 2.2 million Berber immigrants in Europe, especially the Riffians in Belgium, the Netherlands and France and Algerians of Kabyles and Chaouis heritage in France.
The Mozabites lead communal lives.
It remained a source of stress and a point of weakness for Carthage.
He is considered the most important author of the Shilha literary tradition.
The next phase is the ''amarg'', or sung poetry, and then ''ammussu'', a danced overture, ''tammust'', an energetic song, ''aberdag'', a dance, and finally the rhythmically swift ''tabbayt''.
This harmony was short-lived; Arabian and Berber forces controlled the region in turn until 697.
By 711, Umayyad forces helped by Berber converts to Islam had conquered all of North Africa.
But others, like Sijilmasa and Tlemcen, which straddled the principal trade routes, proved more viable and prospered.
In the power hierarchy, Berbers were situated between the Arabic aristocracy and the Muladi populace.
Yet the Berbers lacked cohesion, and although 200,000 strong at one point they succumbed to hunger; their leaders were offered bribes; "they gradually broke up and returned to their homes."
File:Bijoux traditionnels de Kabylie.JPG|Kabyle jewels
For a period the Berbers were in constant revolt.
The Mozabites are governed by the spiritual leaders of Ibadism.
They are the principal inhabitants of the vast Sahara Desert.
Alfonso VI was defeated on 23 October 1086, at the battle of Sagrajas, at the hands of Yusuf ibn Tashfin, and Abbad III al-Mu'tamid.
Again, the tribute demanded by Carthage was onerous.
In comparison, in the Tuareg culture, the woman chooses her future husband.
Before the arrival of Islam into the region, most Berber groups were either Christian, Jewish or Animist, and a number of Berber theologians were important figures in the development of western Christianity.
The Taifa period ended when a Berber dynasty—the Moroccan Almoravids—took over Al-Andalus; they were succeeded by the Almohad dynasty of Morocco, during which time al-Andalus flourished.
The normal exaction taken by Carthage was likely "an extremely burdonsome" one-quarter.
Ziri ibn Manad was a clan leader of the Berber Sanhaja tribe who, as an ally of the Fatimids, defeated the rebellion of Abu Yazid (943-947).
They are directly related to Circumcellions, a sect that worked on disseminating the doctrine in North Africa by the force of the sword.
The Berber identity is usually wider than language and ethnicity, and encompasses the entire history and geography of North Africa.
Also, during the long Second Punic War (218-201 BC) with Rome (see below), the Berber King Masinissa (c. 240-148 BC) joined with the invading Roman general Scipio, resulting to the war-ending defeat of Carthage at Zama, despite the presence of their renown general Hannibal; on the other hand, the Berber King Syphax (d. 202 BC) had supported Carthage.
Famous Berbers throughout history include Yusuf ibn Tashfin, king of the Berber Almoravid empire; Tariq ibn Ziyad the general who conquered Hispania; Abbas Ibn Firnas, a prolific inventor and early pioneer in aviation; Ibn Battuta, a medieval explorer who traveled the longest known distances of his time.
Jugurtha was assigned the western half.
These early forays from a base in Egypt occurred under local initiative rather than under orders from the central caliphate.
Sanhadja, Houaras, Zenata, Masmouda, Kutama, Awarba, Berghwata, et cetera).
The Berber languages comprise many closely related varieties.
Local cave paintings, which have been dated to twelve millennia before present, have been found in the Tassili n'Ajjer region of southern Algeria.
Indeed, some scholars believe that Jewish merchants may have crossed the Sahara, although others dispute this claim.
Nonetheless, a modern criticism tells us that the Carthaginians "did themselves a disservice" by failing to promote the common, shared quality of "life in a properly organized city" that inspires loyalty, particularly with regard to the Berbers.
Yusuf bin Tashfin is the founder of the famous Moroccan city Marrakech (in Berber ''Murakush'', corrupted to ''Morocco'' in English).
All of the specimens belonged to maternal clades associated with either North Africa or the northern and southern Mediterranean littoral, indicating gene flow between these areas since the Epipaleolithic.
File:Berber szív.JPG|Berber decoration
Another Berber cleric, Saint Adrian of Canterbury, traveled to England and played a significant role in its early medieval religious history.
Abu Ya'qub Yusuf (died on 29 July 1184) was the second Almohad ''caliph''.
File:Berber Calendars.jpg|Algerian Berber calendar
Hassen Zermani's all-electric Takfarinas and Abdelli's work with Peter Gabriel's Real World helped bring Kabyle music to new audiences, while the murder of Matoub Lounes inspired many Kabyles to rally around their popular musicians.
Additionally, genomic analysis has found that Berber and other Maghreb communities are defined by a shared ancestral component.
In the 2011 Libyan civil war, Berbers in the Nafusa Mountains were quick to revolt against the Gaddafi regime.
They are thus assured with an abundance of wool, cotton and plants used for dyeing.
The Meshwesh tribe among them represents the first thus identified from the field.
He united all of the Muslim dominions in the Iberian Peninsula (modern Portugal and Spain) to the Maghreb (c. 1090), after being called to the Al-Andalus by the Emir of Seville.
Tariq ibn Ziyad (died 720), known in Spanish history and legend as ''Taric el Tuerto'' (Taric the one-eyed), was a Berber Muslim and Umayyad general who led the conquest of Visigothic Hispania in 711.
Ritual music is performed at regular ceremonies to celebrate marriages and other important life events.
Besides the Arabian influence, North African population also saw an influx via the Barbary Slave Trade of European peoples, with some estimates placing the number of European slaves brought to North Africa during the Ottoman period as high as 1.25&nbsp;million.
He had the Giralda in Seville built.
Fadhma Aït Mansour, born in Tizi Hibel, Algeria, is the mother of writers Jean Amrouche and Taos Amrouche.
Ibn Tumart (c. 1080 - c. 1130), was a Berber religious teacher and leader from the Masmuda tribe who spiritually founded the Almohad dynasty.
According to historians of the Middle Ages, the Berbers were divided into two branches, Botr and Barnès, descended from Mazigh ancestors, who were themselves divided into tribes and subtribes.
Today, most Berber people live in Northern African countries, mainly in Algeria and Morocco; a small Berber population is also found in Niger, Mali, Libya, Mauritania, Tunisia, Burkina Faso and Egypt, as well as large immigrant communities living in France, Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, and other countries of Europe.
His story was recorded by his Christian contemporaries Romuald Guarna and Hugo Falcandus from Sicily and the Muslim historian Ibn Khaldun.
This Maghrebi element peaks among Tunisian Berbers.
Further, it also has a cognate in the Tuareg word "Amajegh", meaning "noble".
There are three varieties of Berber folk music: village and ritual music, and the music performed by professional musicians.
For example, the Punic state began to field Berber Numidian cavalry under their commanders on a regular basis.
The Maghreb region in northwestern Africa is believed to have been inhabited by Berbers from at least 10,000 BC.
The Punic relationship with the majority Berbers continued throughout the life of Carthage.
Kusaila, who had been based in Tlemcen, became a Muslim and moved his headquarters to Takirwan, near Al Qayrawan.
He is most famous for compiling the Dala'il al-Khayrat, an extremely popular Muslim prayer book.
During the pre-Roman era, several successive independent states (Massylii) existed before the king Masinissa unified the people of Numidia.
The Phoenicians established strategic colonial cities in many Berber areas, including sites outside of present-day Tunisia, e.g., the settlements at Volubilis, Chellah and Mogador (now in Morocco).
Dihya or Kahina was a female Berber religious and military leader who led a fierce Berber resistance against the Arab-Muslim expansion in North-West Africa.
A leader is appointed to command the tribe.
After the Muslim conquest, the Berber tribes of coastal North Africa became almost fully Islamized.
The Berbers belonged to the lower social class when in Punic society.
The regime of Muammar Gaddafi in Libya also banned the teaching of Berber languages, and the leader warned Berber leaders in a 2008 diplomatic cable leaked by WikiLeaks "You can call yourselves whatever you want inside your homes – Berbers, Children of Satan, whatever – but you are only Libyans when you leave your homes."
She and her siblings are converts from Islam to Catholicism, and she writes in her book, ''Stolen Lives'': "we had rejected Islam, which had brought us nothing good, and opted for Catholicism instead."
Hence the frequent Berber insurrections.
At the time of his death in 148 BC, Masinissa's territory extended from Mauretania to the boundary of the Carthaginian territory, and also south-east as far as Cyrenaica, so that Numidia entirely surrounded Carthage (Appian, ''Punica'', 106) except towards the sea.
During the Reconquista, Berbers in the areas which became Christian kingdoms were acculturated and lost their ethnic identity, their descendants being among modern Spanish and Portuguese peoples.
Later, when she was with the Sisters at Aït Manguellet hospital, she converted to Roman Catholicism.
Ibn Battuta (born 1304; year of death uncertain, possibly 1368 or 1377) was a Berber Sunni Islamic scholar and jurisprudent from the Maliki Madhhab (a school of Fiqh, or Islamic law), and at times a Qadi or judge.
The best known are the Moroccan music, the popular Gasba, Kabyle and Chawi music of Algeria, and the widespread Tuareg music of Burkina Faso, Niger, and Mali.
These journeys covered almost the entirety of the known Islamic realm, extending from modern West Africa to Pakistan, India, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, South-East Asia and China, a distance readily surpassing that of his predecessor, near-contemporary Marco Polo.
Lack of contemporary written records make the drawing of conclusions here uncertain, which can only be based on inference and reasonable conjecture about matters of social nuance.
The most notable are the Zirids (Ifriqiya, 973-1148), the Hammadids (Western Ifriqiya, 1014–1152), the Almoravids (Morocco and Al-Andalus, 1050–1147), the Almohads (Morocco and Al-Andalus, 1147–1248), the Hafsids (Ifriqiya, 1229–1574), the Zianids (Tlemcen, 1235–1556), the Marinids (Morocco, 1248–1465) and the Wattasids (Morocco, 1471–1554).
As a result, most Berbers had to study and know Arabic, and had no opportunities until the twenty-first century to use their mother tongue at school or university.
Kahina (Berber: Daya Ult Yenfaq Tajrawt) was a Berber Byzantine Christian religious and military leader who led indigenous resistance to Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, the region then known as Numidia, known as the Algeria today.
After the revolt, Ibadin established a number of theocratic tribal kingdoms, most of which had short and troubled histories.
The leader, or ''rayes'', leads the choreography and music of the group.
As in Tunisia these centres were trading hubs, and later offered support for resource development such as olive oil at Volubilis and Tyrian purple dye at Mogador.
The amydaz performs improvised poems, often accompanied by drums and rabab (a one-stringed fiddle), along with a ''bou oughanim'' who plays a double clarinet and acts as a clown for the group.
Professional musicians (''imdyazn'') travel in groups of four, led by a poet (''amydaz'').
Indigenous Christian communities within the Maghreb all but disappeared under Islamic rule, although Christian communities from Europe may still be found in the Maghreb to this day.
During the Taifa era, the petty kings came from a variety of ethnic groups; some—for instance the Zirid kings of Granada—were of Berber origin.
In Algeria, the el Kseur platform in Kabylie gives tribes the right to fine criminal offenders.
The process of Arabization only became a major factor with the arrival of the Banu Hilal, a tribe sent by the Fatimids of Egypt to punish the Berber Zirid dynasty for having abandoned Shiism.
Until the 1960s, there was also a significant Jewish Berber minority in Morocco, but emigration (mostly to Israel and France) dramatically reduced their number to only a few hundred individuals.
A Neolithic society, marked by domestication and subsistence agriculture, developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean region (the Maghreb) of northern Africa between 6000 and 2000 BC.
Jewish, and some adhered to their traditional polytheist religion.
Hence, the interactions between Berber and Phoenician were often asymmetrical.
Kabyle music has been popular in France since the 1930s, when it was played at cafés.
In 396 there was a great uprising.
It only began to gain success among the greater populace when North African states replaced their European colonial languages with Arabic and identified exclusively as Arabian nations, downplaying or ignoring the existence and the social specificity of Berbers.
Berber music, the traditional music of North Africa, has a wide variety of regional styles.
The son of the previous caliph, Muhammad an-Nasir, Yusuf assumed the throne following his father's death, at the age of only 16 years.
The rites of marriage are different for each tribe.
The Chleuh Berbers have professional musicians called ''rwai''s who play in ensembles consisting of lutes, rababs and cymbals, with any number of vocalist.
This dispute, however, is based on a lack of understanding of the Tamazight language as "Am-" is a prefix meaning "a man/one who is-."
The Banu Hilal reduced the Zirids to a few coastal towns and took over much of the plains; their influx was a major factor in the Arabization of the region and in the spread of nomadism in areas where agriculture had previously been dominant.
Masinissa was succeeded by his son Micipsa.
