The Christian Democratic Party gained 0.2%, ending up at 6.3%.
The number of Poles in Bergen rose from 697 in 2006 to 3,128 in 2010.
Bergensk is the native dialect of Bergen and a variation of Vestnorsk.
His art can still be seen several places in the city, and in 2009 the city council choose to preserve Dolk's work "Spray" with protective glass.
Bergen is recognised as the unofficial capital of the region known as Western Norway, and recognised and marketed as the gateway city to the world-famous fjords of Norway and for that reason it has become Norway's largest – and one of Europe's largest – cruise ship ports of call.
Bergen received a totem pole as a gift of friendship from the city of Seattle on the city's 900th anniversary in 1970.
During the Dano-Norwegian period from 1536 to 1814, Bergen was more influenced by Danish than other areas of Norway.
Arna-Bjørnar and Sandviken play in the Women's Premier League.
Bryggen, Eidemarken, Engen, Fjellet, Kalfaret,  Ladegården, Løvstakksiden, Marken, Minde, Møhlenpris, Nordnes, Nygård, Nøstet,  Sandviken, Sentrum, Skansen, Skuteviken, Strandsiden, Stølen, Sydnes, Verftet, Vågsbunnen, Wergeland, and Ytre Sandviken.
Sentrum (literally, "Centre") was a borough (with the same name as a present-day neighbourhood).
The city centre is surrounded by the Seven Mountains, although there is disagreement as to which of the nine mountains constitute these.
Finally, the Labour Party continued being the second largest party in the city, gaining 1% and ending up at 23.9%.
Tertnes plays in the Women's Premier Handball League, and Fyllingen in the Men's Premier Handball League.
Wealthy citizens of Bergen had been living in Fana since the 19th century, but as the city expanded it became more convenient to settle in the municipality.
Most of the old buildings of Bergen, including Bryggen (which was rebuilt in a medieval style), were built after the fire.
In 1686 a new great fire hit ''Strandsiden'', destroying 231 city blocks and 218 boathouses.
Fløibanen is a funicular which runs from the city centre to Mount Fløyen and Ulriksbanen is an aerial tramway which runs to Mount Ulriken.
The last half of the 19th century was a period of rapid expansion and modernisation of the city.
Almost half of the passengers are German or British.
The population of the (now defunct) borough, numbered in 1994 more than 18000 people.
The city limits were expanded in 1876, and Nygård, Møhlenpris and Sandviken were urbanised with large-scale construction of city blocks housing both the poor and the wealthy.
The college was created through amalgamation in 1994; campuses are spread around town but will be co-located at Kronstad.
In December - March, the temperature difference between Bergen and Oslo can be up to 30 degrees Celsius, despite the fact that both cities are located at approximately 60 degrees North.
Already, Bryggen is regularly flooded at extreme tides, and it is feared that as sea levels rise, floods will become a major problem in Bergen.
In the middle of the 14th century, North German merchants who had already been present in substantial numbers since the 13th century, founded one of the four '''' of the Hanseatic League at Bryggen in Bergen.
This was turned down – but as a compromise the name of the diocese was changed to ''Bjørgvin bispedømme''.
In athletics, the city is dominated by IL Norna-Salhus, IL Gular and FIK BFG Fana, formerly also Norrøna IL and TIF Viking.
Bergenhus fortress dates from 1240s and guards the entrance to the harbour in Bergen.
Each year Bergen donates the Christmas Tree seen in Newcastle's Haymarket as a sign of the ongoing friendship between the sister cities.
The Hanseatic merchants lived in their own separate quarter of town, where Middle Low German was used, enjoying exclusive rights to trade with the northern fishermen that each summer sailed to Bergen.
According to tradition, the city was founded in 1070 by king Olav Kyrre; its name was Bjørgvin, "the green meadow among the mountains".
Bergen Port, operated by Bergen Port Authority, is the largest seaport in Norway.
The Socialist Left Party (SV) and the Pensioners Party (PP) ended up as the losers of the election, SV going from 11.6% of the votes in the 2003 elections to 7.1%, and PP losing 2.9% ending up at 1.2%.
Instead of being demolished, the remaining buildings were eventually restored and accompanied by reconstructions of some of the burned buildings.
Buekorps is a unique feature of Bergen culture, consisting of boys aged from 7 to 21 parading with imitation weapons and snare drums.
Brann plays their home games at the 17,824-seat Brann Stadion.
The immigrant population in Bergen has changed a lot since 1970.
The rural municipality of Årstad was merged with Bergen on 1 July 1915.
In 1428 the city was plundered by German pirates, and in 1455, Hanseatic merchants were responsible for burning down Munkeliv Abbey.
In 1916, 300 buildings burned down in the city centre, and in 1955 parts of ''Bryggen'' burned down.
The annual Bergen International Festival is the main cultural festival, which is supplemented by the Bergen International Film Festival.
It was established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt).
In 1665, the city's harbour was the site of the Battle of Vågen, where an English naval flotilla attacked a Dutch merchant and treasure fleet supported by the city's garrison.
None of the plans was carried out in its original form; the Marken and Stølen redevelopment plans were discarded entirely and that of Nordnes only carried out in the area that had been most damaged by war.
Tourism is an important income source for the city.
Ulriken, Fløyen, Løvstakken and Damsgårdsfjellet are always included as well as three of Lyderhorn, Sandviksfjellet, Blåmanen, Rundemanen and Kolbeinsvarden.
Bergen is now a municipality in Norway, in the county of Hordaland.
The fire marked a transition from tar covered houses, as well as the remaining log houses, to painted and some brick-covered wooden buildings.
Another concern is the risk of rising sea levels.
Bergen University College has 6,000 students and 600 staff.
It is now placed in the Nordnes Park and gazes out over the sea towards the friendship city far to the west.
The Gulf Stream keeps the sea relatively warm, considering the latitude, and the mountains protect the city from cold winds from the north, north-east and east.
The city centre and northern neighbourhoods are located on Byfjorden, "the city fjord", and the city is surrounded by mountains; Bergen is known as the city of seven mountains.
The Norwegian State Railways operates express trains to Oslo and the Bergen Commuter Rail to Voss.
The city lost its status as a separate county on the same date.
The city's Hanseatic heritage is documented in the Hanseatic Museum located at Bryggen.
Bergen gradually assumed the function of capital of Norway in the early 13th century, as the first city where a rudimentary central administration was established.
Some indications are that, due to climate change, storms causing landslides and floods will become more severe in the area and in the surrounding counties.
The prediction was supported by over 480 landslides in Hordaland county from the spring of 2006 to the summer of 2007.
The population grew by 4,549 people in 2009, a growth rate of 1,8%.
Two internationally renowned composers from Bergen are Edvard Grieg and Ole Bull.
The team was the football champion in 1961–62, 1963 and 2007, and reached the quarter-finals of the Cup Winners' Cup in 1996–97.
The city centre is surrounded by an electronic toll collection ring using the Autopass system.
Bergen acquired Fyllingsdalen from Fana municipality in 1955.
The national average is 138.0% and 4.2%.
During the Second World War, Bergen was occupied on the first day of the German invasion on 9 April 1940, after a brief fight between German ships and the Norwegian coastal artillery.
The state church is followed by 52,059 (13.55%) irreligious  12,000 Catholics belonging to Saint Paul Catholic Church 4,947 members of various Protestant free churches, 2,707 Muslims, 816 Hindus, 255 Russian Orthodox and 147 Oriental Orthodox.
In 2013 the Avinor-operated airport served  6&nbsp;million passengers.
'''Bergen''' (, historically '''Bjørgvin''', is a city and municipality in Hordaland on the west coast of Norway.
In January 2006, persons with non-Western immigrant background accounted for 6 percent of the population in Bergen.
Outside of the city centre and the surrounding neighbourhoods (i.e.
The population was stagnant, and the city limits were narrow.
The main motorways consist of E39, which runs north–south through the municipality, E16, which runs eastwards, and National Road 555, which runs westwards.
The university cooperates with Haukeland University Hospital within medical research.
By the late 14th century, Bergen had established itself as the centre of the trade in Norway.
For several hundred years, the extent of the city remained almost constant.
The wealthy built villas between Møhlenpris and Nygård, and on the side of Mount Fløyen; these areas were also added to Bergen in 1876.
In 1751, there was a great fire at ''Vågsbunnen''.
The immigrant population has thus accounted for 43.6% of Bergen's population growth and 60.8% of Norway's population growth during the period 1993–2008, compared with 84.5% in Oslo.
Most of the slides hit roads, however none of them caused damage to cars, buildings, or people, until October 2007, when a large dislodged rock killed a motorist.
Most of the homes in these areas are detached row houses, single family homes or small apartment buildings.
It served as Norway's capital in the 13th century, and from the end of the 13th century became a bureau city of the Hanseatic League.
The 2007 city council elections were held on 10 September.
After the local elections of 2007, the city has been ruled by a right-wing coalition of the Progress Party, the Christian Democratic Party and the Conservative Party, each with two commissioners.
FK Fyllingsdalen is the city's second-best team, playing in the Second Division at Varden Amfi.
In the 15th century, the city was attacked several times by the Victual Brothers, and in 1429 they succeeded in burning the royal castle and much of the city.
The Norwegian School of Economics is located in outer Sandviken and is the leading business school in Norway, having produced three Economy Nobel Prize laureates.
Årstad, inner Laksevåg and Sandviken), the majority of the population lives in relatively sparsely populated residential areas that have been built since the 1950s.
Bergen experiences plentiful rainfall in all seasons, with annual precipitation measuring  on average.
Rain fell every day between 29 October 2006 and 21 January 2007, 85 consecutive days.
Lambertseter), Fyllingsdalen was developed into a modern suburb with large apartment buildings, mid-rises, and some single-family homes, in the 1960s and 1970s.
After World War II, Bergen had again run short on land to build on, and, contrary to the original plans, many large apartment buildings were built in Landås in the 1950s and 1960s.
Extensions to other boroughs may occur later.
It is situated among a group of mountains known as the Seven Mountains, although the number is a matter of definition.
This is a slightly slower growth than the national average, which has sextupled during the same period.
The workers' homes in this area were poorly built, and little remains after large-scale redevelopment in the 1960s–1980s.
The Liberal Party more than doubled, going from 2.7% to 5.8%.
Ethnic Norwegians make up 84.5% of Bergen's residents.
Temps below -10 degrees Celsius are rare.
The Madam Felle (1831–1908) monument in Sandviken, is in honor of a Norwegian woman of German origin, who in the mid-19th century, managed, as a woman, against the will of the council to maintain a counter of beer.
The Labour Party is now holding both the mayor office and governing mayor office.
The Gulf Stream provides the city with the warmest winters of all cities in the Nordic countries, and the first frosts sometimes show up well into December.
, the municipality's population was 278,121, and the urban population was 250,420 , Approximately 420,000 people live in the Bergen area.
After Årstad became a part of Bergen in 1916, a development plan was applied to the new area.
As of 2002, the average gross income for men above the age of 17 is 426,000 Norwegian krone (NOK), the average gross income for women above the age of 17 is NOK&nbsp;238,000, with the total average gross income being NOK&nbsp;330,000.
The Red Electoral Alliance lost 1.4%, ending up at 4.5%, while the Centre Party gained 1.2%, ending up at 2.8%.
The municipality covers an area of .
In recent years, precipitation and winds have increased in the city.
Ninety-six percent of the population live in urban areas.
by Lothar Lindtner and Rolf Berntzen on an album in 1977.
The rural municipality of Bergen landdistrikt was merged with Bergen on 1 January 1877.
The hotels in the city may be full at times, due to the increasing number of tourists and conferences.
, the municipality had a population of 278,120, making the population density 599 people per km2.
Modern research has, however, discovered that a trading settlement was established already during the 1020s or 1030s.
Four large bridges connect Bergen to its suburban municipalities.
Of these, 50.2% have background from Europe, 28.9% from Asia, 13.1% from Africa, 5.5% from Latin America, 1.9% from North America and 0.4% from Oceania.
This is because the city is surrounded by mountains that cause moist North Atlantic air to undergo orographic lift, yielding abundant rainfall.
Bergen borders the municipalities Meland, Lindås and Osterøy to the north, Vaksdal and Samnanger to the east, Os and Austevoll to the south, and Sund, Fjell and Askøy to the west.
In 1918, there was a campaign to reintroduce the Norse form ''Bjørgvin'' as the name of the city.
Between Bergen and Arna Station, the train runs about every 30&nbsp;minutes through the Ulriken Tunnel; there is no corresponding road tunnel, forcing road vehicles to travel via Åsane or Nesttun.
The Norwegian Institute of Marine Research has been located in Bergen since 1900.
In 1248, ''Holmen'' and ''Sverresborg'' burned, and 11 churches were destroyed.
In 1702, ⅞ of the city burned.
In terms of temperature and precipitation, Bergen has more in common with the climate of Scotland across the sea than with Oslo and Sweden, where long heat and cold-waves occur regularly.
The rural municipalities of Arna, Fana, Laksevåg, and Åsane were merged with Bergen on 1 January 1972.
The Conservative Party member Trude Drevland is mayor—on unpaid leave since 1 September 2015, while conservative Ragnhild Stolt-Nielsen is the leader of the city government, the most powerful political position in Bergen.
The city was subject to some Allied bombing raids, aiming at German naval installations in the harbour.
Few city blocks akin to those in Nygård and Møhlenpris were planned.
The 1,500-seat Grieg Hall is the city's main cultural venue, and home of the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra, founded in 1765, and the Bergen Woodwind Quintet.
The Church of Norway is the largest denomination in Bergen, with 201,006 (79.74%) adherents in 2012.
Bryggen was under threat of being wholly or partly demolished after the fire of 1955, when a large number of the buildings burned to the ground.
Many of the worker class built their own homes, and many small, detached apartment buildings were built.
In 1198, the Bagler-faction set fire to the city in connection with a battle against the Birkebeiner faction during the civil war.
The modern tram Bergen Light Rail (Bybanen) opened between the city centre and Nesttun in 2010, extended to Rådal (Lagunen Storsenter) in 2013 and is scheduled to reach the airport in 2015.
Public transport in Hordaland is managed by Skyss, which operates an extensive city bus network in Bergen and to many neighbouring municipalities, including one route which operates as a trolleybus.
In late 2005, heavy rains caused floods and several landslides, the worst of which killed three people on 14 September.
As part of the modernisation wave of the 1950s and 1960s, and due to damage caused by World War II, the city government ambitiously planned redevelopment of many areas in central Bergen.
The principal export traded from Bergen was dried cod from the northern Norwegian coast, which started around 1100.
It was strongly influenced by Low German-speaking merchants from the mid-14th to mid-18th centuries.
In 1349, the Black Death was inadvertently brought to Norway by the crew of an English ship arriving in Bergen.
Bergen is the administrative centre of Hordaland and consists of eight boroughs—Arna, Bergenhus, Fana, Fyllingsdalen, Laksevåg, Ytrebygda, Årstad and Åsane.
The university has a broad range of courses and research in academic fields and three national centres of excellence, in climate research, petroleum research and medieval studies.
The Labour Party formed a new center-left city government with the Liberal Party and the Christian Democrats.
In 1582, another fire hit the city centre and ''Strandsiden''.
At the same time as planned city expansion took place inside Bergen, its extra-municipal suburbs too grew rapidly.
The city also features Carte Blanche, the Norwegian national company of contemporary dance.
Grieg's home, Troldhaugen, has been converted to a museum.
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, Bergen produced a series of successful pop, rock and black metal artists, collectively known as the Bergen Wave.
Every summer, temperatures reach the upper twenties several times, but  only some days each decade, the city sees temperatures over 30 degrees.
Stiftelsen Bryggen, the foundation responsible for preserving the UNESCO site has, amongst others, suggested that a sea wall that could be raised and lowered as demanded by the tides, be built outside the harbour to protect the city.
Throughout the 15th and 16th centuries, Bergen remained one of the largest cities in Scandinavia, and was Norway's biggest city until the 1830s, when the capital city of Oslo became the largest.
Bergen connects to the island of Bjorøy via the subsea Bjorøy Tunnel.
Other tertiary education institutions include the Bergen School of Architecture, the Bergen National Academy of the Arts, located in the city centre with 300 students, and the Norwegian Naval Academy located in Laksevåg.
The airport serves as a hub for Scandinavian Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle and Widerøe; there are direct flights to 20 domestic and 53 international destinations.
While some are dominated by apartment buildings and modern terraced houses (e.g.
Their architecture is influenced by a variety of styles; historicism, classicism and Art Nouveau.
A suitable name: Bergen is often called 'the city among the seven mountains'.
Bergen is the seat of the Diocese of Bjørgvin with Bergen Cathedral as its centrepiece, which St John's Church is the city's most prominent.
Compared to areas behind the mountains on the Scandinavian peninsula, Bergen is much wetter and has a narrower temperature range with very cool summers and mild winters.
Fyllingsdalen), others are dominated by single-family homes.
It focuses on professional education, such as teaching, healthcare and engineering.
The main campus is located in the city centre.
The city was granted monopoly in regards to trade from the North of Norway, by king Håkon Håkonsson (1217-1263).
The city centre of Bergen is located west in the municipality, facing the fjord of Byfjorden.
Bergen Airport, Flesland, is located  from the city centre, at Flesland.
Simultaneously, an urbanisation process was taking place in Solheimsviken in Årstad, at the time outside of Bergen municipality, centred on the large industrial activity in the area.
This led to large parts of the German-inspired vocabulary disappearing and pronunciations shifting slightly towards East Norwegian.
It was the playwright Ludvig Holberg who felt so inspired by the seven hills of Rome, that he decided that his home town must be blessed with a corresponding seven mountains – and locals still argue which seven they are.
A well-known restaurant of the same name is now at another place of Bergen.
The first element is ''berg'' (n.) or ''bjǫrg'' (n.), which translates to ''mountain(s)''.
Demolition of old buildings and occasionally whole city blocks is still taking place, the most recent major example being the 2007 razing of Jonsvollskvartalet at Nøstet.
The Rs are uvular trills, as in French, which probably spread to Bergen some time in the 18th century, overtaking the alveolar trill in the time span of two to three generations.
Gullfjellet is the highest mountain in Bergen, at  above mean sea level.
Bergen is looked upon as the street art capital of Norway, the famous artist Banksy visited the city in 2000 and inspired many to start with street art, a bit later the city brought up the most famous street artist in Norway; Dolk.
The city was hit by numerous fires over the years.
What remains of the quays, Bryggen, is a World Heritage Site.
Prior to the Rolling Stones concert in September 2006, many hotels were already fully booked several months in advance.
Michelsen Institute is an independent research foundation established in 1930 focusing on human rights and development issues.
, the main urban area of Bergen had 250,420 residents and covered an area of .
Bergen is well known for having the mildest winter climate, though with a lot of precipitation, of all cities in the Nordic countries.
The Labour Party has formed a new center-left city government including the Labour Party, the Liberal Party and the Christian Democrats.
In addition, 8.1% were first or second generation immigrants of Western background and 7.4% were first or second generation immigrants of non-Western background.
Bergen Port is Norway's busiest in both freight and passengers with over 300 cruise ship calls a year bringing nearly a half a million passengers to Bergen, a number that has doubled in ten years.
''Bergens Tidende'' (BT) and ''Bergensavisen'' (BA) are the largest newspapers, with circulations of 87,076 and 30,719 in 2006, ''BT'' is a regional newspaper covering all of Hordaland and Sogn og Fjordane, while ''BA'' focuses on metropolitan Bergen.
Bergen IK is the premier men's ice hockey team, playing at Bergenshallen in the First Division.
The University of Bergen has 16,000 students and 3,000 staff, making it the third-largest educational institution in Norway.
Some of these caused Norwegian civilian casualties numbering about 100.
The city features Bergen Airport, Flesland, Bergen Light Rail, and is the terminus of the Bergen Line.
Bergen is sheltered from the North Sea by the islands Askøy, Holsnøy (the municipality of Meland) and Sotra (the municipalities of Fjell and Sund).
Passenger catamarans run from Bergen south to Haugesund and Stavanger, and north to Sognefjord and Nordfjord.
From around 1600, the Hanseatic dominance of the city's trade gradually declined in favour of Norwegian merchants (often of Hanseatic ancestry), and in the 1750s, the Hanseatic '''' finally closed.
The resistance groups in Bergen were Saborg, Milorg, ''"Theta-gruppen"'', Sivorg, ''Stein-organisasjonen'' and the Communist Party.
22.8% of the population were under 17&nbsp;years of age, while 4.5% were 80 and above.
Bergen was a European Capital of Culture in 2000.
Since 2000, the city of Bergen has been governed by a city government (''byråd'') based on the principle of parliamentarism.
The immigrant population (those with two foreign-born parents) in Bergen, includes 42,169 individuals with backgrounds from 180 countries representing 15.5% of the city's population (2014).
Also in relation to the total population in Bergen, the proportion of non-Western increased significantly.
In the 2015 election the Labour Party won the Bergen election with a landslide, and got 37,8 % of the votes up 9 percent from 2011, while the Conservative party lost 12,8 % and ended up at just 22,1 %.
Similar developments took place outside of Bergen's city limits, for example in Loddefjord.
The "Bergen School of Meteorology" was developed at the Geophysical Institute beginning in 1917, the Norwegian School of Economics was founded in 1936, and the University of Bergen in 1946.
