* 2000  Windhoek, Namibia
* 1991  Warsaw, Poland
West of the center, Schloss Bellevue is the residence of the German President.
The Neues Museum, which displays the bust of Queen Nefertiti, Alte Nationalgalerie, Pergamon Museum, and Bode Museum were built there.
Both airports together handled 29.5 million passengers in 2015.
Every year Berlin hosts one of the largest New Year's Eve celebrations (Silvester) in the world, attended by over a million people.
It formed most of the territory that comprises modern Berlin and increased the population from 1.9&nbsp;million to 4&nbsp;million.
Berlin has a Maritime temperate climate (''Cfb'') according to the Köppen climate classification system.
It combines 20th-century traditions with the modern architecture of today's Berlin.
Berliners would achieve seven gold, twelve silver and three bronze medals.
With a population of approximately 3.6 million people, Berlin is the second most populous city proper and the seventh most populous urban area in the European Union.
Berlin's energy is mainly supplied by the Swedish firm Vattenfall, which relies more heavily than other electricity producers on lignite as an energy source.
Clubs are not required to close at a fixed time on the weekends, and many parties last well into the morning, or all weekend.
The earliest evidence of settlements in the area of today's Berlin are a wooden rod dated from approximately 1192 and leftovers of wooden houseparts dated to 1174 found in a 2012 excavation in Berlin Mitte.
The Berlin airlift, conducted by the three western Allies, overcame this blockade by supplying food and other supplies to the city from June 1948 to May 1949.
BVG/ Extensive services in all boroughs.
Berlin is among the top three congress cities in the world.
The central boroughs are home to many nightclubs, including the clubs Watergate, Tresor, E-Werk and Berghain.
Furthermore, Berlin is classified as a temperate continental climate (''Dc'') under the Trewartha climate scheme.
24h-service on weekends.
Friedrichstraße was Berlin's legendary street during the Golden Twenties.
Built in 1969, it is visible throughout most of the central districts of Berlin.
The Rathaus Schöneberg, where John F. Kennedy made his famous "Ich bin ein Berliner!"
Berlin has commissioned the company ABL Social Federation to install several hundred free public Wireless LAN sites across the capital by 2016.
One third of its houses were damaged or destroyed, and the city lost half of its population.
The Senate of Berlin consists of the Governing Mayor (''Regierender Bürgermeister'') and up to eight senators holding ministerial positions, one of them holding the official title "Mayor" (''Bürgermeister'') as deputy to the Governing Mayor.
Since the 2011 state election, there has been a coalition of the Social Democratic Party with the Christian Democratic Union.
Several large-scale trade fairs like the consumer electronics trade fair IFA, the ILA Berlin Air Show, the Berlin Fashion Week (including the Bread and Butter tradeshow and ''Panorama Berlin''), the Green Week, the ''Fruit Logistica'', the transport fair InnoTrans, the tourism fair ITB and the adult entertainment and erotic fair Venus  are held annually in the city, attracting a significant number of business visitors.
, Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth, Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety, Food and Agriculture, Economic Cooperation and Development, Health, Transport and Digital Infrastructure and Education and Research are based in the capital.
These were connected by static inverters to the power grid and were loaded during times of low energy consumption and unloaded during periods of high consumption.
Officially, the Berlin-Cölln palace became permanent residence of the Brandenburg electors of the Hohenzollerns from 1486, when John Cicero came to power.
The faithful of the different religions and denominations maintain many places of worship in Berlin.
Nine major European languages can be chosen as foreign languages in 29 schools.
In 2015 Berlin became the venue for the UEFA Champions League Final.
Berlin is the seat of the Roman Catholic archbishop of Berlin and EKBO's elected chairperson is titled the bishop of EKBO.
There are also many boroughs of Slavic origin in the city: Berlin-Karow, Berlin-Malchow, Berlin-Pankow, Berlin-Spandau (earlier: ''Spandow''), Berlin-Gatow, Berlin-Kladow, Berlin-Steglitz, Berlin-Lankwitz, Berlin-Britz, Berlin-Buckow, Berlin-Rudow, Berlin-Alt-Treptow, Berlin-Schmöckwitz, Berlin-Marzahn and Berlin-Köpenick.
For several years Berlin has been recognized as a major center of business founders.
* 1988  Madrid, Spain
Berlin is also the headquarter of major German-language publishing houses like Walter de Gruyter, Springer, the Ullstein Verlagsgruppe (publishing group), Suhrkamp and Cornelsen are all based in Berlin.
The Karneval der Kulturen (''Carnival of Cultures''), a multi-ethnic street parade celebrated every Pentecost weekend.
* 1987  Paris, France
Berlin is also well known for its numerous cafés, street musicians, beach bars along the Spree River, flea markets, boutique shops and pop up stores, which are a source for recreation and leisure.
The Oberbaumbrücke is Berlin's most iconic bridge, crossing the River Spree.
In 2004 the Larger Urban Zone was home to about 5&nbsp;million people in an area of .
Berlin's built-up area creates a microclimate, with heat stored by the city's buildings and pavement.
This has now become the backbone of the city's energy grid.
Several professional clubs representing the most important spectator team sports in Germany have their base in Berlin:
Berlin in the 1920s was the third largest municipality in the world.
The last decade experienced an influx from various Western countries and some African regions.
In the 1990s the ''Aussiedlergesetze'' enabled immigration to Germany of some residents from the former Soviet Union.
The two towns over time formed close economic and social ties, and profited from the staple right on the two important trade routes ''Via Imperii'' and from Brügge to Novgorod.
An estimated 200,000–350,000 Muslims reside in Berlin, making up about 6–10 percent of the population.
The Museum für Naturkunde exhibits natural history near Berlin Hauptbahnhof.
Annual precipitation is  with moderate rainfall throughout the year.
Winters are cool with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
* 1993  Tashkent, Uzbekistan
In 1989, with the end of the Cold War and pressure from the East German population, the Berlin Wall fell on 9 November and was subsequently mostly demolished.
The Admiralspalast in Mitte has a vibrant program of variety and music events.
Deutsche Bahn runs trains to domestic destinations like Hamburg, Munich, Cologne and others.
Long-distance rail lines connect Berlin with all of the major cities of Germany and with many cities in neighboring European countries.
Schloss Charlottenburg, which was burnt out in the Second World War is the largest historical palace in Berlin.
Apart from that, Berlin is well known for its offerings of vegetarian cuisine.
The ''SOUND'' and the ''Dschungel'' gained notoriety.
During World War II, large parts of Berlin were destroyed in the 1943–45 air raids and during the Battle of Berlin.
Potsdamer Platz is an entire quarter built from scratch after 1995 after the Wall came down.
In 1415 Frederick I became the elector of the Margraviate of Brandenburg, which he ruled until 1440.
In 2008, about 25–30% of the population had foreign born parents.
Significant industries also include IT, pharmaceuticals, biomedical engineering, clean tech, biotechnology, construction and electronics.
The FIVB World Tour, a beach volleyball Grand Slam event, is presented at an inner-city site every year, while the Mellowpark in Köpenick is one of the biggest skate and BMX parks in Europe.
Berlin has established a high-profile reputation as a host city of major international sporting events.
The city has a high density of research institutions, such as the Fraunhofer Society, Leibniz Association and the Max Planck Society, which are independent of, or only loosely connected to its universities.
One of Europe's major research and technology clusters is at WISTA in Berlin-Adlershof, with more than 1,000 affiliated companies and 16 scientific institutions.
The Gemäldegalerie (Painting Gallery) focuses on the paintings of the "old masters" from the 13th to the 18th centuries, while the Neue Nationalgalerie (New National Gallery, built by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe) specializes in 20th-century European painting.
National and international migration into the city has a long history.
BVG/ All modes of transport can be accessed with the same ticket.
Stations/ Lines/ Net length
Same-sex bars and dance halls operated freely from the 1880s, and the first magazine, ''Der Eigene'', started in 1896.
Berlin was completely divided.
The wireless networks will be concentrated mostly in central districts; 650 hotspots (325 indoor and 325 outdoor access points) will be installed.
Approximately halfway from the Brandenburg Gate is the Großer Stern, a circular traffic island on which the Siegessäule (Victory Column) is situated.
The Bauhaus Archive is a museum of 20th century design from the famous Bauhaus school.
Berlin has a long history of gay culture, and is an important birthplace of the LGBT rights movement.
Schönefeld Airport (SXF) is located just outside Berlin's south-eastern border in the state of Brandenburg.
Many other immigrants came from Bohemia, Poland, and Salzburg.
Spandau is first mentioned in 1197 and Köpenick in 1209, although these areas did not join Berlin until 1920.
Cyclists have access to  of bicycle paths including approximately  of mandatory bicycle paths,  of off-road bicycle routes,  of bicycle lanes on roads,  of shared bus lanes which are also open to cyclists,  of combined pedestrian/bike paths and  of marked bicycle lanes on roadside pavements (or sidewalks).
The Berlin 380-kV electric line was built when West Berlin's electrical grid was not connected to those of East or West Germany.
The Messe Berlin is the main convention organizing company in the city.
While in both systems and in reunified Berlin, various important heritage monuments were also (partly) reconstructed, including the ''Forum Fridericianum'' with e.g., the State Opera (1955), Charlottenburg Palace (1957), the main monuments of the Gendarmenmarkt (1980s), Kommandantur (2003) and the project to reconstruct the baroque façades of the City Palace.
The modern fast food version of the döner kebab sandwich evolved in Berlin in the 1970s, and became a favorite in Germany.
Summers are warm and sometimes humid with average high temperatures of  and lows of .
The area around Hackescher Markt is home to fashionable culture, with countless clothing outlets, clubs, bars, and galleries.
The most-commonly-spoken foreign languages in Berlin are Turkish, English, Russian, Arabic, Polish, Kurdish, Vietnamese, Serbian, Croatian and French.
Berlin in 2009 was estimated to have from 100,000 to 250,000 non-registered inhabitants.
Berlinerisch or Berlinisch is a dialect of Berlin Brandenburgish German spoken in Berlin and the surrounding metropolitan area.
About 500 top athletes (15% of all German top athletes) are based there.
The Konzerthaus (Concert Hall), home of the Berlin Symphony Orchestra, stands between the two cathedrals.
The Spree follows this valley now.
Today ethnic Germans from countries of the former Soviet Union make up the largest portion of the Russian-speaking community.
In 1971, a Four-Power agreement guaranteed access to and from West Berlin by car or train through East Germany.
The victorious powers divided the city into four sectors, analogous to the occupation zones into which Germany was divided.
By 1700, approximately 30 percent of Berlin's residents were French, because of the Huguenot immigration.
In 2008, 62,000 scientists were working in research and development in the city.
Adjacent to this area is the Rotes Rathaus (City Hall), with its distinctive red-brick architecture.
More than 60% of Berlin residents have no registered religious affiliation.
The Reichstag building is the traditional seat of the German Parliament.
The metropolitan area of the Berlin-Brandenburg region was home to about 4.5&nbsp;million in an area of .
Berlin's nightlife has been celebrated as one of the most diverse and vibrant of its kind.
In 1871 Berlin became capital of the newly founded German Empire.
Also located on the island and adjacent to the Lustgarten and palace is Berlin Cathedral, emperor William II's ambitious attempt to create a Protestant counterpart to St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
Well-preserved specimens of Tyrannosaurus Rex and the early bird Archaeopteryx are at display as well.
It is the only observation tower which stands on insulators and has a restaurant  and an observation deck  above ground, which is reachable by a windowed elevator.
Potsdam is situated on the southwestern periphery of Berlin.
The Haus der Kulturen der Welt presents various exhibitions dealing with intercultural issues and stages world music and conferences.
* 1989  Istanbul, Turkey
Since the ''Ber-'' at the beginning sounds like the German word ''Bär'' (bear), there appears a bear in the coat of arms of the city.
* 1992  Brussels, Belgium
* 1991  Moscow, Russia
The Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, a Holocaust memorial, is situated to the north.
Around 125,000 civilians were killed.
BVG/ Operates predominantly in eastern boroughs.
In 1961 East Germany began the building of the Berlin Wall between East and West Berlin, and events escalated to a tank standoff at Checkpoint Charlie.
The leftover stretch along the Spree river in Friedrichshain remains as the East Side Gallery.
In 1701 the dual state formed the Kingdom of Prussia, as Frederick III, Elector of Brandenburg crowned himself as king Frederick I in Prussia.
It was remodelled by British architect Norman Foster in the 1990s and features a glass dome over the session area, which allows free public access to the parliamentary proceedings and magnificent views of the city.
Many Classical buildings line the street and part of Humboldt University is located there.
The Charité hospital complex is the largest university hospital in Europe, tracing back its origins to the year 1710.
ResearchGate, a global social networking site for scientists, is based in Berlin.
Berlin is home to numerous magazine, newspaper, book and scientific/academic publishers, as well as their associated service industries.
The Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin  are the largest World Heritage Site in Germany.
Spring and autumn are generally chilly to mild.
* 1995  Prague, Czech Republic
This monument, built to commemorate Prussia's victories, was relocated in 1938–39 from its previous position in front of the Reichstag.
On 18 June 1994 soldiers from the United States, France and Britain marched in a parade which was part of the ceremonies to mark the final withdrawal of foreign troops allowing a reunified Berlin.
The ministries and departments of Defence, Justice and Consumer Protection, Finance, Interior, Foreign, Economic Affairs and Energy, Labour and Social Affairs
West Berlin was surrounded by East German territory, and East Germany proclaimed the Eastern part as its capital, a move that was not recognised by the western powers.
Berlin today is consistently rated as an important world city for street art culture.
Several venues have become a popular stage for the Neo-Burlesque scene.
The boroughs of Berlin are not independent municipalities.
The city has four public research universities and more than 30 private, professional, and technical colleges ''(Hochschulen)'', offering a wide range of disciplines.
Apart from the Museum Island, there are many additional museums in the city.
The Tiergarten, located in Mitte, is Berlin's largest park and was designed by Peter Joseph Lenné.
During the Weimar era, Berlin underwent political unrest due to economic uncertainties, but also became a renowned centre of the Roaring Twenties.
The new Berlin Brandenburg Airport (BER), currently under construction, will replace Tegel as single commercial airport of Berlin.
A Fan Fest at Brandenburg Gate, which attracts several hundred-thousand spectators, has become popular during international football competitions, like the UEFA European Championship.
All four Allies shared administrative responsibilities for Berlin.
Important economic sectors in Berlin include life sciences, transportation, information and communication technologies, media and music, advertising and design, biotechnology, environmental services, construction, e-commerce, retail, hotel business, and medical engineering.
Town twinning between Berlin and other cities began with sister city Los Angeles in 1967.
To the west of Potsdamer Platz is the Kulturforum, which houses the Gemäldegalerie, and is flanked by the Neue Nationalgalerie and the Berliner Philharmonie.
It is therefore a canting arm.
The Universität der Künste ''(UdK)'' has about 4,000 students and the Berlin School of Economics and Law has enrollment of about 10,000 students.
Twelve restaurants in Berlin have been included in the Michelin guide of 2015, which ranks the city at the top for the number of restaurants having this distinction in Germany.
Throughout the 1990s, people in their 20s from many countries, particularly those in Western and Central Europe, made Berlin's club scene a premier nightlife venue.
It was completed in a brick gothic style in 1896.
Around 130,000 jobs were added in this period.
The urban area of Berlin comprised about four million people, making it the seventh most populous urban area in the European Union.
In 2013 around 600,000 Berliners were registered in one of the more than 2,300 sport and fitness clubs.
It is a West Germanic language that derives most of its vocabulary from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.
The entire Berlin-Brandenburg capital region has a population of six million.
The city has a 6-year primary education program.
* 2000  London, United Kingdom
The public broadcaster RBB has its headquarters in Berlin as well as the commercial broadcasters MTV Europe, VIVA, and N24.
It has the largest mounted dinosaur in the world (a Giraffatitan).
About 2.7% of the population identify with other Christian denominations (mostly Eastern Orthodox, but also various Protestants).
The total annual state budget of Berlin in 2015 exceeded €24.5 ($30.0) billion including a budget surplus of €205 ($240) million.
There are more than 20 non-indigenous communities with a population of at least 10,000 people, including Turkish, Polish, Russian, Lebanese, Palestinian, Serbian, Italian, Bosnian, Vietnamese, American, Romanian, Bulgarian, Croatian, Chinese, Austrian, Ukrainian, French, British, Spanish, Israeli, Thai, Iranian, Egyptian and Syrian communities.
In the former West Berlin, electricity was supplied chiefly by thermal power stations.
The neighborhoods have no local government bodies.
The Charité is a joint institution of the Freie Universität Berlin and the Humboldt University of Berlin, including a wide range of institutes and specialized medical centers.
The metropolitan region ranks among the top-3 innovative locations in the EU.
Its main exhibition area covers more than .
The nearby New Synagogue is the center of Jewish culture.
Since the reunification on 3 October 1990, Berlin has been one of the three city states in Germany among the present 16 states of Germany.
The Deutsche Oper opened in 1912 in Charlottenburg.
Clusters of high-rise buildings emerge at e.g., Potsdamer Platz, City West and Alexanderplatz.
The ''Berliner Urstromtal'' (an ice age glacial valley), between the low Barnim Plateau to the north and the Teltow Plateau to the south, was formed by meltwater flowing from ice sheets at the end of the last Weichselian glaciation.
The diversity and vivacity of the metropolis led to a trendsetting atmosphere.
The Independent Evangelical Lutheran Church has eight parishes of different sizes in Berlin.
In 1933 Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power.
In 1709, Berlin merged with the four cities of Cölln, Friedrichswerder, Friedrichstadt and Dorotheenstadt under the name Berlin, "Haupt- und Residenzstadt Berlin".
Its current principal conductor is Ivan Fischer.
* 1992  Budapest, Hungary
Berlin became the capital of the new Kingdom.
The ''Kookaburra'' and the ''Quatsch Comedy Club'' are known for satire and stand up comedy shows.
There are seven symphony orchestras in Berlin.
The city hosted the 1936 Summer Olympics and was the host city for the 2006 FIFA World Cup final.
EKBO is a member of the Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD) and Union Evangelischer Kirchen (UEK), and accounts for 18.7% of the local population.
Berlin is subdivided into twelve boroughs or districts (''Bezirke'').
The Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra is one of the preeminent orchestras in the world; it is housed in the Berliner Philharmonie near Potsdamer Platz on a street named for the orchestra's longest-serving conductor, Herbert von Karajan.
The Konzerthausorchester Berlin was founded in 1952 as the orchestra for East Berlin.
Furthermore, Berlin is the seat of many Orthodox cathedrals, such as the Cathedral of St. Boris the Baptist, one of the two seats of the Bulgarian Orthodox Diocese of Western and Central Europe, and the Resurrection of Christ Cathedral of the Diocese of Berlin (Patriarchate of Moscow).
Tegel Airport is an important transfer hub for Air Berlin as well as a focus city for Lufthansa and Eurowings.
One of Europe's largest delicatessen markets is found at the KaDeWe, and among the world’s largest chocolate stores is ''Fassbender & Rausch''.
The Volkspark in Friedrichshain, which opened in 1848, is the oldest park in the city, with monuments, a summer outdoor cinema and several sports areas.
Much of this demolition was initiated by municipal architecture programs to build new residential or business quarters and main roads.
Frequent official visits, and diplomatic consultations among governmental representatives and national leaders are common in contemporary Berlin.
In 1993 the power grid connections to the surrounding areas were restored.
St. Hedwig's Cathedral is Berlin's Roman Catholic cathedral.
Starting here the Karl-Marx-Allee heads east, an avenue lined by monumental residential buildings, designed in the Socialist Classicism style.
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) and The Left (Die Linke) took control of the city government after the 2001 state election and won another term in the 2006 state election.
