The two have a relatively similar climate, but Bermuda has warmer and wetter summers, much like the typical subtropical coastal region of North America on similar parallels.
Sailing, fishing and equestrian sports are popular with both residents and visitors alike.
Bermúdez never landed on the islands, but made two visits to the archipelago, of which he created a recognisable map.
Bermuda's proximity to the US had made it attractive as the site for summit conferences between British Prime Ministers and US Presidents.
But India defeated Bermuda and set a record of 413 runs in a One-Day International (ODI).
In order for the non-binding referendum to be valid, 50% plus 1 of registered voters had to vote.
Other islands such as Morgan's Island held 884 men, including 27 officers; Tucker's Island held 809 Boer prisoners, Burt's Island 607, and Port's Island held 35.
Legends arose of spirits and devils, now thought to have stemmed from the calls of raucous birds (most likely the Bermuda petrel, or ''Cahow'') and the loud noise heard at night from wild hogs.
The predominant language on Bermuda is Bermudian English.
The first notable, and historically important, book credited to a Bermudian was ''The History of Mary Prince'', a slave narrative by Mary Prince.
However, winter temperatures between Hamilton and Madeira's capital Funchal are nearly identical.
Any child born before or since then to one coloured and one white parent has been added to the coloured statistic.
In 1948, regularly scheduled commercial airline service by land-based aeroplanes began to Kindley Field (now L.F. Wade International Airport), helping tourism to reach its peak in the 1960s–1970s.
Bermudian Quinn Talbot was once the World one-armed golf champion.
The professionals soon displaced the amateur ex-Public schoolboys.
Construction began in 1941 of two airbases consisting of  of land, largely reclaimed from the sea.
Since the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997, it is the most populous Territory.
The United States 1930 Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act enacted protective tariffs.
We've underlined to the Bermuda Government that they should have consulted with the United Kingdom as to whether this falls within their competence or is a security issue, for which the Bermuda Government do not have delegated responsibility.
In the 1950s, after the end of World War II, the Royal Naval dockyard and the military garrison were closed.
One of the terms of the agreement was that the airfield the US Army built would be used jointly by the US and the UK (which it was for the duration of the war, with RAF Transport Command relocating there from Darrell's Island in 1943).
Since then, its national team has taken advantage of Bermuda's advanced basketball facilities and competed at the Caribbean Basketball Championship where it beat competitors with multiple times its population.
Participants included Churchill, US President Dwight D. Eisenhower and French Premier Joseph Laniel.
In the first two centuries of settlement, it relied on steady human emigration to keep the population manageable.
In total, over 15,000 exempted or international companies are currently registered with the Registrar of Companies in Bermuda, most of which hold no office space or employees.
Bermuda had one of the world's highest GDP per capita for most of the 20th century and several years beyond.
Bermudians served in the British armed forces during both World War I and World War II.
Coconut palms are found on Bermuda, making it the northernmost location for the natural growth of this species.
There are strong British influences, together with Afro-Caribbean ones.
The current US Consul General is Robert Settje, who took office in August 2012.
The current governor is George Fergusson; he was sworn in on 23 May 2012.
One such  sculpture, created by Bermudian sculptor Chesley Trott, is installed at the airport's baggage claim area.
Tourism is Bermuda's second-largest industry, with the island attracting over half a million visitors annually, of whom more than 80% are from the United States.
Agricultural production met with limited success, however, due to limited areas available for cultivation, high alkilinity of the soil, and the depletion of the soil quality that resulted from excessive farming.
The BSX is a full member of the World Federation of Exchanges and is located in an OECD member nation.
The United States is Bermuda's largest trading partner (providing over 71% of total imports, 85% of tourist visitors, and an estimated $163&nbsp;billion of US capital in the Bermuda insurance/re-insurance industry), and an estimated 5% of Bermuda residents are US citizens, representing 14% of all foreign-born persons.
Before universal suffrage, adopted as part of Bermuda's Constitution in 1967, voting was dependent on a certain level of property ownership.
Google, for example, is known to have shifted over $10 billion in revenue to its Bermuda subsidiary utilising the "Double Irish" and "Dutch Sandwich" tax avoidance strategies, reducing its 2011 tax liability by $2 billion.
Bermuda has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen ''Cfa'') on the border of tropical climate.
Bermuda has also joined several other nations in efforts to protect the Sargasso Sea.
They vigorously pursued whaling, privateering, and the merchant trade.
Of the total workforce of 38,947 persons in 2005, government employment figures stated that 11,223 (29%) were non-Bermudians.
The Government announced in 2006 that it would provide substantial financial support to Bermuda's cricket and football teams.
It had a history of African slavery, although Britain abolished it decades before the US.
A Bermuda sloop carried the news of the victory at Trafalgar as well as news of the death of Admiral Nelson to England.
A second wave of immigration from the West Indies was sustained throughout the 20th century; the more recent arrivals have primarily come from English-speaking countries, also bringing aspects of their cultures.
By the end of the 1970s, international business had supplanted tourism as the dominant sector of Bermuda's economy (see Economy of Bermuda).
In 1998, Bermuda established its own Basketball Association.
From the 1950s onwards, Bermuda relaxed its immigration laws, allowing increased immigration from Britain and Canada.
Actors such as Ernest Trimingham, Oona O'Neill, Earl Cameron, Diana Dill, Lena Headey, Will Kempe, and most famously, Michael Douglas and Catherine Zeta-Jones, grew up here or have lived here as adults.
The private school sector consists of six traditional private schools, two of which are religious schools, and the remaining four are secular with one of these being a single-gender school and another a Montessori school.
Other nearby nations or territories, such as the United States, are not members (although the US Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has observer status, and the United States Virgin Islands announced in 2007 they would seek ties with CARICOM).
Very little of Bermuda's original black emigration came from this area.
The majority of colonists developed a strong sense of devotion to the Crown.
Once these sports reached Bermuda, they were eagerly adopted by Bermudians.
In 2006, the Bermuda Hogges were formed as the nation's first professional football team to raise the standard of play for the Bermuda national football team.
The islands lie due east of Fripp Island, South Carolina and 900 nautical miles north of San Juan, Puerto Rico.
The Bermuda government maintained a local militia.
English is the primary and official language.
Bermuda also competes in the biennial Island Games, which it hosted in 2013.
The principal installation, Kindley Air Force Base on the eastern coast, was transferred to the US Navy in 1970 and redesignated Naval Air Station Bermuda.
"Bitterenders" (Afrikaans: Bittereinders), who refused to pledge allegiance to the British Crown, were interned on Darrell's Island and closely guarded.
In December 2013, Bermuda's bid to host the 2017 America's Cup was announced.
Portuguese is also spoken in Bermuda; this is owing to immigration from Portugal, particularly from the Azores, and Cape Verde.
Two years later, a flotilla of seven ships left England under the Company's Admiral, Sir George Somers, and the new Governor of Jamestown, Sir Thomas Gates, with several hundred settlers, food and supplies to relieve the colony of Jamestown.
The first English coins to circulate in North America were struck in Bermuda.
Although the number of residents born in Africa is very small, it has tripled between 2000 and 2010 (this group also includes non-blacks).
A Stinson Detroiter seaplane flying from New York City, it had to land twice in the ocean: once because of darkness and again to refuel.
The Exchange specialises in listing and trading of capital market instruments such as equities, debt issues, funds (including hedge fund structures) and depository receipt programmes.
In 1811, it started building the large dockyard on Ireland Island, in the west of the chain, to serve as its principal naval base guarding the western Atlantic Ocean shipping lanes.
A cabinet is nominated by the premier and appointed officially by the governor.
After the American Revolutionary War, Bermuda was established as the Western Atlantic headquarters of the Royal Navy.
The legal system is derived from that of the United Kingdom, with recourse to English courts of final appeal.
The OBA government simultaneously introduced a bill to permit civil unions.
Bermudians rapidly abandoned agriculture for shipbuilding, replanting farmland with the native juniper (''Juniperus bermudiana'', called ''Bermuda cedar'') trees that grew thickly over the entire island.
Having no corporate income tax, Bermuda is a popular tax avoidance location.
The government has a programme to protect it, including restoration of a habitat area.
The current ruling party in Bermuda is the One Bermuda Alliance, commonly referred to as the OBA.
The archipelago is formed by high points on the rim of the caldera of a submarine volcano that forms a seamount.
The Bermuda 7's team competed in the 2011 Las Vegas 7's, defeating the Mexican team.
Local artwork may also be viewed at several galleries around the island.
In May 2009, Bermudian Government's application was approved to become a contributory member of the University of the West Indies (UWI).
The first known European explorer to reach Bermuda was Spanish sea captain Juan de Bermúdez in 1503, after whom the islands are named.
Warwick Academy, one of the oldest schools in the western hemisphere, is in the parish of Warwick, Bermuda.
Each dwelling usually has at least one of these tanks forming part of its foundation.
The original NAS Bermuda on the west side of the island, a seaplane base until the mid-1960s, was designated as the Naval Air Station Bermuda Annex.
Opinion polls conducted by Bermudian newspapers, ''The Royal Gazette'' and ''The Bermuda Sun'', showed clear majorities of Bermudians to be opposed to joining CARICOM.
Recently, its economic status has been affected by the global recession.
These schools produced the civil servants and military and naval officers required to build and maintain the British empire, and team sports were considered a vital tool for training their students to think and act as part of a team.
If a visit to a hospital is required, costs of care must be paid by cheque or credit for services to be rendered.
Bermuda is warmed by the nearby Gulf Stream, and low latitude.
Today, the only military unit remaining in Bermuda, other than naval and army cadet corps, is the Bermuda Regiment, an amalgam of the voluntary units originally formed toward the end of the 19th century.
The New York Yankees of Major League Baseball held Spring Training in Bermuda in 1913.
The Royal Naval Dockyard, and the attendant military garrison, continued to be important to Bermuda's economy until the mid-20th century.
Most importantly, they dominated the North American salt trade with ''de facto'' control of the Turks Islands.
The Royalist colonies were also threatened with invasion.
Its merchant fleet and a web of expatriate Bermudian merchants dominated trade through a number of American Atlantic Seaboard ports and the West Indies.
The required minimum was not reached.
There are four hundred securities listed on the stock exchange, of which almost three hundred are offshore funds and alternative investment structures attracted by Bermuda's regulatory environment.
The number of persons born in Asian countries doubled between the 2000 and the 2010 censuses), blacks have remained in the majority, with new white immigration from Portugal, Britain and elsewhere countered by black immigration from the West Indies.
Bermuda also competed in Men's Skeleton at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy.
Due to 160 years of immigration from Portuguese Atlantic islands (primarily the Azores, though also from Madeira and the Cape Verde Islands), a portion of the population also speaks Portuguese.
The most famous escapee was the Boer prisoner of war Captain Fritz Joubert Duquesne who was serving a life sentence for "conspiracy against the British government and on (the charge of) espionage.".
The number of people born in Canada declined by 13%.
This 36-hole event was held on 16–17 October 2007, at the Mid Ocean Club in Tucker's Town.
Many Bermudians, both black and white, who lack family connections to the West Indies have objected to this emphasis.
There is a Hamilton Parish in addition to the City of Hamilton in Pembroke Parish.
It has  of coastline.
Bermuda has had one Olympic medallist, Clarence Hill, who won a bronze medal in boxing.
In 2007, Bermuda hosted the 25th PGA Grand Slam of Golf.
Those who reported West Indian ancestry were 13%.
It is thought to have contributed to the abolition of slavery in the British Empire.
He settled in the US and later became a spy for Germany in both World Wars.
The law requires that each household collect rainwater that is piped down from the roof of each house.
The only boys' school opened its doors to girls in the 1990s, and in 1996, one of the aided schools became a private school.
The following week, Furbert tabled a bill to deny same-sex marriage in Bermuda.
At the end of the 19th century, the colony raised volunteer units to form a reserve for the military garrison.
They have emphasised Bermuda's cultural connections with the West Indies.
During the War of 1812 between Britain and the United States, the British attacks on Washington, D.C. and the Chesapeake were planned and launched from Bermuda, where the headquarters of the Royal Navy's North American Station had recently been moved from Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Those internationally owned and operated businesses that are physically based in Bermuda (around four hundred) are represented by the Association of Bermuda International Companies (ABIC).
Many of Bermuda's hotels are located along the south shore of the island.
The top of the seamount has gone through periods of complete submergence, during which its limestone cap was formed by marine organisms, and in the Ice Ages the entire caldera was above sea level, forming an island of approximately two hundred square miles.
Patrick Singleton placed 19th, with a final time of 1:59.81.
Also very well-known is David Hemp, a former captain of Glamorgan in English first class cricket.
Bermuda was discovered in 1503 by Spanish explorer Juan de Bermúdez.
This season-ending tournament is limited to four golfers: the winners of the Masters, U.S. Open, British Open and PGA Championship.
Bermuda were knocked out of the World Cup.
The secret bilateral discussions that led to prisoner transfers between the US and the devolved Bermuda government sparked diplomatic ire from the United Kingdom, which was not consulted on the move despite Bermuda being a British territory.
Control of the Turks had passed to the Bahamas in 1819.
Both measures were in response to a decision by the Chief Justice of Bermuda's earlier ruling that same-sex spouses of Bermuda citizens could not be denied basic human rights.
The deeper ancestral demography of Bermuda's population has been obscured by the ethnic homogenisation of the last four centuries.
A steady trickle of outward migration continued.
Of those, 15, including the eponymous cedar, are endemic.
A sport unique to Bermuda is racing the Bermuda Fitted Dinghy.
He claimed to be responsible for the 1916 death of Lord Herbert Kitchener in the sinking of HMS Hampshire, the head of the British Army who had also commanded British forces in South Africa during the second Boer War, but this had resulted from a mine.
On July 14th, 2016, the senate of Bermuda rejected the Furbert bill.
Congressional opposition to their admittance to the United States was very strong and the US failed to find a home for them until Bermuda and Palau agreed to accept the 22 men in June 2009.
The flotilla was broken up by a storm.
Most of those historically described as "coloured" are today described as "black", or "of African heritage", which obscures their non-African heritage (those previously described as "coloured" who were not of African ancestry had been very few, though the numbers of South Asians, particularly, is now growing.
UWI also agreed that their Open Campus (online degree courses) would become open to Bermudian students in the future, with Bermuda becoming the 13th country to have access to the Open Campus.
# BF&M Life Insurance Company Ltd
Navigation and weather forecasting improved in 1933 when the Royal Air Force (then responsible for providing equipment and personnel for the Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm) established a station at the Royal Naval Dockyard to repair (and supply replacement) float planes for the fleet.
The Cenotaph in front of the Cabinet Building (in Hamilton) was erected in tribute to Bermuda's Great War dead (the tribute was later extended to Bermuda's Second World War dead) and is the site of the annual Remembrance Day commemoration.
Bermuda u/19 team won the 2010 Caribbean Championships.
However, the climate is usually too cool to allow the palms to properly set fruit.
''All Ships that Trade with the Rebels may be surprised.
The United States maintains the largest diplomatic mission in Bermuda, comprising both the United States Consulate and the US Customs and Border Protection Services at the L.F. Wade International Airport.
For higher education, the Bermuda College offers various associate degrees and other certificate programmes.
Scuba divers can explore numerous wrecks and coral reefs in relatively shallow water (typically  in depth), with virtually unlimited visibility.
Somers had previous experience sailing with both Sir Francis Drake and Sir Walter Raleigh.
On 10 March 1973, the Governor of Bermuda Richard Sharples was assassinated by local Black Power militants during a period of civil unrest.
Among them was John Rolfe, whose wife and child died and were buried in Bermuda.
According to the Bermuda Government's Economic Statistics Division, Bermuda's GDP was $5.85&nbsp;billion in 2007, or $91,477 per capita, giving Bermuda the highest GDP per capita in the world.
It is tradition for Bermuda to march in the Opening Ceremony in Bermuda shorts, regardless of the summer or winter Olympic celebration.
The archipelago's limited land area and resources led to the creation of what may be the earliest conservation laws of the New World.
On June 23, the OBA Government held a "non-binding" referendum.
It established a colony at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607.
Bermuda has developed a proud Rugby Union community.
In the 20th century, numerous books were written and published locally, though few were directed at a wider market than Bermuda.
During the course of the following War of 1812, the primary market for Bermuda's salt disappeared as the Americans developed their own sources.
This tournament began in 1872 when Captain Moresby of the Royal Navy introduced the game to Bermuda, holding a match at Somerset to mark ''forty years since the unjust thraldom of slavery''.
Elections must be called at no more than five-year intervals.
of the Royal Naval Dockyard, including the Commissioner's House, and exhibits artefacts of the base's military history.
Legislation was introduced by Private Members Bill by PLP MP Wayne Furbert to amend the Human Rights Act of Bermuda to disallow same-sex marriage under the Act in February 2016.
Prior to 1965, the Bermuda school system was racially segregated.
Despite the banning of the importation of Irish, and the repeated attempts to force free blacks to emigrate and the owners of black slaves to export them, the merging of the various minority groups, along with some of the white English, had resulted in a new demographic group, "coloured" (which term, in Bermuda, referred to anyone not wholly of European ancestry) Bermudians, gaining a slight majority.
There are four clubs on the island: (1) Police (2) Mariners (3) Teachers (4) Renegades.
Despite the small land mass, place names are repeated:  two islands named Long Island, three bays named Long Bay (on Somerset, Main, and Cooper's islands), two Horseshoe Bays (one in Southampton, on the Main Island, the other at Morgan's Point, formerly Tucker's Island), two roads through cuttings called Khyber Pass, one in Warwick, the other in St. George's Parish, and two St George's Towns on St George's Island in St George's Parish, each known as St George's.
They are primarily engaged in specialised professions such as accounting, finance, and insurance.
He claimed the apparently uninhabited islands for the Spanish Empire.
After 1949, when Newfoundland became part of Canada, Bermuda was automatically ranked as the oldest remaining British Overseas Territory.
Compiling a list of the islands is often complicated, as many have more than one name (as does the entire archipelago, which has also been known historically as La Garza, Virgineola, and the Isle of Devils.
The islands do get some cooler temperatures in January, February, and March (average -).
The average annual temperature of the Atlantic Ocean around Bermuda is , from  in February to  in August.
In 1970 the country switched its currency from the Bermudian pound to the Bermudian dollar, which is pegged at par with the US dollar.
The close economic, family, and historical ties ensured Bermudians were strongly sympathetic with the rebels at the start of the War.
Prior to the war, with no useful landmass or natural resources, Bermuda was largely ignored and left to its own devices by the London government.
The island experienced large-scale immigration over the 20th century, especially after the Second World War.
The old Globe Hotel in St George's, which was a centre of intrigue for Confederate agents, is preserved as a public museum.
Jillian Teceira competed in the Beijing Olympics in 2008.
In 1936 Luft Hansa began to experiment with seaplane flights from Berlin via the Azores with continuation to New York City.
Bermudas's consumption tax is equivalent to local income tax to local residents and funds government and infrastructure expenditures.
Among Bermuda's most prominent footballers are Clyde Best, Shaun Goater, Kyle Lightbourne, Reggie Lambe, Sam Nusum and Nahki Wells.
In Bermuda, related tensions resulted in civil war on the island; it was ended by militias.
The American diplomatic presence is an important element in the Bermuda political landscape.
The most recent meeting was on 23 June 2008, between Premier Ewart Brown and President George W. Bush.
It was rediscovered in 1951 after having been thought extinct since the 1620s.
The end of the war, however, was to cause profound change in Bermuda, though some of those changes would take decades to crystallise.
In 1609, the English Virginia Company, which had established Jamestown in Virginia (a term originally applied to all of the North American continent) two years earlier, permanently settled Bermuda in the aftermath of a hurricane, when the crew and passengers of the ''Sea Venture'' steered the ship onto the surrounding reef to prevent its sinking, then landed ashore.
Bermudian sailors and merchants relied on more than the export of salt, however.
Recently through genetic DNA studies, scientists have discovered that a species of turtle, the diamondback terrapin, previously thought to have been introduced, pre-dated the arrival of humans in the archipelago.
The Bermuda cedar boxes used to ship tobacco to England were reportedly worth more than their contents.
It is not possible to rent a car on the island; public transport is available or visitors can hire scooters for use as private transport.
Other commonly known fauna of Bermuda include its national bird, the Bermuda petrel or cahow.
As the war progressed, economic realities caused Bermudians to seize opportunities; they turned to privateering against the Americans.
Only 165 of the island's current 1,000 vascular plant species are considered native.
Following the war, with the buildup of Naval and military forces in Bermuda, the primary leg of the Bermudian economy became defence infrastructure.
Of these, only Bermuda's and the Isle of Man's Tynwald have been in continuous existence since 1620.
Bermuda is in the hurricane belt.
When promoted to Brigadier at age 39, following his wounding at the Anzio landings, Harvey became the youngest-ever Royal Marine Brigadier.
