Russell won a scholarship to read for the Mathematical Tripos at Trinity College, Cambridge, and commenced his studies there in 1890, taking as coach Robert Rumsey Webb.
When Russell was eleven years old, his brother Frank introduced him to the work of Euclid, which transformed his life.
On 23 November 1969 he wrote to ''The Times'' newspaper saying that the preparation for show trials in Czechoslovakia was "highly alarming".
In the Middle East, Russell suggested that the West avoid opposing Arab nationalism, and proposed the creation of a United Nations peacekeeping force to guard Israel's frontiers to ensure that Israel was protected from aggression and prevented from committing it.
The same month, he appealed to Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to support an international war crimes commission to investigate alleged torture and genocide by the United States in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War.
Russell was asked by ''The New Republic'', a liberal American magazine, to elaborate his views on world peace.
The magistrate offered to exempt him from jail if he pledged himself to "good behaviour", to which Russell replied: "No, I won't."
Despite her religious conservatism, she held progressive views in other areas (accepting Darwinism and supporting Irish Home Rule), and her influence on Bertrand Russell's outlook on social justice and standing up for principle remained with him throughout his life.
(One could challenge the view that Bertrand stood up for his principles, based on his own well-known quotation: "I would never die for my beliefs because I might be wrong".)
His work has had a considerable influence on mathematics, logic, set theory, linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer science (see type theory and type system), and philosophy, especially the philosophy of language, epistemology, and metaphysics.
They had known each other since 1925, and Edith had taught English at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, sharing a house for 20 years with Russell's old friend Lucy Donnelly.
On 8 July 1930 Dora gave birth to her third child Harriet Ruth.
He was born in Monmouthshire into one of the most prominent aristocratic families in the United Kingdom.
He remarked in his autobiography that his keenest interests were in religion and mathematics, and that only his wish to know more mathematics kept him from suicide.
Apparently they found this harsh and reacted resentfully.
The international press reported that Russell appeared with a number of Labour MPs, including Ramsay MacDonald and Philip Snowden, as well as former Liberal MP and anti-conscription campaigner, Professor Arnold Lupton.
Her favourite Bible verse, 'Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil' (Exodus 23:2), became his motto.
In the 1922 and 1923 general elections Russell stood as a Labour Party candidate in the Chelsea constituency, but only on the basis that he knew he was extremely unlikely to be elected in such a safe Conservative seat, and he was not on either occasion.
He is widely held to be one of the 20th century's premier logicians.
In 1980 a memorial to Russell was commissioned by a committee including the philosopher A. J. Ayer.
In 1943, he adopted a stance toward large-scale warfare, "Relative Political Pacifism": War was always a great evil, but in some particularly extreme circumstances, it may be the lesser of two evils.
This resignation, Hardy explains, was completely voluntary and was not the result of another altercation.
When Brand Blanshard asked Russell why he did not write on aesthetics, Russell replied that he did not know anything about it, "but that is not a very good excuse, for my friends tell me it has not deterred me from writing on other subjects".
During this period, Russell had passionate (and often simultaneous) affairs with a number of women, including Lady Ottoline Morrell and the actress Lady Constance Malleson.
Gilbert Ryle refused to have the book reviewed in the philosophical journal ''Mind'', which caused Russell to respond via ''The Times''.
Dora was six months pregnant when the couple returned to England on 26 August 1921.
Russell delivered his lectures on Logical Atomism, his version of these ideas, in 1918, before the end of the First World War.
The Italians had responded to Georg Cantor, making a science of set theory; they gave Russell their literature including the Formulario mathematico.
Russell died of influenza on 2 February 1970 at his home, Plas Penrhyn, in Penrhyndeudraeth, Merionethshire, Wales.
Russell claimed that beginning at age 15, he spent considerable time thinking about the validity of Christian religious dogma, which he found very unconvincing.
In 1943, Russell expressed support for Zionism: "I have come gradually to see that, in a dangerous and largely hostile world, it is essential to Jews to have some country which is theirs, some region where they are not suspected aliens, some state which embodies what is distinctive in their culture".
In the early 20th century, Russell led the British "revolt against idealism".
Later, he campaigned against Adolf Hitler, then criticised Stalinist totalitarianism, attacked the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War, and was an outspoken proponent of nuclear disarmament.
In January 1920, it was announced that Russell had accepted the reinstatement offer from Trinity and would begin lecturing from October.
In 1941, G. H. Hardy wrote a 61-page pamphlet titled ''Bertrand Russell and Trinity''—published later as a book by Cambridge University Press with a foreword by C. D. Broad—in which he gave an authoritative account about Russell's 1916 dismissal from Trinity College, explaining that a reconciliation between the college and Russell had later taken place and gave details about Russell's personal life.
Mill died the year after Russell's birth, but his writings had a great effect on Russell's life.
He wrote a foreword to ''Words and Things'' by Ernest Gellner, which was highly critical of the later thought of Ludwig Wittgenstein and of ordinary language philosophy.
Both were early advocates of birth control at a time when this was considered scandalous.
For example, he told them that he heard shots fired in the middle of the night and was sure these were clandestine executions, but the others maintained that it was only cars backfiring.
Personal: to care for what is noble, for what is beautiful, for what is gentle; to allow moments of insight to give wisdom at more mundane times.
He attended the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris in 1900 where he met Giuseppe Peano and Alessandro Padoa.
The school was run from a succession of different locations, including its original premises at the Russells' residence, Telegraph House, near Harting, West Sussex.
CIVILIZED MAN CONDEMNS IT.
The three-volume ''Principia Mathematica'', written with Whitehead, was published between 1910 and 1913.
In January 1876, his father died of bronchitis following a long period of depression.
Wittgenstein was, at that time, serving in the Austrian Army and subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp at the end of the conflict.
Their marriage began to fall apart in 1901 when it occurred to Russell, while he was cycling, that he no longer loved her.
Finally, at the age of 18, after reading Mill's "Autobiography", he abandoned the "First Cause" argument and became an atheist.
Albert Einstein's oft-quoted aphorism that "great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds" originated in his open letter, dated 19 March 1940, to Morris Raphael Cohen, a professor emeritus at CCNY, supporting Russell's appointment.
In "Reflections on My Eightieth Birthday" ("Postscript" in his ''Autobiography''), Russell wrote: "I have lived in the pursuit of a vision, both personal and social.
En route to one of his lectures in Trondheim, Russell was one of 24 survivors (among a total of 43 passengers) of an aeroplane crash in Hommelvik in October 1948.
Russell participated in many broadcasts over the BBC, particularly ''The Brains Trust'' and the Third Programme, on various topical and philosophical subjects.
'''Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell''',  (; 18 May 1872&nbsp;– 2 February 1970) was a British philosopher, logician, mathematician, historian, writer, social critic, political activist and Nobel laureate.
The Russells had been prominent in England for several centuries before this, coming to power and the peerage with the rise of the Tudor dynasty (see: Duke of Bedford).
In October 1965 he tore up his Labour Party card because he suspected Harold Wilson's Labour government was going to send troops to support the United States in Vietnam.
The protest was started by the mother of a student who would not have been eligible for his graduate-level course in mathematical logic; many intellectuals, led by John Dewey, protested at his treatment.
He quickly distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy, graduating as seventh Wrangler in the former in 1893 and becoming a Fellow in the latter in 1895.
His grandfather, former Prime Minister Earl Russell, died in 1878, and was remembered by Russell as a kindly old man in a wheelchair.
Russell first met the American Quaker Alys Pearsall Smith when he was 17 years old.
During these formative years he also discovered the works of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
He was particularly prolific in the field of metaphysics, the logic and the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of language, ethics and epistemology.
Russell began his published work in 1896 with ''German Social Democracy'', a study in politics that was an early indication of a lifelong interest in political and social theory.
Russell viewed Wittgenstein as a genius and a successor who would continue his work on logic.
Russell had two siblings: brother Frank (nearly seven years older than Bertrand), and sister Rachel (four years older).
A later conviction for publicly lecturing against inviting the US to enter the war on the United Kingdom's side resulted in six months' imprisonment in Brixton prison (see ''Bertrand Russell's views on society'') in 1918.
Lord Amberley consented to his wife's affair with their children's tutor, the biologist Douglas Spalding.
He was appointed professor at the City College of New York (CCNY) in 1940, but after a public outcry the appointment was annulled by a court judgment that pronounced him "morally unfit" to teach at the college due to his opinions—notably those relating to sexual morality, detailed in ''Marriage and Morals'' (1929).
Russell and Peter had one son, Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell, 5th Earl Russell, who became a prominent historian and one of the leading figures in the Liberal Democratic party.
In 1948, Russell was invited by the BBC to deliver the inaugural Reith Lectures—what was to become an annual series of lectures, still broadcast by the BBC.
He soon joined the Barnes Foundation, lecturing to a varied audience on the history of philosophy; these lectures formed the basis of ''A History of Western Philosophy''.
His experiences destroyed his previous tentative support for the revolution.
Russell continued to write about philosophy.
He spent the year giving lectures in China and Japan.
In 1952 Russell was divorced by Spence, with whom he had been very unhappy.
They established themselves as one of the leading British Whig families, and participated in every great political event from the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536–40 to the Glorious Revolution in 1688–89 and the Great Reform Act in 1832.
Russell contemplated asking Trinity for another one-year leave of absence but decided against it, since this would have been an 'unusual application' and the situation had the potential to snowball into another controversy.
In 1966–67, Russell worked with Jean-Paul Sartre and many other intellectual figures to form the Russell Vietnam War Crimes Tribunal to investigate the conduct of the United States in Vietnam.
In August 1920, Russell traveled to Russia as part of an official delegation sent by the British government to investigate the effects of the Russian Revolution.
He soon fell in love with the puritanical, high-minded Alys, who was a graduate of Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, and, contrary to his grandmother's wishes, married her on 13 December 1894.
Russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in political causes primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the Vietnam War.
WE WILL NOT HAVE MASS MURDER.
In 1950 Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought".
At that time, only the United States possessed an atomic bomb, and the USSR was pursuing an extremely aggressive policy towards the countries in Eastern Europe which were being absorbed into the Soviet Union's sphere of influence.
He proposed that Germany be reunified and accept the Oder-Neisse line as its border, and that a neutral zone be established in Central Europe, consisting at the minimum of Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, with each of these countries being free of foreign troops and influence, and prohibited from forming alliances with countries outside the zone.
The 1955 Russell–Einstein Manifesto was a document calling for nuclear disarmament and was signed by eleven of the most prominent nuclear physicists and intellectuals of the time.
In 1898 he wrote ''An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry'' which discussed the Cayley–Klein metrics used for non-Euclidean geometry.
Russell merely smiled, but afterwards claimed that the reply "That's right, just like your brother" immediately came to mind.
In his autobiography, he mentions that he found Lenin disappointing, sensing an "impish cruelty" in him and comparing him to "an opinionated professor".
In 1905 he wrote the essay "On Denoting", which was published in the philosophical journal ''Mind''.
In July 1920, Russell applied for a one year leave of absence; this was approved.
Russell published his three-volume autobiography in 1967, 1968, and 1969.
Russell played a significant part in the ''Leeds Convention'' in June 1917, a historic event which saw well over a thousand "anti-war socialists" gather; many being delegates from the Independent Labour Party and the Socialist Party, united in their pacifist beliefs and advocating a peace settlement.
He cruised down the Volga on a steamship.
The Trinity incident resulted in Russell being fined £100, which he refused to pay in hopes that he would be sent to prison, but his books were sold at auction to raise the money.
In 1924, Bertrand again gained press attention when attending a "banquet" in the House of Commons with well-known campaigners, including Arnold Lupton, who had been a Member of Parliament and had also endured imprisonment for "passive resistance to military or naval service".
The atmosphere at Pembroke Lodge was one of frequent prayer, emotional repression, and formality; Frank reacted to this with open rebellion, but the young Bertrand learned to hide his feelings.
He is considered one of the founders of analytic philosophy along with his predecessor Gottlob Frege, colleague G. E. Moore, and protégé Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Fox sent her daughter Judith to Beacon Hill School for some time.
He became a hero to many of the youthful members of the New Left.
After the event, Russell told Lady Ottoline Morrell that, "to my surprise, when I got up to speak, I was given the greatest ovation that was possible to give anybody".
The following month, he protested to Alexei Kosygin over the expulsion of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from the Soviet Union of Writers.
He concluded that Adolf Hitler taking over all of Europe would be a permanent threat to democracy.
He suggested that all nuclear-weapons testing and constant flights by planes armed with nuclear weapons be halted immediately, and negotiations be opened for the destruction of all hydrogen bombs, with the number of conventional nuclear devices limited to ensure a balance of power.
In the preface to this pamphlet, Hardy wrote:
Russell and Fox developed an intensive relationship.
Hardy writes that Russell's dismissal had created a scandal since the vast majority of the Fellows of the College opposed the decision.
From 1922 to 1927 the Russells divided their time between London and Cornwall, spending summers in Porthcurno.
He was in contact with Lionel Rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film ''Good Times, Wonderful Times'' in the 1960s.
His parents, Viscount and Viscountess Amberley, were radical for their times.
''A History of Western Philosophy'' (1945) became a best-seller and provided Russell with a steady income for the remainder of his life.
This was often a drain on Russell's energy, but Russell continued to be fascinated by him and encouraged his academic development, including the publication of Wittgenstein's ''Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus'' in 1922.
His relationship with the eccentric Albert C. Barnes soon soured, and he returned to the UK in 1944 to rejoin the faculty of Trinity College.
Social: to see in imagination the society that is to be created, where individuals grow freely, and where hate and greed and envy die because there is nothing to nourish them.
YOUR ACTION DESPERATE.
B. Priestley, and the Oxford history professor Hugh Trevor-Roper.
It consists of a bust of Russell in Red Lion Square in London sculpted by Marcelle Quinton.
On a tour through the USA in 1927 Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens) who became a well-known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years.
In 1903 he published ''The Principles of Mathematics'', a work on foundations of mathematics.
Russell was reinstated in 1919, resigned in 1920, was Tarner Lecturer 1926 and became a Fellow again in 1944 until 1949.
Their children were John Conrad Russell, 4th Earl Russell, born on 16 November 1921, and Katharine Jane Russell (now Lady Katharine Tait), born on 29 December 1923.
Russell's adolescence was very lonely, and he often contemplated suicide.
After he left the school in 1932, Dora continued it until 1943.
In September 1961, at the age of 89, Russell was jailed for seven days in Brixton Prison after taking part in an anti-nuclear demonstration in London, for "breach of peace".
In early 1963, in particular, Russell became increasingly vocal in his disapproval of the Vietnam War, and felt that the US government's policies there were near-genocidal.
Conrad, Russell's son by Spence, did not see his father between the time of the divorce and 1968 (at which time his decision to meet his father caused a permanent breach with his mother).
At the age of 29, in February 1901, Russell underwent what he called a "sort of mystic illumination", after witnessing Whitehead's wife's acute suffering in an angina attack.
Together with Dora, Russell founded the experimental Beacon Hill School in 1927.
Other scholars present in China at the time included John Dewey and Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian Nobel-laureate poet.
Others, including Griffin, who obtained a transcript of the speech, have argued that he was merely explaining the usefulness of America's atomic arsenal in deterring the USSR from continuing its domination of Eastern Europe.
NO CONCEIVABLE JUSTIFICATION.
Russell sent this telegram to President Kennedy:
He viewed the crisis as another reminder of what he saw as a pressing need for a more effective mechanism for international governance, and to restrict national sovereignty to places such as the Suez Canal area "where general interest is involved".
He also suggested Western recognition of the People's Republic of China, and that it be admitted to the UN with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
Most of the so-called Western World was fulminating".
Russell made a cameo appearance playing himself in the anti-war Hindi film ''Aman'' which was released in India in 1967.
This was Russell's final political statement or act.
When he was given the Order of Merit, George VI was affable but slightly embarrassed at decorating a former jailbird, saying, "You have sometimes behaved in a manner that would not do if generally adopted".
Russell returned to the London School of Economics to lecture on the science of power in 1937.
Upon the death of his elder brother Frank, in 1931, Russell became the 3rd Earl Russell.
He wrote a four-part series of articles, titled "Soviet Russia1920", for the US magazine ''The Nation''.
At this age, he came to the conclusion that there is no free will and, two years later, that there is no life after death.
They separated in 1932 and finally divorced.
He now started an intensive study of the foundations of mathematics at Trinity.
He was educated at home by a series of tutors.
In the King's Birthday Honours of 9 June 1949, Russell was awarded the Order of Merit, and the following year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
It was to be a hollow shell of a marriage and they finally divorced in 1921, after a lengthy period of separation.
Russell often feared the ridicule of his maternal grandmother, one of the campaigners for education of women.
It was read out at the International Conference of Parliamentarians in Cairo on 3 February 1970, the day after his death.
In 1925, Russell was asked by the Council of Trinity College to give the ''Tarner Lectures'' on the Philosophy of the Sciences; these would later be the basis for one of Russell's best received books according to Hardy: ''The Analysis of Matter'', published in 1927.
His philosophical essay "On Denoting" has been considered a "paradigm of philosophy".
The result was a month-long correspondence in ''The Times'' between the supporters and detractors of ordinary language philosophy, which was only ended when the paper published an editorial critical of both sides but agreeing with the opponents of ordinary language philosophy.
Russell described himself as an agnostic, "speaking to a purely philosophical audience", but as an atheist "speaking popularly", on the basis that he could not disprove the Christian God – similar to the way that he could not disprove the Olympic gods either.
This does not mean that I am opposed to socialism."
Russell was a prominent anti-war activist; he championed anti-imperialism and went to prison for his pacifism during World War I.
The reason for the resignation, according to Hardy, was that Russell was going through a tumultuous time in his personal life with a divorce and subsequent remarriage.
According to historian Peter Knight, after JFK's assassination, Russell, "prompted by the emerging work of the lawyer Mark Lane in the US ... rallied support from other noteworthy and left-leaning compatriots to form a ''Who Killed Kennedy Committee'' in June 1964, members of which included Michael Foot MP, Caroline Benn, the publisher Victor Gollancz, the writers John Arden and J.
This, along with the earlier ''The Principles of Mathematics'', soon made Russell world-famous in his field.
In Fox's words: "... for three years we were very close."
Many understood Russell's comments to mean that Russell approved of a first strike in a war with the USSR, including Nigel Lawson, who was present when Russell spoke of such matters.
He called for an Israeli withdrawal to the pre-Six-Day War borders.
In 1963 he became the inaugural recipient of the Jerusalem Prize, an award for writers concerned with the freedom of the individual in society.
He said he owed his life to smoking since the people who drowned were in the non-smoking part of the plane.
Lord Amberley was an atheist and his atheism was evident when he asked the philosopher John Stuart Mill to act as Russell's secular godfather.
In January 1958 Russell elaborated his views in ''The Observer'', proposing a cessation of all nuclear-weapons production, with the UK taking the first step by unilaterally suspending its own nuclear-weapons program if necessary, and with Germany "freed from all alien armed forces and pledged to neutrality in any conflict between East and West".
Frank and Bertrand were placed in the care of their staunchly Victorian paternal grandparents, who lived at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park.
By this time Russell was world-famous outside academic circles, frequently the subject or author of magazine and newspaper articles, and was called upon to offer opinions on a wide variety of subjects, even mundane ones.
From 1927 to 1932 Russell wrote 34 letters to Fox.
His paternal grandfather, the Earl Russell, had been asked twice by Queen Victoria to form a government, serving her as Prime Minister in the 1840s and 1860s.
Russell's marriage to Dora grew increasingly tenuous, and it reached a breaking point over her having two children with an American journalist, Griffin Barry.
Russell was impressed by the precision of Peano's arguments at the Congress, read the literature upon returning to England, and came upon Russell's paradox.
Before World War II, Russell taught at the University of Chicago, later moving on to Los Angeles to lecture at the UCLA Department of Philosophy.
He believed that religion and the religious outlook serve to impede knowledge and foster fear and dependency, and are responsible for much of our world's wars, oppression, and misery.
Russell also criticised the American press for failing to heed any voices critical of the official version.
After the USSR carried out its nuclear bomb tests, Russell changed his position and advocated for the total abolition of atomic weapons.
In November 1957 Russell wrote an article addressing US President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, urging a summit to consider "the conditions of co-existence".
In 1962 Russell played a public role in the Cuban Missile Crisis: in an exchange of telegrams with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev assured him that the Soviet government would not be reckless.
She asked him if he loved her and he replied that he did not love her.
He wrote a great many letters to world leaders during this period.
Although he later feigned a lack of concern, at the time he was disgusted by the brutal Soviet response, and on 16 November 1956, he expressed approval for a declaration of support for Hungarian scholars which Michael Polanyi had cabled to the Soviet embassy in London twelve days previously, shortly after Soviet troops had already entered Budapest.
He went with optimism and hope, seeing China as then being on a new path.
Russell attracted criticism for speaking out fervently against the Suez war while ignoring Soviet repression in Hungary, to which he responded that he did not criticise the Soviets "because there was no need.
While in prison, Russell read enormously and wrote the book ''Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy''.
During the 1930s, Russell became a close friend and collaborator of V. K. Krishna Menon, then secretary of the India League, the foremost lobby in the United Kingdom for Indian self-rule.
These things I believe, and the world, for all its horrors, has left me unshaken".
Russell published a highly critical article weeks before the Warren Commission Report was published, setting forth ''16 Questions on the Assassination'' and equating the Oswald case with the Dreyfus affair of late 19th-century France, in which the state wrongly convicted an innocent man.
When the couple visited Japan on their return journey, Dora took on the role of spurning the local press by handing out notices reading "Mr. Bertrand Russell, having died according to the Japanese press, is unable to give interviews to Japanese journalists".
He spent hours dealing with Wittgenstein's various phobias and his frequent bouts of despair.
Although Russell did the right thing, in Hardy's opinion, the reputation of the College suffered due to Russell's resignation since the 'world of learning' knew about Russell's altercation with Trinity but not that the rift had healed.
In his autobiography, he writes: "I spent all my spare time reading him, and learning him by heart, knowing no one to whom I could speak of what I thought or felt, I used to reflect how wonderful it would have been to know Shelley, and to wonder whether I should meet any live human being with whom I should feel so much sympathy".
US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles replied for Eisenhower.
At the same time the Suez Crisis was taking place, the world was also captivated by the Hungarian Revolution and the subsequent crushing of the revolt by intervening Soviet forces.
The countess was from a Scottish Presbyterian family, and successfully petitioned the Court of Chancery to set aside a provision in Amberley's will requiring the children to be raised as agnostics.
He was a member of the Advisory Council of the British Humanist Association and President of Cardiff Humanists until his death.
He left an estate valued at £69,423.
For most of his adult life, Russell maintained that religion is little more than superstition and, despite any positive effects that religion might have, it is largely harmful to people.
On 18 January 1936, Russell married his third wife, an Oxford undergraduate named Patricia ("Peter") Spence, who had been his children's governess since 1930.
Edith remained with him until his death, and, by all accounts, their marriage was a happy, close, and loving one.
He became acquainted with the younger George Edward Moore and came under the influence of Alfred North Whitehead, who recommended him to the Cambridge Apostles.
Russell also disliked Alys's mother, finding her controlling and cruel.
In 1896 he taught German social democracy at the London School of Economics.
