Beryllium contracts and deforms less than glass – and remains more uniform – in such temperatures.
Disordered structure of beryllium glass (sketch, two dimensions)
The combination of this modulus and a relatively low density results in an unusually fast sound conduction speed in beryllium – about 12.9&nbsp;km/s at ambient conditions.
Low atomic number also makes beryllium relatively transparent to energetic particles.
10Be accumulates at the soil surface, where its relatively long half-life (1.36 million years) permits a long residence time before decaying to boron-10.
The two valence electrons give beryllium a +2 oxidation state and thus the ability to form two covalent bonds; the only evidence of lower valence of beryllium is in the solubility of the metal in BeCl2.
Thin beryllium foils are used as radiation windows for X-ray detectors, and the extremely low absorption minimizes the heating effects caused by high intensity, low energy X-rays typical of synchrotron radiation.
Acute beryllium disease in the form of chemical pneumonitis was first reported in Europe in 1933 and in the United States in 1943.
Beryllium has also been proposed as a cladding material for nuclear fuel rods, because of its good combination of mechanical, chemical, and nuclear properties.
Within the cores of stars beryllium is depleted as it is fused and creates larger elements.
Beryllium mirrors are of particular interest.
Because of its low atomic number and very low absorption for X-rays, the oldest and still one of the most important applications of beryllium is in radiation windows for X-ray tubes.
It thus has very high ionization potentials and strong polarization while bonded to other atoms, which is why all of its compounds are covalent.
For about 160 years, beryllium was also known as  '''glucinum''' or '''glucinium''' (with the accompanying chemical symbol "'''Gl'''", or "'''G'''" ), the name coming from the Greek word for sweet: γλυκυς, due to the sweet taste of beryllium salts.
Usually the beryllium mirror is coated with hard electroless nickel plating which can be more easily polished to a finer optical finish than beryllium.
The low density of beryllium allows collision products to reach the surrounding detectors without significant interaction, its stiffness allows a powerful vacuum to be produced within the pipe to minimize interaction with gases, its thermal stability allows it to function correctly at temperatures of only a few degrees above absolute zero, and its diamagnetic nature keeps it from interfering with the complex multipole magnet systems used to steer and focus the particle beams.
In structural applications, the combination of high flexural rigidity, thermal stability, thermal conductivity and low density (1.85 times that of water) make beryllium metal a desirable aerospace material for aircraft components, missiles, spacecraft, and satellites.
A small number of extreme high-end bicycle frames have been built with beryllium.
There have been extensive studies of these complexes which show the stability of the O-Be bond.
Beryllium oxide is also being studied for use in increasing the thermal conductivity of uranium dioxide nuclear fuel pellets.
Beryllium hydroxide is precipitated from a solution of sodium fluoroberyllate and sodium hydroxide in water.
Other products of hydrolysis include the trimeric ion Be3(OH)3(H2O)63+.
Beryllium hydroxide created using either the sinter or melt method is then converted into beryllium fluoride or beryllium chloride.
Large-area mirrors, frequently with a honeycomb support structure, are used, for example, in meteorological satellites where low weight and long-term dimensional stability are critical.
Beryllium was also used for cantilevers in high performance phonograph cartridge styli, where its extreme stiffness and low density allowed for tracking weights to be reduced to 1 gram, yet still track high frequency passages with minimal distortion.
Beryllium oxide is frequently used as an insulator base plate in high-power transistors in radio frequency transmitters for telecommunications.
Cross-rolled beryllium sheet is an excellent structural support for printed circuit boards in surface-mount technology.
Beryllium may be found in coal slag.
Some high-fidelity products have been fraudulently claimed to be made of the material.
Beryllium is a p-type dopant in III-V compound semiconductors.
The single primordial beryllium isotope 9Be also undergoes a (n,2n) neutron reaction with neutron energies over about 1.9 MeV, to produce 8Be, which almost immediately breaks into two alpha particles.
It is more chemically similar to aluminium than its close neighbors in the periodic table due to having a similar charge-to-radius ratio.
EDTA preferentially forms octahedral complexes&nbsp;– thus absorbing other cations such as Al3+ which might interfere – for example, in the solvent extraction of a complex formed between Be2+ and acetylacetone.
Neutron sources in which beryllium is bombarded with gamma rays from a gamma decay radioisotope, are also used to produce laboratory neutrons.
Halophosphate-based phosphors replaced beryllium-based phosphors after beryllium was found to be toxic.
The more common beryllium containing minerals include: bertrandite (Be4Si2O7(OH)2), beryl (Al2Be3Si6O18), chrysoberyl (Al2BeO4) and phenakite (Be2SiO4).
Tritium is a radioisotope of concern in nuclear reactor waste streams.
It is most concentrated in the soils, 6 ppm.
'''Order and disorder in difluorides'''
This makes its decay rate dependent to a measurable degree upon its chemical surroundings&nbsp;– a rare occurrence in nuclear decay.
Workers handling finished beryllium pieces are routinely advised to handle them with gloves, both as a precaution and because many if not most applications of beryllium cannot tolerate residue of skin contact such as fingerprints.
Both stable and unstable isotopes of beryllium are created in stars, but the radioisotopes do not last long.
Solid beryllium metal does not carry the same hazards as airborne inhaled dust, but any hazard associated with physical contact is poorly documented.
The green color in gem-quality forms of beryl comes from varying amounts of chromium (about 2% for emerald).
Beryllium improves many physical properties when added as an alloying element to aluminium, copper (notably the alloy beryllium copper), iron and nickel.
Beryllium is a component of several dental alloys.
It killed some early workers in nuclear weapons design, such as Herbert L. Anderson.
The application also requires a coefficient of thermal expansion that is well matched to the alumina and polyimide-glass substrates.
It has exceptional stiffness (Young's modulus 287 GPa) and a reasonably high melting point.
To reduce costs, beryllium can be alloyed with significant amounts of aluminium, resulting in the AlBeMet alloy  (a trade name).
In general, beryllium has a tendency to bond covalently, much more so than the other alkaline earths and its fluoride is partially covalent (although still more ionic than its other halides).
The use of beryllium engine components was banned following a protest by Scuderia Ferrari.
Thus, natural beryllium bombarded either by alphas or gammas from a suitable radioisotope is a key component of most radioisotope-powered nuclear reaction neutron sources for the laboratory production of free neutrons.
Smaller beryllium mirrors are used in optical guidance systems and in fire-control systems, e.g.
Beryllium alloys are used in many applications because of their combination of elasticity, high electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity, high strength and hardness, nonmagnetic properties, as well as good corrosion and fatigue resistance.
Other significant properties are high specific heat (1925 J·kg−1·K−1) and thermal conductivity (216 W·m−1·K−1), which make beryllium the metal with the best heat dissipation characteristics per unit weight.
Note that  has a half life of only 0.8 seconds, β- is an electron, and  has a high neutron absorption cross-section.
This process allows carbon to be produced in stars, but not in the Big Bang.
The fuel elements have small appendages that are resistance brazed to the fuel cladding using an induction brazing process with Be as the braze filler material.
Beryllium production saw a rapid increase during World War II, due to the rising demand for hard beryllium-copper alloys and phosphors for fluorescent lights.
Symptoms of the disease can take up to five years to develop; about a third of patients with it die and the survivors are left disabled.
Therefore, it is used to build the beam pipe around the collision region in particle physics setups, such as all four main detector experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (ALICE, ATLAS, CMS, LHCb), the Tevatron and the SLAC.
An oxide layer forms around beryllium that prevents further reactions with air unless heated above 1000&nbsp;°C.
Beryllium difluoride is very soluble in water, unlike the other alkaline earth difluorides.
Solutions of beryllium salts, e.g.
The sintering process involves mixing beryl with sodium fluorosilicate and soda at  to form sodium fluoroberyllate, aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide.
An earlier major application of beryllium was in brakes for military airplanes because of its hardness, high melting point, and exceptional ability to dissipate heat.
Beryllium is a steel gray and hard metal that is brittle at room temperature and has a close-packed hexagonal crystal structure.
In the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has designated a permissible exposure limit (PEL) in the workplace with a time-weighted average (TWA) 0.002&nbsp;mg/m3  and a constant exposure limit of 0.005&nbsp;mg/m3 over 30 minutes, with a maximum peak limit of 0.025&nbsp;mg/m3.
Early analyses of emeralds and beryls by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Torbern Olof Bergman, Franz Karl Achard, and Johann Jakob Bindheim always yielded similar elements, leading to the fallacious conclusion that both substances are aluminium silicates.
The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 4&nbsp;mg/m3.
'''Beryllium''' is a chemical element with symbol '''Be''' and atomic number 4.
Beryllium is non-magnetic.
Nuclear explosions also form 10Be by the reaction of fast neutrons with 13C in the carbon dioxide in air.
Because of its stiffness, light weight and dimensional stability over a wide temperature range, beryllium metal is used for lightweight structural components in the defense and aerospace industries in high-speed aircraft, guided missiles, spacecraft, and satellites.
Beryllium dissolves readily in non-oxidizing acids, such as HCl and diluted H2SO4, but not in nitric acid or water as this forms the oxide.
(Although they are strongly ionic, they do not dissolve because of the especially strong lattice energy of the fluorite structure.)
Beryllium tries to achieve a coordination number of 4 because its two covalent bonds fill half of this octet.
The chemical method using potassium yielded only small grains of beryllium from which no ingot of metal could be cast or hammered.
In combination with the relatively low coefficient of linear thermal expansion (11.4×10−6 K−1), these characteristics result in a unique stability under conditions of thermal loading.
A successful test for beryllium in air and on surfaces has been recently developed and published as an international voluntary consensus standard ASTM D7202.
Electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride was used to isolate beryllium during the 19th century.
Heating the fluoride to  with magnesium forms finely divided beryllium, and additional heating to  creates the compact metal.
The Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis, written in the third or fourth century CE, contains notes on how to prepare artificial emerald and beryl.
To form the fluoride, aqueous ammonium hydrogen fluoride is added to beryllium hydroxide to yield a precipitate of ammonium tetrafluoroberyllate, which is heated to  to form beryllium fluoride.
A number of beryllium borides are known, such as Be5B, Be4B, Be2B, BeB2, BeB6 and BeB12.
The James Webb Space Telescope will have 18 hexagonal beryllium sections for its mirrors.
Small additions of magnesium tungstate improved the blue part of the spectrum to yield an acceptable white light.
Their process involves the electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluorides and barium, which causes molten beryllium to collect on a water-cooled iron cathode.
Beryllium does not form oxides until it reaches very high temperatures.
The strong and stable ionic fluorite structure adopted by calcium difluoride and many other difluorides
: + n →  + ,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  →  + β-,&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;  + n →  +
Therefore, when 7Be decays by L-electron capture, it does so by taking electrons from its atomic orbitals that may be participating in bonding.
Thus, for high-energy neutrons, beryllium is a neutron multiplier, releasing more neutrons than it absorbs.
Aqueous ammonia is then used to remove the aluminium and sulfur, leaving beryllium hydroxide.
No beryllium silicide has been identified.
For this purpose, a target of beryllium-9 is bombarded with energetic alpha particles from a radioisotope such as polonium-210, radium-226, plutonium-239, or americium-241.
Total world reserves of beryllium ore are greater than 400,000 tonnes.
The production of 10Be is inversely proportional to solar activity, because increased solar wind during periods of high solar activity decreases the flux of galactic cosmic rays that reach the Earth.
Precious forms of beryl are aquamarine, red beryl and emerald.
Because of its low density and atomic mass, beryllium is relatively transparent to X-rays and other forms of ionizing radiation; therefore, it is the most common window material for X-ray equipment and components of particle physics experiments.
Fluorescence increases with increasing beryllium concentration.
Approximately 35&nbsp;micrograms of beryllium is found in the average human body, an amount not considered harmful.
The first commercially successful process for producing beryllium was developed in 1932 by Alfred Stock and Hans Goldschmidt.
In the fields of radio communications and powerful (usually military) radars, hand tools made of beryllium are used to tune the highly magnetic klystrons, magnetrons, traveling wave tubes, etc., that are used for generating high levels of microwave power in the transmitters.
This blend is cheaper than pure beryllium, while still retaining many desirable properties.
Beryllium azide, BeN6 is known and beryllium phosphide, Be3P2 has a similar structure to Be3N2.
in the German-made Leopard 1 and Leopard 2 main battle tanks.
Beryllium also releases neutrons under bombardment by gamma rays.
Chronic berylliosis is a pulmonary and systemic granulomatous disease caused by inhalation of dust or fumes contaminated with beryllium; either large amounts over a short time or small amounts over a long time can lead to this ailment.
Upon cooling and washing the resulting gray-black powder he saw that it was made of fine particles with a dark metallic luster.
The above reaction immediately took place and caused the crucible to become white hot.
The new procedure has been successfully tested on a variety of surfaces and is effective for the dissolution and ultratrace detection of refractory beryllium oxide and siliceous beryllium (ASTM D7458).
Early precursors of the word ''beryllium'' can be traced to many languages, including Latin ''Beryllus''; French ''Béry''; Greek ''βήρυλλος'', ''bērullos'', ''beryl''; Prakrit ''veruliya'' (वॆरुलिय‌); Pāli ''veḷuriya'' (वेलुरिय), ''veḷiru'' (भेलिरु) or ''viḷar'' (भिलर्) – "to become pale", in reference to the pale semiprecious gemstone beryl.
Naturally occurring beryllium, save for slight contamination by cosmogenic radioisotopes, is essentially pure beryllium-9, which has a nuclear spin of .
Beryllium forms binary compounds with many non-metals.
This is particularly applicable to cryogenic operation where thermal expansion mismatch can cause the coating to buckle.
:BeCl2 + 2 K → 2 KCl + Be
It is amphoteric and dissolves in strongly alkaline solutions.
All beryllium halides have a linear monomeric molecular structure in the gas phase.
The concentration of beryllium in sea water is 0.2–0.6 parts per trillion.
As a metal, beryllium is transparent to most wavelengths of X-rays and gamma rays, making it useful for the output windows of X-ray tubes and other such apparatus.
Primordial beryllium contains only one stable isotope, 9Be, and therefore beryllium is a monoisotopic element.
Anhydrous halides are known for F, Cl, Br and I. BeF2 has a silica-like structure with corner-shared BeF4 tetrahedra.
Beryllium nitride, Be3N2 is a high-melting-point compound which is readily hydrolyzed.
The beryllium atom has the electronic configuration He 2s2.
Mineralogist René Just Haüy discovered that both crystals are geometrically identical, and he asked chemist Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin for a chemical analysis.
Therefore, tools fabricated out of beryllium-based materials are used by naval or military explosive ordnance disposal teams for work on or near naval mines, since these mines commonly have magnetic fuzes.
In scientific setups for various X-ray emission studies (e.g., energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) the sample holder is usually made of beryllium because its emitted X-rays have much lower energies (~100 eV) than X-rays from most studied materials.
Beryllium also dissolves in alkali solutions.
Beryllium fluoride is one of the constituent salts of the eutectic salt mixture FLiBe, which is used as a solvent, moderator and coolant in many hypothetical molten salt reactor designs, including the liquid fluoride thorium reactor (LFTR).
Beryllium hydroxide, Be(OH)2, is insoluble even in acidic solutions with pH less than 6, that is at biological pH.
Trace amounts of 9Be are found in the Earth's atmosphere.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) lists beryllium and beryllium compounds as Category 1 carcinogens.
Friedrich Wöhler and Antoine Bussy independently isolated beryllium in 1828 by the chemical reaction of metallic potassium with beryllium chloride, as follows:
Beryllium is chemically similar to magnesium and therefore can displace it from enzymes, which causes them to malfunction.
Beryllium carbide, Be2C, is a refractory brick-red compound that reacts with water to give methane.
This phenomenon can be understood as the nuclei of 11Be and 14Be have, respectively, 1 and 4 neutrons orbiting substantially outside the classical Fermi 'waterdrop' model of the nucleus.
Beryllium could be produced by reducing beryllium compounds such as beryllium chloride with metallic potassium or sodium.
In critical electronic applications, beryllium is both a structural support and heat sink.
BeF2 has tetrahedrally coordinated metal and forms glasses (is difficult to crystallize).
In the nuclear reaction that occurs, a beryllium nucleus is transmuted into carbon-12, and one free neutron is emitted, traveling in about the same direction as the alpha particle was heading.
Beryllium's chemical behavior is largely a result of its small atomic and ionic radii.
A survey found that about 5% of workers in plants manufacturing fluorescent lamps in 1949 in the United States had beryllium-related lung diseases.
Beryllium is found in over 100 minerals, but most are uncommon to rare.
In these systems, very rapid movement of the mirror is required which again dictates low mass and high rigidity.
Thus, 10Be and its daughter products are used to examine natural soil erosion, soil formation and the development of lateritic soils, and as a proxy for measurement of the variations in solar activity and the age of ice cores.
The isotope 7Be (half-life 53 days) is also cosmogenic, and shows an atmospheric abundance linked to sunspots, much like 10Be.
The low weight and high rigidity of beryllium make it useful as a material for high-frequency speaker drivers.
Beryllium oxide is useful for many applications that require the combined properties of an electrical insulator and an excellent heat conductor, with high strength and hardness, and a very high melting point.
This nuclear reaction is:
In a 1798 paper read before the Institut de France, Vauquelin reported that he found a new "earth" by dissolving aluminium hydroxide from emerald and beryl in an additional alkali.
Mixing about 2.0% beryllium into copper forms an alloy called beryllium copper that is six times stronger than copper alone.
This characteristic is employed in analytical techniques using EDTA as a ligand.
It has a half-life of 2.7&nbsp;×&nbsp;10−21 s. 6Be is also very short-lived with a half-life of 5.0&nbsp;×&nbsp;10−21 s. The exotic isotopes 11Be and 14Be are known to exhibit a nuclear halo.
The Sun has a concentration of 0.1 parts per billion (ppb) of beryllium.
Beryllium(II) readily forms complexes with strong donating ligands such as phosphine oxides and arsine oxides.
Most early fluorescent lamps used zinc orthosilicate with varying content of beryllium to emit greenish light.
This same method is used in one class of radioisotope-based laboratory neutron sources that produce 30 neutrons for every million α particles.
8Be has a very short half-life of about 7&nbsp;s that contributes to its significant cosmological role, as elements heavier than beryllium could not have been produced by nuclear fusion in the Big Bang.
This is due to the lack of sufficient time during the Big Bang's nucleosynthesis phase to produce carbon by the fusion of 4He nuclei and the very low concentrations of available beryllium-8.
Therefore, it works as a neutron reflector and neutron moderator, effectively slowing the neutrons to the thermal energy range of below 0.03 eV, where the total cross section is at least an order of magnitude lower – exact value strongly depends on the purity and size of the crystallites in the material.
The two main ores of beryllium, beryl and bertrandite, are found in Argentina, Brazil, India, Madagascar, Russia and the United States.
For the same reason, the optics of the Spitzer Space Telescope are entirely built of beryllium metal.
Such alpha decay driven beryllium neutron sources, named "urchin" neutron initiators, were used some in early atomic bombs.
Tetracoordination allows beryllium compounds, such as the fluoride or chloride, to form polymers.
The price on the American market for vacuum-cast beryllium ingots was about $338 per pound ($745 per kilogram) in 2001.
Notable gemstones which contain beryllium include beryl (aquamarine, emerald) and chrysoberyl.
Extraction of beryllium using the melt method involves grinding beryl into a powder and heating it to .
The shortest-lived known isotope of beryllium is 13Be which decays through neutron emission.
Beryllium is most commonly extracted from the mineral beryl, which is either sintered using an extraction agent or melted into a soluble mixture.
In the first century CE, Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder mentioned in his encyclopedia ''Natural History'' that beryl and emerald ("smaragdus") were similar.
The highly reactive potassium had been produced by the electrolysis of its compounds, a process discovered 21 years before.
Its toxicity is exacerbated by the fact that the body has no means to control beryllium levels, and once inside the body the beryllium cannot be removed.
A sample of beryllium was bombarded with alpha rays from the decay of radium in a 1932 experiment by James Chadwick that uncovered the existence of the neutron.
This behavior is similar to that of aluminium metal.
The commercial use of beryllium requires the use of appropriate dust control equipment and industrial controls at all times because of the toxicity of inhaled beryllium-containing dusts that can cause a chronic life-threatening allergic disease in some people called berylliosis.
When crystalline, beryllium fluoride has the same room temperature crystal structure as quartz and shares many higher temperature structures also.
Heating beryllium hydroxide forms the oxide, which becomes beryllium chloride when combined with carbon and chlorine.
Beryllium has a concentration of 2 to 6 parts per million (ppm) in the Earth's crust.
Beryllium has a large scattering cross section for high-energy neutrons, about 6 barns for energies above approximately 10 keV.
In some applications, though, the beryllium blank is polished without any coating.
Once ignited, beryllium burns brilliantly forming a mixture of beryllium oxide and beryllium nitride.
Early in the 20th century, the production of beryllium by the thermal decomposition of beryllium iodide was investigated following the success of a similar process for the production of zirconium, but this process proved to be uneconomical for volume production.
In stream water, however, beryllium is more abundant with a concentration of 0.1 ppb.
Tools made of beryllium copper alloys are strong and hard and do not create sparks when they strike a steel surface.
Radioactive cosmogenic 10Be is produced in the atmosphere of the Earth by the cosmic ray spallation of oxygen.
Beryllium is also commonly used in some neutron sources in laboratory devices in which relatively few neutrons are needed (rather than having to use a nuclear reactor, or a particle accelerator-powered neutron generator).
BeCl2 and BeBr2 have chain structures with edge-shared tetrahedra.
Between 1998 and 2008, the world's production of beryllium had decreased from 343 to about 200 tonnes, of which 176 tonnes (88%) came from the United States.
Chronic berylliosis resembles sarcoidosis in many respects, and the differential diagnosis is often difficult.
The 2s electrons of beryllium may contribute to chemical bonding.
Although the use of beryllium compounds in fluorescent lighting tubes was discontinued in 1949, potential for exposure to beryllium exists in the nuclear and aerospace industries and in the refining of beryllium metal and melting of beryllium-containing alloys, the manufacturing of electronic devices, and the handling of other beryllium-containing material.
The toxicity of finely divided beryllium (dust or powder, mainly encountered in industrial settings where beryllium is produced or machined) is very well-documented.
It is widely used in materials such as GaAs, AlGaAs, InGaAs and InAlAs grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
They are also found in maintenance and construction materials near magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines because of the high magnetic fields generated.
beryllium sulfate and beryllium nitrate, are acidic because of hydrolysis of the Be(H2O)42+ ion.
Because beryllium is expensive (many times more than titanium), hard to shape due to its brittleness, and toxic if mishandled, beryllium tweeters are limited to high-end home, pro audio, and public address applications.
:Be(H2O)42+ + H2O  Be(H2O)3(OH)+ + H3O+
Modern diagnostic equipment no longer necessitates this highly risky procedure and no attempt should be made to ingest this highly toxic substance.
