# Measurements can be taken at varying wavelengths within the electromagnetic spectrum and the difference in reported diameters can be as much as 30–35%, yet comparing one finding with another is difficult as the star's apparent size differs depending on the wavelength used.
This demonstrates the nature of the pulsations in size, although corresponding temperature and spectral variations are not clearly seen.
In the popular science fiction series ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy'' by Douglas Adams, Ford Prefect was from "a small planet somewhere in the vicinity of Betelgeuse."
An observation by the Herschel Space Observatory in January 2013 revealed that the star's winds are crashing against the surrounding interstellar medium.
There are periods when it will surpass Procyon to become the seventh brightest star, and occasionally even brighter.
The last part of the name, "-elgeuse", comes from the Arabic  '''', a historical Arabic name of the constellation Orion, a feminine name in old Arabian legend, and of uncertain meaning.
As a result, it has begun to fuse helium into carbon and oxygen and has ignited a hydrogen shell outside the core.
Just as human depth perception increases when two eyes instead of one perceive an object, Fizeau proposed the observation of stars through two apertures instead of one to obtain interferences that would furnish information on the star's spatial intensity distribution.
Other technological breakthroughs include adaptive optics, space observatories like Hipparcos, Hubble and Spitzer, and the Astronomical Multi-BEam Recombiner (AMBER), which combines the beams of three telescopes simultaneously, allowing researchers to achieve milliarcsecond spatial resolution.
A Sanskrit name for Betelgeuse is ārdrā "the moist one", eponymous of the ''Ardra'' lunar mansion in Hindu astrology.
However, later evaluation of the Hipparcos parallax measurements for variable stars like Betelgeuse found that the uncertainty of these measurements had been underestimated.
Moreover, observations from 2009 of Betelgeuse exhibiting a 15% contraction in angular diameter would equate to a reduction of the star's radius from about 5.5 to 4.6&nbsp;AU, assuming that the photosphere is a perfect sphere.
In 2007, an improved figure of π&nbsp;=&nbsp; was calculated, hence a much tighter error factor yielding a distance of roughly  or .
A team of astronomers working in the near-infrared announced in 2004, that the more accurate photospheric measurement was 43.33 ± 0.04&nbsp;mas.
Consequently, the average density is less than twelve parts per billion () that of the Sun.
Recent work has corroborated this hypothesis, yet there are still uncertainties about the structure of their convection, the mechanism of their mass loss, the way dust forms in their extended atmosphere, and the conditions which precipitate their dramatic finale as a type II supernova.
It is enriched in oxygen and especially in nitrogen relative to carbon.
The star is classified as a red supergiant of spectral type M1-2 and is one of the largest and most luminous stars visible to the naked eye.
This conclusion, if further corroborated, would suggest an average angular diameter for Betelgeuse closer to Perrin's estimate at 43.33&nbsp;arcseconds, hence a stellar radius of about 3.4&nbsp;AU (730&nbsp;R☉) assuming the shorter Hipparcos distance of 498&nbsp;±&nbsp;73&nbsp;ly in lieu of Harper's estimate at 643&nbsp;±&nbsp;146&nbsp;ly.
On 9 June 2009, it was announced that the star had shrunk by 15% since 1993 at an increasing rate without a significant diminution in magnitude.
In 2000, the SSL team produced another measure of 54.7 ± 0.3&nbsp;mas, ignoring any possible contribution from hotspots, which are less noticeable in the mid-infrared.
This book disseminated ideas on how to apply computer technologies to create stellar models, while the Stratoscope projects, by taking balloon-borne telescopes above the Earth's turbulence, produced some of the finest images of solar granules and sunspots ever seen, thus confirming the existence of convection in the solar atmosphere.
Solving the mystery of mass loss in the late stages of a star's evolution may reveal those factors that precipitate the explosive deaths of these stellar giants.
Subsequent ultraviolet spectra taken with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph suggested that the hot spot was one of Betelgeuse's poles of rotation.
Astronomers may be close to solving this mystery.
Scorpion days marked as nights that both constellations could be seen.
Combining these data with historical distance estimates of 180 to 815&nbsp;ly yields a projected radius of the stellar disk of anywhere from 1.2 to 8.9&nbsp;AU.
This equated to a distance of 56&nbsp;parsecs (pc) or roughly 180&nbsp;light-years (ly), producing not only an inaccurate radius for the star but every other stellar characteristic.
At near-infrared wavelengths (K and L bands), the scattering is negligible, so the classical photosphere can be directly seen; in the mid-infrared the scattering increases once more, causing the thermal emission of the warm atmosphere to increase the apparent diameter.
The study also put forth an explanation as to why varying wavelengths from the visible to mid-infrared produce different diameters: the star is seen through a thick, warm extended atmosphere.
Betelgeuse is travelling supersonically through the interstellar medium at a speed of 30&nbsp;km per second (i.e.
At short wavelengths (the visible spectrum) the atmosphere scatters light, thus slightly increasing the star's diameter.
Earlier studies have typically lasted one to two years by comparison and have explored multiple wavelengths, often yielding vastly different results.
The details depend on the exact initial mass and other physical properties of that main sequence star.
With improvements in infrared telescopy atop Mount Wilson, Mount Locke and Mauna Kea in Hawaii, astrophysicists began peering into the complex circumstellar shells surrounding the supergiant, causing them to suspect the presence of huge gas bubbles resulting from convection.
The first claim of a dust shell surrounding Betelgeuse was put forth in 1977 when it was noted that dust shells around mature stars often emit large amounts of radiation in excess of the photospheric contribution.
That main sequence version of Betelgeuse would have been a hot luminous star with a spectral type such as O9V.
They are a molecular environment otherwise known as the MOLsphere, a gaseous envelope, a chromosphere, a dust environment and two outer shells (S1 and S2) composed of carbon monoxide (CO).
In 2001, Graham Harper estimated a stellar wind at 0.03&nbsp; every  years, but research since 2009 has provided evidence of episodic mass loss making any total figure for Betelgeuse uncertain.
When Schwarzschild first proposed his theory of huge convection cells, he argued it was the likely cause of mass loss in evolved supergiants like Betelgeuse.
In his 1953 story "Tony and the Beetles" Philip K. Dick describes a planet system around Betelguese and the neighboring stars occupied by the Terra (Earth) invaders.
The star was named ''Beldengeuze'' in the ''Alfonsine Tables'', and Italian Jesuit priest and astronomer Giovanni Battista Riccioli had called it ''Bectelgeuze'' or ''Bedalgeuze''.
In addition to the star's diameter, questions have arisen about the complex dynamics of Betelgeuse's extended atmosphere.
It may outshine the full moon and would be easily visible in daylight.
The 1984 report of a giant asymmetric dust shell 1&nbsp;pc ()  has not been corroborated by recent studies, although another published the same year said that three dust shells were found extending four light-years from one side of the decaying star, suggesting that Betelgeuse sheds its outer layers as it moves.
The first, in  1991, gave a parallax of π = 9.8&nbsp;±&nbsp;4.7 mas, yielding a distance of roughly 102&nbsp;pc or 330&nbsp;ly.
At about 0.45 stellar radii (~2–3&nbsp;AU) above the photosphere there may lie a molecular layer known as the MOLsphere or  molecular environment.
In a 2009 paper, stellar mass loss was cited as the "key to understanding the evolution of the universe from the earliest cosmological times to the current epoch, and of planet formation and the formation of life itself".
It was also called ''Ta'urua-nui-o-Mere'' "Great festivity in parental yearnings".
Models of rotating  stars predict a peculiar type II supernova similar to SN 1987A from a blue supergiant progenitor.
All stars more massive than about  are expected to end their lives when their core collapses, typically producing a supernova explosion.
With the history of astronomy intimately associated with mythology and astrology before the scientific revolution, the red star, like the planet Mars that derives its name from a Roman war god, has been closely associated with the martial archetype of conquest for millennia, and by extension, the motif of death and rebirth.
Consequently, it is likely that Betelgeuse has not always had its current motion through space but has changed course at one time or another, possibly the result of a nearby stellar explosion.
The Lacandon people of Central America knew it as ''chäk tulix'' "red butterfly".
Assuming the Jovian orbit of 5.5&nbsp;AU as the star radius, the inner shell would extend roughly 50 to 150 stellar radii (~300 to 800&nbsp;AU) with the outer one as far as 250 stellar radii (~1400&nbsp;AU).
Other theories include close binary interactions, chromospheric magnetic activity influencing mass loss, or non-radial pulsations such as g-modes.
Such star matter is so tenuous that Betelgeuse has often been called a "red-hot vacuum".
Parallax is the apparent change of the position of an object, measured in seconds of arc, caused by the change of position of the observer of that object.
The kinematics of Betelgeuse are complex.
Further studies have found no evidence for these companions or have actively refuted their existence, but the possibility of a close companion contributing to the overall flux has never been fully ruled out.
In South African mythology, Betelgeuse was perceived as a lion casting a predatory gaze toward the three zebras represented by Orion's Belt.
The constellations in Macedonian folklore represented agricultural items and animals, reflecting their village way of life.
Some of these elements are known to be asymmetric while others overlap.
However, limb darkening and measurement errors resulted in uncertainty about the accuracy of these measurements.
As the researcher, Harper, points out: "The revised Hipparcos parallax leads to a larger distance () than the original; however, the astrometric solution still requires a significant cosmic noise of 2.4 mas.
Up to about , a type II-P supernova is always produced from the red supergiant stage.
But it was not until the late 1980s and early 1990s, when Betelgeuse became a regular target for aperture masking interferometry, that breakthroughs occurred in visible-light and infrared imaging.
The source of the long secondary periods is unknown, but they certainly aren't due to radial pulsations.
Helped by John Anderson, the trio measured the angular diameter of Betelgeuse at 0.047", a figure which resulted in a diameter of 3.84&nbsp;×&nbsp;108&nbsp;km (2.58 AU) based on the parallax value of 0.018".
These were the first optical and infrared images of a stellar disk other than the Sun, taken first from ground-based interferometers and later from higher-resolution observations of the COAST telescope.
Studies show it to be composed of water vapor and carbon monoxide with an effective temperature of about .
This corresponds to the radius calculated from the effective temperature and bolometric luminosity.
The most likely star-formation scenario for Betelgeuse is that it is a runaway star from the Orion OB1 Association.
From 1836 to 1840, he noticed significant changes in magnitude when Betelgeuse outshone Rigel in October 1837 and again in November 1839.
However, numerous interferometric studies in the near-infrared made at the Paranal Observatory in Chile argue for much tighter diameters.
The photosphere has an extended atmosphere, which displays strong lines of emission rather than absorption, a phenomenon that occurs when a star is surrounded by a thick gaseous envelope (rather than ionized).
It is believed that runaway stars may be caused by supernovae, and there is strong evidence that OB stars μ&nbsp;Columbae, AE Aurigae and 53 Arietis all originated from such explosions in Ori OB1 2.2, 2.7 and 4.9 million years ago.
This type of supernova would remain at roughly constant brightness for 2–3 months before rapidly dimming.
Moreover, Betelgeuse's projected pathway does not appear to intersect with the 25 Ori subassociation or the far younger Orion Nebula Cluster (ONC, also known as Ori OB1d), particularly since Very Long Baseline Array astrometry yields a distance from Betelgeuse to the ONC of between 389 and 414&nbsp;parsecs.
Moreover, if future research bears out this hypothesis, Betelgeuse may prove to have traveled close to  as a red supergiant scattering as much as  along its trajectory.
It was this methodology that identified the hotspots on Betelgeuse in the 1990s.
The Gaia spacecraft may clarify assumptions presently used in calculating the size of Betelgeuse's stellar disk.
Having been ejected from its birthplace in the Orion OB1 Association—which includes the stars in Orion's Belt—this crimson runaway has been observed moving through the interstellar medium at a supersonic speed of 30&nbsp;km/s, creating a bow shock over 4 light-years wide.
Studies with the IOTA and VLTI published in 2009 brought strong support to Perrin's analysis and yielded diameters ranging from 42.57 to 44.28&nbsp;mas with comparatively insignificant margins of error.
These composition anomalies are likely caused by contamination by CNO-processed material from the inside of Betelgeuse.
Astronomers have identified at least six shells surrounding Betelgeuse.
The observations have conclusively demonstrated that the warm chromospheric plasma spatially overlaps and coexists with cool gas in Betelgeuse's gaseous envelope as well as with the dust in its circumstellar dust shells (see below).
To the Inuit, the appearance of Betelgeuse and Bellatrix high in the southern sky after sunset marked the beginning of spring and lengthening days in late February and early March.
The records of the American Association of Variable Star Observers (AAVSO) show a maximum brightness of 0.2 in 1933 and 1942, and a minimum of 1.2, observed in 1927 and 1941.
A 10-year quiescent period followed; then in 1849, Herschel noted another short cycle of variability, which peaked in 1852.
In the Northern Hemisphere, beginning in January of each year, it can be seen rising in the east just after sunset.
What is not fully known is whether this observation is evidence of a rhythmic expansion and contraction of the star's photosphere as astronomers have theorized, and if so, what the periodic cycle might be, although Townes suggested that if a cycle does exist, it is probably a few decades long.
Later, '''' was also designated as the scientific Arabic name for Orion and for Gemini.
There is no consensus for the correct pronunciation of the name, and pronunciations for the star are as varied as its spellings:
Betelgeuse is generally considered to be a single isolated star and a runaway star, not currently associated with any cluster or star-forming region, although its birthplace is unclear.
The plume's presence implies that the spherical symmetry of the star's photosphere, often observed in the infrared, is ''not'' preserved in its close environment.
Distinctly reddish, it is a semiregular variable star whose apparent magnitude varies between 0.0 and 1.3, the widest range of any first-magnitude star.
*  (Canadian Oxford Dictionary, ''Webster's Collegiate Dictionary'')
Only more massive stars, or low metallicity stars with lower mass loss, would produce a black hole.
Betelgeuse is not likely to produce a gamma-ray burst and is not close enough for its x-rays, ultraviolet radiation, or ejected material to cause significant effects on Earth.
As seen from Earth, it would have a peak apparent magnitude of about &minus;12.4.
From Arctic latitudes, Betelgeuse's red colour and higher location in the sky than Rigel meant the Inuit regarded it as brighter, and one local name was ''Ulluriajjuaq'' "large star".
Although interferometry was still in its infancy, the experiment proved a success.
Other Arabic names recorded include '''' ("the Right Hand"), '''' ("the Arm"), and '''' ("the Shoulder"), all appended to "of the giant", as  ''''.
Following Betelgeuse's supernova, a small dense remnant will be left behind, either a neutron star or black hole.
To them, Betelgeuse was ''Orach'' "the ploughman", alongside the rest of Orion which depicted a plough with oxen.
They noticed a large plume of gas extending at least six times its stellar radius indicating that Betelgeuse is not shedding matter evenly in all directions.
In Tahitian lore, Betelgeuse was one of the pillars propping up the sky, known as ''Anâ-varu'', the pillar to sit by.
Although the radio data also have systematic errors, the Harper solution combines the datasets in the hope of mitigating such errors.
The setting of Orion and rising of Scorpius signify the death of Orion by the scorpion.
Later observers recorded unusually high maxima with an interval of years, but only small variations from 1957 to 1967.
Other cultures have produced different myths.
Calculations of its mass range from slightly under ten to a little over twenty times that of the Sun.
*  (''The Friendly Stars'')
In 2011, a third estimate in the near-infrared corroborating the 2009 numbers, this time showing a limb-darkened disk diameter of 42.49&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.06 mas.
A novel method of determining the supergiant's mass was proposed in 2011, arguing for a current stellar mass of 11.6&nbsp;M⊙ with an upper limit of 16.6 and lower of 7.7&nbsp;M⊙, based on observations of the star's intensity profile from narrow H-band interferometry and using a photospheric measurement of roughly 4.3&nbsp;AU or 955&nbsp;R⊙.
More massive stars can lose mass quickly enough that they evolve towards higher temperatures before their cores can collapse, particularly for rotating stars and models with especially high mass loss rates.
Similarly, the Lakota people of North America see it as a chief whose arm has been severed.
However, the physical mechanism is not well understood.
This variability in brightness may explain why Johann Bayer, with the publication of his ''Uranometria'' in 1603, designated the star ''alpha'' as it may have rivaled the usually brighter Rigel (''beta'').
The opposed locations of Orion and Scorpius, with their corresponding bright variable red stars Betelgeuse and Antares, were noted by ancient cultures around the world.
One theory to explain long secondary periods is that they are caused by the evolution of such cells combined with the rotation of the star.
Although young, Betelgeuse has exhausted the hydrogen in its core, causing the core to contract under the force of gravity into a hotter and denser state.
Variations in the diameter of Betelgeuse have also been measured directly.
He added that they had received a suggestion the sequel be named ''Sanduleak-69 202'' after the former star of SN 1987A.
In 1995, the Hubble Space Telescope's Faint Object Camera captured an ultraviolet image with a resolution superior to that obtained by ground-based interferometers—the first conventional-telescope image (or "direct-image" in NASA terminology) of the disk of another star.
Other names for Betelgeuse included the Persian '''' "the Arm", and Coptic '''' "an Armlet". ''''
Although the exact size of the two outer CO shells remains elusive, preliminary estimates suggest that one shell extends from about 1.5 to 4.0 arcseconds and the other expands as far as 7.0 arcseconds.
Using the Solar System for comparison, the orbit of Mars is about 1.5&nbsp;AU, Ceres in the asteroid belt 2.7&nbsp;AU, Jupiter 5.5&nbsp;AU—so, assuming Betelgeuse occupying the place of the Sun, its photosphere might extend beyond the Jovian orbit, not quite reaching Saturn at 9.5&nbsp;AU.
This extended gaseous atmosphere has been observed moving away from and towards Betelgeuse, depending on radial velocity fluctuations in the photosphere.
The cometary structure is estimated to be at least 1 parsec wide, assuming a distance of 643 light-years.
Its chemical makeup can be reasonably assumed to have been around 70% hydrogen, 28% helium, and 2.4% heavy elements, slightly more metal-rich than the sun but otherwise similar.
In 1920, Albert Michelson and Francis Pease mounted a 6-meter interferometer on the front of the 2.5-meter telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory.
Two American navy ships were named after the star, both of them World War II vessels, the  launched in 1939 and  launched in 1944.
The identity of the red star Borgil mentioned in ''Lord of the Rings'' was much debated; Aldebaran, Betelgeuse and the planet Mars were touted as candidates.
More detailed analyses have shown a main period near 400 days and a longer secondary period around 2,100 days.
In 1996, Betelgeuse was shown to have a uniform disk of 56.6 ± 1.0&nbsp;mas.
The Rigvedic God of storms Rudra presided over the star; this association was linked by 19th-century star enthusiast Richard Hinckley Allen to Orion's stormy nature.
Not only is the photosphere enormous, but the star is surrounded by a complex circumstellar environment where light could take over three years to escape.
The VLA images also show this lower-temperature gas progressively cools as it extends outward.
The Rosseland radius derived from angular measurements of the star's photosphere rather than an extended envelope is .
Because Betelgeuse is so bright, it was only in 1997 that the bow shock was first imaged.
The initial rotation rate is more uncertain, but models with slow to moderate initial rotation rates produce the best matches to Betelgeuse's current proprties.
The time until Betelgeuse explodes depends on the predicted initial conditions and on the estimate of the time already spent as a red supergiant.
Analysis of polarization data from 1968 through 1983 indicated a close companion with a periodic orbit of about 2.1 years.
"Instead of the star's atmosphere expanding uniformly due to gas heated to high temperatures near its surface, it now appears that several giant convection cells propel gas from the star's surface into its atmosphere."
The Batak of Sumatra marked their New Year with the first new moon after the sinking of Orion's Belt below the horizon, at which point Betelgeuse remained "like the tail of a rooster".
The MOLsphere may also contain SiO and Al2O3—molecules which could explain the formation of dust particles.
Astronomers in the 1970s saw some major advances in astronomical imaging technology beginning with Antoine Labeyrie's invention of speckle interferometry, a process that significantly reduced the blurring effect caused by astronomical seeing.
In a paper published in 2012, the Berkeley team reported that their measurements were "dominated by the behavior of cool, optically thick material above the stellar photosphere," indicating that the apparent expansion and contraction may be due to activity in the star's outer shells and not the photosphere itself.
A 2014 paper derives an angular diameter of 42.28&nbsp;mas (equivalent to a 41.01&nbsp;mas uniform disc) using H and K band observations made with the VLTI AMBER instrument.
Currently in a late stage of stellar evolution, the supergiant is expected to explode as a supernova within the next million years.
This constellation was ultimately expanded to ten stars, but the earlier name stuck.
Probing deeper with ESO's AMBER, gas in the supergiant's extended atmosphere has been observed vigorously moving up and down, creating bubbles as large as the supergiant itself, leading his team to conclude that such stellar upheaval is behind the massive plume ejection observed by Kervella.
If Betelgeuse were at the center of the Solar System, its surface would extend past the asteroid belt, wholly engulfing Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars.
The average radius of the chromosphere in 1996 was about 2.2 times the optical disk (~10&nbsp;AU) and was reported to have a temperature no higher than .
The Sun's heliopause is estimated at about 100 AU, so the size of this outer shell would be almost fourteen times the size of the Solar System.
The traditional name ''Betelgeuse'' is derived from the Arabic  '''', meaning "the axilla of Orion", or  '''', meaning "the hand of Orion" (see below).
Also included was a theoretical allowance for limb darkening, yielding a diameter of 55.2 ± 0.5&nbsp;mas.
In 1994, it was reported that Betelgeuse undergoes sporadic decades long dust production, followed by inactivity.
The debate about differences between measurements in the mid-infrared, which suggest a possible expansion and contraction of the star, and the near-infrared, which advocates a relatively constant photospheric diameter, remains to be resolved.
Betelgeuse has a color index (B–V) of 1.85—a figure which points to its advanced "redness".
In 1920, Betelgeuse became the second star (after the Sun) to have the angular size of its photosphere measured.
The images also revealed a bright area in the southwest quadrant of the disk.
The researchers, using a uniform disk model, determined that Betelgeuse had a diameter of 0.047&nbsp;arcseconds, although the stellar disk was likely 17% larger due to the limb darkening, resulting in an estimate for its angular diameter of about 0.055".
However the first dredge-up occurs soon after a star reaches the red supergiant phase and so this only means that Betelgeuse has been a red supergiant for at least a few thousand years.
The visible light is produced mainly by the radioactive decay of cobalt, and maintains its brightness due to the increasing transparency of the cooling hydrogen ejected by the supernova.
The earlier estimate equates to a radius of roughly 5.6&nbsp;AU or , assuming the 2008 Harper distance of 197.0 ± 45&nbsp;pc, a figure roughly the size of the Jovian orbit of 5.5&nbsp;AU, published in 2009 in ''Astronomy'' Magazine and a year later in NASA's Astronomy Picture of the Day.
A Hawaiian term for it was ''Kaulua-koko'' "brilliant red star".
Betelgeuse's suspected birthplace in the Orion OB1 Association is the location of several previous supernovae.
Two spectroscopic companions have been proposed to the red supergiant star.
It is proposed that this is due to granulation, similar to the same effect on the sun but on a much larger scale.
Astronomy writer Robert Burnham, Jr. proposed the term ''padparadaschah'' which denotes a rare orange sapphire in India, for the star.
Current observations suggest that a star like Betelgeuse may spend a portion of its lifetime as a red supergiant, but then cross back across the H-R diagram, pass once again through a brief yellow supergiant phase and then explode as a blue supergiant or Wolf-Rayet star.
Consequently, if one combines the smaller Hipparcos distance from van Leeuwen of 152 ± 20&nbsp;pc with Perrin's angular measurement of 43.33&nbsp;mas, a near-infrared photospheric estimate would equate to about 3.4&nbsp;AU or 730&nbsp;R☉.
The main character incorrectly states the name of the star is of Jewish origin.
The angular diameter of Betelgeuse is only exceeded by R Doradus (and the Sun).
Estimates range from 20,000 years to a maximum of 140,000 years.
Stephen R. Wilk has proposed the constellation of Orion could have represented the Greek mythological figure Pelops, who had an artificial shoulder of ivory made for him, with Betelgeuse as the shoulder, its color reminiscent of the reddish yellow sheen of ivory.
In the late phase of stellar evolution, massive stars like Betelgeuse exhibit high rates of mass loss, possibly as much as 1&nbsp; every  years, resulting in a complex circumstellar environment that is constantly in flux.
To overcome these challenges, researchers have employed various solutions.
In the outer reaches of the photosphere the density is extremely low, yet the total mass of the star is believed to be no more than .
The star's unusual name inspired the title of the 1988 film ''Beetlejuice'', and script writer Michael McDowell was impressed by how many people made the connection.
*  or  Oxford English Dictionary
Betelgeuse typically shows only small brightness changes near to magnitude +0.5, although at its extremes it can become as bright as magnitude 0.0 or as faint as magnitude +1.3.
As a result, only about 13% of the star's radiant energy is emitted in the form of visible light.
High resolution interferometry of Betelgeuse and its vicinity, far beyond the technology of the 1980s and 90s, have not detected any companions.
''α Orionis'' (Latinised to ''Alpha Orionis'') is the star's Bayer designation.
*  Oxford English Dictionary and Royal Astronomical Society of Canada
The 1950s and 1960s saw two developments that would impact stellar convection theory in red supergiants: the Stratoscope projects and the 1958 publication of ''Structure and Evolution of the Stars'', principally the work of Martin Schwarzschild and his colleague at Princeton University, Richard Härm.
Betelgeuse has been known as ''Betelgeux'', and in German ''Beteigeuze'' (according to Bode).
Betelgeuse is one of three stars that make up the Winter Triangle asterism, and it marks the center of the Winter Hexagon.
Asymmetries on the stellar disk had been reported at different wavelengths.
was its Sanskrit name, as part of a Hindu understanding of the constellation as a running antelope or stag.
Betelgeuse is often mistranslated as "armpit of the central one".
Its core will eventually collapse, producing a supernova explosion and leaving behind a compact remnant.
In 1979, a French supertanker named ''Betelgeuse'' was moored off Whiddy Island discharging oil when it exploded, killing 50 people in one of the worst disasters in Ireland's history.
Since then, other studies have produced angular diameters that range from 0.042 to 0.069&nbsp;arcseconds.
Using speckle interferometry, the team concluded that the closer of the two companions was located at  (~9 AU) from the main star with a position angle (PA) of 273 degrees, an orbit that would potentially place it within the star's chromosphere.
In 2008, using the Very Large Array (VLA), produced a radio solution of π&nbsp;=&nbsp;, equalling a distance of  or .
