Her memoir concluded with a letter to her daughter, in which she addressed her several times as "Hyman," and described her actions as "a glaring lack of loyalty and thanks for the very privileged life I feel you have been given".
She accepted roles in the television miniseries ''The Dark Secret of Harvest Home'' (1978) and the theatrical film ''Death on the Nile'' (1978), an Agatha Christie murder mystery.
She concluded with a reference to the title of Hyman's book, "If it refers to money, if my memory serves me right, I've been your keeper all these many years.
Several of Davis' friends commented that Hyman's depictions of events were not accurate; one said, "so much of the book is out of context."
Happy at Last'' (1982).
Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, Davis spent the early months of 1942 selling war bonds.
The following year, Davis was cast as the lead in an Aaron Spelling sitcom, ''The Decorator''.
In 1977 Davis became the first woman to be honored with the AFI Life Achievement Award.
In 1921, Ruth Davis moved to New York City with her daughters, where she worked as a portrait photographer.
Davis's film choices were often unconventional; she sought roles as manipulators and killers in an era when actresses usually preferred to play sympathetic characters, and she excelled in them.
She insisted that she be portrayed realistically in her death scene, and said, "the last stages of consumption, poverty and neglect are not pretty and I intended to be convincing-looking."
The script was rewritten to place more emphasis on Barbara Carrera's character, and the reworked version was released after Davis' death.
Her next picture was ''Jezebel'' (1938), and during production Davis entered a relationship with director William Wyler.
"The Case of Constant Doyle" began filming on December 12, 1962, and aired January 31, 1963.
During the early 1940s, several of Davis' film choices were influenced by the war, such as ''Watch on the Rhine'' (1943), by Lillian Hellman, and ''Thank Your Lucky Stars'' (1943), a lighthearted all-star musical cavalcade, with each of the featured stars donating their fee to the Hollywood Canteen.
Film reviewers complimented Davis on her performance, the ''National Board of Review'' commenting that she gave the film "a dignity not fully warranted by the script."
In her next film, ''The Petrified Forest'' (1936), Davis co-starred with Leslie Howard and Humphrey Bogart, but Bogart, in his first important role, received most of the critics' praise.
Among the film roles offered to Davis following her return to film making was Rose Sayer in ''The African Queen'' (1951).
Davis won a Best Actress award from the Cannes Film Festival, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award.
Davis was also offered a role in a film version of the Virginia Kellogg prison drama ''Women Without Men.''
Davis explained her viewpoint to a journalist, saying "I knew that, if I continued to appear in any more mediocre pictures, I would have no career left worth fighting for."
When Davis was not nominated for an Academy Award for ''Of Human Bondage,'' ''The Hollywood Citizen News'' questioned the omission and Norma Shearer, herself a nominee, joined a campaign to have Davis nominated.
In a film retrospective that celebrated the films and stars of 1939, ''Life'' concluded that Davis was the most significant actress of her era, and highlighted ''Dark Victory'' (1939) as one of the most-important films of the year.
Jack Warner testified, and was asked, "Whatever part you choose to call upon her to play, if she thinks she can play it, whether it is distasteful and cheap, she has to play it?"
In later years, Davis cited this performance as her personal favorite.
In 1926, she saw a production of Henrik Ibsen's ''The Wild Duck'' with Blanche Yurka and Peg Entwistle, a well-known Broadway actress who killed herself in 1932 by jumping off the H of the Hollywood Sign.
Davis appeared in several films over the next two years but most were poorly received.
In 1977 Davis became the first woman to receive the American Film Institute's Lifetime Achievement Award.
Thirty years experience as an actress in Motion Pictures.
The film became one of the highest-grossing films of the year, and the role of Judith Traherne brought her an Academy Award nomination.
Warner replied, "Yes, she must play it."
He remarked, "if anybody wants to put me into perpetual servitude on the basis of that remuneration, I shall prepare to consider it."
On July 3, 1950, Davis' divorce from William Sherry was finalized, and on July 28 she married Gary Merrill.
When Davis was nominated for an Academy Award, Crawford contacted the other Best Actress nominees (who were unable to attend the ceremonies) and offered to accept the award on their behalf should they win, which was exactly what happened when Anne Bancroft was announced as winner.
The film earned good reviews, with one critic writing, "Bette crawls across the screen like a testy old hornet on a windowpane, snarling, staggering, twitching—a symphony of misfired synapses."
could have combated so successfully the obvious intention of the adaptors of the play to make frustrated sex the mainspring of the chief character's interest in the young miner."
Her nervousness was compounded when she overheard the Chief of Production, Carl Laemmle, Jr., comment to another executive that she had "about as much sex appeal as Slim Summerville," one of the film's co-stars.
I will never recover as completely from B.D.
The film's director Joseph L. Mankiewicz later remarked, "Bette was letter perfect.
With Sherry's consent, Merrill adopted B.D., Davis' daughter (Barbara) with Sherry.
She was uncomfortable working outside of her area of expertise; she had never been a musical performer and her limited theater experience had been more than 20&nbsp;years earlier.
In the early 1970s, Davis was invited to appear in New York, in a stage presentation, ''Great Ladies of the American Cinema.''
She won an Emmy Award for ''Strangers: The Story of a Mother and Daughter'' (1979) with Gena Rowlands, and was nominated for her performances in ''White Mama'' (1980) and ''Little Gloria...
The film was not a success, and her next role in ''Seed'' (1931) was too brief to attract attention.
After Jack Warner criticized her tendency to cajole crowds into buying, she reminded him that her audiences responded most strongly to her "bitch" performances.
Davis ensured that every night there would be a few important "names" for the visiting soldiers to meet.
The Hollywood Canteen is one of them."
Probably some of both."
However, her early films for Universal Studios (and as a loanout to other studios) were unsuccessful.
She gives the curious feeling of being charged with power which can find no ordinary outlet."
It failed at the box office, and the studio lost nearly one million dollars.
Her image was considered with more care; although she continued to play character roles, she was often filmed in close-ups that emphasizes her distinctive eyes.
Davis testified before an inquest that she knew of no event that might have caused the injury.
However, she was pregnant and went on maternity leave.
To play the elderly Elizabeth I of England, Davis shaved her hairline and eyebrows.
You must continually attempt things that you think are beyond you, or you get into a complete rut."
Katharine Hepburn played the role and was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Actress.
In 1964 Jack Warner spoke of the "magic quality that transformed this sometimes bland and not beautiful little girl into a great artist," and in a 1988 interview, Davis remarked that, unlike many of her contemporaries, she had forged a career without the benefit of beauty.
He commented, "I always disliked that because she was encouraged to behave badly.
Her career went through several periods of eclipse, and she admitted that her success had often been at the expense of her personal relationships.
"Until you're known in my profession as a monster, you are not a star," she said, "but I've never fought for anything in a treacherous way.
She recalled that she had seen the same lighting technique "on the sets of Ruth Chatterton and Kay Francis, and I knew what they meant."
For the rest of her life, Davis maintained that she gave the statue its familiar name of "Oscar" because its posterior resembled that of her husband, whose middle name was Oscar, although her claim has been disputed by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, among others.
In January 1951 Davis and Merrill adopted a 5-day-old baby girl they named Margot, named after the character Margo Channing.
William Wyler directed Davis for the third time in Lillian Hellman's ''The Little Foxes'' (RKO, 1941), but they clashed over the character of Regina Giddens, a role originally played on Broadway by Tallulah Bankhead (coincidentally, Davis had portrayed in film roles initiated by Bankhead on the stage twice before, in ''Dark Victory'' and ''Jezebel'').
During 1988 and 1989, Davis was fêted for her career achievements, receiving the Kennedy Center Honor, the Legion of Honor from France, the Campione d'Italia from Italy and the Film Society of Lincoln Center Lifetime Achievement Award.
The following year, her mother died.
In one of the film's most imitated scenes, Paul Henreid lights two cigarettes as he stares into Davis' eyes and passes one to her.
Davis' adopted son, Michael Merrill, ended contact with Hyman and refused to speak to her again, as did Davis, who also disinherited her.
''The Hollywood Reporter'' wrote of mannerisms "that you'd expect to find in a nightclub impersonation of Davis," while the London critic, Richard Winninger, wrote, "Miss Davis, with more say than most stars as to what films she makes, seems to have lapsed into egoism.
She accepted her next role, in the Grand Guignol horror film ''What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?''
Carl Laemmle, the head of Universal Studios, considered terminating Davis's employment, but cinematographer Karl Freund told him she had "lovely eyes" and would be suitable for ''Bad Sister'' (1931), in which she subsequently made her film debut.
After more than 20&nbsp;film roles, the role of the vicious and slatternly Mildred Rogers in the RKO Radio production of ''Of Human Bondage'' (1934), a film adaptation of W. Somerset Maugham's novel, earned Davis her first major critical acclaim.
John Springer, who had arranged her speaking tours of the early 1970s, wrote that despite the accomplishments of many of her contemporaries, Davis was "''the'' star of the thirties and into the forties," achieving notability for the variety of her characterizations and her ability to assert herself, even when her material was mediocre.
The film contained the line, "What a dump!," which became closely associated with Davis after it was referenced in Edward Albee's ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?,'' and impersonators began to use it in their acts.
Some reviewers criticized Davis for the excess of her performance; James Agee wrote that she "demonstrates the horrors of egocentricity on a marathonic scale;" but despite the mixed reviews, she received another Academy Award nomination.
Upon graduating from Cushing Academy, Bette enrolled in John Murray Anderson's Dramatic School.
She also received the San Francisco Film Critics Circle Award as "Best Actress", having been named by them as the "Worst Actress" of 1949 for ''Beyond the Forest''.
''The New York Times'' hailed her as "becoming one of the most interesting of our screen actresses."
Davis was preparing to return to New York when actor George Arliss chose Davis for the lead female role in the Warner Brothers picture ''The Man Who Played God'' (1932), and for the rest of her life, Davis credited him with helping her achieve her "break" in Hollywood.
Hollywood's most important stars volunteered to entertain servicemen.
Both were shattering experiences."
Critics responded positively to Davis' performance and several of her lines became well-known, particularly, "Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be a bumpy night."
Davis and Joan Crawford played two aging sisters, former actresses forced by circumstance to share a decaying Hollywood mansion.
It became one of the best known of her "women's pictures."
After filming was completed, their public comments against each other allowed the tension to develop into a lifelong feud.
The film became one of the year's biggest successes.
Davis played Miss Moffat, an English teacher who saves a young Welsh miner (John Dall) from a life in the coal pits, by offering him education.
Davis performed a novelty song, "They're Either Too Young or Too Old," which became a hit record after the film's release.
The reviews that followed were scathing; Dorothy Manners writing for the ''Los Angeles Examiner'' described the film as "an unfortunate finale to her brilliant career."
Of the 25&nbsp;actresses listed, Davis was ranked at number two, behind Katharine Hepburn.
She was emotional during the making of her next film, ''Dark Victory'' (1939), and considered abandoning it until the producer Hal B. Wallis convinced her to channel her despair into her acting.
Just thought I would die."
Davis refused, as she had met Arthur Farnsworth, a New England innkeeper.
When it received lukewarm reviews and failed at the box office, Hollywood columnists wrote that Davis' comeback had petered out, and an Academy Award nomination for ''The Star'' (1952) did not halt her decline.
Convinced that her career was being damaged by a succession of mediocre films, Davis accepted an offer in 1936 to appear in two films in Britain.
She appeared in the stage production, ''Miss Moffat,'' a musical adaptation of her film ''The Corn is Green,'' but after the show was panned by the Philadelphia critics during its pre-Broadway run, she cited a back injury and abandoned the show, which closed immediately.
Faced with the disapproval and resistance of the committee, Davis resigned, and was succeeded by her predecessor Walter Wanger.
Wants steady employment in Hollywood.
On her tombstone is written: "She did it the hard way," an epitaph that she mentioned in her memoir ''Mother Goddam'' as having been suggested to her by Joseph L. Mankiewicz shortly after they had filmed ''All About Eve.''
She admitted she was terrified during the making of her earliest films and that she became tough by necessity.
At John Garfield's suggestion of opening a servicemen's club in Hollywood, Davis—with the aid of Warner, Cary Grant and Jule Styne—transformed an old nightclub into the Hollywood Canteen, which opened on October 3, 1942.
Davis read the script, described it as the best she had ever read, and accepted the role.
The film received poor reviews and was described by Bosley Crowther as "a distressingly empty piece;" but, with a profit of $2.5 million, it was one of her biggest box-office successes.
In 2006, ''Premiere'' magazine ranked her portrayal of Margo Channing in the film as fifth on their list of "100 Greatest Performances of All Time," commenting, "There is something deliciously audacious about her gleeful willingness to play such unattractive emotions as jealousy, bitterness, and neediness."
Davis gained a reputation as a perfectionist who could be highly combative and confrontational.
Mike Wallace rebroadcast a ''60 Minutes'' interview he had filmed with Hyman a few years earlier in which she commended Davis on her skills as a mother, and said that she had adopted many of Davis' principles in raising her own children.
''All This and Heaven Too'' (1940) was the most financially successful film of Davis' career to that point, while ''The Letter'' (1940) was considered "one of the best pictures of the year" by ''The Hollywood Reporter,'' and Davis won admiration for her portrayal of an adulterous killer, a role originated by famed actress Katharine Cornell.
Davis expressed her desire to play Scarlett, and while David O. Selznick was conducting a search for the actress to play the role, a radio poll named her as the audience favorite.
Attempting to explain her popularity with gay audiences, the journalist Jim Emerson wrote, "Was she just a camp figurehead because her brittle, melodramatic style of acting hadn't aged well?
and later wrote in her memoir that she became absorbed in motherhood and considered ending her career.
A finding of accidental death was reached.
Betty was inspired to become an actress after seeing Rudolph Valentino in ''The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse'' (1921) and Mary Pickford in ''Little Lord Fauntleroy'' (1921), and changed the spelling of her name to "Bette" after Honoré de Balzac's ''La Cousine Bette''.
She filmed ''The Story of a Divorce'' (released by RKO Radio Pictures in 1951 as ''Payment on Demand'') but had received no other offers.
The same year, Davis refused the title role in ''Mildred Pierce'' (1945), a role for which Joan Crawford won an Academy Award, and instead made ''The Corn Is Green'' (1945) based on a play by Emlyn Williams.
Featured speakers included her son Michael Merrill and Lauren Bacall.
She was also severely ill and was operated on for osteomyelitis of the jaw.
During the making of ''All About Eve,'' (1950) Joseph L. Mankiewicz told her of the perception in Hollywood that she was difficult, and she explained that when the audience saw her on screen, they did not consider that her appearance was the result of numerous people working behind the scenes.
The bulk of her remaining work was for television.
The film was later described by Bosley Crowther as "interminable;" and he noted that "of all the miserable dilemmas in which Miss Davis has been involved&nbsp;...&nbsp;this one is probably the worst".
The latter was her first color film and her only color film made during the height of her career.
Upon her return, she learned that Hyman had published a memoir, ''My Mother's Keeper,'' in which she chronicled a difficult mother-daughter relationship and depicted scenes of Davis' overbearing and drunken behavior.
Margot was diagnosed as severely brain damaged due to an injury sustained during or shortly after her birth, and was eventually placed in an institution after age ~3years.
If she was presented as "a horse's ass ... forty feet wide, and thirty feet high," that is all the audience "would see or care about."
She recovered sufficiently to travel to Spain where she was honored at the Donostia-San Sebastián International Film Festival, but during her visit her health rapidly deteriorated.
In 1972 she played the lead role in two television films that were each intended as pilots for upcoming series for NBC, ''Madame Sin'' with Robert Wagner, and ''The Judge and Jake Wyler,'' with Joan Van Ark, but in each case, NBC decided against producing a series.
During production, she established what would become a lifelong friendship with her co-star, Anne Baxter, and a romantic relationship with her leading man, Gary Merrill, which led to marriage.
Daughter Barbara (credited as B. D. Merrill) played a small role in the film and when she and Davis visited the Cannes Film Festival to promote it, she met Jeremy Hyman, an executive for Seven Arts Productions.
As she entered old age, Davis was acknowledged for her achievements.
Even late in life, Bette smoked 100 cigarettes a day.
Skeffington'' (1944); but Jack Warner, who had halted production following Farnsworth's death, convinced her to continue.
Mobile still and more affable than rumor would have it.
She won the Academy Award for Best Actress twice, was the first person to accrue ten Academy Award nominations for acting, and was the first woman to receive a Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute.
After a short courtship, she married Hyman at the age of 16, with Davis' permission.
She won the Academy Award for Best Actress for the role, but commented that it was belated recognition for ''Of Human Bondage,'' calling the award a "consolation prize."
I am continuing to do so, as my name has made your book about me a success."
Davis played dual roles, as twins.
In a 1971 interview with Dick Cavett, she related the experience with the observation, "I was the most Yankee-est, most modest virgin who ever walked the earth.
The First Day of Issue celebration took place September 18, 2008, at Boston University, which houses an extensive Bette Davis archive.
That's the only way you grow in your profession.
She improvised dialogue, causing confusion among other actors, and infuriated the writer, Julius Epstein, who was called upon to rewrite scenes at her whim.
She sold two million dollars worth of bonds in two days, as well as a picture of herself in ''Jezebel'' for $250,000.
By this time her health was failing, and after disagreements with Cohen she walked off the set.
In 1948 Davis was cast in the melodrama ''Winter Meeting;'' and, although she was initially enthusiastic, she soon learned that Warner had arranged for "softer" lighting to be used to disguise her age.
The critic E. Arnot Robertson observed that "only Bette Davis .
As her career declined, her marriage continued to deteriorate until she filed for divorce in 1960.
She was later chosen to play Hedwig, the character she had seen Entwistle play, in ''The Wild Duck.''
During this time, she was in a relationship with her former costar George Brent, who proposed marriage.
While making ''June Bride'' (1948), Davis clashed with co-star Robert Montgomery, later describing him as "a male Miriam Hopkins... an excellent actor, but addicted to scene-stealing."
They laid me on a couch, and I tested fifteen men&nbsp;...&nbsp;They all had to lie on top of me and give me a passionate kiss.
Davis disagreed and insisted on playing the part as written and wore a gray wig and padding under her clothes, to create a dowdy appearance.
Director Vincent Sherman recalled the intense competitiveness and animosity between the two actresses, and Davis often joked that she held back nothing in a scene in which she was required to shake Hopkins in a fit of anger.
Davis later recalled that Entwistle inspired her full commitment to her chosen career, and said, "Before that Entwistle."
Interviewed by CNN, Merrill said that Hyman was motivated by "cruelty and greed."
A few months before her death in 1989, Davis was one of several actors featured on the cover of ''Life'' magazine.
Her films of this period included ''The Virgin Queen'' (1955), ''Storm Center'' (1956), and ''The Catered Affair'' (1956).
In fact, a studio employee had waited for her, but left because he saw nobody who "looked like an actress."
She would later recount her surprise that nobody from the studio was there to meet her at the train.
After performing in Philadelphia, Washington and Boston, she made her Broadway debut in 1929 in ''Broken Dishes,'' and followed it with ''Solid South.''
Individual performances continued to receive praise; in 1987, Bill Collins analyzed ''The Letter'' (1940), and described her performance as "a brilliant, subtle achievement," and wrote, "Bette Davis makes Leslie Crosbie one of the most extraordinary females in movies."
While reviewing ''What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?''
But the uproar led to a change in Academy voting procedures the following year, whereby nominations were determined by votes from all eligible members of a particular branch, rather than by a smaller committee, with results independently tabulated by the accounting firm Price Waterhouse.
In her second memoir, ''This 'N That'' (1987), Davis wrote, "I am still recovering from the fact that a child of mine would write about me behind my back, to say nothing about the kind of book it is.
Recalling the episode many years later, Davis remarked that Laughton's advice had influenced her throughout her career.
Hastily dressed in an ill-fitting costume with a low neckline, she was rebuffed by the director William Wyler, who loudly commented to the assembled crew, "What do you think of these dames who show their chests and think they can get jobs?"
The film was well received by critics and made a profit of $2.2 million.
''Where Love Has Gone'' (1964) was a romantic drama based on a Harold Robbins novel.
Davis was well received and was invited to tour Australia with the similarly themed, ''Bette Davis in Person and on Film,'' and its success allowed her to take the production to the United Kingdom.
Her last performance was the title role in Larry Cohen's ''Wicked Stepmother'' (1989).
Davis's counsel presented her complaints—that she could be suspended without pay for refusing a part, with the period of suspension added to her contract, that she could be called upon to play any part within her abilities regardless of her personal beliefs, that she could be required to support a political party against her beliefs, and that her image and likeness could be displayed in any manner deemed applicable by the studio.
A ''Perry Mason'' fan, Davis was the first of the guest stars.
In 1997 the executors of her estate, Michael Merrill, her son, and Kathryn Sermak, her former assistant, established "The Bette Davis Foundation" which awards college scholarships to promising actors and actresses.
''Possessed'' (1947) had been tailor-made for Davis and was to have been her next project after ''Deception.''
Her final years were marred by a long period of ill health, but she continued acting until shortly before her death from breast cancer, with more than 100 films, television and theater roles to her credit.
But just try to look away!"
She lobbied Jack Warner to make two films, ''Ethan Frome'' and a biography of Mary Todd Lincoln; however, Warner vetoed each proposal.
Few of Davis' films of the 1950s were successful and many of her performances were condemned by critics.
Shortly before filming was completed, the producer Darryl F. Zanuck offered her the role of the aging theatrical actress Margo Channing in ''All About Eve'' (1950).
The film was based in a plot previously filmed in Mexico by Dolores del Rio".
Her actress—vain, scared, a woman who goes too far in her reactions and emotions—makes the whole thing come alive."
She played supporting roles in ''Burnt Offerings'' (1976),  and ''The Disappearance of Aimee'' (1976), but clashed with Karen Black and Faye Dunaway, the stars of the two respective productions, because she felt that neither extended her an appropriate degree of respect, and that their behavior on the film sets was unprofessional.
Warners offered her services to Selznick as part of a deal that also included Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, but Selznick did not consider Davis as suitable, and rejected the offer, while Davis did not want Flynn cast as Rhett Butler.
Edwin Schallert for the ''Los Angeles Times'' praised Davis's performance in ''Mr.
Davis starred in three movies in 1941, the first being ''The Great Lie,'' opposite George Brent.
By 1949, Davis and Sherry were estranged and Hollywood columnists were writing that Davis' career was at an end.
Wyler encouraged Davis to emulate Bankhead's interpretation of the role, but Davis wanted to make the role her own.
Davis was 81 years old.
's book as I have from the stroke.
In 1938, Nelson obtained evidence that Davis was engaged in a sexual relationship with Howard Hughes and subsequently filed for divorce citing Davis' "cruel and inhuman manner."
For her performance in the film she was awarded the Volpi Cup at the 1937 Venice Film Festival.
As she continued making films, however, her relationship with her daughter B.D.
A second test was arranged for Davis, for the 1931 film ''A House Divided''.
In 1961 Davis opened in the Broadway production ''The Night of the Iguana'' to mostly mediocre reviews, and left the production after four months due to "chronic illness."
Davis later explained her actions with the observation, "when I was most unhappy I lashed out rather than whined."
Davis and Farnsworth were married at Home Ranch, in Rimrock, Arizona, in December 1940.
Despite the lackluster box office receipts from her more recent films, in 1949, she negotiated a four-film contract with Warner Bros., which paid $10,285 per week and made her the highest-paid woman in the United States.
''Hush… Hush, Sweet Charlotte'' (1964) was Robert Aldrich's follow-up to ''What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?,'' in which he planned to reunite Davis and Crawford, but when Crawford withdrew allegedly due to illness soon after filming began, she was replaced by Olivia de Havilland.
Davis later commented, "There are few accomplishments in my life that I am sincerely proud of.
Originally intended to pair Davis with Joan Crawford, Davis made it clear that she would not appear in any "dyke movie."
Eventually, Davis brought her case to court in Britain, hoping to get out of her contract with Warner Bros. She later recalled the opening statement of the barrister, Sir Patrick Hastings, who represented Warner Bros. Hastings urged the court to "come to the conclusion that this is rather a naughty young lady and that what she wants is more money."
