Protected wildlife has entered agricultural areas, trampling crops and killing livestock.
Their culture is closely related to that of Tibet.
It became a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) in 1985.
It differs from Olympic standards in technical details such as the placement of the targets and atmosphere.
They include the Dongzhi or winter solstice (around 1 January, depending on the lunar calendar), Lunar New Year (February or March), the King's birthday and the anniversary of his coronation, the official end of monsoon season (22 September), National Day (17 December), and various Buddhist and Hindu celebrations.
The government aims to promote conservation as part of its plan to target Gross National Happiness.
The skirmishes eventually led to the Duar War (1864–65), a confrontation for control of the Bengal Duars.
The Torsa, Raidak, Sankosh, and Manas are the main rivers of Bhutan, flowing through this region.
Bhutanese people primarily consist of the Ngalops and Sharchops, called the Western Bhutanese and Eastern Bhutanese respectively.
Portuguese Jesuits Estêvão Cacella and João Cabral were the first recorded Europeans to visit Bhutan, on their way to Tibet.
After many years in refugee camps, many inhabitants are now moving to host nations such as Canada, Norway, the UK, Australia, and the US as refugees.
Bhutan has seen recent growth in the technology sector, in areas such as green tech and consumer Internet/e-commerce.
Handicrafts, particularly weaving and the manufacture of religious art for home altars, are a small cottage industry.
The globally endangered white-winged duck has been added recently to Bhutan's bird list.
Education programmes were given a boost in 1990 when the Asian Development Bank (see Glossary) granted a US$7.13 million loan for staff training and development, specialist services, equipment and furniture purchases, salaries and other recurrent costs, and facility rehabilitation and construction at Royal Bhutan Polytechnic.
Its territory was composed of minor warring fiefs until the early 17th century.
Locally, Bhutan has been known by many names.
John Claude White, British Political Agent in Bhutan, took photographs of the ceremony.
Other religions account for less than 1% of the population.
Until the 1980s, the government sponsored the teaching of Nepali in schools in southern Bhutan.
The current king, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, wed Jetsun Pema, 21, a commoner and daughter of a pilot, on 13 October 2011.
It is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).
Jewellery is mostly worn by women, especially during religious festivals (tsechus) and public gatherings.
Environmental conservation has been placed at the core of the nation's development strategy, the middle path.
By the 10th century, Bhutan's political development was heavily influenced by its religious history.
After the decline of the Yuan dynasty in the 14th century, these subsects vied with each other for supremacy in the political and religious landscape, eventually leading to the ascendancy of the Drukpa Lineage by the 16th century.
The literacy rate in Bhutan is 59.5 percent.
The University of Texas at El Paso in the United States has adopted Bhutanese architecture for its buildings on campus, as have the nearby Hilton Garden Inn and other buildings in the city of El Paso.
In July 1972, Jigme Singye Wangchuck ascended to the throne at the age of sixteen after the death of his father, Dorji Wangchuck.
The national dress for Bhutanese men is the ''gho'', a knee-length robe tied at the waist by a cloth belt known as the ''kera''.
Bhutan maintains formal diplomatic relations with several Asian and European nations, Canada, and Brazil.
On its part the Government of Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of the Government of India in regard to its external relations."
After a stay of nearly eight months Cacella wrote a long letter from the Chagri Monastery reporting on his travels.
The government of British India managed relations with the kingdom from the Bhutan House in Kalimpong.
Another popular sport is basketball.
Tshangla, the language of the Sharchop and the principal pre-Tibetan language of Bhutan, is spoken by a greater number of people.
To strengthen Bhutan's identity as an independent country, Bhutanese law requires all Bhutanese government employees to wear the national dress at work and all citizens to wear the national dress while visiting schools and other government offices though many citizens, particularly adults, choose to wear the customary dress as formal attire.
From his power base in central Bhutan, Ugyen Wangchuck defeated his political enemies and united the country following several civil wars and rebellions during 1882–85.
The modern ''rigsar'' is played on a mix of traditional instruments and electronic keyboards, and dates back to the early 1990s; it shows the influence of Indian popular music, a hybrid form of traditional and Western popular influences.
The industry employs 21,000 people and accounts for 1.8% of GDP.
The industrial sector is in a nascent stage, and though most production comes from cottage industry, larger industries are being encouraged and some industries such as cement, steel, and ferroalloy have been set up.
Much the same could be said of the Sharchops the dominant group, who traditionally follow the Nyingmapa rather than the official Drukpa Kagyu form of Tibetan Buddhism.
The ''Druk Gyalpo'' (''Dragon King'') is the head of state.
To the west, it is separated from Nepal by the Indian state of Sikkim; and further south it is separated from Bangladesh by the Indian states of Assam and West Bengal.
After Bhutan lost the war, the Treaty of Sinchula was signed between British India and Bhutan.
Soups and stews of meat and dried vegetables spiced with chilies and cheese are prepared.
This was mainly due to the commissioning of the gigantic Tala Hydroelectric Power Station.
The climate in Bhutan varies with elevation, from subtropical in the south to temperate in the highlands and polar-type climate, with year-round snow in the north.
'''Bhutan''' (;  ''''), officially the '''Kingdom of Bhutan''' ( ''''), is a sovereign state landlocked in the Eastern Himalayas in South Asia.
Approximately 269 square kilometers remain under discussion between China and Bhutan.
Though Bhutan's economy is one of the world's smallest, it has grown rapidly in recent years, by eight percent in 2005 and 14 percent in 2006.
Many such ''dzong'' still exist and are active centers of religion and district administration.
The country currently has no UNESCO World Heritage Sites, but it has eight declared tentative sites for UNESCO inclusion since 2012.
In response, Bhutan has implemented an insurance scheme, begun constructing solar powered alarm fences, watch towers, and search lights, and has provided fodder and salt licks outside human settlement areas to encourage animals to stay away.
The national language is Bhutanese (Dzongkha), one of 53 languages in the Tibetan language family.
Bhutan is also well known for mountain adventure trekking and hiking.
The northern region of Bhutan consists of an arc of Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows reaching up to glaciated mountain peaks with an extremely cold climate at the highest elevations.
Agriculture provides the main livelihood for 55.4 percent of the population.
In the temperate zone, grey langur, tiger, goral and serow are found in mixed conifer, broadleaf and pine forests.
The Ngalops primarily consist of Bhutanese living in the western part of the country.
In modern times, with improved transportation infrastructure, there has been much intermarriage between these groups.
The foothills descend into the subtropical Duars Plain.
Membership is voluntary and the minimum age for recruitment is 18.
The reigning monarch is Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck.
Paro Airport is the only international airport in Bhutan.
Bhutan's import partners include India (74.5 percent), Japan (7.4 percent) and Sweden (3.2 percent).
As part of the war reparations, the Duars were ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for a rent of Rs.
The huge market value of the ''Ophiocordyceps sinensis'' fungus crop collected from the wild has also resulted in unsustainable exploitation which is proving very difficult to regulate.
Bhutan's inflation rate was estimated at about three percent in 2003.
, the Tala Hydroelectric Power Station is its largest power plant, with an installed capacity of 1,020 MW.
In the early 20th century, Bhutan established relations with the British Empire.
Being a landlocked country, Bhutan has no navy.
Bhutan had trade relations with the Tibet region until 1960, when it closed its border with China after an influx of refugees.
In 2007, Bhutan had the second-fastest-growing economy in the world, with an annual economic growth rate of 22.4 percent.
In the early 1970s, intermarriage between the Lhotshampas Bhutanese and mainstream Bhutanese society was encouraged by the government, but after the late 1980s, the Bhutanese government forced about 108,000 Lhotshampas from their homes, seized their land, and expelled them to refugee camps.
This is a rare extant report of the Shabdrung.
Fearful of Chinese communist expansion, Bhutan signed a friendship treaty with the newly independent Republic of India in 1949.
A long-sleeved jacket-like garment, the ''toego'' is worn over the kira.
Bhutan has a number of progressive environmental policies that have caused the head of the UNFCCC to call it a "inspiration and role model for the world on how economies and different countries can address climate change while at the same time improving the life of the citizen."
Bhutan's border with China is largely not demarcated and thus disputed in some places.
Bhutan is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government.
Although uncommon, polygamy is accepted, often being a device to keep property in a contained family unit rather than dispersing it.
The modern distinction between the two did not begin until well into the Scottish explorer George Bogle's 1774 expedition — realizing the differences between the two regions, cultures and states, his final report to the East India Company formally proposed labelling the Druk Desi's kingdom as "Boutan" and the Panchen Lama's as "Tibet".
Bhutan's main export partner is India, accounting for 58.6 percent of its export goods.
Bhutan's capital and largest city is Thimphu.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly.
A member of the United Nations, Bhutan has diplomatic relations with 52 countries and the European Union; but does not maintain formal ties with the five permanent members of the UNSC.
The endangered wild water buffalo occurs in southern Bhutan, although in small numbers.
The sleeves of the wonju and the tego are folded together at the cuffs, inside out.
There is usually plenty of food and drink complete with singing and dancing.
As its border with Tibet is closed, trade between Bhutan and China is now almost non-existent.
Industries include cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic beverages and calcium carbide.
Bhutan maintains strong economic, strategic, and military relations with neighbouring India.
Bhutan has very warm relations with Japan, which provides significant development assistance.
Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities harmful to the national security and interest of the other."
Because the country gets most of its energy from hydrolelectric power, it does not emit significant greenhouse gases for energy production.
This had little real effect, given Bhutan's historical reticence, and also did not appear to affect Bhutan's traditional relations with Tibet.
Because of its largely unspoiled natural environment and cultural heritage, Bhutan has been referred to as ''The Last Shangri-la''.
The country's constitution mentions  environment standards in multiple sections.
Power is supplied to various states in India.
Other countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, have no formal diplomatic relations with Bhutan, but maintain informal contact through their respective embassies in New Delhi and Bhutanese honorary consulate in Washington DC.
An Indian intelligence officer has said that a Chinese delegation in Bhutan told the Bhutanese that they were "overreacting".
Main items imported include fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery, vehicles, fabrics and rice.
To defend the country against intermittent Tibetan forays, Namgyal built a network of impregnable ''dzongs'' or fortresses, and promulgated the Tsa Yig, a code of law that helped to bring local lords under centralized control.
Bhutan is the first country in the world to have banned the sale of tobacco under its Tobacco Act of 2010.
The Lateral Road is Bhutan's primary east–west corridor, connecting Phuentsholing in the southwest to Trashigang in the east.
It is not treated as a sector but rather as a set of concerns that must be mainstreamed in Bhutan's overall approach to development planning and to be buttressed by the force of law.
It was the first country to recognize Bangladesh's independence in 1971.
Each member of the team shoots two arrows per round.
There are 1,070 males to every 1,000 females.
In 1965, he set up a Royal Advisory Council, and in 1968 he formed a Cabinet.
In February 2007 the Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty was substantially revised.
In Bhutanese families, inheritance generally passes through the female rather than the male line.
The British government promptly recognized the new monarchy, and in 1910 Bhutan signed the Treaty of Punakha, a subsidiary alliance which gave the British control of Bhutan's foreign affairs and meant that Bhutan was treated as an Indian princely state.
It consists of the National Council, an upper house with 25 elected members; and the National Assembly with 47 elected lawmakers from political parties.
The alpine habitats of the great Himalayan range in the north are home to the snow leopard, blue sheep, marmot, Tibetan wolf, antelope, Himalayan musk deer and the takin, Bhutan's national animal.
The country has a potential to generate 30,000 MW of hydropower.
The government strictly enforced the law in Buddhist religious buildings, government offices, schools, official functions, and public ceremonies.
The country's landscape ranges from lush subtropical plains in the south to the sub-alpine Himalayan mountains in the north, where there are peaks in excess of .
Historians have theorized that the state of ''Lhomon'' (literally, "southern darkness"), or ''Monyul'' ("Dark Land", a reference to the Monpa, the aboriginal peoples of Bhutan) may have existed between 500 BC and AD 600.
Relations with Nepal remained strained due to Bhutanese refugees.
Social status and class determine the texture, colours, and decorations that embellish the garments.
The lowest point, at , is in the valley of Drangme Chhu, where the river crosses the border with India.
The Treaty of 1949, Article 2 states: "The Government of India undertakes to exercise no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan.
, Bhutan's per capita income was US$2,420.
Bhutan enjoyed strong cultural links with Tibet and was located on the Silk Road between China and the Indian subcontinent.
National carrier Druk Air operates flights between Paro Airport and airports in Jakar (Bumthang Dzongkhag) and Gelephu (Sarpang Dzongkhag) on a weekly basis.
Tibetan king Songtsän Gampo (reigned 627–649), a convert to Buddhism, who actually had extended the Tibetan Empire into Sikkim and Bhutan, ordered the construction of two Buddhist temples, at Bumthang in central Bhutan and at Kyichu (near Paro) in the Paro Valley.
In 1907, an epochal year for the country, Ugyen Wangchuck was unanimously chosen as the hereditary king of the country by an assembly of leading Buddhist monks, government officials, and heads of important families.
In December 2005, King Jigme Singye Wangchuck announced that he would abdicate the throne in his son's favour in 2008.
Cricket has also gained popularity in Bhutan, particularly since the introduction of television channels from India.
In 2002, Bhutan's national football team played Montserrat, in what was billed as The Other Final; the match took place on the same day Brazil played Germany in the World Cup final, but at the time Bhutan and Montserrat were the world's two lowest ranked teams.
During the 1870s, power struggles between the rival valleys of Paro and Tongsa led to civil war in Bhutan, eventually leading to the ascendancy of Ugyen Wangchuck, the ''ponlop'' (governor) of Tongsa.
In 2013 the government announced that Bhutan will become the first country in the world with 100 percent organic farming.
Nearly 56.3% of all Bhutanese citizens are involved with agriculture, forestry or conservation.
The match was held in Thimphu's Changlimithang National Stadium, and Bhutan won 4–0.
In 1953, King Jigme Dorji Wangchuck established the country's legislature – a 130-member National Assembly – to promote a more democratic form of governance.
Bhutan has a population of 770,000 people in 2015.
On 13 November 2005, Chinese soldiers crossed into the disputed territories between China and Bhutan, and began building roads and bridges.
Bhutan has numerous public holidays, most of which centre around traditional, seasonal, secular and religious festivals.
Most of the population lives in the central highlands.
It lies between latitudes 26°N and 29°N, and longitudes 88°E and 93°E.
Buddhism was first introduced to Bhutan in the 7th century AD.
25 percent of the budget expenditure, however, is financed by India's Ministry of External Affairs.
Per capita income (PPP) is around $7,641, ranked 144th.
Fungi form a key part of Bhutanese ecosystems, with mycorrhizal species providing forest trees with mineral nutrients necessary for growth, and with wood decay and litter decomposing species playing an important role in natural recycling.
In the schools English is the medium of instruction and Dzongkha is taught as the national language.
Characteristic of the region is a type of castle fortress known as the dzong.
Bhutan has a rich and unique cultural heritage that has largely remained intact because of its isolation from the rest of the world until the mid-20th century.
Pressures on the natural environment are already evident and will be fuelled by a complex array of forces.
The SAARC Development Fund is based in Thimphu.
Hydropower has been the primary focus for the country's five-year plans.
The United Kingdom has an honorary consul resident in Thimphu.
The script, here called ''Chhokey'' ("Dharma language"), is identical to classical Tibetan.
Yongphulla Airport was scheduled for completion in January 2010 but as of January 2015, the airport remains closed due to ongoing runway repair.
In May 2012, Thimphu TechPark launched in the capital and incubates start-ups via the Bhutan Innovation and Technology Centre (BITC).
More than 770 species of bird have been recorded in Bhutan.
In 1772, Cooch Behar appealed to the British East India Company which assisted them in ousting the Bhutanese and later in attacking Bhutan itself in 1774.
File:Himalayan Landscape.jpg|Sub-alpine Himalayan landscape
The larger minority languages are Dzala (11%), Limbu (10%), Kheng (8%), and Rai (8%).
More than 5,400 species of plants are found in Bhutan.
Judicial power is vested in the courts of Bhutan.
The highest mountain in Bhutan is the Gangkhar Puensum.
Mountain rivers, fed by either the melting snow or the monsoon rains, empty into the Brahmaputra River in India.
Bhutan borders China to the north and India to the south, east and west.
The first time a separate Kingdom of Bhutan did appear on a western map, it did so under its local name as "Broukpa".
Bhutan is the first nation in the world to ban smoking.
On 8 August 1949, a treaty similar to that of 1910, in which Britain had gained power over Bhutan's foreign relations, was signed with the newly independent India.
However, the peace was tenuous, and border skirmishes with the British were to continue for the next hundred years.
Bhutan has a median age of 24.8 years.
Bhutan has diplomatic relations with 52 countries and the European Union and has missions in India, Bangladesh, Thailand and Kuwait.
The chief justice is the administrative head of the judiciary.
The economy of Bhutan depends greatly on hydropower exports.
It was claimed they constituted 45% of the population in 1988 census, and include migrants from as early as the 1890s to as recent as the 1980s, who have fought a bitter war with Bhutan over rights to abode, language, and dress.
The first bilateral agreement between China and Bhutan was signed in 1998 and Bhutan has also set up honorary consulates in the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau.
The Bengal tiger, clouded leopard, hispid hare and the sloth bear live in the lush tropical lowland and hardwood forests in the south.
The current legal framework, in principle guarantees freedom of religion; proselytism, however, is forbidden by a royal government decision and by judicial interpretation of the Constitution.
Although Bhutan's natural heritage is still largely intact, the government has said that it cannot be taken for granted and that conservation of the natural environment must be considered one of the challenges that will need to be addressed in the years ahead.
Much of early Bhutanese history is unclear because most of the records were destroyed when fire ravaged the ancient capital, Punakha, in 1827.
A man is expected to make his own way in the world and often moves to his wife's home.
Imports, however, amount to €164 million, leading to a trade deficit.
It has received assistance from India, Austria and the Asian Development Bank in developing hydroelectric projects.
In response, Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang of the People's Republic of China has said that the border remains in dispute and that the two sides are continuing to work for a peaceful and cordial resolution of the dispute.
They met Ngawang Namgyal, presented him with firearms, gunpowder and a telescope, and offered him their services in the war against Tibet, but the Zhabdrung declined the offer.
The DPT won the elections by taking 45 out of 47 seats.
It has two UN missions, one in New York and one in Geneva.
Japan is also helping Bhutan cope with glacial floods through developing an early warning system.
It currently has net zero greenhouse gas emissions because the small amount of pollution it creates is absorbed by the forests that cover most of the country.
Jhomolhari Base Camp Trek, Snowman Trek, Masagang trek are some of the popular treks in Bhutan.
The northern Duars, which abut the Himalayan foothills, have rugged, sloping terrain and dry, porous soil with dense vegetation and abundant wildlife.
Bhutan signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 11 June 1992, and became a party to the convention on 25 August 1995.
After Ngawang Namgyal's death in 1651, his passing was kept secret for 54 years; after a period of consolidation, Bhutan lapsed into internal conflict.
During the chaos that followed, the Tibetans unsuccessfully attacked Bhutan in 1714.
The political system grants universal suffrage.
Most development projects, such as road construction, rely on Indian contract labour.
The music of Bhutan can generally be divided into traditional and modern varieties; traditional music comprises religious and folk genres, the latter including ''zhungdra'' and ''boedra''.
Hinduism is the second most dominant religion in Bhutan, being most prevalent in the southern regions.
Differently coloured scarves, known as ''rachu'' for women (red is the most common colour) and ''kabney'' for men, are important indicators of social standing, as Bhutan has traditionally been a feudal society.
The EIC's surveyor general James Rennell first anglicized the French name as Bootan and then popularized the distinction between it and greater Tibet.
Various subsects of Buddhism emerged that were patronized by the various Mongol warlords.
