The Torah ends with the death of Moses.
It has inspired men and women to acts of great service and courage, to fight for liberation and human development; and it has provided the ideological fuel for societies which have enslaved their fellow human beings and reduced them to abject poverty.
File:Bizzell Bible Collection.jpg |Shelves of the Bizzell Bible Collection at Bizzell Memorial Library
Together they comprise most of the ancient manuscripts.
Some of these deuterocanonical books (e.g.
The Old Testament has always been central to the life of the Christian church.
* Psalms of Solomon
Biblical criticism refers to the investigation of the Bible as a text, and addresses questions such as authorship, dates of composition, and authorial intention.
Professor John K. Riches, Professor of Divinity and Biblical Criticism at the University of Glasgow, in an Oxford University Press introduction to the Bible, says that "the biblical texts themselves are the result of a creative dialogue between ancient traditions and different communities through the ages", and "the biblical texts were produced over a period in which the living conditions of the writers – political, cultural, economic, and ecological – varied enormously".
The Bible was later translated into Latin and other languages.
Some include 2 Esdras.
There is also 4 Maccabees which is only accepted as canonical in the Georgian Church, but was included by St. Jerome in an appendix to the Vulgate, and is an appendix to the Greek Orthodox Bible, and it is therefore sometimes included in collections of the Apocrypha.
Since Late Antiquity, once attributed to a hypothetical late 1st-century Council of Jamnia, mainstream Rabbinic Judaism rejected the Septuagint as valid Jewish scriptural texts.
A Christian Bible is a set of books that a Christian denomination regards as divinely inspired and thus constituting scripture.
The Old Testament canon entered into Christian use in the Greek Septuagint translations and original books, and their differing lists of texts.
However, the book of Sirach, is now known to have existed in a Hebrew version, since ancient Hebrew manuscripts of it were rediscovered in modern times.
Most Christian denominations and traditions may accept the Books of Enoch as having some historical or theological interest or significance.
The Septuagint is the basis for the Old Latin, Slavonic, Syriac, Old Armenian, Old Georgian and Coptic versions of the Christian Old Testament.
The New Testament presupposes the inspiration of the Old Testament.
* The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children ''verses 1–68'' (Book of Daniel, chapter 3, verses 24–90)
In Greek-speaking areas, this happened near the end of the 2nd century, and in Latin-speaking areas (at least in North Africa), it occurred in the middle of the 3rd century.
The Nevi'im tell the story of the rise of the Hebrew monarchy and its division into two kingdoms, ancient Israel and Judah, focusing on conflicts between the Israelites and other nations, and conflicts among Israelites, specifically, struggles between believers in "the  God" and believers in foreign gods, and the criticism of unethical and unjust behaviour of Israelite elites and rulers; in which prophets played a crucial and leading role.
The Protestant Old Testament of today has a 39-book canon—the number of books (though not the content) varies from the Jewish Tanakh only because of a different method of division—while the Roman Catholic Church recognizes 46 books (51 books with some books combined into 46 books) as the canonical Old Testament.
John Riches states that:
The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type (generally minimalist), the Byzantine text-type (generally maximalist), and the Western text-type (occasionally wild).
Among Christian denominations there is some disagreement about the contents of the canon, primarily in the Apocrypha, a list of works that are regarded with varying levels of respect.
File:Kennicott Bible 305r.l.jpg|Jonah being swallowed by the fish, Kennicott Bible, 1476
** Gospel According to Matthew
For example, Rastafaris view the Bible as essential to their religion and Unitarian Universalists view it as "one of many important religious texts".
* Second Epistle to the Corinthians
Most evangelical biblical scholars associate inspiration with only the original text; for example some American Protestants adhere to the 1978 Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy which asserted that inspiration applied only to the autographic text of Scripture.
** Gospel According to Luke
Many works that are "apocryphal" are otherwise considered genuine.
* Epistle to the Galatians
And in 1546, at the Council of Trent, Jerome's Vulgate translation was declared by the Roman Catholic Church to be the only authentic and official Bible in the Latin Church.
Both Catholics and Protestants (as well as Greek Orthodox) have the same 27-book New Testament Canon.
* Third Epistle of John
''Ketuvim'' or ''Kəṯûḇîm'' (in  "writings") is the third and final section of the Tanakh.
Therefore, editions of the Bible intended for use in the Anglican Church include the Deuterocanonical books accepted by the Catholic Church, plus 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, which were in the Vulgate appendix.
First, some mistranslations were claimed.
The oldest extant copy of a complete Bible is an early 4th-century parchment book preserved in the Vatican Library, and known as the Codex Vaticanus.
The term "Hebrew Scriptures" is often used as being synonymous with the Protestant Old Testament, since the surviving scriptures in Hebrew include only those books, while Catholics and Orthodox include additional texts that have not survived in Hebrew.
However, the beginning and end of the book of Job are in the normal prose system.
* Susanna (Book of Daniel, chapter 13)
The New Testament books are ordered differently in the Catholic/Orthodox/Protestant tradition, the Slavonic tradition, the Syriac tradition and the Ethiopian tradition.
* Epistle to the Ephesians
* First Epistle of Peter
* Greek Additions to Esther (Book of Esther, chapters 10:4 – 12:6)
These early Christian Greek writings consist of narratives, letters, and apocalyptic writings.
With estimated total sales of over 5 billion copies, the Bible is widely considered to be the best-selling book of all time.
When later scribes were copying the copy, they were sometimes uncertain if a note was intended to be included as part of the text.
* The Letter of Baruch
The original texts of the Tanakh were mainly in Hebrew, with some portions in Aramaic.
These are the latest books collected and designated as "authoritative" in the Jewish canon even though they were not complete until the 2nd century CE.
It also refers to books of the New Testament canon whose authorship is misrepresented.
Shortly afterwards the philosopher Baruch Spinoza published a unified critical analysis, arguing that the problematic passages were not isolated cases that could be explained away one by one, but pervasive throughout the five books, concluding that it was "clearer than the sun at noon that the Pentateuch was not written by Moses .
* Epistle to Philemon
It is used to help determine the lifestyle and practices of people living in biblical times.
Various texts of the Bible mention divine agency in relation to its writings.
Evidence suggests, however, that the people of Israel were adding what would become the Ketuvim to their holy literature shortly after the canonization of the prophets.
In addition to those, the Greek and Russian Orthodox Churches recognize the following:
The Apocrypha are included under a separate heading in the King James Version of the Bible, the basis for the Revised Standard Version.
* Slavonic Book of Enoch (2 Enoch)
The same is true of some Jewish sects.
In Tiberian Masoretic codices, including the Aleppo Codex and the Leningrad Codex, and often in old Spanish manuscripts as well, the order is Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Esther, Daniel, Ezra.
400, Jerome produced a definitive Latin edition of the Bible (see Vulgate), the canon of which, at the insistence of the Pope, was in accord with the earlier Synods.
This means that there was little time for oral traditions to assume fixed form.
Groups within Christianity include differing books as part of their sacred writings, most prominent among which are the biblical apocrypha or deuterocanonical books.
These are ancient Jewish religious works, traditionally ascribed to the prophet Enoch, the great-grandfather of the patriarch Noah.
One broad division includes biblical maximalism which generally takes the view that most of the Old Testament or Hebrew Bible is based on history although it is presented through the religious viewpoint of its time.
* Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah
Finally, the rabbis claimed a divine authority for the Hebrew language, in contrast to Aramaic or Greek – even though these languages were the ''lingua franca'' of Jews during this period (and Aramaic would eventually be given a holy language status comparable to Hebrew).
* Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (2 Baruch)
* Hebrew Book of Enoch (3 Enoch) (also known as "The Revelation of Metatron" or "The Book of Rabbi Ishmael the High Priest")
In addition, some newer books were included in the Septuagint, among these are the Maccabees and the Wisdom of Sirach.
Jewish antiquity attests to belief in sacred texts, and a similar belief emerges in the earliest of Christian writings.
When ancient scribes copied earlier books, they sometimes wrote notes on the margins of the page (''marginal glosses'') to correct their text—especially if a scribe accidentally omitted a word or line—and to comment about the text.
The Ketuvim are believed to have been written under the Ruach HaKodesh (the Holy Spirit) but with one level less authority than that of prophecy.
In addition to the Septuagint, Christianity subsequently added various writings that would become the New Testament.
The "Old Testament" Pseudepigraphal works include the following:
* First Epistle to Timothy
As a general rule, one can say that the Orthodox Churches generally follow the Septuagint in including more books in their Old Testaments than are in the Jewish canon.
Third, the rabbis wanted to distinguish their tradition from the newly emerging tradition of Christianity.
the Wisdom of Solomon, and the second book of Maccabees) were not translated, but composed directly in Greek.
* Second Epistle of John
* First Epistle to the Thessalonians
* Second Epistle to Timothy
Timothy H. Lim, a professor of Hebrew Bible and Second Temple Judaism at the University of Edinburgh, says that the Old Testament is "a collection of authoritative texts of apparently divine origin that went through a human process of writing and editing."
The first eleven chapters of Genesis provide accounts of the creation (or ordering) of the world and the history of God's early relationship with humanity.
* Epistle to the Romans
Tradition states that there are 613 commandments (''taryag mitzvot'').
The remaining four books of the Torah tell the story of Moses, who lived hundreds of years after the patriarchs.
* the struggle of the people to possess the land (in the Book of Judges),
* The Apocalypse of Baruch
Second, the Hebrew source texts used for the Septuagint differed from the Masoretic tradition of Hebrew texts, which was chosen as canonical by the Jewish rabbis.
This translation became known as the Latin Vulgate Bible, in the fourth century CE.
It is not the same as criticism of the Bible, which is an assertion against the Bible being a source of information or ethical guidance, or observations that the Bible may have translation errors.
** Gospel According to Mark
Apocalyptic literature, also called Prophetical
Jews and Christians consider the books of the Bible to be a product of divine inspiration or an authoritative record of the relationship between God and humans.
The Torah always maintained its pre-eminence as the basis of the canon but the collection of prophetic writings, based on the ''Nevi'im'', had various hagiographical works incorporated into it.
There are a wide range of interpretations in the field of biblical archaeology.
But historically  ''copies'' exist of those original autographs, transmitted and preserved in a number of manuscript traditions.
Wright says "Jesus himself was profoundly shaped by the scriptures."
In most ancient copies of the Bible which contain the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, the Book of Daniel is not the original Septuagint version, but instead is a copy of Theodotion's translation from the Hebrew, which more closely resembles the Masoretic Text.
As early as 132 BCE references suggest that the Ketuvim was starting to take shape, although it lacked a formal title.
and some other books.
The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches use most of the books of the Septuagint, while Protestant churches usually do not.
References in the four Gospels as well as other books of the New Testament indicate that many of these texts were both commonly known and counted as having some degree of religious authority early in the 1st century CE.
The biblical account of the 8th to 7th centuries BCE is widely, but not universally, accepted as historical, while the verdict on the earliest period of the United Monarchy (10th century BCE) and the historicity of David is unclear.
Many scholars believe that the limits of the Ketuvim as canonized scripture were determined by the Council of Jamnia c. 90 CE.
Most Protestants term these books as apocrypha.
He commissioned Saint Jerome to produce a reliable and consistent text by translating the original Greek and Hebrew texts into Latin.
These three books are also the only ones in Tanakh with a special system of cantillation notes that are designed to emphasize parallel stichs within verses.
It has estimated annual sales of 100 million copies, and has been a major influence on literature and history, especially in the West where the Gutenberg Bible was the first mass-printed book.
The New Testament is a collection of 27 books of 4 different genres of Christian literature (Gospels, one account of the Acts of the Apostles, Epistles and an Apocalypse).
There exist also churches that reject some of the books that Roman Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants accept.
Among adherents of Biblical literalism, a minority, such as followers of the King-James-Only Movement, extend the claim of inerrancy only to a particular translation.
In the 4th century a series of synods produced a list of texts equal to the 39, 46(51),54, or 57 book canon of the Old Testament and to the 27-book canon of the New Testament that would be subsequently used to today, most notably the Synod of Hippo in 393 CE.
Biblical archaeology is the archaeology that relates to and sheds light upon the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures (or "New Testament").
Even in this version there are words which are traditionally read differently from written, because the oral tradition is considered more fundamental than the written one, and presumably mistakes had been made in copying the text over the generations.
* Epistle to the Hebrews
The historicity of the biblical account of the history of ancient Israel and Judah of the 10th to 7th centuries BCE is disputed in scholarship.
The Bibles of the Eastern Churches vary considerably: the Ethiopic Orthodox canon includes 81 books and contains many apocalyptic texts, such as were found at Qumran and subsequently excluded from the Jewish canon.
They contain narratives that begin immediately after the death of Moses with the divine appointment of Joshua as his successor, who then leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land, and end with the release from imprisonment of the last king of Judah.
In Christian Bibles, the New Testament Gospels were derived from oral traditions in the second half of the first century CE.
Over time, different regions evolved different versions, each with its own assemblage of omissions and additions.
The order of the other books is somewhat different from other groups', as well.
The Roman Catholic Church recognizes:
* First Epistle to the Corinthians
The Septuagint version of some Biblical books, like Daniel and Esther, are longer than those in the Jewish canon.
Scholars have attempted to reconstruct something of the history of the oral traditions behind the Gospels, but the results have not been too encouraging.
With the benefit of hindsight it can be said that this process effectively set the New Testament canon, although there are examples of other canonical lists in use after this time.
He leads the Children of Israel from slavery in Ancient Egypt to the renewal of their covenant with God at Mount Sinai and their wanderings in the desert until a new generation was ready to enter the land of Canaan.
These commandments provide the basis for Jewish religious law.
Even among those scholars who adhere to biblical minimalism, the Bible is a historical document containing first-hand information on the Hellenistic and Roman eras, and there is universal scholarly consensus that the events of the 6th century BCE Babylonian captivity have a basis in history.
* Bel and the Dragon (Book of Daniel, chapter 14)
Fundamentalist Christians are associated with the doctrine of biblical literalism, where the Bible is not only inerrant, but the meaning of the text is clear to the average reader.
The Torah contains the commandments of God, revealed at Mount Sinai (although there is some debate among traditional scholars as to whether these were all written down at one time, or over a period of time during the 40 years of the wanderings in the desert, while several modern Jewish movements reject the idea of a literal revelation, and critical scholars believe that many of these laws developed later in Jewish history).
* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs
History does not record the reason for this, and St. Jerome reports, in the preface to the Vulgate version of Daniel, "This thing 'just' happened."
The New Testament writers assumed the inspiration of the Old Testament, probably earliest stated in , "All scripture is given by inspiration of God".
* First Epistle of John
Although the Early Church primarily used the Septuagint or the Targums among Aramaic speakers, the apostles did not leave a defined set of new scriptures; instead the canon of the New Testament developed over time.
Members of other religions may also seek inspiration from the Bible.
It was based on the Septuagint, and thus included books not in the Hebrew Bible.
The original autographs, that is, the original Greek writings and manuscripts written by the original authors of the New Testament, have not survived.
* Ethiopic Book of Enoch (1 Enoch)
In the 17th century Thomas Hobbes collected the current evidence to conclude outright that Moses could not have written the bulk of the Torah.
Russian and Georgian Orthodox Churches include:
Within these broad beliefs many schools of hermeneutics operate.
The biblical account of events of the Exodus from Egypt in the Torah, and the migration to the Promised Land and the period of Judges are not considered historical in scholarship.
The three books of Meqabyan are not to be confused with the books of Maccabees.
Some modern Western translations since the 14th century make use of the Septuagint to clarify passages in the Masoretic Text, where the Septuagint may preserve a variant reading of the Hebrew text.
The Septuagint version was discarded in favour of Theodotion's version in the 2nd to 3rd centuries CE.
* Greek Apocalypse of Baruch (3 Baruch)
The books which make up the Christian Old Testament differ between the Catholic (see Catholic Bible), Orthodox, and Protestant (see Protestant Bible) churches, with the Protestant movement accepting only those books contained in the Hebrew Bible, while Catholics and Orthodox have wider canons.
It has been proposed, and is thought highly likely by scholars, that "Esdras B" – the canonical Ezra–Nehemiah – is Theodotion's version of this material, and "Esdras A" is the version which was previously in the Septuagint on its own.
There have been some minor variations, additions or omissions, in some of the texts.
* Letter of Aristeas  (Letter to Philocrates regarding the translating of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek)
General epistles, also called catholic epistles
The Ethiopian Biblical canon includes:
The five relatively short books of Song of Songs, Book of Ruth, the Book of Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and Book of Esther are collectively known as the ''Hamesh Megillot'' (Five Megillot).
* Revelation, or the Apocalypse
Number of languages with a translation of the New Testament
* Epistle to the Colossians
They are not part of the biblical canon used by Jews, apart from Beta Israel.
Archaeological evidence providing information on this period, such as the Tel Dan Stele, can potentially be decisive.
In their book ''A General Introduction to the Bible'', Norman Geisler and William Nix write: "The process of inspiration is a mystery of the providence of God, but the result of this process is a verbal, plenary, inerrant, and authoritative record."
* Joshua's conquest of the land of Canaan (in the Book of Joshua),
The oldest copy of the Tanakh in Hebrew and Aramaic dates to the 10th century CE.
The term "New Testament" came into use in the second century during a controversy among Christians over whether or not the Hebrew Bible should be included with the Christian writings as sacred scripture.
He adds that the earliest Christians also searched those same Hebrew scriptures in their effort to understand the earthly life of Jesus.
The biblical scholar F.F.
A number of books which are part of the Peshitta or Greek Septuagint but are not found in the Hebrew (Rabbinic) Bible (i.e., among the protocanonical books) are often referred to as deuterocanonical books by Roman Catholics referring to a later secondary (i.e., deutero) canon, that canon as fixed definitively by the Council of Trent 1545–1563.
Approximate number of languages spoken in the world today
Christian use of the term can be traced to c. 223 CE.
The Anglican Church also recognizes a longer canon.
In addition to the authoritative Masoretic Text, Jews still refer to the Septuagint, the translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, and the Targum Onkelos, an Aramaic version of the Bible.
The name Tanakh (Hebrew: ) reflects the threefold division of the Hebrew Scriptures, Torah ("Teaching"), Nevi'im ("Prophets") and Ketuvim ("Writings").
* Epistle to the Philippians
There arose in some Protestant biblical scholarship an extended use of the term ''pseudepigrapha'' for works that appeared as though they ought to be part of the biblical canon, because of the authorship ascribed to them, but which stood outside both the biblical canons recognized by Protestants and Catholics.
Since the Protestant Reformation, Bible translations for many languages have been made.
* Second Epistle of Peter
The Septuagint was generally abandoned in favour of the 10th-century Masoretic Text as the basis for translations of the Old Testament into Western languages.
In Eastern Christianity, translations based on the Septuagint still prevail.
Roman Catholics, Anglicans and Eastern Orthodox Christians stress the harmony and importance of the Bible and sacred tradition, while Protestant churches focus on the idea of ''sola scriptura'', or scripture alone.
In recent times, however, the authority of the New Testament books has been challenged.
The older sections (mainly in the Book of the Watchers) are estimated to date from about 300&nbsp;BC, and the latest part (Book of Parables) probably was composed at the end of the 1st century&nbsp;BCE.
The translation of the Bible into Latin marks the beginning of a parting of the ways between Western Latin-speaking Christianity and Eastern Christianity, which spoke Greek, Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and other languages.
Treating Samuel and Kings as single books, they cover:
Attitudes towards the Bible also vary amongst Christian groups.
Somewhat different lists of accepted works continued to develop in antiquity.
The Eastern Orthodox Churches recognize 3 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Prayer of Manasseh and Psalm 151 in addition to the Catholic canon.
Most Christians consider the New Testament to be an infallible source of doctrine, while others go even farther to affirm that it is also inerrant, or completely correct in historical and factual details as well as theologically.
The Anglican Church uses some of the Apocryphal books liturgically.
* Sibylline Oracles
The '''Bible''' (from Koine Greek τὰ βιβλία, ''tà biblía'', "the books") is a collection of sacred texts in Judaism and Christianity.
"little papyrus books") was "an expression Hellenistic Jews used to describe their sacred books (the Septuagint).
* Second Epistle to the Thessalonians
