Rancho Milpitas was a  land grant given in 1838 by governor Juan Alvarado to Ygnacio Pastor.
Big Sur is not an incorporated town, but a region on the Central Coast of California.
In 2010, the company's president stated that he believes that at some point the company will be allowed to extract the limestone in a way that doesn't harm the environment.
Federal funds were appropriated and in 1921 voters approved additional state funds.
The Santa Lucia Mountains rise suddenly from the Pacific Ocean, creating a steep coastline.
It stipulated that "a hiking, bicycle, and equestrian trails system be established along or near the coast" and that "ideally the trails system should be continuous and located near the shoreline."
As the "longest and most scenic stretch of undeveloped coastline in the continental United States,"  it has been described it as a "national treasure that demands extraordinary procedures to protect it from development," and "one of the most beautiful coastlines anywhere in the world, an isolated stretch of road, mythic in reputation."
The region does not have specific boundaries, but is generally considered to include the  segment of California State Route 1 from Carmel River south to San Carpoforo Creek near San Simeon and the entire Santa Lucia range between the rivers.
The California condor (''Gymnogyps californianus'') is a critically endangered species that was near extinction when the remaining wild birds were captured.
One was set up by Little Sur River, one at Kirk Creek and a third was later established in the south at Anderson Creek.
Scientists estimate that about 90 in.
After 18 years of construction,  aided by New Deal funds during the Great Depression, the paved two-lane road was completed and opened on June 17, 1937.
Most lodging and restaurants are clustered in the Big Sur River valley, where Highway 1 leaves the coast for a few miles and winds into a redwood forest, protected from the chill ocean breezes and summer fog.
Many of the developed parcels more than one residence or commercial building on them.
(39&nbsp;cm) at Pfeiffer–Big Sur State Park, compared to 85 in.
Others include the vast inland areas comprising the Los Padres National Forest, Ventana Wilderness, and Silver Peak Wilderness, about  inland to the eastern foothills of the Santa Lucia Mountains.
There are no urban areas, although three small clusters of gas stations, restaurants, and motels are often marked on maps as "towns": Posts in the Big Sur River valley, Lucia, near Limekiln State Park, and Gorda, on the southern coast.
The Big Sur coastal land use plan states:
Fire plays a key role in the ecology of the upper slopes of the Big Sur region's mountains where chaparral dominates the landscape.
South of Big Sur Valley, the limit is set to one unit per (, and in the far south of the region, only one unit per  are allowed.
The land is mostly steep, rocky, semi-arid except for the narrow canyons, and inaccessible.
These wealthy homeowners, however, are usually only part-time residents of Big Sur.
Orson Welles and his wife at the time, Rita Hayworth, bought a Big Sur cabin on impulse during a trip down the coast in 1944.
The road was declared the first State Scenic Highway in 1965, and in 1966 the first lady, Lady Bird Johnson, led the official designation ceremony at Bixby Creek Bridge.
In tourist areas, the limit is one living unit per acre.
The wettest calendar year on record was 1983, when it rained .
The gauge frequently receives more rain than any gauge in the San Francisco Bay Area.
They agreed to allow rentals as long as the owners paid the Transient Occupancy Tax.
He began harvesting tanoak bark from the canyon, a lucrative source of income at the time.
West of Highway 1, density is limited to one unit per , and east of the highway to one unit per .
Although some Big Sur residents catered to adventurous travelers in the early twentieth century, the modern tourist economy began when Highway 1 opened the region to automobiles, and only took off after World War II-era gasoline rationing ended in the mid-1940s.
By 1880, the James Brown Cattle Company owned and operated Rancho Milpitas and neighboring Rancho Los Ojitos.
This was often shortened to ''el sur grande''.
The road necessitated construction of 33 bridges, the largest of which was the Bixby Creek Bridge.
The state first approved building Route 56, or the Carmel – San Simeon Highway, to connect Big Sur to the rest of California in 1919.
These prevailing summer winds from the northwest drive the ocean surface water slightly offshore (through the Ekman effect) which generates an upwelling of colder sub surface water.
The waterfall is located near the ruins of a grand stone cliffside house built in 1940 by Lathrop and Hélène Hooper Brown that was the region's first electrified home.
The Henry Miller Memorial Library is a nonprofit bookstore and arts center that opened in 1981 as a tribute to the legendary writer.
The interior region is uninhabited, while the coast remains relatively isolated and sparsely populated with about 1,000 year-round residents and relatively few visitor accommodations.
''The Sandpiper'' was one of the few major studio motion pictures filmed in Big Sur, and perhaps the only one to identify real Big Sur locales by name as part of the plot.
About 60% of the coastal region is owned by a government or private agency which does not allow any development.
"Big Sur" sometimes refers to the concentration of buildings and services near Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park, known locally as the Big Sur Village.
In 2007, the Coastal Conservancy began to develop a master plan for the  stretch of coast through Big Sur from near Ragged Point in San Luis Obispo County to the Carmel River.
Pfieffer Beach is accessible by driving  south of the entrance to Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park on Highway 1, and turning west on the unmarked Sycamore Canyon Road.
One of the largest private land holdings along the coast is El Sur Ranch.
The second European settlers were the Pfeiffer family from France.
In the lower elevations and canyons, the California Redwood is often found.
In 1990, there were about 800 housing units in Big Sur, about 600 of which were single family dwellings.
It was Anglicized by English-speaking settlers as Big Sur.
During the winter of 1982–1983, it rained more than 178 in.
The region is protected by the Big Sur Local Coastal Program which preserves the region as "open space, a small residential community, and agricultural ranching."
Born John Rogers Cooper, he was a Yankee born in the British Channel Islands who arrived in Monterey in 1823.
The area's increasing popularity and incredible beauty soon brought the attention of Hollywood.
This became the first festival.
From 1964 to 1971, the Big Sur Folk Festival featured a line up of emerging and established artists including Joan Baez, Joni Mitchell, Judy Collins, The Beach Boys, Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, Country Joe McDonald, John Sebastian, Arlo Guthrie, Dorothy Morrison & the Edwin Hawkins Singers, Julie Payne, and Richard and Mimi Farina.
Jack Kerouac spent a few days in Big Sur in early 1960 at fellow poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti's cabin in the woods, and wrote a novel, ''Big Sur'', based on his experience there.
Big Sur also became home to centers of study and contemplation—a Catholic monastery, the New Camaldoli Hermitage in 1958, the Esalen Institute.
In established communities like Palo Colorado and the Big Sur Valley, only one living unit per  is permitted.
In 1769, an expedition led by Gaspar de Portolá became the first Europeans known to have explored Big Sur when they entered the area in the south near San Carpoforo Canyon.
A 2010 study compared post-wildfire survival and regeneration of redwood and associated species.
The acquisition of lands by the Big Sur Land Trust and others has created a  long wildland corridor that begins at the Carmel River and extends southward to the Hearst Ranch in San Luis Obispo County.
The population was limited as the Santa Lucia Mountains made the area relatively inaccessible and long-term habitation a challenge.
In 1940, the state contracted for "the largest installation of guard rail ever placed on a California state highway", calling for  of steel guard rail and 3,649 guide posts along  of the road.
Big Sur typically enjoys a mild climate year-round, with a sunny, dry summer and fall, and a cool, wet winter.
In 1839, Alvarado granted Rancho San Jose y Sur Chiquito, also about two square leagues of land totalling , to Marcelino Escobar, a prominent official of Monterey.
About half of the residents of Big Sur rent their residences.
The road was initially called the Carmel-San Simeon Highway, but was better known as the Roosevelt Highway, honoring the current President (Franklin Delano Roosevelt).
The majority of the interior region is part of the Los Padres National Forest, the Ventana Wilderness, Silver Peak Wilderness, or Fort Hunter Liggett.
In the rain shadow, the forests disappear and the vegetation becomes open oak woodland, then transitions into the more familiar fire-tolerant California chaparral scrub.
Six more concrete arch bridges were built between Point Sur and Carmel, and all were listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1986.
When the Spanish colonized the region beginning in 1770 and established the California missions, they baptized and forced the native population to labor at the missions.
It is popular with hikers and photographers for its views of nearby bluffs.
When Granite Rock prevailed in the lower courts, the Coastal Commission appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which in a historic 5-4 decision, found in favor of the commission.
In 1940, in anticipation of the increased forces required in World War II, the U.S. War Department purchased the land from Hearst to create a troop training facility known as the Hunter Liggett Military Reservation.
In modern history, fires are known to have burned the Big Sur area multiple times.
The highway winds along the western flank of the mountains mostly within sight of the Pacific Ocean, varying from near sea level up to a thousand-foot sheer drop to the water.
The views are one reason that Big Sur was ranked second among all United States destinations in TripAdvisor's 2008 Travelers' Choice Destination Awards.
'''Big Sur''', described as the "greatest meeting of land and water in the world," is an undeveloped, lightly populated, unincorporated region on California's Central Coast where the Santa Lucia Mountains rise abruptly from the Pacific Ocean.
The driest year on record is 1990, with only .
The southern portion is known as the "Coast Ridge Road."
The stunning views make Big Sur a popular tourist destination.
The Encinale family of 16 members and the Quintana family with three members lived in the vicinity of The Indians (now known as Santa Lucia Memorial Park west of Ft.
Besides sightseeing from the highway, Big Sur offers hiking, mountain climbing, and other outdoor activities.
It is a gathering place for locals and has become the focal point of individuals with a literary mind,  a cultural center devoted to Miller's life and work, and a popular attraction for tourists.
Sunday afternoon they invited all the neighbors for a free, open performance.
He said, "The regulatory hassle is unbelievable.
Some geologists believe that the rock underlying the mountains was originally located  to the south, near the southern end of the present-day Sierra Nevada Mountains, and may have been buried as deep as  beneath the surface.
It is sometimes confused with the beach at Julia Pfeiffer Burns State Park to the south.
This is one of the few places on Earth where redwoods grow in close proximity to cacti.
The local post office was designated as the Big Sur Post Office in 1915, cementing the name in place.
Approved in 1981, it is one of the most restrictive local use programs in the state, and is widely regarded as one of the most restrictive documents of its kind anywhere.
The upstream river canyon is characteristic of the Ventana Wilderness region: steep-sided, sharp-crested ridges separating valleys.
Many of these lands are distant from the coast, and the coastal trail plan calls for placing the trail, "Wherever feasible, ...within sight, sound, or at least the scent of the sea.
Some redwood trees were logged in the early 20th century but many inaccessible locations were never logged, and in 2008 scientist J. Michael Fay published a map of the old growth redwoods based on his transect of the entire redwood range.
The Palo Colorado-San Gregorio fault transitions from shore to sea at Doud Creek, about  south of Point Lobos.
Public Transportation is available to and from Monterey on Monterey-Salinas Transit.
More than 70 percent of the rain falls from December through March.
Coast residents east of Highway 1 were required to evacuate for short periods, and Highway 1 was shut down at intervals over several days to allow firefighters to conduct backfire operations.
During the 1890s, Dr. John L. D. Roberts, a physician and land speculator who had founded Seaside, California and resided on the Monterey Peninsula, was summoned on April 21, 1894 to assist treating survivors of the wreck of the ''S.S.
Gold mining in the Los Burros District was a focal point of mining activity during the 1880s.
The route was incorporated into the state highway system and redesignated as Highway 1 in 1939.
Numerous fauna are found in the Big Sur region.
; Basin Complex Fire
The water vapor in the air contacting this cold water condenses into fog.
Residential areas include Otter Cove, Garrapata Ridge and the adjacent Rocky Point, Garrapata and Palo Colorado Canyons, Bixby Canyon, Pfeiffer Ridge and Sycamore Canyon, Coastlands, Partington Ridge, Burns Creek, Buck Creek to Lime Creek, Plaskett Ridge, and Redwood Gulch.
In 2015, Monterey County began considering how to deal with the issue of short term rentals brought on by services such as Airbnb.
These estimates exclude the sizeable number of residents who live in Palo Colorado Canyon, who are included in the Carmel Valley Zip Code Tabulation Area.
The first Europeans to see Big Sur were Spanish mariners led by Juan Cabrillo in 1542, who sailed up the coast without landing.
Snowfall is rare on the coast, but is common in the winter months on the higher ridges of the Santa Lucia Mountains.
The case secured to local government the right to use its police power for aesthetic purposes.
The native people hollowed mortar holes into large exposed rocks or boulders which they used to grind the acorns into flour.
The region does not have formal boundaries, but many descriptions of the area refer to the  of coastline from the Carmel River in Monterey County south to the San Carpoforo Creek in San Luis Obispo County.
There are fewer than 300 hotel rooms on the entire  stretch of Highway 1 between San Simeon and Carmel.
In January 1995 it rained a record .
It allows limited amounts of additional commercial development, but only in four existing areas.
In 1885, 1894, and 1898 fires burned without any effort by the few local residents to put them out, except to save their buildings.
Short term rentals also remove scarce residences from the rental market and are likely to drive up demand and the cost of housing.
Inmates were paid 35 cents per day and had their prison sentences reduced in return.
The fire, which burned over , represented the largest of many lightening-caused wildfires that had broken out throughout California during the same period.
Because most of the upper reaches of the Big Sur River watershed are within the Los Padres National Forest and the Ventana Wilderness, much of the river is in pristine condition.
Among other notable mentions of Big Sur in music are Charles Lloyd' album Notes from Big Sur, Buckethead's song "Big Sur Moon" on the album ''Colma'', the song "Big Sur" by Irish indie band The Thrills from their album ''So Much for the City'', Jason Aldean's "Texas Was You," and Siskiyou's song "Big Sur," the 7-minute-long penultimate track from their debut self-titled album.
The first to file a land patent was Micheal Pfeiffer on January 20, 1883, who claimed two sections of land he already resided on near and immediately north of the mouth of Sycamore Canyon.
Beginning in the 1920s, his poetry introduced the romantic idea of Big Sur's wild, untamed spaces to a national audience, which encouraged many of the later visitors.
The wide sandy expanse with views of a scenic arch rock offshore is a favorite among local residents.
After World War II and gas rationing ended, tourism and travel boomed along the coast.
The trail south of Bixby Creek enters Brazil Ranch, which requires permission to enter.
A U.S. fisheries service report estimates that the number of trout in the entire south-central coast area—including the Pajaro River, Salinas River, Carmel River, Big Sur River, and Little Sur River—have dwindled from about 4,750 fish in 1965 to about 800 in 2005.
Along with much of the central and northern California coast, Big Sur frequently has dense fog in summer.
The California Coastal Act of 1976 requires local jurisdictions to identify an alignment for the California Coastal Trail in their Local Coastal Programs.
The Big Sur Marathon is an annual marathon that begins south of Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park and ends at the Crossroads Shopping Center in Carmel, California.
The record maximum temperature was  on June 20, 2008, and the record low was , recorded on December 21, 1998, and January 13, 2007.
In the south, Sand Dollar Beach is the longest stretch of beach in Big Sur.
Author and Big Sur historian Jeff Norman considered Big Sur to extend inland to include the watersheds that drain into the Pacific Ocean.
The racial makeup of this area was 87.6% White, 1.1% African American, 1.3% Native American, 2.4% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 5.5% from other races, and 3.0% from two or more races.
When Hearst Castle opened in 1958, a huge number of tourists also flowed through Big Sur.
In Monterey County, the trail is being developed in two sections: the Big Sur Trail and the Monterey Bay Sanctuary Trail.
An adaptation of ''The Stranger in Big Sur'' by Lillian Bos Ross, the film portrayed the 1870s life of the Ross family and their Big Sur neighbors.
Many residents of Big Sur object to the rentals.
The mountains trap most of the moisture out of the clouds; fog in summer, rain and snow in winter.
(216&nbsp;cm) in 1982–1983.
The coastal trail plan is intended to be respectful of the private landowner's rights.
The average home sold is  and has 2.39 bedrooms.
(230&nbsp;cm) falls on average near the ridge tops.
The original Spanish-language name for the unexplored mountainous terrain south of Monterey, the capital of Alta California, was "''el país grande del sur''" meaning, "the big country of the south."
Singer Johnny Rivers' hit song "Going Back to Big Sur" in 1969, on his ''Realization'' album, was typical of the songs of that era praising the unique qualities of Big Sur.
Approximately 790 parcels are undeveloped.
The route was designated as an All American Road by the U.S. Government.
Highway 1 has been closed on several occasions due to damage due from California landslides, mudslides, erosion, and fire.
The many climates of Big Sur result in a great biodiversity, including many rare and endangered species such as the wild orchid ''Piperia yadonii'', which is found only on the Monterey Peninsula and on Rocky Ridge in the Los Padres forest.
there are about 1,100 private land parcels on the Big Sur Coast.
He married native American Encarnacion Vallejo and acquired considerable land including Rancho El Sur, on which he built a cabin in April or May 1861.
These can be found throughout the region.
It also protects views of Mount Pico Blanco from the Old Coast Road.
The Palo Colorado-San Gregorio fault system transitions onshore at Doud Creek, 7 miles south of Point Lobos, exposing the western edge of the Salinian block.
When the region was first settled by European immigrants in 1853, it was the United States' "last frontier."
Roberts was only successful in gaining attention to the project when State Senator Elmer S. Rigdon, a member of the California Senate Committee on Roads and Highways, promoted the military necessity of defending California's coast.
The coast is frequently praised for its rugged coastline and mountain views.
, there were about 300 households in the Palo Colorado Canyon area.
The Santa Lucia range rises to more than 5,800&nbsp;ft (1760 m), and the amount of rainfall greatly increase as the elevation rises and cools the air.
Farther inland, away from the ocean's moderating influence, temperatures are much more variable.
There are a number of state and federal lands and parks, including McWay Falls at Julia Pfeiffer Burns State Park, one of only two waterfalls on the Pacific Coast that plunge directly into the ocean.
His 1957 essay/memoir/novel ''Big Sur and the Oranges of Hieronymus Bosch'' described the joys and hardships that came from escaping the "air conditioned nightmare" of modern life.
One of the places to stay, Deetjen's Big Sur Inn, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Among the places that draw visitors are the counter-culture Esalen Institute, the luxury Ventana Inn, the Nepenthe Restaurant, built around the house Orson Welles and Rita Hayworth bought to celebrate their six-month-long affair, and far from the coast in the Las Padres forest, the Tassajara Zen Mountain Center.
It preserves the region as "open space, a small residential community, and agricultural ranching."
it burned 57 homes in the Garrapata and Palo Colorado Canyon areas.
These areas have the greatest number of developed parcels.
Daunted by the sheer cliffs and difficult topography, his party avoided the area and traveled far inland through the Salinas Valley.
It concluded that fires of all severity increase the relative abundance of redwood and higher-severity fires provide the greatest benefit.
This was the first time in more than 100 years in which a pair of California condors had been seen nesting in Northern California.
The state replaced that section of road with a viaduct that wraps around the unstable hillside.
In 1975–1976, it rained only 15 in.
Esalen hosted many figures of the nascent "New Age", and in the 1960s, played an important role in popularizing Eastern philosophies, the "human potential movement", and Gestalt therapy in the United States.
The fog usually moves out to sea during the day and closes in at night, but sometimes heavy fog blankets the coast all day.
Most plants cannot take water directly out of the air, but the condensation on leaf surfaces slowly precipitates into the ground like rain.
Big Sur acquired a bohemian reputation with these newcomers.
The Big Sur Local Coastal Program was created to conserve scenic views and the unparalleled beauty of the area.
, they still own the land.
Coastal temperatures range from the 50s at night to the 70s by day (Fahrenheit) from June through October, and in the 40s to 60s from November through May.
Nineteen eating places of various sizes are found along the highway, cumulatively seating about 1,100 people.
The grant was bounded on the north by the Carmel River and on the south by Palo Colorado Canyon.
, the county was conducting hearings and gathering input towards making a decision about short-term rentals on the Big Sur coast.
They claim short term rentals violate the Big Sur Local Use Plan which prohibits establishing facilities that attract destination traffic.
Stream canyons frequently follow fault the north-westerly trending fault lines, rather than descending directly to the coast.
There are also limited oil and gas reserves located offshore on the Outer Continental Shelf.
The first known European settler in Big Sur was George Davis, who in 1853 claimed a tract of land along the Big Sur River.
It also forbids any development visible from Highway 1 and major public viewing areas such as beaches, parks, campgrounds, and major trails, with a few exceptions.
In the United States House of Representatives, Big Sur is in .
Local entrepreneurs built small boat landings like what is known today as Bixby Landing at a few coves along the coast from which supplies could be received and products could be shipped from schooners via a cable hoist.
The Basin Complex Fire forced an eight-day evacuation of Big Sur and the closure of Highway 1, beginning just before the July 4, 2008 holiday weekend.
Most of the population lived without power until connections to the California electric grid were established in the early 1950s.
While living at the missions, the aboriginal population was exposed to unknown diseases like smallpox and measles for which they had no immunity, devastating the Native American population and their culture.
The summer is generally dry.
The "Old Coast Road" was later expanded south to the Post Ranch near Sycamore Canyon, and then expanded further south.
; California Condor
Its thick bark, along with foliage that starts high above the ground, protect the species from both fire and insect damage, contributing to the coast redwood's longevity.
The rugged, isolated terrain kept out all but the sturdiest and most self-sufficient settlers.
Alvarado later traded Rancho El Sur for the more accessible Rancho Bolsa del Potrero y Moro Cojo in the northern Salinas Valley, owned by his uncle by marriage, Captain John B.R.
Los Angeles'' (originally ''USRC Wayanda''), which had run aground near the Point Sur Light Station about  south of Carmel.
It was approved in 1981 and is one of the most restrictive local use programs in the state, and is widely regarded as one of the most restrictive documents of its kind anywhere.
