With the fabric shortage still in place and in an endeavour to resurrect swimwear sales, two French designers&nbsp;– Jacques Heim and Louis Réard &nbsp;– almost simultaneously launched their new two-piece swimsuit ranges in 1946.Claudia Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, ''Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia'' (vol.
In 1913, designer Carl Jantzen made the first functional two-piece swimwear.
Beginning in the late thirties skants, a type of skanty men's briefs, were introduced, featuring very high-cut leg openings and a lower rise to the waistband.
At the same time, demand for all swimwear declined as there was not much interest in going to the beach, especially in Europe.
To meet the fast pace of demands, some manufacturers now offer made-to-order bikinis ready in as few as seven minutes.
It can refer to virtually any undergarment that provides less coverage to the midriff than traditional underwear, panties or knickers, especially suited to clothing such as crop tops.
The male body was celebrated through advertising campaigns for brands such as Calvin Klein, particularly by photographers Bruce Weber and Herb Ritts.
In Europe, 17-year-old Brigitte Bardot wore scanty bikinis (by contemporary standards) in the French film ''Manina, la fille sans voiles'' ("Manina, the girl unveiled").
Swimwear and underwear have similar design considerations, both being form-fitting garments.
At the West Asian Games in 2006, organizers banned bikini-bottoms for female athletes and asked them to wear long shorts.
Although briefer than the two-piece swimsuits of the 1930s, the bottom of Heim's new two-piece beach costume still covered the wearer's navel.
Stretch nylon bikini briefs and bras complemented the adolescent boutique fashions of the 1960s, allowing those to be minimal.
By 1988 the bikini made up nearly 20% of swimsuit sales, more than any other model in the US, though one-piece suits made a comeback during the 1980s and early 1990s.
The United States Motion Picture Production Code, also known as the Hays Code, enforced from 1934, allowed two-piece gowns but prohibited the display of navels in Hollywood films.
At the 2006 Asian Games at Doha, Qatar, only one Muslim country&nbsp;– Iraq&nbsp;– fielded a team in the beach volleyball competition because of concerns that the uniform was inappropriate.
Much of the interest was because of the sex appeal of bikini-clad players along with their athletic ability.
In ''The Bikini Book'' by Kelly Killoren Bensimon, swimwear designer Norma Kamali says, "Anyone with a tummy" should not wear a bikini.
Despite the garment's initial success in France, worldwide women still stuck to traditional one-piece swimsuits, and, his sales stalling, Réard went back to designing and selling orthodox knickers.
It's at the razor's edge of decency."
For women, bikini or bikini-style underwear is underwear that is similar in size and form to a regular bikini.
Wartime production during World War II required vast amounts of cotton, silk, nylon, wool, leather, and rubber.
In the seventies, with the emergence of skintight jeans, thong versions of the panty became mainstream, since the open, stringed back eliminated any tell-tale panty lines across the rear and hips.
DuPont's introduction of Lycra (spandex) in the 1960s completely changed how bikinis were designed and worn, as according to Kelly Killoren Bensimon, a former model and author of ''The Bikini Book'', "the advent of Lycra allowed more women to wear a bikini...it didn't sag, it didn't bag, and it concealed and revealed.
Sports journalism expert Kimberly Bissell conducted a study on the camera angles used during the 2004 Summer Olympic Games beach volleyball games.
The tiny "fitness-bikinis" made of lycra were launched to cater to this hardbodied ideal.
It has often been more profitable to win the bikini contest than the female surfing event.
It is an official uniform for beach volleyball and is widely worn in athletics and other sports.
In 1994, the bikini became the official uniform of women's Olympic beach volleyball.
The uniform made its Olympic debut at Sydney's Bondi Beach in the 2000 Summer Olympics amid some criticism.
He named the swimsuit after Bikini Atoll, where testing on the atomic bomb was taking place.
By the 1960s, the bikini swimsuit influenced panty styles and coincided with the cut of the new lower rise jeans and pants.
Spandex expanded the range of novelty fabrics available to designers which meant suits could be made to fit like a second skin without heavy linings.
Male bodies and men's undergarments were commodified and packaged for mass consumption, and swimwear and sportswear were influenced by sports photography and fitness.
Fashion designer Jacques Heim, also from France, re-released a similar design earlier that same year, the Atome.
The ''Language Report'', compiled by lexicographer Susie Dent and published by the Oxford University Press (OUP) in 2003, considers lexicographic inventions like bandeaukini and camkini, two variants of the tankini, important to observe.
She also posed in a bikini for the glossy ''Filmfare'' magazine.
Metal and stone jewelery pieces are now often used to dress up look and style according to tastes.
From this decade sexualization and eroticization of the male body was on the rise.
One feminist viewpoint sees the bikini uniform as objectification of women athletes.
More revealing than a one-piece swimsuit, the bikini was slow to be adopted, and in many countries it was banned from beaches and public places.
'', advertised as "mankind's first bikini", (1966) was later described as a "definitive look of the 1960s".
Richard Baker, the federation spokesperson, said that "many of these countries have religious and cultural requirements so the uniform needed to be more flexible".
Réard said that "like the atom bomb, the bikini is small and devastating".
Since then, a number of bikini designers including Malia Mills have encouraged women of all ages and body types to take up the style.
Bardot was also photographed wearing a bikini on the beach during the 1953 Cannes Film Festival.
As late as 1959, Anne Cole, one of the United States' largest swimsuit designers, said, "It's nothing more than a G-string.
For men, the dress code specifies "swim trunks only (no shorts, cut-off pants, or Speedos)."
Despite the conservative ideas prevalent in India, bikinis have become more popular.
He sliced the top off Heim's bottoms.
The 1967 film ''An Evening in Paris'' is mostly remembered because it featured Bollywood actress Sharmila Tagore as the first Indian actress to wear a bikini on film.
A ''mankini'' is a type of sling swimsuit worn by men.
Rayon was used in the 1920s in the manufacture of tight-fitting swimsuits, but its durability, especially when wet, proved problematic.
The term is inspired by the word bikini.
The term ''men's bikini'' is sometimes used to describe swim briefs.
Indian women wear bikinis when they vacation abroad or in Goa without the family.
In summer, when women take up swimming, often in a public space, a lot of tankinis, shorts and single-piece swimsuits are sold.
In 1986, the Ms Universe competition was divided into two sections&nbsp;– "physique" (for a more muscular physique) and "figure" (traditional feminine presentation in high heels).
Four days earlier, the United States had initiated its first peace-time nuclear weapons test at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads.
She wrote, "Significantly, on the beaches as on the streets, some of the youngest and prettiest women (who were once the only ones who dared to bare) seem to have decided that exposure is over."
Warner standardized the concept of Cup size in 1935.
Movies like ''Blue Crush'' and TV reality shows like ''Surf Girls'' have merged the concepts of bikini models and athletes together, further accentuating the toned body ideal.
No'', wore a white bikini, which became known as the "Dr. No bikini".
Jersey and silk were also sometimes used.
According to French fashion historian Olivier Saillard, this was due to "the power of women, and not the power of fashion".
By the 1980s the design of the French-cut panty pushed the waistband back up to the natural waistline and the rise of the leg openings was nearly as high (French Cut panties come up to the waist, has a high cut leg, and usually are full in the rear).
The Bikini, with a total area of  of cloth,  was advertised as "smaller than the smallest swimsuit".
Huludao, Liaoning, China set the world record for the largest bikini parade in 2012, with 1,085 participants and a photo shoot involving 3,090 women.
I'm sure the male spectators love it, but I find it a little bit offensive."
In 2011, Huda Naccache (Miss Earth 2011), when she posed for the cover of ''Lilac'' (based in Israel) became the first bikini-clad Arab model on the cover of an Arabic magazine.
Visible pubic hair is widely culturally disapproved, considered to be embarrassing, and often removed.
Sports commentator Jeanne Moos commented, "Beach volleyball has now joined go-go girl dancing as perhaps the only two professions where a bikini is the required uniform."
Certain sunscreen ingredients can cause harm if they penetrate the skin over time.
Heim's ''atome'' was more attuned to the sense of propriety of the 1940s and a bigger hit than Réard's design but Réard's was the design that won the public's imagination over time.
Even indoor volleyball costumes followed suit to become smaller and tighter.
Modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey.
Yearly Spring Break festivities, which mark the start of the bikini season in North America, trigger many with eating disorders because of the over-promotion of the bikini body ideal.
In 1961, ''The New York Times'' reported the opinion that the bikini is permissible for people are not "too fat or too thin".
For women, wearing a bikini signaled a kind of second liberation.
The winners earned titles like Miss Body Beautiful, Miss Physical Fitness and Miss Americana, and also presented trophies to the winners of the men's contest.
While still considered risqué, the bikini gradually became a part of popular culture when film stars&mdash;Brigitte Bardot, Raquel Welch, Ursula Andress, and others&mdash;began wearing them on public beaches and in film.
Women in athletics often wear bikinis of similar size as those worn in beach volleyball.
The Hays Code was abandoned by the mid-1960s, and with it the prohibition of female navel exposure, as well as other restrictions.
DuPont introduced lycra (DuPont's name for spandex) in the same decade.
The posing brief standard to bodybuilding competitions is an example of this style.
Male punk rock musicians have performed on the stage wearing women's bikini briefs.
In ''Coronation of the Winner,'' a mosaic in the floor of a Roman villa in Sicily that dates from the Diocletian period (286–305&nbsp;AD), young women participate in weightlifting, discus throwing, and running ball games dressed in bikini-like garments (technically bandeaukinis in modern lexicon).
Men's bikini briefs can be low- or high-side that are usually lower than true waist, often at hips, and usually have no access pouch or flap, legs bands at tops of thighs.
According to Mills, "The leg line became superhigh, the front was superlow, and the straps were superthin."
Increasingly common glamour shots of popular actresses and models on either side of the Atlantic played a large part in bringing the bikini into the mainstream.
Later swimsuit designs like the ''tan''kini and ''tri''kini further cemented this false assumption.
By the end of the first decade of 21st century, the Chinese bikini industry became a serious international threat for the Brazilian bikini industry.
The bikini design had become common in Western countries by the mid-1960s as beachwear, swimwear, and underwear.
Over time, swimwear evolved from weighty wool to high-tech skin-tight garments, eventually cross-breeding with sportswear, underwear and exercise wear, resulting in the interchangeable fashions of the 1990s.
The National Legion of Decency, a Roman Catholic body guarding over American media content, also pressured Hollywood and foreign film producers to keep bikinis from being featured in Hollywood movies.
Fashion writer Diana Vreeland described the bikini as the "atom bomb of fashion".
By the early 2000s, bikinis had become a US$811 million business annually, and boosted spin-off services such as bikini waxing and sun tanning.
In the 1920s women started discarding the corset, while the Cadole company of Paris started developing something they called the "breast girdle".
In 1942, the United States  War Production Board issued Regulation L-85, cutting the use of natural fibers in clothing and mandating a 10% reduction in the amount of fabric in women's beachwear.
By the 1930s, manufacturers had lowered necklines in the back, removed sleeves, and tightened the sides.
Over time the "''–kini'' family" (as dubbed by author William Safire), including the "''–ini'' sisters" (as dubbed by designer Anne Cole), expanded into a variety of swimwear, often with an innovative lexicon, including the monokini (also numokini or unikini), seekini, tankini, camikini, hikini (also hipkini), minikini, face-kini, burkini, and microkini.
The costume shocked a conservative Indian audience, but it also set in motion a trend carried forward by Zeenat Aman in ''Heera Panna'' (1973) and ''Qurbani'' (1980), Dimple Kapadia in ''Bobby'' (1973), and Parveen Babi in ''Yeh Nazdeekiyan'' (1982).
Similar photographs were taken of Anita Ekberg and Sophia Loren, among others.
The fitness boom of the 1980s led to one of the biggest leaps in the evolution of the bikini.
''Playboy'' first featured a bikini on its cover in 1962; the ''Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue'' debut two years later featured Babette March in a white bikini on the cover.
Suits less than 1.5&nbsp;inches wide at the hips are less common for sporting purposes and are most often worn for recreation, fashion, and sun tanning.
Amy Acuff, a US high-jumper, wore a black leather bikini instead of a track suit at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
It was popularized by Sacha Baron Cohen when he donned one in the film ''Borat''.
In the 1980s, the Ms Olympia competition started in the USA and in the UK the NABBA (National Amateur Body Building Association) renamed Miss Bikini International to Ms Universe.
By the end of the century, the bikini had become the most popular beachwear around the globe.
By 1930s underwear styles for both women and men were influenced by the new brief models of swimwear from Europe.
In a single fashion show in 1985, there were two-piece suits with cropped tank tops instead of the usual skimpy bandeaux, suits that resembled bikinis from the front and one-pieces from the back, suspender straps, ruffles, and deep navel-baring cutouts.
The press, welcoming the spectacle, referred to it as ''Miss World'', a name Morley registered as a trademark.
The first underwire bra was developed in 1938.
1), page 182, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007, ISBN 978-0-313-08444-7Tim Gunn, ''Tim Gunn's Fashion Bible'', page 215, Simon and Schuster, 2013, ISBN 978-1-4516-4386-2James Gilbert Ryan and Leonard C. Schlup, ''Historical Dictionary of the 1940s'', page 50, M.E.
By making an inappropriate analogy with words like ''bilingual'' and ''bilateral'' containing the Latin prefix "bi-" (meaning "two" in Latin), the word ''bikini'' was first back-derived as consisting of two parts, ''bi'' + ''kini'' by Rudi Gernreich, who introduced the ''mono''kini in 1964.
Réard himself would later describe it as a "two-piece bathing suit which reveals everything about a girl except for her mother's maiden name."
It also drew the ire of some athletes.
Modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey.
Alternative swimwear fabrics such as velvet, leather, and crocheted squares surfaced in the early '70s.
The 1970s saw the rise of the lean ideal of female body and figures like Cheryl Tiegs.
At about the same time, Louis Réard created a competing two-piece swimsuit design, which he called the ''bikini''.
Though some regarded the bikini and beauty contests as bringing freedom to women, they were opposed by some feminists as well as religious and cultural groups who objected to the degree of exposure of the female body.
By the late 20th century it had also become common as sportswear, particularly in sports such as beach volleyball and bodybuilding.
According to Beth Dincuff Charleston, research associate at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, "The bikini represents a social leap involving body consciousness, moral concerns, and sexual attitudes."
Although "bikini" was originally a registered trademark of Réard, it has since become genericized.
Bikini variations have grown to include a large number of more or less revealing styles&nbsp;— string bikinis, monokinis (topless or top and bottom connected), Trikinis (three pieces instead of two), tankinis (tank top, bikini bottom), camikinis (camisole top, bikini bottom), bandeaukini (bandeau top, bikini bottom), skirtini (bikini top, skirt bottom), "granny bikini" (bikini top, boy shorts bottom), hikinis (also hipkini), seekinis (transparent), minikinis, microkinis, miniminis, slingshots (or suspender bikinis), thong bottoms, tie-sides (a variety of string bikini)  and teardrops.
Increased reliance on stretch fabric led to simplified construction.
Bardot's photography helped to enhance the public profile of the festival, and Cannes in turn played a crucial role in her career.
The influence of the National Legion of Decency also waned by the 1960s.
It allowed designers to create the string bikini, and allowed Rudi Gernreich to create the topless monokini.
"The advent of Lycra allowed more women to wear a bikini," wrote Kelly Killoren Bensimon, a former model and author of ''The Bikini Book'', "It didn't sag, it didn't bag, and it concealed and revealed.
Men's bikinis can have high or low side panels, and string sides or tie sides.
The bikini was banned on the French Atlantic coastline, Spain, Italy, Portugal and Australia, and was prohibited or discouraged in a number of US states.
Although the waistband was still above the navel, the leg openings of the panty brief were cut in an arc to rise from the crotch to the hip joint.
As he explains, "The emancipation of swimwear has always been linked to the emancipation of women", though one survey indicates 85% of all bikinis never touch the water.
Bissell found that 20% of the camera angles were focused on the women's chests, and 17% on their buttocks.
By the time the film was released in the United States in 1958 it was re-titled ''Manina, the Girl in the Bikini''.
As bikinis leave most of the body exposed to potentially dangerous UV radiation, overexposure can cause sunburn, skin cancer, as well as other acute and chronic health effects on the skin, eyes, and immune system.
Most lack a button or flap front.
In the 1960s etiquette writer Emily Post decreed that "A bikini is for perfect figures only, and for the very young."
Réard's company folded in 1988, four years after his death.
In 1999, the International Volleyball Federation (FIVB) standardized beach volleyball uniforms, with the bikini becoming the required uniform for women.
He advertised the Atome as the world's "smallest bathing suit".
Though Heim's design was the first worn on the beach and sold more swimsuits, it was Réard's description of the two-piece swimsuit as a ''bikini'' that stuck.
Sports bikinis have gained popularity since the 1990s.
To comply with the regulations, swimsuit manufacturers removed skirt panels and other attachments, while increasing production of the two-piece swimsuit with bare midriffs.
For most parts of the  Middle East, bikinis are either banned or is highly controversial.
The 2000 Bollywood film ''Hera Pheri'' shows men sunbathing in bikinis, who were mistakenly believed to be women from a distance.
In 1952, bikinis were banned from the pageant and replaced by evening gowns.
Nevertheless, professional beach volleyball player Gabrielle Reece, who competes in a bikini, claims that "confidence" alone can make a bikini sexy.
Female swimmers do not normally wear bikinis in competitive swimming.
While the two-piece swimsuit as a design existed in classical antiquity, the modern design first attracted public notice in Paris on July 5, 1946.
It was the fifth largest television audience of all the sports at the 2000 Games.
Her role wearing the leather bikini raised Welch to a fashion icon and the photo of her in the bikini became a best-selling pinup poster.
Several incidents of families being evicted from public pools due to their child being topless have been reported.
The Association of Surfing Professionals often pairs female surf meets with bikini contests, an issue that divides the female pro-surfing community into two parts.
In 1965, a woman told ''Time'' that it was "almost square" not to wear a bikini; the magazine wrote two years later that "65% of the young set had already gone over".
Howard Hughes designed the push-up bra worn by Jane Russell in ''The Outlaw'' in 1943.
According to fellow gold medalist Misty May-Treanor and Walsh it does not restrict movement.
They refused to wear bikinis.
Women's magazines used terms like "Bikini Belly", and workout programs were launched to develop a "bikini-worthy body".
Male bikini tops also exist and are often used as visual gags.
One survey commissioned by Diet Chef, a UK home delivery service, reported by ''Daily Mail'' and ''The Today Show'' and ridiculed by ''More'' magazine, showed that women should stop wearing bikinis by the age of 47.
A man's brief swimsuit may also be referred to as a bikini.
His initial design consisted of a bra and two triangular pieces of newspaper-type print fabric connected by strips of material.
Raquel Welch's deer skin bikini in ''One Million Years B.C.
No'' as the first Bond girl, I was given the freedom to take my pick of future roles and to become financially independent."
Many female beach volleyball players have suffered injuries by over-straining the abdominal muscles while many others have gone through augmentation mammoplasty to look appealing in their uniforms.
According to ''The Guardian'', Bardot's photographs in particular turned Saint-Tropez into the beachwear capital of the world, with Bardot identified as the original Cannes bathing beauty.
String bikinis and other revealing clothes are common in surfing, though most surfing bikinis are more robust with more coverage than sunning bikinis.
''Surfing Magazine'' printed a pictorial of Kymberly Herrin, ''Playboy'' Playmate March 1981, surfing in a revealing bikini, and eventually started an annual bikini issue.
In 1951, Eric Morley organized the ''Festival Bikini Contest'', a beauty contest and swimwear advertising opportunity at that year's Festival of Britain.
Olympic gold medal winner Kerry Walsh said, "I love our uniforms."
During the Great Depression, panties and bras became softly constructed and were made of various elasticized yarns making underwear fit like a second skin.
The maximum sales for bikinis happen in the winter, the honeymoon season.
It was instead a celebration of freedom and a return to the joys in life."
Working with her husband and agent Roger Vadim she garnered significant attention with photographs of her wearing a bikini on every beach in the south of France.
Alternative swimwear fabrics such as velvet, leather, and crocheted squares surfaced in the early 1970s.
Fashion magazine ''Modern Girl Magazine'' in 1957 stated that "it is hardly necessary to waste words over the so-called bikini since it is inconceivable that any girl with tact and decency would ever wear such a thing".
From the 1950s to mid-1970s, men's contest formats were often supplemented with women's beauty contests or bikini shows.
It wasn't so much like lingerie anymore."
Hollywood endorsed the new glamor in films like ''Neptune's Daughter'' in which Esther Williams wore provocatively named costumes such as "Double Entendre" and "Honey Child".
As a result, medical organizations recommend that bikini wearers protect themselves from UV radiation by using broad-spectrum sunscreen, which has been shown to protect against sunburn, skin cancer, wrinkling and sagging skin.
The bikini line delineates the part of a woman's pubic area to be covered by the bottom part of a bikini, which means any pubic hair visible beyond the boundaries of a swimsuit.
Competitors Natalie Cook and Holly McPeak support the bikini as a practical uniform for a sport played on sand during the heat of summer.
Brian Hyland's novelty-song hit "Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini" became a ''Billboard'' No.
The world's most expensive bikini was designed in February 2006 by Susan Rosen; containing  of diamond, it was valued at £20&nbsp;million.
In 1950, Elvira Pagã walked at the Rio Carnival, Brazil in a golden bikini, starting the bikini tradition of the carnival.
Runner Florence Griffith-Joyner mixed bikini bottoms with one-legged tights at the 1988 Summer Olympics, earning her more attention than her record breaking performance in the women's 200 meters event.
The bikini remains preferred by most players and corporate sponsors.
Bikinis have become a major component of marketing various women's sports.
The International Swimming Federation (FINA) voted to prohibit female swimmers from racing in bikinis in its meeting at Rome in 1960.
After the crowning, Håkansson was condemned by Pope Pius XII, while Spain and Ireland threatened to withdraw from the pageant.
Child-sized bikinis appeared shortly after the introduction of the swimsuit in the 1950s.
Unlike swim briefs, bikinis are not designed for drag reduction and generally lack a visible waistband.
It became one of the most famous bikinis of all time and an iconic moment in cinematic and fashion history.
For men, bikini briefs are undergarments that are smaller and more revealing than men's regular briefs.
The main difference is that, unlike underwear, swimwear is open to public view.
French mechanical engineer Louis Réard introduced a design he named the "bikini", taking the name from the Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean, which is Marshallese for ''coconut place''.
As a result of the controversy, the bikini was explicitly banned from many other beauty pageants worldwide.
