In private, Graham would also advise King and other members of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).
It was aired on several networks including FOX News.
According to ''Newsweek'' magazine, "The shock of the revelation was magnified because of Graham's longtime support of Israel and his refusal to join in calls for conversion of the Jews."
Observers have questioned whether the support of Republican and religious right politics on issues such as same-sex marriage coming from Graham—who no longer speaks in public or to reporters—in fact reflects the views of his son, Franklin, head of the BGEA.
City officials estimated more than 250,000 in attendance.
He has appeared on the list 55 times since 1955, more than any other individual in the world.
In 2002, the controversy was renewed when declassified "Richard Nixon tapes" confirmed remarks made by Graham to Nixon three decades earlier.
As the sessions became larger, he arranged a group of up to 5,000 people to sing in a choir.
After this visit, Johnson frequently would call on Graham for more spiritual counseling as well as companionship.
By the middle of 1960, King and Graham traveled together to the Tenth Baptist World Congress of the Baptist World Alliance.
He insisted on integration for his revivals and crusades in 1953 and invited Martin Luther King, Jr. to preach jointly at a revival in New York City in 1957.
At this time, he was influenced and inspired by Pastor Charley Young from Eastport Bible Church.
* ''Decision'' magazine, the official publication of the association
Ruth Graham died on June 14, 2007, at the age of 87.
Graham received the Big Brother of the Year Award for his work on behalf of children.
* A syndicated newspaper column, ''My Answer'', carried by newspapers across the United States and distributed by Tribune Media Services
On September 22, 1991 Graham held his largest event in North America on the Great Lawn of New York's Central Park.
In 1983 he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by U.S. President Ronald Reagan.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to stumble into hell because of our pride."
Graham operates a variety of media and publishing outlets.
Graham has had Parkinson's disease since 1992.
In addition to his White House visits, Graham would visit Johnson at Camp David and occasionally met with the President when he retreated to his private ranch in Stonewall, Texas.
(Today's Florida College is now located at that site in Temple Terrace, Florida.)
In 2009, more Nixon tapes were released, in which Graham is heard in conversation with Nixon referring to Jews and "the synagogue of Satan".
He supported him over John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election.
He just never wanted me to leave."
In April 2013, the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association started "My Hope With Billy Graham", the largest outreach in its history, encouraging church members to spread the gospel in small group meetings after showing a video message by Graham.
Since the Eisenhower years, the preacher enjoyed a friendship with Nixon.
In 1937, Graham transferred to the Florida Bible Institute (now Trinity College of Florida).
He can use it mightily."
He made further remarks which were characterized as antisemitic by Abraham Foxman of the Anti-Defamation League and evangelical author Richard Land.
It was during his time at Wheaton that Graham decided to accept the Bible as the infallible word of God.
Consulting with the members of his church in Western Springs, Graham decided to take over Johnson's program with financial support from his congregation.
Graham has been a friend of the Reagans for years.
The movement remains a significant fruit of Graham's legacy, with a presence in nearly every nation.
Graham became a national figure with heavy coverage from the wire services and national magazines.
Former presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, and Bill Clinton appeared to celebrate with Graham.
In 2001 Queen Elizabeth II awarded him an honorary knighthood.
Since his ministry began in 1947, Graham conducted more than 400 crusades in 185 countries and territories on six continents.
In Moscow, in 1992, one-quarter of the 155,000 people in Graham's audience went forward at his call.
In 1967, he was the first Protestant to receive an honorary degree from Belmont Abbey College, a Roman Catholic school.
The first Billy Graham Crusade, held September 13–21, 1947, in the Civic Auditorium in Grand Rapids, Michigan, was attended by 6,000 people.
After King's "Beyond Vietnam" speech denouncing U.S. intervention in Vietnam, Graham castigated him and others for their criticism of American foreign policy.
He refused to join Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority in 1979, saying: "I'm for morality, but morality goes beyond sex to human freedom and social justice.
Graham prepared one last sermon, ''My Hope America'', released on DVD and played around America and possibly worldwide between November 7–10, 2013, November 7 being his 95th birthday, hoping to cause a revival.
George Washington Baines, invited Graham to the White House to give him spiritual counseling.
Reverend Billy Graham Memorial Park was established on the Hillsborough River directly east of the 18th green and across from where Graham often paddled a canoe to a small island in the river, where he would preach to the birds, alligators, and cypress stumps.
William Franklin Graham, Jr. was born on November 7, 1918.
Graham traveled throughout both the United States and Europe as an YFCI evangelist.
In his autobiography, Graham wrote of receiving his "calling on the 18th green of the Temple Terrace Golf and Country Club", which is immediately in front of today's Sutton Hall at Florida College.
Graham said that his planned retirement was because of his failing health.
On October 15, 1989 Graham received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Estimates from the Nixon administration concluded that such a military aerial bombing campaign against dikes in North Vietnam would have killed approximately one million North Vietnamese.
As of 2008, Graham's estimated lifetime audience, including radio and television broadcasts, topped 2.2 billion.
He's...well, I hadn't ought to say this, but he's one of those counterfeits I was telling you about.
Graham gave a globe surmounted with doves to the North Korean Friendship Museum.
In August 2005, Graham appeared at the groundbreaking for his library in Charlotte, North Carolina.
In 1933, when he was fourteen, as Prohibition in the United States ended, Graham's father forced him and his sister Katherine to drink beer until they got sick, which created such an aversion that both avoided alcohol and drugs for the rest of their lives.
Graham officiated at the funeral services of former First Lady Pat Nixon in 1993, and the death and funeral of Richard Nixon in 1994.
Such people were called inquirers and were given the chance to speak one-on-one with a counselor, to clarify questions and pray together.
At one revival in Seoul, South Korea, Graham attracted more than one million people to a single service.
Graham was 28 years old.
In 1960 he was opposed to the candidacy of John F. Kennedy because he was Catholic, and worked "behind the scenes" to encourage influential Protestant ministers to speak out against him.
* World Wide Pictures, which has produced and distributed more than 130 films
This was mentioned by George Bush in his eulogy.
Graham was a spiritual adviser to American presidents; he was particularly close to Dwight D. Eisenhower, Lyndon Johnson (one of Graham's closest friends) and Richard Nixon.
Graham leaned toward the Republicans during the presidency of Richard Nixon whom he had met and befriended as vice president under Dwight Eisenhower.
He has also reached hundreds of millions more through television, video, film, and webcasts.
We as clergy know so very little to speak with authority on the Panama Canal or superiority of armaments.
In 1970, Graham stated that feminism was "an echo of our overall philosophy of permissiveness", and that women did not want to be "competitive juggernauts pitted against male chauvinists."
After one semester, he found it too legalistic in both coursework and rules.
Grant Wacker reports that by the mid-1960s, he had become the "Great Legitimator":
Graham would later advocate to Nixon that this proposed escalation of the war in Southeast Asia as plan that "could overnight destroy the economy of North Vietnam" by employing "tens of thousands of North Vietnamese defectors to bomb and invade the North."
Launching the new radio program on January 2, 1944, still called ''Songs in the Night'', Graham recruited the bass-baritone George Beverly Shea as his director of radio ministry.
Eisenhower asked for Graham while on his deathbed.
During the Apartheid era, Graham consistently refused to visit South Africa until its government allowed integrated seating for audiences.
Though a registered Democrat, Graham also maintained firm support towards aggression against the foreign threat of Communism and strongly sympathized with Nixon's views regarding American foreign policy.
In 1957, Graham's stance towards integration became more publicly shown when he allowed African American ministers Thomas Kilgore and Gardner Taylor to serve as members of his New York Crusade's executive committee and invited the Rev.
Graham is a registered member of the Democratic Party.
While there, his friend Torrey Johnson, pastor of the Midwest Bible Church in Chicago, told Graham that his radio program, ''Songs in the Night'', was about to be canceled due to lack of funding.
I will be in the future."
His ''alma mater'' Wheaton College has an archive of his papers at the Billy Graham Center.
The crusade event ran for eight weeks—five weeks longer than planned.
During a 1953 rally in Chattanooga, Tennessee, Graham tore down the ropes that organizers had erected to separate the audience into racial sections.
Graham has been outspoken against communism and supported the American Cold War policy, including the Vietnam War.
I just don't go for people like that.
As Graham recalled to his biographer Frady, "I almost used the White House as a hotel when Johnson was President.
In 1984, he led a series of meetings in the United Kingdom summer, called Mission England, using outdoor football (soccer) grounds as venues.
He would rent a large venue, such as a stadium, park, or street.
Nixon was the first president to give a speech from an evangelist's platform.
He presided over the graveside services of President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1973 and took part in eulogizing the former president.
He has received the Templeton Foundation Prize for Progress in Religion and the Sylvanus Thayer Award for his commitment to "Duty, Honor, Country".
In San Francisco, California, the Bill Graham Civic Auditorium is sometimes erroneously called the "Billy Graham Civic Auditorium" and falsely considered to be named in his honor, but it is actually named after the rock and roll promoter Bill Graham.
Graham was the only minister, functioning in that capacity, to receive one.
The evangelist actively supported Quaker Nixon for the presidency in 1960, even to the extent of convening an August strategy session of evangelical leaders in Montreaux, Switzerland, to plan how best to oppose Nixon's Roman Catholic opponent, Senator John F. Kennedy.
Graham has had a personal audience with many sitting US presidents, from Harry S. Truman to Barack Obama.
Graham had missions in London, which lasted 12 weeks, and a New York City mission in Madison Square Garden in 1957, which ran nightly for 16 weeks.
According to his staff, more than 3.2 million people have responded to the invitation at Billy Graham Crusades to "accept Jesus Christ as their personal savior".
Their friendship became strained in 1973 when Graham rebuked Nixon for his post-Watergate behavior and the profanity heard on the Watergate tapes; they eventually reconciled after Nixon's resignation.
Franklin has denied this, and says that he will continue to act as his father's spokesperson rather than allowing press conferences.
He was unable to attend the state funeral of Ronald Reagan on June 11, 2004, as he was recovering from hip replacement surgery.
He was always trying to keep me there.
He held large indoor and outdoor rallies; sermons were broadcast on radio and television, some still being re-broadcast today.
'''William Franklin''' "'''Billy'''" '''Graham, Jr.''' (born November 7, 1918) is an American evangelical Christian evangelist, ordained as a Southern Baptist minister, who rose to celebrity status in 1949 reaching a core constituency of middle-class, moderately conservative Protestants.
In 2000, former First Lady Nancy Reagan presented the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award to Graham.
In 1927, when he was eight years old, the family moved about  from their white frame house to a newly built red brick home.
Notably, his grandson Tullian Tchividjian, son of Gigi, was the senior pastor of Coral Ridge Presbyterian Church in Fort Lauderdale, Florida until he was defrocked in June 2015 after admitting to an extra-marital affair.
In collaboration with ''Christianity Today'', Graham convened what ''TIME'' magazine described as "a formidable forum, possibly the widest–ranging meeting of Christians ever held" with 2,700 participants from 150 nations gathering for the International Congress on World Evangelization.
During the 1964 US presidential election, supporters of Republican nominee Barry Goldwater sent an estimate 2 million telegrams to Graham's hometown of Montreat, North Carolina and sought the preacher's endorsement.
He attracted national media coverage, especially in the conservative Hearst chain, although Hearst and Graham never met.
He would preach the gospel and invite people to come forward (a practice begun by Dwight L. Moody).
Graham developed his dike bombing strategy during an earlier business meeting in Bangkok with his evangelists assigned to Southern Vietnam.
According to his father, that yelling had led him to become a minister.
At that time Graham met and would become close friends with Vice President Richard Nixon.
It drew one of the largest crowds in Tennessee and protesters against the Vietnam War.
All he's interested in is getting his name in the paper.
After a period of recuperation in Florida, he was hired as the first full-time evangelist of the new Youth for Christ (YFC), co-founded by Torrey Johnson and the Canadian evangelist Charles Templeton.
Its purpose was to strengthen the global church for world evangelization, and to engage ideological and sociological trends which bore on this.
Though Graham's appearance with Daniel dashed King's hopes of holding joint crusades with Graham in the Deep South, the two still remained friends and King told a Canadian television audience the following year that Graham had taken a "very strong stance against segregation."
God can use that voice of yours.
At the time of Ruth Graham's death, it was announced that they would be buried at the library site.
A lot of things that I commented on years ago would not have been of the Lord, I'm sure, but I think you have some—like communism, or segregation, on which I think you have a responsibility to speak out.'"
The movie ''Billy: The Early Years'' premiered in theaters officially on October 10, 2008, less than one month before Graham's 90th birthday.
He appeared as a guest on a 1969 Woody Allen television special, where he joined the comedian in a witty exchange on theological matters.
Graham officiated at one presidential burial and one presidential funeral.
The "Billy Graham Children's Health Center" in Asheville is named after and funded by Graham.
Iain Murray, writing from a conservative Protestant standpoint, argues that "Graham's concessions are sad words from one who once spoke on the basis of biblical certainties."
He was criticized by feminists as being part of a backlash for these statements.
Graham once recalled "I have never had many people do that."
On September 14, 2001, in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, Graham was invited to lead a service at Washington National Cathedral, which was attended by President George W. Bush and past and present leaders.
Graham's faith prompted his maturing view of race and segregation; he told a member of the KKK that integration was necessary primarily for religious reasons: "there is no scriptural basis for segregation", Graham argued, "The ground at the foot of the cross is level, and it touches my heart when I see whites standing shoulder to shoulder with blacks at the cross."
were removed from Graham's website.
This was shortly before Kennedy's speech on the separation of church and state in Houston, Texas, which was considered to be successful in meeting concerns of many voters.
He warned a white audience, "we have been proud and thought we were better than any other race, any other people.
Both held strongly antisemitic views.
Captured on the tapes, Graham agreed with Nixon that Jews control the American media, calling it a "stranglehold" during a 1972 conversation with Nixon.
While the radio ministry continued for many years, Graham decided to move on in early 1945.
During April 1989, a secret, thirteen page letter written on April 15, 1969 by White House Chaplain Billy Graham to U.S. President Richard Nixon was released to the public by National Archives and Records Administration in which Graham had encouraged Nixon to utilize a military campaign to bomb dikes across North Vietnam should the Paris Peace Talks fail to reach a negotiated settlement of the U.S. war in Southeast Asia.
In 1982, Graham preached in the Soviet Union and attended a wreath-laying ceremony to honor the war dead of World War II, when the Soviets were American allies in the fight against Nazism.
He was raised in the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church by his parents and is of Scottish and Irish descent.
Graham had earlier said that "there come times when we have to fight for peace."
At the same time, he started as a student at the Sharon Grammar School.
He recounted in his memoirs that he told two ushers to leave the barriers down "or you can go on and have the revival without me."
* Passageway.org, the website for a youth discipleship program created by BGEA
The association relocated to Charlotte, North Carolina in 1999.
When the tapes were made public, Graham apologized and said, "Although I have no memory of the occasion, I deeply regret comments I apparently made in an Oval Office conversation with President Nixon … some 30 years ago.
The inquirers were often given a copy of the Gospel of John or a Bible study booklet.
Then 86, he used a walker during the ceremony.
Evangelists cannot be closely identified with any particular party or person.
He did not completely ally himself with the later religious right, saying that Jesus did not have a political party.
Over 157 nations were gathered in 2000 at the RAI Convention Center in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
According to the PBS ''Frontline'' program, ''God in America'' (2010), Episode 5, Graham also organized a meeting in September 1960 of hundreds of Protestant ministers in Washington, D.C. to this purpose; Norman Vincent Peale led the meeting.
Graham went on to note that although he had never met Kim's son and former North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, he had "exchanged gifts with him."
This belief in Jewish conspiracies and domination of the media was similar to those of Graham's former mentors: William Bell Riley chose Graham to succeed him as the second president of Northwestern Bible and Missionary Training School and evangelist Mordecai Ham led the meetings where Graham first believed in Christ.
In a 1999 speech, Graham discussed his relationship with the late North Korean leader Kim Il-Sung, praising him as a "different kind of communist" and "one of the great fighters for freedom in his country against the Japanese."
Graham has received 20 honorary degrees and refused at least that many more.
Graham as Bridge Builder deliberately reached into the secular world.
Graham met with a conference of Protestant ministers in Montreux, Switzerland during the 1960 campaign, to discuss their mobilizing congregations to defeat Kennedy.
BGEA ministries have included:
Because of his crusades, Graham has preached the gospel to more people in person than anyone in the history of Christianity.
Graham held integrated crusades in Birmingham, Alabama, on Easter 1964 in the aftermath of the bombing of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, and toured Alabama again in the wake of the violence that accompanied the first Selma to Montgomery march in 1965.
Unlike many evangelists, he had little formal theological training.
Novelist Patricia Cornwell, a family friend, also opposed burial at the library, calling it a tourist attraction.
Graham eventually graduated from Wheaton College in Wheaton, Illinois with a degree in anthropology in 1943.
A memorial there marks the site of Graham's decision.
During the Cold War, Graham-the-Bridge-Builder  became the first evangelist of note to speak behind the Iron Curtain, addressing large crowds in countries throughout Eastern Europe and in the Soviet Union, calling for peace.
In 2012, Graham publicly endorsed the Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney.
In March 1991, Graham said in reference to the Persian Gulf War, "As … President Bush has said, it is not the people of Iraq we are at war with.
Before this, in 1924, when Graham was only five, he focused on the outdoors, but rarely did he walk, as he was running and zooming, constantly.
Johnson would also become the first sitting President to attend one of Graham's crusades, which took place in Houston, Texas in 1965.
He claims he's a friend of all the presidents, but he was never a friend of mine when I was President.
… They do not reflect my views and I sincerely apologize for any offense caused by the remarks."
He was almost expelled, but Bob Jones, Sr. warned him not to throw his life away: "At best, all you could amount to would be a poor country Baptist preacher somewhere out in the sticks.... You have a voice that pulls.
He went on to say that out of the war in the Gulf may "come a new peace and, as suggested by the President, a new world order."
He is the eldest of four children born to Morrow (née Coffey; 1892–1981) and William Franklin Graham, Sr. (1888–1962).
He spent the last night of Johnson's presidency in the White House, and he stayed for the first night of Nixon's.
When ''Newsweek'' asked Graham whether ministers—whether they think of themselves as evangelists, pastors or a bit of both—should spend time engaged with politics, he replied: 'You know, I think in a way that has to be up to the individual as he feels led of the Lord.
After Nixon's victorious 1968 presidential campaign, Graham became an adviser, regularly visiting the White House and leading the president's private worship services.
On August 13, 1943, Graham married Wheaton classmate Ruth Bell (1920–2007), whose parents were Presbyterian missionaries in China.
Despite their friendship, tensions between Graham and King emerged in 1958 when the sponsoring committee of a crusade which took place in San Antonio, Texas on July 25 arranged for Graham to be introduced by that state's segregationist governor, Price Daniel.
Graham's eldest daughter Gigi, however, has praised the movie and has also been hired as a consultant to help promote the film.
At one point, Johnson even considered making Graham a member of his cabinet and grooming him to be his successor, though Graham insisted he had no political ambitions and wished to remain a preacher.
We have to stand in the middle in order to preach to all people, right and left.
Graham has frequently been honored by surveys, including "Greatest Living American" and has consistently ranked among the most admired persons in the United States and the world.
He appeared in China in 1988—for Ruth, this was a homecoming, since she had been born in China to missionary parents.
Her father, L. Nelson Bell, was a general surgeon.
The Grahams were married 64 years.
* Mission television specials broadcast in almost every market in the US and Canada
Graham was interested in fostering evangelism around the world.
There had been controversy over Graham's proposed burial place; he announced in June 2007 that he and his wife would be buried alongside each other at the Billy Graham Library in his hometown of Charlotte, North Carolina.
He has given his support to various political candidates over the years.
Starting to read books from an early age, Graham loved to read novels for boys, especially ''Tarzan''.
He also spoke at the memorial service following the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995.
I haven't been faithful to my own advice in the past.
Graham's advisor, Grady Wilson, replied to King that "even though we do not see eye to eye with him on every issue, we still love him in Christ."
For example, As Entrepreneur he built his own pavilion for the 1964 New York World's Fair.
He further stated that the role of wife, mother, and homemaker was the destiny of "real womanhood" according to the Judeo-Christian ethic.
Graham bailed King out of jail in the 1960s when King was arrested in demonstrations.
On July 9, 2006, he spoke at the Metro Maryland Franklin Graham Festival, held in Baltimore, Maryland, at Oriole Park at Camden Yards.
Graham was criticized by some for being too attracted to the seat of political power.
