On July 22, King had right knee surgery, which forced her to miss the US Open.
Once the tour took flight, King worked tirelessly to promote it even though many of the other top players were not supportive.
Indianapolis was followed by five tournaments that King failed to win (Detroit, Boston, Chicago, Jacksonville, and the inaugural Family Circle Cup in Hilton Head, South Carolina).
During the Federation Cup competition, King hinted at retirement from future major singles competitions and said that she was "sick and tired of continued surgery" in trying to get fit enough for those events.
In 2000, King received an award from GLAAD, an organization devoted to reducing discrimination against gays, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgender people, for "furthering the visibility and inclusion of the community in her work".
King is a member of the Board of Honorary Trustees for the Sports Museum of America, which opened in 2008.
In the final Grand Slam tournament of the year, King lost in the quarterfinals of the US Open to Nancy Richey Gunter 6–4, 8–6.
She won the title in San Francisco in mid-January.
At the clay court Family Circle Cup in late March, King played for the last time her long-time rival Nancy Richey Gunter in the first round.
Casals said, "No matter how far down you got her, you never could be sure of beating her."
King rebounded to win her third consecutive Wimbledon singles title, defeating Jones in the semifinals and Dalton in the final.
In 1979, several top players were asked who they would pick to help them recover from a hypothetical deficit of 1–5 (15–40) in the third set of a match on Wimbledon's Centre Court.
In 1963, King won the Southern California Championships for the first time, defeating Darlene Hard in the final.
(One of the city's recreation facilities has subsequently been named the Billie Jean King Tennis Center.)
King, who previously had rejected challenges from Riggs, then accepted a lucrative financial offer to play him for $100,000, winner-take-all.
Concerning the qualities of a champion tennis player, King said,
She defeated Navratilova and Wendy Turnbull to win in Phoenix, losing only four points to Turnbull in the third set of the final.
Claiming that the women's game was so inferior to the men's game that even a 55-year-old like himself could beat the current top female players, he challenged and defeated Margaret Court 6–2, 6–1.
King then defeated fourth seeded Goolagong Cawley in the second most lopsided women's final ever at Wimbledon (6–0, 6–1).
King was the runner-up in six Grand Slam singles events.
Evert said immediately after the final, which was her thirteenth career match with King, "I think that's the best that Billie Jean has ever played.
1 in six of the ten years from 1966 through 1975.
She defeated another clay court specialist, Virginia Ruzici, in the second round before winning only one game from Evert in the final.
Upon her return to the United States, King won the Pacific Coast Pro and the Los Angeles Pro.
To close out the year, King in November won the Virginia Slims Invitational in Richmond, Virginia and the Embassy Indoor Tennis Championships in London.
In November, Evert snapped King's 18-match winning streak in the final of the Colgate Series Championships in Mission Hills, California.
After thirteen unsuccessful attempts to win a Grand Slam singles title from 1959 through 1965, King at the age of 22 finally won the first of her six singles titles at Wimbledon and the first of twelve Grand Slam singles titles overall, defeating Court in the semifinals 6–3, 6–3 and Maria Bueno in the final.
King was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1987.
She was seeded second but lost in the quarterfinals to fifth-seeded Dianne Fromholtz Balestrat of Australia 6–1, 6–4.
As King was serving for the match at 6–5 in the third set, a disputed line call went in Evert's favor.
In 2008, King published the book ''Pressure is a Privilege: Lessons I've Learned from Life and the Battle of the Sexes''.
Olga Morozova then upset King in her next two tournaments, at Philadelphia in the final and at Wimbledon in a quarterfinal 7–5, 6–2.
In Perth, King won the Western Australia Championships, defeating Margaret Court in the final.
In second round singles play at Wimbledon, fifth-seeded Yola Ramírez Ochoa defeated King in a two-day match on Centre Court 11–9, 1–6, 6–2 after King had received a first round bye.
At the US Open, the ninth-seeded King reached the quarterfinals without dropping a set, where she upset the fourth-seeded Virginia Wade 6–3, 7–6(4).
In 1999 King was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame.
''Life'' magazine in 1990 named her one of the "100 Most Important Americans of the 20th Century".
At the US Open, however, King won the tournament without losing a set, including a quarterfinal win over Wade, a semifinal defeat of Court, and a final win over Kerry Melville Reid.
"For three years we had two tours and because of their governments Martina Navratilova and Olga Morozova had to play the other tour.
John McEnroe, Venus Williams, Jimmy Connors, and Chris Evert were among the speakers during the rededication ceremony.
After deciding not to defend her French Open singles title, King won four consecutive tournaments, including her fifth Wimbledon singles title when she defeated Kerry Melville Reid in the quarterfinals, Evonne Goolagong in the semifinals on her eighth match point, and Chris Evert in the final.
There, she won the women's doubles title in her first attempt while partnering Karen Hantze Susman.
While in Australia, King played three tournaments that year and lost in the quarterfinals of the Queensland Grass Court Championships, the final of the New South Wales Championships (to Court), and the third round of the Victorian Championships.
But then King lost in Long Beach to Françoise Dürr (although King claimed in her 1982 autobiography that she intentionally lost the match because of an argument with her husband) and in Fort Lauderdale on clay to Chris Evert 6–1, 6–0.
She then played two clay court tournaments in Europe, winning neither, before resuming play in the United States.
In August, King won the indoor Houston tournament and the U.S. Women's Clay Court Championships in Indianapolis.
Jones pulled her left hamstring muscle early in the final and saved four match points in the second set before King prevailed.
You're supposed to win.
In one strip, Peppermint Patty tells Marcie, "Has anyone ever told you that when you're mad, you look just like Billie Jean King?"
At the Philadelphia and District Women's Grass Court Championships, King defaulted her quarterfinal match with Kathy Chabot while trailing 6–1, 1–2.
Along the way, she defeated Masthoff in a three-set quarterfinal and Wade in a three-set semifinal, saving two match points at 4–5 in the second set.
This was the first year since 1965 that King did not win at least one Grand Slam singles title.
She defeated Virginia Wade in the quarterfinals, Helga Niessen Masthoff in the semifinals, and Goolagong in the final.
The match is considered a very significant event in developing greater recognition and respect for women's tennis.
He then became a self-described tennis "hustler" who played in promotional challenge matches.
King was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in 1990, and in 2006, the USTA National Tennis Center in New York City was renamed the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center.
"This is a chance for me – and for the United States of America – to say thank you to some of the finest citizens of this country and of all countries", President Obama said.
The following week in Tokyo, King won her first singles title in almost two years, defeating Goolagong Cawley in the final.
King returned to singles competition at the Wimbledon warm-up tournament in Chichester.
King was the year-ending World No.
In May, she lost in the quarterfinals of the Southern California Championships 6–4, 2–6, 6–4 to 43-year-old Dorothy "Dodo" Cheney, who was the first American to win the singles title at the Australian Championships in 1938.
King argued that this was corrupt and kept the game highly elitist.
King saved three match points while serving at 6–7 and three more match points while serving at 7–8.
At Wimbledon, Court needed seven match points to defeat King in the final 14–12, 11–9 in one of the greatest women's finals in the history of the tournament.
In only her second career singles match at Wimbledon, King upset Margaret Court, the World No.
It would ruin the women's tennis tour and affect all women's self-esteem."
An indicator of King's mental toughness at crunch time in Grand Slam singles tournaments was her 11–2 career record in deuce third sets, i.e., third sets that were tied 5–5 before being resolved.
King quickly became a significant force in the opening of tennis to professionalism.
Concerning the personal cost of concealing her sexuality for so many years, King said:
The third week, she defeated Ruzici, Stöve, and Janet Newberry Wright to win in San Juan.
King led in the tiebreaker 5–1 before Navratilova came back to win the set, whereupon the umpire then agreed to the suspension.
In 1973, the US Open became the first major tournament to offer equal prize money for men and women.
Billie Jean's younger brother Randy Moffitt grew up to become a professional baseball player, pitching for 12 years in the major leagues for the San Francisco Giants, Houston Astros, and Toronto Blue Jays.
The next week, she defeated Navratilova, Fromholtz Balestrat, and Wimbledon runner-up Stöve to win in São Paulo.
In 1977, King said that her doctors predicted in 1968 that her left knee would allow her to play competitive tennis for only two more years.
I'm not 20-years-old and I can't just go out and change my game.
To end the year, King played two tournaments in New Zealand but did not win either.
King won six tournaments during the year.
In her last competitive doubles match, King and her partner, Jennifer Capriati, lost a second round match to Brenda Schultz-McCarthy and Andrea Temesvári 6–3, 6–2 at the Virginia Slims of Florida tournament.
In 1972, King was the joint winner, with John Wooden, of the ''Sports Illustrated'' Sportsman of the Year award and was one of the ''Time'' Persons of the Year in 1975.
(Martina Navratilova also has 20 career titles at Wimbledon.)
The thrill was exposing a lot of new people to tennis."
In 1971 she had an abortion.
But King recovered the next week to win the German Open in Hamburg on clay.
1 male tennis player for 1941, 1946, and 1947.
King lost only nine points in the 6–0 bageling of Evert in the first set of their final.
You gotta be kidding.
King did not lose again until mid-August, winning six consecutive tournaments.
King became the oldest WTA player to win a singles tournament when she won Birmingham at 39 years, 7 months and 23 days.
King teamed with Navratilova to win the women's doubles title at the US Open, King's fourth women's doubles title at that tournament and fourteenth Grand Slam women's doubles title overall.
In her final adult tournament of the year, King lost (7–5 in the third set) to Ann Haydon-Jones in the third round of the Pacific Southwest Championships.
She was honored by the Office of the Manhattan Borough President in March 2008 and was included in a map of historical sites related or dedicated to important women.
The following week, King won the Sarasota, Florida tournament, defeating Evert in the final 6–3, 6–2.
And she doesn't have any."
This was followed in successive weeks by a loss in the Jacksonville final to Marie Neumannova Pinterova and in a St. Petersburg semifinal to Evert (6–2, 6–3).
King had minor knee surgery on November 14 in San Francisco to remove adhesions and cartilage.
Her last tournament of the year was the U.S. Championships, where she defeated Jones in the quarterfinals and Bueno in the semifinals.
At 34, I feel fitter than when I was 24."
In 2006, the Women's Sports Foundation began to sponsor the Billie Awards, which are named after and hosted by King.
King became the captain of the United States Fed Cup team and coach of its women's Olympic tennis squad.
Chris Evert, Margaret Court, Virginia Wade, they let us do the pioneering work and they weren't very nice to us.
She guided the U.S. to the Fed Cup championship in 1996 and helped Lindsay Davenport, Gigi Fernández, and Mary Joe Fernández capture Olympic gold medals.
The Italian Open victory was the first important clay court title of King's career.
King then won her Wightman Cup matches, defeated Navratilova to win the tournament in Japan, and beat Wade to win the Bremar Cup in London.
King said that it took eight months (May 1969) for her knee to recover completely from the surgery.
King then upset third-seeded Tracy Austin in the quarterfinals 3–6, 6–4, 6–2 to become the oldest female semifinalist at Wimbledon since Dorothea Douglass Lambert Chambers in 1920.
The following week in Indian Wells, California, King again defeated Gunter in the semifinals but lost to Evert in the final.
King returned to the tour in September, where she had a first round loss at the Virginia Slims Invitational in Houston and a semifinal loss at the Pacific Coast Championships in Berkeley, California.
According to King, "I had nothing left to give."
This loss prompted King to say, "I better get it together by October or November or that's it.
King said after the match, "I don't think my mobility is very good and that's what I need to beat her.
The following year, Zina Garrison succeeded King as Fed Cup captain.
On dealing with my parents and even how to raise children.
On December 6, 2006, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and his wife Maria Shriver inducted King into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History, Women, and the Arts.
The semifinal victory ended Court's 12-tournament and 59-match winning streaks, with King saving at least three match points when down 5–4 (40–0) in the second set.
King won 39 Grand Slam titles, including 12 singles, 16 women's doubles, and 11 mixed doubles titles.
The week after, King again defeated Wade to win the Irish Open for the second time in her career.
Because she wore eyeglasses, King agreed to start the match then on condition that tournament officials immediately suspend the match if the rain resumed.
King played 51 Grand Slam singles events from 1959 through 1983, reaching at least the semifinals in 27 and at least the quarterfinals in 40 of her attempts.
She defeated Navratilova all four times they played, including three times in three consecutive weeks, and beat Wimbledon champion Virginia Wade twice.
I'm going to win Wimbledon next year."
1 for the year; this was her first full season since winning the Grand Slam in 1970, as she had missed significant portions of 1971 and 1972 due to childbirth.
The inconsistent results continued through mid-April, in Oklahoma City (losing in the quarterfinals); Washington, D.C. (losing in the second round); and Dallas (losing to Nancy Richey Gunter after defeating Evert in the quarterfinals 6–7(4–5), 6–3, 7–5 and Evonne Goolagong in the semifinals 1–6, 6–4, 6–1).
Six of King's Grand Slam singles titles were at Wimbledon, four were at the U.S. Championships/Open, one was at the French Open, and one was at the Australian Championships.
When the tour returned to the United States, King did not win any of the three tournaments she played before the US Open, including a straight sets loss to Margaret Court in Newport.
Beginning September 26, King played seven consecutive weeks.
In 1967, King criticized the United States Lawn Tennis Association (USLTA) in a series of press conferences, denouncing what she called the USLTA's practice of "shamateurism", where top players were paid under the table to guarantee their entry into tournaments.
But if I keep using that as a copout, I shouldn't play."
Evert repeated her Wimbledon quarterfinal victory over King at the clay court US Open, winning 6–2, 6–0.
2 in three of those years and the World No.
She's mad because she could not get what she wanted."
Her dominance was aided by rival Margaret Court's absence from the tour due to childbirth during most of the 1972 season.
Physically, she Evert tears your guts apart unless you can stay with her.
On grass at the Wills Open in Bristol, United Kingdom, King defeated Virginia Wade in the semifinals (6–8, 11–9, 6–2) before losing to Court.
King's five losses during this period were to Françoise Dürr (twice), Casals (once), Ann Haydon-Jones (once), and Chris Evert (in St. Petersburg).
In the fourth round, King upset sixth-seeded Australian Wendy Turnbull in straight sets.
In Federation Cup finals, King was on the winning United States team seven times, in 1963, 1966, 1967, and 1976 through 1979.
During the first set, drizzle began to fall; however, the chair umpire refused to suspend the match.
It just means I've got a lot more work.
That was followed by straight set wins over Rosemary Casals and Goolagong.
She partnered Phil Dent to the mixed doubles title at the US Open.
King then won the French Open without losing a set and completed a career Grand Slam.
She defeated Ann Haydon-Jones at both the Wightman Cup and Fed Cup but lost to Court in the final of the Federation Cup 6–2, 6–3.
Although unseeded, King and Susman defeated the top seeded team of Renée Schuurman Haygarth and Sandra Reynolds Price in the quarterfinals and the third seeded team of Margaret Court and Jan Lehane O'Neill in the final.
She talks about me being the smart one.
I've been painted as a person who only competes....
When Heldman complained to the match umpire that King was taking too long between games, King reportedly told Heldman, "If you want the match that badly, you can have it!"
Four weeks later at the Queen's Club tournament in London, King played Margaret Court for the first time in 1971, losing their final.
I tried not to get upset with them.
King teamed with Navratilova to win King's 39th and final Grand Slam title at the US Open.
During the European clay court season, King warmed-up for the French Open by playing in Monte Carlo (losing in the semifinals), winning the Italian Open (saving three match points against Virginia Wade in the semifinals), playing in Bournemouth (losing to Wade in the quarterfinals), and playing in Berlin (losing to Masthoff in the semifinals).
King played doubles sporadically from 1984 through 1990.
When I was down 4–5 and love–40, I told myself, 'You have been here 21 years, so use that experience and hang on.
At Wimbledon, the unseeded King defeated seventh-seeded Maria Bueno in the quarterfinals 6–2, 7–5 and third-seeded Ann Haydon-Jones in the semifinals 6–4, 6–4 before losing the final to top-seeded Margaret Court.
This was King's first career victory over Austin after five defeats and reversed the result of their 1979 Wimbledon quarterfinal.
King won five of the eight tournaments she entered plus both of her Wightman Cup matches.
If you go back and look at the old quotes; they played for the love of the game, we played for the money.
I'll have to make some big decisions.
At Wimbledon, King played with a painful heel spur in her left foot and lost to Evert in the quarterfinals for the second consecutive year 6–3, 3–6, 6–2.
At the Federation Cup one week later in West Germany on clay, King won all four of her matches, including victories over DuPlooy, Ann Haydon-Jones, and Helga Niessen Masthoff.
Their rivalry resumed in the final of the Virginia Slims of Nashville tournament, where Court won for the third time in four matches against King in 1973.
She lost in the final of the South Australian Championships and the first round of the Western Australia Championships.
She retired from competitive play in doubles in March 1990.
King said after the match that she was cheated out of the match and that she had never been angrier about a match.
At the US Open, King defeated Bueno in a semifinal before being upset in the final by Virginia Wade.
Three weeks later in Brighton, King lost a semifinal match with Navratilova 7–5, 0–6, 7–6(3) after King led 6–5 in the third set.
At Wimbledon, King lost only 13 points while defeating Rosemary Casals in the semifinals 6–1, 6–0; however, Jones upset King in the final and prevented King from winning her fourth consecutive singles title there.
After graduating, she attended California State University, Los Angeles (Cal State LA).
The remainder of the year, King's win–loss record was 31–3, losing only to Evert, Dianne Fromholtz Balestrat, and Michelle Tyler Wilson.
Let me tell you, Billie Jean's the smartest one, the cleverest one you'll ever see.
At the Middle States Grass Court Championships in Philadelphia, King lost to Nancy Richey Gunter in the quarterfinals.
King then won the Australian Championships for the first time, defeating Dalton in the semifinals and Court in the final.
In the third set, Navratilova broke serve to take a 2–0 lead before King broke back twice and eventually served for the match at 6–5.
To end the year, King was undefeated in five doubles matches (four with Evert and one with Rosemary Casals) as the U.S. won the Federation Cup in Melbourne, Australia.
Evert blamed her semifinal defeat on a loss of concentration when she saw Jimmy Connors, her former fiance, escorting Susan George into Centre Court.
In Hobart, King won the Tasmanian Championships by defeating Judy Tegart Dalton in the final.
But as soon as I got to the point where I could read her too well, she tried to dissociate the relationship.
King saved two match points before Navratilova broke serve to win the match.
Evert said after the match, "Psychologically, I feel very confident when I ... play her."
Riggs had been a top men's player in the 1930s and 1940s in both the amateur and professional ranks.
King eventually won the tournament.
She doesn't want to risk appearing weak in front of anybody.
As during the previous year, King started 1973 inconsistently.
On August 28, 2006, the USTA National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park was rededicated as the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center.
Dubbed "the Battle of the Sexes", the Riggs-King match took place at the Houston Astrodome in Texas on September 20, 1973.
King eventually reached the quarterfinals, losing to fifth-seeded Ann Haydon-Jones 6–3, 6–1, who wrote a book "A Game of Love" (1971).
She became league commissioner in 1982 and major owner in 1984.
King then won the tournaments in Louisville, Phoenix, and London (Wembley Pro).
In 1970, Margaret Court won all four Grand Slam singles tournaments and was clearly the World No.
She made a bad decision.
Afterward, King did not play a tour match until the US Open, where she won her fourth singles title and third in the last four years.
In 2002, King dismissed Capriati from the Fed Cup team, saying Capriati had violated rules that forbade bringing along and practicing with personal coaches.
Evert said she was disappointed with King and that until Richards's status was resolved, "all of the women should stick together."
But in early 1972, King admitted that cramps associated with the abortion caused the retirement.
King then won two tournaments in South Africa, including the South African Open.
I gotta go out and kill myself for the next six months.
This was the first time in Wimbledon history that the women's top seed had lost her first match.
She was inducted into the Southern California Tennis Hall of Fame on August 5, 2011.
Sometimes when I'm watching someone like Martina Navratilova, I remember how nice it was to be No.
The following week, King won her first international title at the Irish Championships.
