Clinton later agreed to an out-of-court settlement, paying $850,000.
The family moved to Hot Springs in 1950.
Both Clintons earned law degrees from Yale Law School, where they met and began dating.
In September 2004, Clinton received a quadruple bypass surgery.
According to officials, the IED was large enough to "blow up the entire presidential motorcade".
On February 11, 2010, he was rushed to NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital in New York City after complaining of chest pains, and had two coronary stents implanted in his heart.
His mother, Virginia Dell ( Cassidy; 1923–1994), traveled to New Orleans to study nursing soon after he was born.
After Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign was over, Bill Clinton continued to raise funds to help pay off her campaign debt.
Following another attempt in December 2000 at Bolling Air Force Base, in which the President offered the Clinton Parameters, the situation broke down completely after the end of the Taba Summit and with the start of the Second Intifada.
This foundation includes the Clinton Foundation HIV and AIDS Initiative (CHAI), which strives to combat that disease, and has worked with the Australian government toward that end.
In 1974 he ran for the House of Representatives.
Linda Tripp's grand jury testimony also differed from Willey's claims regarding inappropriate sexual advances.
Also in 1998, Juanita Broaddrick alleged that Clinton had raped her in the spring of 1978, although she stated she did not remember the exact date.
ABC News characterized public consensus on Clinton as, "You can't trust him, he's got weak morals and ethics and he's done a heck of a good job."
He further stated that because he opposed the war, he would not volunteer to serve in uniform, but would subject himself to the draft, and would serve if selected only as a way "to maintain my political viability within the system."
Bill Clinton continues to be active in public life, giving speeches, fundraising, and founding charitable organizations.
Standing at a height of  (1.88&nbsp;m), Clinton is tied with five others as the fourth-tallest president in the nation's history.
He has been honored in various other ways, in countries that include the Czech Republic, Papua New Guinea, Germany, and Kosovo.
General Wesley Clark was Supreme Allied Commander of NATO and oversaw the mission.
After the 1998 elections, the House impeached Clinton, alleging perjury and obstruction of justice related to the Lewinsky scandal.
Chaired by Clinton's wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, also an attorney and chair of the Legal Services Corporation, the Arkansas Education Standards Committee transformed Arkansas's education system from the worst in the United States to one of the best.
Details of the plot were revealed to Gormley by Lewis C. Merletti, former member of the Presidential Protection Detail and Director of the Secret Service.
At the end of this operation Clinton announced that "So long as Saddam remains in power, he will remain a threat to his people, his region, and the world.
Robert S. Bennett, Clinton's main lawyer for the case, called the filing "a pack of lies" and "an organized campaign to smear the President of the United States" funded by Clinton's political enemies.
The claim "Slick Willie" would last throughout his presidency.
Winning the big prizes of Florida and Texas and many of the Southern primaries on Super Tuesday gave Clinton a sizable delegate lead.
Running in a conservative district against incumbent Republican John Paul Hammerschmidt, Clinton's campaign was bolstered by the anti-Republican and anti-incumbent mood resulting from the Watergate scandal.
After Hurricane Katrina, Clinton joined with fellow former President George H. W. Bush to establish the Bush-Clinton Tsunami Fund in January 2005, and the Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund in October of that year.
He was presented with the Medal for Distinguished Public Service by Secretary of Defense William Cohen in 2001.
Two years later, in 1996, Clinton became the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected to a second term.
Noting that Clinton's sex life was scrutinized more than his career accomplishments, Morrison compared this to the stereotyping and double standards that blacks typically endure.
Presenting himself as a moderate and a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, he headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991.
Monroe Schwarzlose of Kingsland in Cleveland County, polled 31&nbsp;percent of the vote against Clinton in the Democratic gubernatorial primary of 1980.
Bill Clinton is one of the narrators on a 2003 recording of Sergei Prokofiev's ''Peter and the Wolf'', on Pentatone, together with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia Loren.
During the operation, two U.S. helicopters were shot down by rocket-propelled grenade attacks to their tail rotors, trapping soldiers behind enemy lines.
He was honored with a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children, a J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding, a TED Prize (named for the confluence of technology, entertainment and design), and was named as an Honorary GLAAD Media Award recipient for his work as an advocate for the LGBT community.
Because Bush's approval ratings were around 80&nbsp;percent during the Gulf War, he was described as unbeatable.
He brought Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat together at Camp David for the Camp David Summit in July 2000, which lasted 14 days.
In his eight years in office, 11.6% of Clinton's court of appeals nominees and 17.4% of his district court nominees were black; 32.8% of his court of appeals nominees and 28.5% of his district court nominees were women.
After Clinton at first denied having a relationship with Flowers on ''60 Minutes'', he later admitted that he had a sexual encounter with Flowers.
In response, U.S. forces were withdrawn from Somalia and later conflicts were approached with fewer soldiers on the ground.
Clinton's advisers pressured him to raise taxes on the theory that a smaller federal budget deficit would reduce bond interest rates.
To hold impeachment proceedings, the Republican leadership called a lame-duck session in December 1998.
In 1994, Paula Jones brought a sexual harassment lawsuit against Clinton, claiming he made unwanted advances in 1991, which he denied.
Clinton repeatedly condemned Bush for making a promise he failed to keep.
Brock later apologized to Clinton, saying the article was politically motivated "bad journalism" and that "the troopers were greedy and had slimy motives."
Finally, conservatives were previously united by anti-communism, but with the end of the Cold War, the party lacked a uniting issue.
Based on his philanthropic worldview, Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address issues of global importance.
There were many more Somali casualties.
Some suggested Schwarzlose's unexpected voter turnout foreshadowed Clinton's defeat in the general election that year by Republican challenger Frank D. White.
The same poll showed that just 3% of American voters regarded Clinton as the worst president since World War II.
After extensive investigation over several years, no indictments were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas.
And Clinton also pushed for passing hate crimes laws for gays and for the private sector Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which, buoyed by his lobbying, failed to pass the Senate by a single vote in 1996.
Once more, the word "wedding" was the code name used by a terrorist group for a past assassination attempt.
On January 1, 1994, Clinton signed the North American Free Trade Agreement into law.
The election gave Democrats full control of the United States Congress, the first time one party controlled both the executive and legislative branches since Democrats held the 96th United States Congress during the presidency of Jimmy Carter.
The story mentioned a woman named ''Paula'', a reference to Paula Jones.
Jimmy Carter had made a similar visit in 1994.
He gave the nationally televised opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, but his speech, which was 33 minutes long and twice as long as it was expected to be, was criticized for being too long and poorly delivered.
In the first primary contest, the Iowa Caucus, Clinton finished a distant third to Iowa Senator Tom Harkin.
Clinton earned more than $104 million from paid speeches between 2001 and 2012.
Most of the controversy surrounded Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clinton's brother, Hugh Rodham, accepted payments in return for influencing the president's decision-making regarding the pardons.
Clinton received 379, or over 70&nbsp;percent of the Electoral College votes, with Dole receiving 159 electoral votes.
As Clinton once joked, he was the youngest ex-governor in the nation's history.
From a poll conducted of the American people in December 1999, Clinton was among eighteen included in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.
At age 46, Clinton was the third-youngest president, and the first from the Baby Boomer generation.
Despite claims by Mansoor Ijaz and Sudanese officials that the Sudanese government had offered to arrest and extradite bin Laden and that U.S. authorities rejected each offer the 9/11 Commission Report stated that "we have not found any reliable evidence to support the Sudanese claim."
Clinton has spoken in prime time at every Democratic National Convention since 1988.
Bill Clinton has given dozens of paid speeches each year, mostly to corporations and philanthropic groups in North America and Europe, often earning $100,000 to $300,000 per speech.
During Clinton's re-election campaign he said, "My 1994 crime bill expanded the death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers, and nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons."
He defeated four Republican candidates for governor: Lowe (1978), White (1982 and 1986), Jonesboro businessmen Woody Freeman (1984), and Sheffield Nelson of Little Rock (1990).
After killing a police officer and a civilian, Rector shot himself in the head, leading to what his lawyers said was a state where he could still talk but did not understand the idea of death.
Clinton declared at the ceremony that "in the United States of America, I really don't believe former American presidents need awards anymore, but I am very honored by this one, I love Haiti, and I believe in its promise."
After his impeachment proceedings in 1998 and 1999, Clinton's rating reached its highest point.
They married on October 11, 1975, and their only child, Chelsea, was born on February 27, 1980.
Hillary Clinton said that she and Bill came out of the White House financially "broke" and in debt, especially due to large legal fees incurred during their years in the White House.
Clinton's November 2000 visit to Vietnam was the first by a U.S. president since the end of the Vietnam War.
The resolution placed Kosovo under UN administration and authorized a peacekeeping force to be deployed to the region.
Along with his two Supreme Court appointments, Clinton appointed 66 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 305 judges to the United States district courts.
The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged effort by the People's Republic of China (PRC) to influence the domestic policies of the United States, before and during the Clinton administration, and involved the fundraising practices of the administration itself.
Proposed reforms included more spending for schools (supported by a sales-tax increase), better opportunities for gifted children, vocational education, higher teachers' salaries, more course variety, and compulsory teacher competency exams.
In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives for perjury before a grand jury and obstruction of justice during a lawsuit against him, both related to a scandal involving White House (and later Department of Defense) employee Monica Lewinsky.
After failing to pass national health care reform, the Democratic House was ousted when the Republican Party won control of the Congress in 1994, for the first time in 40 years.
However, John F. Harris, a biographer of Clinton's, states the program failed because of a lack of coordination within the White House.
In December of that year, allegations by Arkansas state troopers Larry Patterson and Roger Perry were first reported by David Brock in the American Spectator.
In the January 1997 State of the Union address, Clinton proposed a new initiative to provide coverage to up to five million children.
Their position was that Clinton should have integrated the military by executive order, noting that President Harry S. Truman used executive order to racially desegregate the armed forces.
Merletti wanted to reroute the motorcade, but the alternate route would add forty-five minutes to the drive time.
On October 10, 2000, Clinton signed into law the U.S.–China Relations Act of 2000, which granted permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) trade status to People's Republic of China.
After Clinton met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, Kim issued a pardon.
In Clinton's 1998 State of the Union Address, he warned Congress that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was building an arsenal of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons:
Others were more critical.
During the 2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign, Clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife, Hillary Clinton.
Various colleges and universities have awarded Clinton honorary degrees, including Doctorate of Law degrees and Doctor of Humane Letters degrees.
Clinton controversially issued 141 pardons and 36 commutations on his last day in office on January 20, 2001.
Such remarks lead to apprehension that the party would be split to the detriment of Obama's election.
Clinton has remained active in politics by campaigning for Democratic candidates, including his wife's campaigns for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2008 and 2016, and Barack Obama's presidential campaigns in 2008 and 2012.
Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd President of the United States on January 20, 1993.
The policy was developed as a compromise after Clinton's proposal to allow gays to serve openly in the military met staunch opposition from prominent Congressional Republicans and Democrats, including Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Sam Nunn (D-GA).
Following the failures of the peace talks, Clinton stated Arafat "missed the opportunity" to facilitate a "just and lasting peace."
In 2010, Clinton announced support of, and delivered the keynote address for, the inauguration of NTR, Ireland's first environmental foundation.
He subsequently decided not to join the ROTC, saying in a letter to the officer in charge of the program he had planned to join that he opposed the war, but did not think it was honorable to use ROTC, National Guard, or Reserve service to avoid serving in Vietnam.
The Congressional Budget Office reported budget surpluses of $69&nbsp;billion in 1998, $126&nbsp;billion in 1999, and $236&nbsp;billion in 2000, during the last three years of Clinton's presidency.
Gallup polls in 2007 and 2011 showed that Clinton was regarded by 13% of Americans as the greatest president in U.S. history.
With United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the bombing campaign ended on June 10, 1999.
Batts was confirmed by the Senate in a voice vote in 1994.
As part of the tsunami effort, these two ex-presidents appeared in a Super Bowl XXXIX pre-game show, and traveled to the affected areas.
Clinton continues to visit Haiti to witness the inauguration of refugee villages, and to raise funds for victims of the earthquake.
Shortly after taking office, Clinton signed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 on February 5, which required large employers to allow employees to take unpaid leave for pregnancy or a serious medical condition.
Some of the American bodies were dragged through the streets—a spectacle broadcast on television news programs.
But Jones appealed Webber Wright's ruling, and her suit gained traction following Clinton's admission to having an affair with Monica Lewinsky in August 1998.
Officials also discovered a bomb near a major U.S. naval base.
Since 2000, he has frequently been referred to as "The Big Dog" or "Big Dog."
His 373 judicial appointments are the second most in American history behind those of Ronald Reagan.
Ultimately, in United States v. Windsor, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down DOMA in June 2013.
While the House Judiciary Committee hearings ended in a straight party-line vote, there was lively debate on the House floor.
In his autobiography, Clinton blames Arafat for the collapse of the summit.
Additionally, through the implementation of spending restraints, it mandated the budget be balanced over a number of years.
Opponents sometimes referred to him as "Slick Willie", a nickname which was first applied to him in 1980 by ''Pine Bluff Commercial'' journalist Paul Greenberg; Greenberg believed that Clinton was abandoning the progressive policies of previous Arkansas Governors such as Winthrop Rockefeller, Dale Bumpers and David Pryor.
Clinton was born and raised in Arkansas, and is an alumnus of Georgetown University, where he was a member of Kappa Kappa Psi and the Phi Beta Kappa Society and earned a Rhodes Scholarship to attend the University of Oxford.
The perjury charge arose from Clinton's testimony before a grand jury that had been convened to investigate perjury he may have committed in his sworn deposition during Paula Jones's sexual harassment lawsuit.
She left Clinton in Hope with her parents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy, who owned and ran a small grocery store.
Two days after taking office, on January 22, 1993—the 20th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in ''Roe v. Wade'', Clinton reversed restrictions on domestic and international family planning programs that had been imposed by Clinton's predecessors, Ronald Reagan and George H.W.
During the 1992 campaign it was revealed that Clinton's uncle had attempted to secure him a position in the Navy Reserve, which would have kept him from going to Vietnam.
Many were especially critical of him following his remarks in the South Carolina primary, which Obama won.
Many military events occurred during Clinton's presidency.
This resulted in an urban battle that killed 18 American soldiers, wounded 73 others, and one was taken prisoner.
The Senate finished a twenty-one-day trial on February 12, 1999, with the vote of 55 Not Guilty/45 Guilty on the perjury charge and 50 Not Guilty/50 Guilty on the obstruction of justice charge.
Two other bombs had been discovered in Manila earlier in the week so the threat level that day was high.
At the end of his presidency, Clinton moved to New York and helped his wife win election to the U.S. Senate there.
Until recently, this thwarted assassination attempt was never made public and remained top secret.
His prominent role in campaigning for President Obama during the 2012 presidential election and his widely publicized speech at the 2012 Democratic National Convention, where he officially nominated Obama and criticized Republican nominee Mitt Romney and Republican policies in detail, earned him the nickname "Explainer-in-Chief."
On January 19, 2001, Clinton's law license was suspended for five years after he acknowledged to an Arkansas circuit court that he had engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice in the ''Jones'' case.
In 2009, Clinton was named the United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti, and after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Clinton teamed with George W. Bush to form the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund.
Clinton appointed the first African American judges to the Fourth Circuit (Roger Gregory) and the Seventh Circuit (Ann Claire Williams).
In 1992, Gennifer Flowers stated that she had a relationship with Clinton that began in 1980.
In 1976 Clinton ran for Arkansas Attorney General.
Since then, Clinton has been assigned a number of other diplomatic missions.
In 1999 Clinton signed into law the ''Financial Services Modernization Act'' also known as the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, which repealed the part of the Glass–Steagall Act that had prohibited a bank from offering a full range of investment, commercial banking, and insurance services since its enactment in 1933.
While campaigning for U.S. President, the then-Governor Clinton returned to Arkansas to see that Ricky Ray Rector would be executed.
Clinton deployed U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia in late 1995, to uphold the subsequent Dayton Agreement.
His policies, particularly the North American Free Trade Agreement and welfare reform, have been attributed to a centrist Third Way philosophy of governance.
Both Bill and Hillary Clinton have received millions of dollars in book authorship fees.
On May 19, 1993, Clinton fired seven employees of the White House Travel Office, causing the White House travel office controversy even though the Travel Office staff served at the pleasure of the president and could be dismissed without cause.
With no major Southern state remaining, Clinton targeted New York, which had many delegates.
Administration spokesman Richard Socarides said, "...the alternatives we knew were going to be far worse, and it was time to move on and get the president re-elected."
In March 2000, Independent Counsel Robert Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any crime.
Clinton was also a member of the Order of DeMolay, a youth group affiliated with Freemasonry, but he never became a Freemason.
A U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation did result in convictions against the McDougals for their role in the Whitewater project, but the Clintons themselves were never charged, and Clinton maintains innocence in the affair.
Throughout his first year in office, Clinton consistently supported ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate.
Two days later, in a nationally televised address to a joint session of Congress, Clinton unveiled his economic plan.
In another 1998 event, Elizabeth Gracen recanted a six-year-old denial and stated she had a one-night stand with Clinton in 1982.
Later known as Troopergate, the allegations by these men were that they arranged sexual liaisons for Bill Clinton back when he was governor of Arkansas.
In 2014, 18% of respondents in a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll of American voters regarded Clinton as the best president since World War II, making him the third most popular among postwar presidents, behind John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan.
He became the youngest governor in the country at 32.
Clinton signed the Brady Bill into law on November 30, 1993, which mandated federal background checks on firearm purchasers in the United States, and imposed a five-day waiting period on purchases, until the NICS system was implemented in 1998..
Bennett said that the President made the settlement only so he could end the lawsuit for good and move on with his life.
The bill passed the house with 234 votes against 200 opposed (132 Republicans and 102 Democrats voting in favor; 156 Democrats, 43 Republicans, and 1 independent against).
The White House FBI files controversy of June 1996 arose concerning improper access by the White House to FBI security-clearance documents.
Clinton's foundation joined with the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group in 2006 to improve cooperation among those cities, and he met with foreign leaders to promote this initiative.
During the eight years of the Clinton administration, the U.S. abortion rate declined by about 18.4 percent.
Through speaking engagements and fundraisers, he was able to raise $10&nbsp;million toward her campaign.
Clinton drew strong support from the African American community and made improving race relations a major theme of his presidency.
The term "ethnic cleansing" was used as an alternative to "genocide" to denote not just ethnically motivated murder but also displacement, though critics charge there is no difference.
After this experience, Clinton adopted the plant-based whole foods (vegan) diet recommended by doctors Dean Ornish and Caldwell Esselstyn.
On July 17, 1996, Clinton issued Executive Order 13011&nbsp;– Federal Information Technology, ordering the heads of all federal agencies to utilize information technology fully to make the information of the agency easily accessible to the public."
In the 1996 presidential election, Clinton was re-elected, receiving 49.2&nbsp;percent of the popular vote over Republican Bob Dole (40.7&nbsp;percent of the popular vote) and Reform candidate Ross Perot (8.4&nbsp;percent of the popular vote), becoming the first Democratic incumbent since Lyndon Johnson to be elected to a second term and the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected President more than once.
Clinton left office with the highest end-of-office approval rating of any U.S. President since World War II.
Seeking to weaken Hussein's grip on power, Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 into law on October 31, 1998, which instituted a policy of "regime change" against Iraq, though it explicitly stated it did not provide for direct intervention on the part of American military forces.
Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address international causes, such as the prevention of AIDS and global warming.
In June 2014, ABC News and ''The Washington Post'' reported that Bill Clinton has made more than $100 million giving paid speeches since leaving public office, and in 2008, the ''New York Times'' reported that the Clintons' income tax returns show they have made $109 million in the 8 years from January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2007, including almost $92 million from his speaking and book-writing.
The Senate later acquitted Clinton on both charges.
In March 2005, he underwent surgery for a partially collapsed lung.
On budgetary matters his policy of fiscal conservatism helped to reduce deficits.
Clinton also oversaw a boom of the U.S. economy.
In the Yale Law Library in 1971 he met fellow law student Hillary Rodham, who was a year ahead of him.
Clinton was in the chorus and played the tenor saxophone, winning first chair in the state band's saxophone section.
Ray's report further stated, "there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official was involved" in seeking the files.
Clinton joined friend Bruce Lindsey's Little Rock law firm of Wright, Lindsey and Jennings.
During the campaign for the New Hampshire primary, reports of an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers surfaced.
The courts disagreed with the allegation of grave mental impairment and allowed the execution.
The U.S. treasury reported a debt of $5.413 trillion in 1997, and a debt of $5.656 trillion in 1999.
Although he immediately assumed use of his stepfather's surname, it was not until Clinton turned fifteen that he formally adopted the surname Clinton as a gesture toward his stepfather.
Impeachment proceedings were based on allegations that Clinton had illegally lied about and covered up his relationship with 22-year-old White House (and later Department of Defense) employee Monica Lewinsky.
The obstruction charge was based on his actions to conceal his relationship with Lewinsky before and after that deposition.
Opinions in the popular press criticized pre-war genocide statements by the Clinton administration as greatly exaggerated.
Opposition came chiefly from anti-trade Republicans, protectionist Democrats and supporters of Ross Perot.
An intense investigation took place into the events in Manila and it was discovered that the group behind the bridge bomb was a Saudi terrorist group in Afghanistan known as al-Qaeda and the plot was masterminded by Osama bin Laden.
They began dating and soon were inseparable.
During his visit to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in Manila, while he was on his way to meet with a senior member of the Philippine government, Clinton was saved from danger minutes before his motorcade was scheduled to drive over a bridge charged with a timed improvised explosive device (IED).
A member of the Democratic Party, ideologically Clinton was a New Democrat, and many of his policies reflected a centrist "Third Way" political philosophy.
Clinton registered for the draft and received a high number (311), meaning that those whose birthdays had been drawn as numbers 1 to 310 would have to be drafted before him, making it unlikely that he would be drafted.
Clinton was the first president in history to appoint more women and minority judges than white male judges to the federal courts.
Some gay-rights advocates criticized Clinton for not going far enough and accused him of making his campaign promise to get votes and contributions.
'''William Jefferson''' "'''Bill'''" '''Clinton''' (born  August 19, 1946) is an American politician who served as the 42nd President of the United States from 1993 to 2001.
He scored a resounding victory in New York City, shedding his image as a regional candidate.
Clinton delivered the Democratic response to President Reagan's 1985 State of the Union Address and served as Chair of the National Governors Association from 1986 to 1987, bringing him to an audience beyond Arkansas.
The treaty was then ratified by the Senate and signed into law by the President.
Ken Gormley, author of ''The Death of American Virtue: Clinton vs. Starr'', reveals in his book that President Clinton narrowly escaped possible assassination in the Philippines in November 1996.
Some of Clinton's pardons remain a point of controversy.
