At 13, he enrolled in the Lakeside School, a private preparatory school.
He argued with examiner David Boies over the contextual meaning of words such as, "compete", "concerned", and "we".
And that's kind of a religious belief.
When Gates was young, his family regularly attended a church of the Congregational Christian Churches, a Protestant Reformed denomination.
Gates is also known as an avid reader, and the ceiling of his large home library is engraved with a quotation from ''The Great Gatsby''.
That should be positive if we manage it well.
In February 1976, Gates wrote an Open Letter to Hobbyists in the MITS newsletter in which he asserted that more than 90% of the users of Microsoft Altair BASIC had not paid Microsoft for it and by doing so the Altair "hobby market" was in danger of eliminating the incentive for any professional developers to produce, distribute, and maintain high-quality software.
Gates and his wife invited Joan Salwen to Seattle to speak about what the family had done, and on December 9, 2010, Gates, investor Warren Buffett, and Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg signed a commitment they called the "Gates-Buffet Giving Pledge."
During Microsoft's early years, all employees had broad responsibility for the company's business.
He had studied the game until he solved it.
Starting in 1987, Gates was included in the ''Forbes'' list of the world's wealthiest people and was the wealthiest from 1995 to 2007, again in 2009, and has been since 2014.
Also in 2010, he was honored with the Silver Buffalo Award by the Boy Scouts of America, its highest award for adults, for his service to youth.
Bill Gates and his foundation are taking an interest in solving global sanitation problems since about 2005, for example by announcing the "Reinvent the Toilet Challenge" which has received considerable media interest.
Firsthand accounts of these meetings describe him as verbally combative, berating managers for perceived holes in their business strategies or proposals that placed the company's long-term interests at risk.
Gates has several investments outside Microsoft, which in 2006 paid him a salary of $616,667 and $350,000 bonus totalling $966,667.
The family resides in the Gates' home, an earth-sheltered house in the side of a hill overlooking Lake Washington in Medina near Seattle in the state of Washington, United States.
In response to press criticism, the foundation announced a review of its investments to assess social responsibility.
The first commercial, co-starring Jerry Seinfeld, is a 90-second talk between strangers as Seinfeld walks up on a discount shoe store (Shoe Circus) in a mall and notices Gates buying shoes inside.
''Time'' also collectively named Gates, his wife Melinda and U2's lead singer Bono as the 2005 Persons of the Year for their humanitarian efforts.
In 2013, Gates became a LinkedIn Influencer.
IBM representative Jack Sams mentioned the licensing difficulties during a subsequent meeting with Gates and told him to get an acceptable operating system.
One of these systems was a PDP-10 belonging to Computer Center Corporation (CCC), which banned four Lakeside students Gates, Paul Allen, Ric Weiland, and Kent Evans for the summer after it caught them exploiting bugs in the operating system to obtain free computer time.
The scholarship program is administered by the United Negro College Fund.
He divided his responsibilities between two successors, placing Ray Ozzie in charge of day-to-day management and Craig Mundie in charge of long-term product strategy.
To say that it was generated by random numbers, that does seem, you know, sort of an uncharitable view laughs.
While at Harvard, he met Steve Ballmer, who would later succeed Gates as CEO of Microsoft.
In a second commercial in the series, Gates and Seinfeld are at the home of an average family trying to fit in with normal people.
As they are walking out of the mall, Seinfeld asks Gates if he has melded his mind to other developers, after getting a "Yes", he then asks if they are working on a way to make computers edible, again getting a "Yes".
Gates has also provided personal donations to educational institutions.
When IBM's representatives mentioned that they needed an operating system, Gates referred them to Digital Research (DRI), makers of the widely used CP/M operating system.
In 2015, Gates, along with his wife Melinda, received the Padma Bhushan, India's third-highest civilian award for their social work in the country.
The  estate has a  swimming pool with an underwater music system, as well as a  gym and a  dining room.
According to ''Forbes'', Gates was ranked as the fourth most powerful person in the world in 2012, up from fifth in 2011.
When subordinates appeared to be procrastinating, he was known to remark sarcastically, "I'll do it over the weekend."
I agree with Elon Musk and some others on this and don't understand why some people are not concerned.
IBM approached Microsoft in July 1980, regarding its upcoming personal computer, the IBM PC.
Within a year, the hyphen was dropped, and on November 26, 1976, the trade name "Microsoft" was registered with the Office of the Secretary of the State of New Mexico.
A few weeks later, Gates proposed using 86-DOS (QDOS), an operating system similar to CP/M that Tim Paterson of Seattle Computer Products (SCP) had made for hardware similar to the PC.
Gates was an active software developer in Microsoft's early history, particularly on the company's programming language products, but his role most of its history was primarily as management and executive.
In November 2006, he was awarded the Placard of the Order of the Aztec Eagle, together with his wife Melinda who was awarded the Insignia of the same order, both for their philanthropic work around the world in the areas of health and education, particularly in Mexico, and specifically in the program "''''".
We've raised our kids in a religious way; they've gone to the Catholic church that Melinda goes to and I participate in.
He remained as chairman and created the position of chief software architect for himself.
Gates oversaw Microsoft's company restructuring on June 25, 1981, which re-incorporated the company in Washington state and made Gates the president of Microsoft and its board chairman.
In response to a question about his greatest fear when he looks 50 years into the future, Gates stated: "... there'll be some really bad things that'll happen in the next 50 or 100 years, but hopefully none of them on the scale of, say, a million people that you didn't expect to die from a pandemic, or nuclear or bioterrorism."
Gates was fascinated by the machine and how it would always execute software code perfectly.
The pledge is a commitment by all three to donate at least half of their wealth over the course of time to charity.
The building contains the Computer Science Department (CSD) and the Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL) of Stanford's Engineering department.
In a March 2015 interview, with Baidu's CEO, Robin Li, Gates claimed he would "highly recommend" Nick Bostrom's recent work, ''Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies''.
He gradually transferred his duties to Ray Ozzie (chief software architect) and Craig Mundie (chief research and strategy officer).
A few decades after that though the intelligence is strong enough to be a concern.
In 1999, his wealth briefly surpassed $101&nbsp;billion, causing the media to call Gates a "centibillionaire".
In the first five years, Gates personally reviewed every line of code the company shipped, and often rewrote parts of it as he saw fit.
Now science has filled in some of the realm&nbsp;– not all&nbsp;– that religion used to fill.
Gates was number one on the Forbes 400 list from 1993 through to 2007, and number one on ''Forbes'' list of The World's Richest People from 1995 to 2007 and 2009.
He wrote his first computer program on this machine: an implementation of tic-tac-toe that allowed users to play games against the computer.
The Foundation allows benefactors to access information that shows how its money is being spent, unlike other major charitable organizations such as the Wellcome Trust.
Bill and Melinda Gates have said that they intend to leave their three children $10&nbsp;million each as their inheritance.
Gates has credited the generosity and extensive philanthropy of David Rockefeller as a major influence.
Between 2009 and 2014, his wealth doubled from 40&nbsp;billion to more than 82&nbsp;billion.
In 2006, Gates received the James C. Morgan Global Humanitarian Award from The Tech Awards.
Gates was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in 2005.
He was the fourth of his name in his family, but was known as William Gates III or "Trey" because his father had the "II" suffix.
Gates studied the work of Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller, and in 1994, sold some of his Microsoft stock to create the "William H. Gates Foundation."
The foundation is organized into four program areas: Global Development Division, Global Health Division, United States Division, and Global Policy & Advocacy Division.
Microsoft launched its first retail version of Microsoft Windows on November 20, 1985, and in August, the company struck a deal with IBM to develop a separate operating system called OS/2.
Gates has authored and co-authored several books.
They did, and the sales of MS-DOS made Microsoft a major player in the industry.
Gates's solution held the record as the fastest version for over thirty years; its successor is faster by only one percent.
In 2002, Bill and Melinda Gates received the Jefferson Award for Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged.
The demonstration, held at MITS's offices in Albuquerque, was a success and resulted in a deal with MITS to distribute the interpreter as Altair BASIC.
In March 2010, Gates was the second wealthiest person behind Carlos Slim, but regained the top position in 2013, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires List.
At age 17, Gates formed a venture with Allen, called Traf-O-Data, to make traffic counters based on the Intel 8008 processor.
", and ''InfoWorld'' quoted an expert as stating "it's Gates' computer".
Bill Gates likes the program, not because it's going to make him a lot of money (although I'm sure it will do that), but because it's a neat hack."
Gates never returned to Harvard to complete his studies.
With only $30&nbsp;million kept in the family, they appear to be on a course to give away about 99.96 percent of their wealth.
Gates has received honorary doctorates from Nyenrode Business Universiteit, Breukelen, The Netherlands, in 2000; KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2002; Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2005; Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in April 2007; Harvard University in June 2007; Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, in 2007, and Cambridge University in June 2009.
He was also made an honorary trustee of Peking University in 2007.
Gates also identified innovation as the "real driver of progress" and pronounced that "America's way better today than it's ever been."
In 1975, Gates and Paul Allen co-founded Microsoft, which became the world's largest PC software company.
The Maxwell Dworkin Laboratory of the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences is named after the mothers of both Gates and Microsoft President Steven A. Ballmer, both of whom were students (Ballmer was a member of the School's graduating class of 1977, while Gates left his studies for Microsoft), and donated funds for the laboratory's construction.
As to his demeanor during the deposition, he said, "Did I fence with Boies?
Early on in his life, Gates's parents had a law career in mind for him.
In a substantial interview with ''Rolling Stone'' magazine, published in March 27, 2014 issue, Gates provided his perspective on a range of issues, such as climate change, his charitable activities, various tech companies and people involved in them, and the state of America.
He also enjoys playing bridge, tennis, and golf.
The target of his outburst then had to defend the proposal in detail until, hopefully, Gates was fully convinced.
'''William Henry''' "'''Bill'''" '''Gates III''' (born October 28, 1955) is an American business magnate, investor, author and philanthropist.
His choice of things to take on a desert island were, for music: "Blue Skies" by Willie Nelson; book: ''The Better Angels of Our Nature'' by Steven Pinker; and luxury item: a DVD Collection of Lectures from The Teaching Company.
He gained a reputation for being distant to others; as early as 1981 an industry executive complained in public that "Gates is notorious for not being reachable by phone and for not returning phone calls."
Gates has been criticized for his business tactics, which have been considered anti-competitive, an opinion that has in some cases been upheld by numerous court rulings.
Gates has one elder sister, Kristi (Kristianne), and one younger sister, Libby.
They named their partnership "Micro-Soft" and had their first office located in Albuquerque.
I mean, it's at least a moral belief.
According to 2007 King County public records, the total assessed value of the property (land and house) is $125&nbsp;million, and the annual property tax is $991,000.
Microsoft made a deal with SCP to become the exclusive licensing agent, and later the full owner, of 86-DOS.
Entomologists named Bill Gates' flower fly, '''', in his honor in 1997.
During his career at Microsoft, Gates held the positions of chairman, CEO and chief software architect, and was the largest individual shareholder until May 2014.
After reading the January 1975 issue of ''Popular Electronics'' that demonstrated the Altair 8800, Gates contacted Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems (MITS), the creators of the new microcomputer, to inform them that he and others were working on a BASIC interpreter for the platform.
Gates has not officially been on a development team since working on the TRS-80 Model 100, but wrote code as late as 1989 that shipped in the company's products.
In the 1998 ''United States v. Microsoft'' case, Gates gave deposition testimony that several journalists characterized as evasive.
When he reflected back on that moment, he said, "There was just something neat about the machine."
To raise awareness for the topic of sanitation and possible solutions, Bill Gates drank water which was "produced from human feces" in 2014&nbsp;– in fact it was produced from a sewage sludge treatment process called the Omni-processor.
He is the son of William H. Gates, Sr. and Mary Maxwell Gates.
His solution was later formalized in a published paper in collaboration with Harvard computer scientist Christos Papadimitriou.
In the same interview, Gates said: "I agree with people like Richard Dawkins that mankind felt the need for creation myths.
They have three children: Jennifer Katharine (born 1996), Rory John (born 1999), and Phoebe Adele (born 2002).
After his administrators became aware of his programming abilities, Gates wrote the school's computer program to schedule students in classes.
Microsoft became independent of MITS in late 1976, and it continued to develop programming language software for various systems.
Gates oversaw the business details, but continued to write code as well.
He founded Corbis, a digital imaging company, in 1989.
Gates and his father met with Rockefeller several times, and their charity work is partly modeled on the Rockefeller family's philanthropic focus, whereby they are interested in tackling the global problems that are ignored by governments and other organizations.
The moral systems of religion, I think, are super important.
Some say that this is an homage to Seinfeld's own show about "nothing" (''Seinfeld'').
Gates is currently the wealthiest person in the world with a net worth of US$90&nbsp;billion as of August 2016.
The salesman is trying to sell Mr. Gates shoes that are a size too big.
He aggressively broadened the company's range of products, and wherever Microsoft achieved a dominant position he vigorously defended it.
Whatever that penalty is should be levied against me: rudeness to Boies in the first degree."
His father was a prominent lawyer, and his mother served on the board of directors for First Interstate BancSystem and the United Way.
''PC Magazine'' asked if Gates were "the man behind the machine?
In a May 2006 interview, Gates commented that he wished that he were not the richest man in the world because he disliked the attention it brought.
The following year, Information Sciences, Inc. hired the four Lakeside students to write a payroll program in Cobol, providing them computer time and royalties.
He later stated that "it was hard to tear myself away from a machine at which I could so unambiguously demonstrate success."
After adapting the operating system for the PC, Microsoft delivered it to IBM as PC DOS in exchange for a one-time fee of $50,000.
When he was in the eighth grade, the Mothers Club at the school used proceeds from Lakeside School's rummage sale to buy a Teletype Model 33 ASR terminal and a block of computer time on a General Electric (GE) computer for the school's students.
Gates has recently expressed concern about the existential threats of Superintelligence; in a Reddit "ask me anything", he stated that
Gates also donated $6&nbsp;million to the construction of the Gates Computer Science Building, completed in January 1996, on the campus of Stanford University.
Ozzie later left the company.
Paul Allen was hired into MITS, and Gates took a leave of absence from Harvard to work with Allen at MITS in Albuquerque in November 1975.
Gates's last full-time day at Microsoft was June 27, 2008.
He had talked this decision over with his parents, who were supportive of him after seeing how much Gates wanted to start a company.
He remained interested in technical details; Jerry Pournelle wrote in 1985 that when watching Gates announcing Microsoft Excel, "Something else impressed me.
Gates is one of the best-known entrepreneurs of the personal computer revolution.
and "Why don't you just give up your options and join the Peace Corps?"
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation supports the use of genetically modified organisms in agricultural development.
He interrupted presentations with such comments "That's the stupidest thing I've ever heard!"
As Gates is buying the shoes, he holds up his discount card, which uses a slightly altered version of his own mugshot of his arrest in New Mexico in 1977, for a traffic violation.
The Gates Millennium Scholars program has been criticized by Ernest W. Lefever for its exclusion of Caucasian students.
Gates's wife suggested people should emulate the philanthropic efforts of the Salwen family, which had sold its home and given away half of its value, as detailed in ''The Power of Half''.
This letter was unpopular with many computer hobbyists, but Gates persisted in his belief that software developers should be able to demand payment.
That is a competitor."
As an executive, Gates met regularly with Microsoft's senior managers and program managers.
Despite Gates' denials, the judge ruled that Microsoft had committed monopolization and tying, and blocking competition, both in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
Despite his wealth and extensive business travel Gates usually flew coach until 1997, when he bought a private jet.
Gates' ancestral origin includes English, German, and Irish, Scots-Irish.
Microsoft's Altair BASIC was popular with computer hobbyists, but Gates discovered that a pre-market copy had leaked into the community and was being widely copied and distributed.
Gates later said he had simply resisted attempts by Boies to mischaracterize his words and actions.
In 2014, Bill Gates sparked a protest in Vancouver when he decided to donate 50 million dollars to UNAIDS through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for the purpose of mass circumcision in Zambia and Swaziland.
In reality, Gates and Allen did not have an Altair and had not written code for it; they merely wanted to gauge MITS's interest.
Gates did not have a definite study plan while a student at Harvard and spent a lot of time using the school's computers.
In his second year, Gates devised an algorithm for pancake sorting as a solution to one of a series of unsolved problems presented in a combinatorics class by Harry Lewis, one of his professors.
As of 2007, Bill and Melinda Gates were the second-most generous philanthropists in America, having given over $28&nbsp;billion to charity; the couple plan to eventually donate 95 percent of their wealth to charity.
He modified the code so that he was placed in classes with "a disproportionate number of interesting girls."
''Time'' magazine named Gates one of the 100 people who most influenced the 20th century, as well as one of the 100 most influential people of 2004, 2005, and 2006.
From Microsoft's founding in 1975 until 2006, Gates had primary responsibility for the company's product strategy.
Since 2000, the nominal value of his Microsoft holdings has declined due to a fall in Microsoft's stock price after the dot-com bubble burst and the multibillion-dollar donations he has made to his charitable foundations.
Among Gates's private acquisitions is the Codex Leicester, a collection of writings by Leonardo da Vinci, which Gates bought for $30.8&nbsp;million at an auction in 1994.
He stepped down as chairman of Microsoft, in February 2014, taking on a new post as technology adviser to support newly appointed CEO Satya Nadella.
Later in his career Gates pursued a number of philanthropic endeavors, donating large amounts of money to various charitable organizations and scientific research programs through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, established in 2000.
After being named one of ''Good Housekeeping''s "50 Most Eligible Bachelors" in 1985, Gates married Melinda French in Hawaii on January 1, 1994.
I've been very lucky, and therefore I owe it to try and reduce the inequity in the world.
''BusinessWeek'' reported:
In 1999, Gates donated $20&nbsp;million to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for the construction of a computer laboratory named the "William H. Gates Building" that was designed by architect Frank O. Gehry.
Another executive recalled that after he showed Gates a game and defeated him 35 of 37 times, when they met again a month later Gates "won or tied every game.
Between 2013 and 2014, his wealth increased by 15&nbsp;billion.
Gates did not offer to transfer the copyright on the operating system, because he believed that other hardware vendors would clone IBM's system.
Gates took an interest in programming the GE system in BASIC, and was excused from math classes to pursue his interest.
Although the two companies successfully developed the first version of the new system, mounting creative differences caused the partnership to deteriorate.
In early 1973, Bill Gates served as a congressional page in the U.S. House of Representatives.
Gates was listed in the ''Sunday Times'' power list in 1999, named CEO of the year by ''Chief Executive Officers magazine'' in 1994, ranked number one in the "Top 50 Cyber Elite" by ''Time'' in 1998, ranked number two in the ''Upside'' Elite 100 in 1999, and was included in ''The Guardian'' as one of the "Top 100 influential people in media" in 2001.
Gates's maternal grandfather was JW Maxwell, a national bank president.
At the end of the ban, the four students offered to find bugs in CCC's software in exchange for computer time.
Gates appeared in a series of ads to promote Microsoft in 2008.
Specifically, the foundation is supporting the International Rice Research Institute in developing Golden Rice, a genetically modified rice variant used to combat Vitamin A deficiency.
The family encouraged competition; one visitor reported that "it didn't matter whether it was hearts or pickleball or swimming to the dock ... there was always a reward for winning and there was always a penalty for losing".
In 2004, he became a director of Berkshire Hathaway, the investment company headed by long-time friend Warren Buffett.
In an interview with ''Rolling Stone'', Gates stated in regard to his faith:
But the mystery and the beauty of the world is overwhelmingly amazing, and there's no scientific explanation of how it came about.
Rather than use the system via Teletype, Gates went to CCC's offices and studied source code for various programs that ran on the system, including programs in Fortran, Lisp, and machine language.
Gates was born in Seattle, Washington on October 28, 1955.
Gates stepped down as chief executive officer of Microsoft in January 2000.
The following year saw the release of the MITS Altair 8800 based on the Intel 8080 CPU, and Gates and Allen saw this as the opportunity to start their own computer software company.
While Microsoft had previously given financial support to the institution, this was the first personal donation received from Gates.
First the machines will do a lot of jobs for us and not be super intelligent.
The company moved from Albuquerque to its new home in Bellevue, Washington, on January 1, 1979.
Gates was the guest on BBC Radio 4's ''Desert Island Discs'' on January 31, 2016, in which he talks about his relationships with his father and Steve Jobs, meeting his then future wife Melinda Ann French, the start of Microsoft and some of his habits (for example reading The Economist "from cover to cover every week").
In 2000, Gates and his wife combined three family foundations to create the charitable Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which was identified by the Funds for NGOs company in 2013, as the world's wealthiest charitable foundation, with assets reportedly valued at more than $34.6&nbsp;billion.
In 2006, he was voted eighth in the list of "Heroes of our time".
The computer company first proposed that Microsoft write the BASIC interpreter.
In 1994, he was honored as the twentieth Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society.
In June 2006, Gates announced that he would be transitioning from full-time work at Microsoft to part-time work, and full-time work at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
Gates dropped out of Harvard at this time.
Gates graduated from Lakeside School in 1973, and was a National Merit Scholar.
It subsequently canceled the review and stood by its policy of investing for maximum return, while using voting rights to influence company practices.
On June 15, 2006, Gates announced that he would transition out of his day-to-day role over the next two years to dedicate more time to philanthropy.
In 2016 he revealed that he was color-blind when discussing his gaming habits.
I think it makes sense to believe in God, but exactly what decision in your life you make differently because of it, I don't know."
MITS president Ed Roberts agreed to meet them for a demo, and over the course of a few weeks they developed an Altair emulator that ran on a minicomputer, and then the BASIC interpreter.
In early 2015, he also appeared with Jimmy Fallon on Late Night With Jimmy Fallon and challenged him to see if he could taste the difference between this reclaimed water or bottled water.
After the Mothers Club donation was exhausted, he and other students sought time on systems including DEC PDP minicomputers.
In 1999, Gates received New York Institute of Technology's President's Medal.
