On Saturday, February 14, 2009, during the 2009 NBA All-Star Weekend in Phoenix, NBA Commissioner David Stern announced that the NBA Finals MVP Award would be named after Bill Russell.
Russell was elected to one NBA All-Defensive First Team.
A morass to fight from."
In a game called as "unreal" and "devoid of emotion", the Sixers lost 127–118 on April 5.
The Celtics broke a league record by winning 52 games, and Russell's strong performance once again helped lead the Celtics through the post-season, as they returned to the NBA Finals.
In the playoffs, however, Russell and his Celtics achieved upsets over the Philadelphia 76ers and New York Knicks to earn a meeting with the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA Finals.
Russell was so quick that he could run over for a quick double team and make it back in time if the opponents tried to find the open man.
Russell then ordered to double-team West, and Boston won Game 3.
He had the option to skip the tournament and play a full season for the Celtics, but he was determined to play in the Olympics.
Russell later called the Celtics' defense the best of all time.
However, Heinsohn proposed Russell himself as a player-coach, and when Auerbach asked his center, he said yes.
During that same draft, Boston also drafted guard K. C. Jones, Russell's former USF teammate.
Later that year, on November 17, 2006, the two-time NCAA winner Russell was recognized for his impact on college basketball as a member of the founding class of the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame.
The United States dominated the tournament, winning by an average of 53.5 points per game.
Once again, the Celtics were powered by Russell, who averaged 16.8 points and 23.6 rebounds per game, won his fourth regular-season MVP title, and earned MVP honors at the 1963 NBA All-Star Game following his 19-point, 24-rebound performance for the East.
He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame and the National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame.
The latter told him to take matters into his own hands, so after the next provocation, Russell punched Felix unconscious, paid a $25 fine and was no longer a target of cheap fouls.
During his career, Russell was one of the first big earners in NBA basketball.
He was often called "Felton X", presumably in the tradition of the Nation of Islam's practice of replacing a European slave name with an "X", and even purchased land in Liberia.
However, coach George Powles saw Russell's raw athletic potential and encouraged him to work on his fundamentals.
The Celtics made good use of the fact that the Los Angeles Lakers had exhausted St. Louis in a long seven-game Western Conference Finals, and the Celtics convincingly won in five games.
In that season, Russell's Celtics won a record 59 regular season games (including a then-record tying 17 game win streak) and met Chamberlain's Warriors in the Eastern Division Finals.
Once, Russell's father was refused service at a gas station until the staff had taken care of all the white customers.
We won the National Championship.
Boston defeated the Cincinnati Royals 4–1 to earn another NBA Finals appearance, and then won against Chamberlain's newly relocated San Francisco Warriors 4–1.
Being closer to his mother Katie than to his father, Russell received a major emotional blow when she suddenly died when he was 12.
The USF center was livid after this snub and declined the offer: he reasoned that if Saperstein was too smart to speak with him, then he was too smart to play for Saperstein.
For most of his career, Russell was close friends with his perennial opponent Wilt Chamberlain.
When Wilt Chamberlain became the first NBA player to earn $100,000 in salary in 1965, Russell went to Auerbach and demanded a $100,001 salary, which he promptly received.
UCLA coach John Wooden called Russell "the greatest defensive man I've ever seen".
Combining the stature and shot-blocking skills of a center with the foot speed of a guard, Russell became the centerpiece of a USF team that soon became a force in college basketball.
This took place during his last season (1969), and was the first season the NBA All-Defensive Teams were selected.
Russell is universally seen as one of the best NBA players ever, and was declared "Greatest Player in the History of the NBA" by the Professional Basketball Writers Association of America in 1980.
Russell finished with a clutch performance, scoring 30 points and tying his own NBA Finals record with 40 rebounds in a 110–107 overtime win.
In the 1960–61 season, Russell averaged 16.9 points and 23.9 rebounds per game, leading his team to a regular season mark of 57–22.
The following season, Russell scored a career-high 18.9 points per game, accompanied by 23.6 rebounds per game.
The Celtics won, earning their first NBA Championship.
Suddenly, Russell Sr. broke down crying.
In the 1960 Finals, the Celtics outlasted the Hawks 4–3 and won their third championship in four years.
Though the game was tied, Russell had the daunting task of defending against Baylor with little frontline help, as the three best Celtics forwards, Loscutoff, Heinsohn and Tom Sanders, had fouled out.
When he later became a standout amateur basketball player at USF, Russell recalled how he and his few fellow black colleagues were jeered by white students.
Russell thus became the first African American head coach in NBA history, and commented to journalists: "I wasn't offered the job because I am a Negro, I was offered it because Red figured I could do it."
Auerbach assigned Russell to shut down St. Louis's main scorer, and the rookie impressed the Boston crowd with his man-to-man defense and shot-blocking.
(K. C. Jones did not play for the Celtics until 1958 because of military service.)
During a conversation with students, a reporter—unknown to Russell— heard Russell describe Chamberlain as a malingerer and accuse him of "copping out" of the game when it seemed that the Lakers would lose.
Russell also had seven regular season games with 40 or more rebounds, the NBA Finals record for highest rebound per game average (29.5 rpg, 1959) and by a rookie (22.9 rpg, 1957).
He led the NBA in rebounds four times, had a dozen consecutive seasons of 1,000 or more rebounds, and remains second all-time in both total rebounds and rebounds per game.
Career-wise in rebounds, Russell ranks second only to Wilt Chamberlain in regular season total (21,620) and average per game (22.5), and he led the NBA in average rebounds per game four times.
Team spokesman Brian Olive says the 80-year-old Russell felt faint after the Thursday morning fall at the Hyatt Regency resort in Incline Village, Nevada, but was planning on returning home to Seattle this evening.
We won 28 out of 29 games.
Asked by his grandson what was wrong, his grandfather replied how proud he was of him, being coach of an organization in which blacks and whites coexisted in harmony.
In 1995, the Celtics left Boston Garden and entered the FleetCenter, now the TD Garden, and as the main festive act, the Boston organization wanted to re-retire Russell's jersey in front of a sellout audience.
"At that time", he has said, "it was never acceptable that a black player was the best.
Russell was an elite help defender who allowed the Celtics to play the so-called "Hey, Bill" defense: whenever a Celtic requested additional defensive help, he would shout "Hey, Bill!"
Russell was also honored during the 2009 NBA All-Star Weekend in Phoenix.
With his teammates, Russell had a cordial relationship, with the notable exception of fellow rookie and old rival Heinsohn.
When he became player-coach in 1966, Russell bluntly said to his teammates that "he intended to cut all personal ties to other players", and seamlessly made the transition from their peer to their superior.
The Bill Russell Legacy Project artwork by Ann Hirsch of Somerville, Massachusetts, in collaboration with Pressley Associates Landscape Architects of Boston, was unveiled on November 1, 2013, with Russell in attendance.
Russell is one of the most successful and decorated athletes in North American sports history.
In that period, centers and forwards were defined by their offensive output, and their ability to play defense was secondary.
After losing for the fifth straight time against Russell and his Celtics, Hall-of-Fame Lakers guard Jerry West stated, "If I had a choice of any basketball player in the league, my No.1 choice has to be Bill Russell.
In retrospect, Auerbach's thoughts were unorthodox.
In the Eastern Division Finals, the 76ers had the better record than the Celtics and were slightly favored.
After USF kept Holy Cross star Tom Heinsohn scoreless in an entire half, ''Sports Illustrated'' wrote, "If Russell ever learns to hit the basket, they're going to have to rewrite the rules."
Russell is a member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, having been initiated into its Gamma Alpha chapter while a student at University of San Francisco.
The NBA reasoned that other centers were better all-round players than Russell, but no player was more valuable to his team.
In 2009, the NBA announced that the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player trophy would be named the Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award in honor of Russell.
He also could score with putbacks and made mid-air outlet passes to point guard Bob Cousy for easy fast break points.
Before his NBA rookie year, Russell was the captain of the U.S. national basketball team that competed at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne, Australia.
After retiring as a player, Russell had stints as head coach of the Seattle SuperSonics (1973 to 1977) and Sacramento Kings (1987 to 1988).
This approach allowed the Celtics to finish with a 44–28 regular season record, the team's second-best record since beginning play in the 1946–47 season, and guaranteed a post-season appearance.
When I started to jump to make defensive plays and to block shots, I was initially corrected, but I stuck with it, and it paid off."
''Russell's Rules'' was published in 2001, and in January 2006, he convinced Miami Heat superstar center Shaquille O'Neal to bury the hatchet with fellow NBA superstar and former Los Angeles Lakers teammate Kobe Bryant, with whom O'Neal had a bitter public feud.
At the start of the 1957–58 season, the Celtics won 14 straight games, and continued to succeed.
However, the close relationship ended after Game 7 of the 1969 NBA Finals, during which Chamberlain injured his knee with six minutes left and left the game.
In his USF years, Russell used his relative lack of bulk to develop a unique style of defense: instead of purely guarding the opposing center, he used his quickness and speed to play help defense against opposing forwards and aggressively challenge their shots.
The Celtics won 49 games and easily made the first berth in the 1958 NBA Playoffs, and made the 1958 NBA Finals against their familiar rivals, the St. Louis Hawks.
Russell was equally notable for his rebounding abilities.
Russell is the all-time playoff leader in total (4,104) and average (24.9) rebounds per game, he grabbed 40 rebounds in three separate playoff games (twice in the NBA Finals), and he never failed to average at least 20 rebounds per game in any of his 13 post-season campaigns.
Decades later, Russell explained that his experiences hardened him against abuse of all kinds.
Prior to Game 5, the Celtics seemed dead: no NBA team had ever come back from a 3–1 deficit.
However, Russell contributed by completing the famous "Coleman Play".
In Game 1 of the Eastern Division Finals, the Celtics met the Syracuse Nationals, who were led by Dolph Schayes.
The Bill Russell Legacy Foundation, established by the Boston Celtics Shamrock Foundation, funded the project.
He also participated in the high jump; ''Track & Field News'' ranked him as the seventh-best high jumper in the world in 1956.
When Russell originally retired, he demanded that his jersey be retired in an empty Boston Garden.
Lakers head coach John Kundla praised Russell, stating, "We don't fear the Celtics without Bill Russell.
Russell also wrote books, usually written as a joint project with a professional writer, including 1979's ''Second Wind''.
The Celtics surprisingly won Game 4, but the Hawks prevailed in Games 5 and 6, with Pettit scoring 50 points in the deciding Game 6.
He competed in the  race, which he could complete in 49.6 seconds.
His 1956 rookie contract was worth $24,000, only fractionally smaller than the $25,000 of top earner Bob Cousy.
Although White became a standout Celtics player, the Celtics lacked an All-Star center, went just 34–48 in the next season and failed to make the playoffs for the first time since 1950.
On May 6, 1999, the Celtics re-retired Russell's jersey in a ceremony attended by his on-court rival (and friend) Chamberlain, along with Celtics legend Larry Bird and Hall of Famer Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
Russell refused to attend the ceremony when his #6 jersey was retired in 1972, or his induction into the Hall of Fame in 1975.
He was one of five, along with John Wooden, Oscar Robertson, Dean Smith and Dr. James Naismith, selected to represent the inaugural class.
Even after he became a star on the Boston Celtics, Russell was the victim of racial abuse.
The Celtics' championship streak ended that season at eight, however, as Wilt Chamberlain's Philadelphia 76ers won a record-breaking 68 regular season games and overcame the Celtics 4–1 in the Eastern Finals.
Sports journalist John Taylor described it as a watershed in Russell's life, because Russell realized that basketball was his one chance to escape poverty and racism; as a consequence, Russell swore to make the best of it.
Woolpert emphasized defense and deliberate half-court play, concepts that favored defensive standout Russell.
In his career, Russell won five regular season MVP awards (1959, 1961–63, 1965)—tied with Michael Jordan for second all-time behind Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's six awards.
As a consequence, Russell was extremely sensitive to all racial prejudice: according to Taylor, he often perceived insults even if others did not.
Before the 1961–62 season, Russell's team was scheduled to play in an exhibition game in Lexington, Kentucky, when Russell and his black teammates were refused service at a local restaurant.
In previous years, the Celtics had been a high-scoring team, but lacked the defensive presence needed to close out tight games.
His time as a coach was lackluster; although he led the struggling SuperSonics into the playoffs for the first time in franchise history, Russell's defensive, team-oriented Celtics mindset did not mesh well with the team, and he left in 1977 with a 162–166 record.
On the hardwood, he was considered the consummate defensive center, noted for his unmatched defensive intensity, his stellar basketball IQ and his sheer will to win.
In the following 1963–64 season, the Celtics posted a league-best 58–22 record in the regular season.
In addition, Russell holds the NBA Finals single-game record for most rebounds (40, March 29, 1960, vs. St. Louis, and April 18, 1962, vs. Los Angeles), most rebounds in a quarter (19, April 18, 1962 vs. Los Angeles), and most consecutive games with 20 or more rebounds (15 from April 9, 1960 – April 16, 1963).
In the second overtime, both teams were in serious foul trouble: Heinsohn had fouled out, and the Hawks were so depleted that they had only 7 players left.
In his early years, Russell struggled to develop his skills as a basketball player.
Russell was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2011.
Avery Brundage, head of the International Olympic Committee, argued that Russell had already signed a professional contract and thus was no longer an amateur, but Russell prevailed.
Although Russell was a good runner and jumper and had large hands, he simply did not understand the game and was cut from the team in junior high school.
In one notable incident, hotels in Oklahoma City refused to admit Russell and his black teammates while they were in town for the 1954 All-College Tournament.
He had invested $250,000 into a rubber plantation in Liberia, where he had wanted to spend his retirement, but it went bankrupt.
I was first team All American.
Take him out and we can beat them&nbsp;...
Russell's 51 rebounds in a single game is the second-highest performance ever, only trailing Chamberlain's all-time record of 55.
This attitude contributed to his legendary bad rapport with fans and journalists.
Russell's team again beat Chamberlain's Philadelphia 76ers 4 games to 1 in the Division Finals, proceeding to win the NBA Finals in a tight seven-game showdown against the Los Angeles Lakers, with Russell scoring 25 points and grabbing 32 rebounds in a 95–93 win in the deciding seventh game.
They had three children, namely daughter Karen Russell, the television pundit and lawyer, and sons William Jr. and Jacob.
For his efforts Russell was named ''Sports Illustrated'''s Sportsman of the Year.
On the hardwood, his experiences were far more pleasant.
The Russell draft-day trade was later called one of the most important trades in the history of North American sports.
He also won a gold medal at the 1956 Summer Olympics as captain of the U.S. national basketball team.
However, Lakers coach Bill van Breda Kolff kept Chamberlain on the bench until the end of the game, saying later that he wanted to stay with the lineup responsible for the comeback.
The relationship was shrouded in controversy because Didi was white.
According to a Thursday evening, July 17, 2014 Associated Press (AP) news story, it was stated that,: "Boston Celtics officials say NBA Hall of Famer Bill Russell is doing OK after collapsing during a speaking engagement near Lake Tahoe.
Russell is one of only seven players in history to win an NCAA Championship, an NBA Championship, and an Olympic Gold Medal.
He was selected three times to the All-NBA First Teams (1959, 1963, 1965) and eight Second Teams (1958, 1960–62, 1964, 1966–68), and was a twelve-time NBA All-Star (1958–1969).
Because large numbers of blacks were moving to the West during World War II to look for work there, Russell's father moved the family out of Louisiana when Russell was eight years old and settled them in Oakland, California.
Denotes seasons in which Russell won an NBA championship
In response, Russell described Boston as a "flea market of racism".
Well, that let me know that if I were to accept these as the final judges of my career I would die a bitter old man."
On May 20, 2007, Russell was awarded an honorary doctorate by Suffolk University, where he served as its commencement speaker, and Russell received an honorary degree from Harvard University on June 7, 2007.
In his first NBA full season (1957–58), Russell became the first player in NBA history to average more than 20 rebounds per game for an entire season, a feat he accomplished 10 times in his 13 seasons.
Russell used a copy as extra motivation and told his team to play a running game, because in that case, not the better, but the more determined team was going to win.
His older brother was the noted playwright Charlie L. Russell.
Russell also ignored Heinsohn's plea to give his cousin an autograph, and openly said to Heinsohn that he deserved half of his $300 Rookie of the Year check.
In 2012, the city and the Celtics announced that a statue honoring Russell would be placed on Boston's City Hall Plaza.
A five-time NBA Most Valuable Player and a twelve-time All-Star, he was the centerpiece of the Celtics dynasty, winning eleven NBA championships during his thirteen-year career.
As a child, the young Russell witnessed how his parents were victims of racial abuse, and the family eventually moved into government housing projects to escape the daily torrent of bigotry.
He also became famous for his shot-blocking skills: pundits called his blocks "Wilsonburgers", referring to the Wilson NBA basketballs he "shoved back into the faces of opposing shooters".
In the pivotal Game 7, Russell managed to hold Chamberlain to only 22 points (28 below his season average) while scoring 19 himself.
The Celtics were ahead by nine points with five minutes remaining; in addition, West was heavily limping after a Game 5 thigh injury and Chamberlain had left the game with an injured leg.
This supported the opinion of many white fans that Russell (who was the highest-paid Celtic) was egotistical, paranoid and hypocritical.
In overtime, Baylor fouled out the fourth forward, Frank Ramsey, so Russell was completely robbed of his usual four-men wing rotation.
He was active in the Black Power movement and supported Muhammad Ali's decision to refuse to be drafted.
However, in the 1968–69 season, Russell seemed to reach a breaking point.
He later commented that he would have participated in the high jump if he had been snubbed by the basketball team.
At Chamberlain's eulogy, Russell stated that he did not consider them to be rivals, but rather to have a competition, and that the pair would "be friends through eternity."
Russell was married to his college sweetheart Rose Swisher from 1956 to 1973.
The St. Louis Hawks, who owned the second pick, drafted Russell, but were vying for Celtics center Ed Macauley, a six-time All-Star who had roots in St. Louis.
So he made a conscious decision, he said, to put the team first and foremost, and not worry about individual achievements.
However, Boston's chances of getting Russell seemed slim.
Russell again excelled during the 1964–65 season.
Both men awed onlookers with "nakedly awesome athleticism", and while Chamberlain outscored Russell 30 to 22, the Celtics won 115–106, and the match was called a "new beginning of basketball".
However, the game still ended on a high note for Russell.
To teammates and friends, Russell was open and amicable, but was extremely distrusting and cold towards anyone else.
However, the games were often difficult for the USF squad.
The teams split the first six games, and the tension was so high that, in Game 3, Celtics coach Auerbach punched his colleague Ben Kerner and received a $300 fine.
Racism also shaped his lifelong paradigm as a team player.
Chamberlain outscored Russell by 81 points in the series, but the Celtics walked off with a 4–2 series win.
Brown, who gave him a high $24,000 rookie contract, just $1,000 shy of the top earning veteran Bob Cousy.
In 1977, he married Dorothy Anstett, Miss USA of 1968, but they divorced in 1980.
Russell and his African American teammates became targets of racist jeers, particularly on the road.
Because the Celtics had finished second in the previous season and the worst teams had the highest draft picks, the Celtics had slipped too low in the draft order to pick Russell.
After rejoining the Celtics, Russell played 48 games, averaging 14.7 points per game and a league-high 19.6 rebounds per game.
In December 2008, the We Are Boston Leadership Award was presented to Russell.
After much debate, Auerbach agreed to give up Hagan, and the Hawks made the trade.
Not only did he want Macauley, who was the Celtics premier player at the time, he wanted Cliff Hagan, who had been serving in the military for three years and had not yet played for the Celtics.
The Celtics earned another post-season appearance, where they defeated the Syracuse Nationals 4–1 in the Eastern Division Finals.
On June 18, 2007, Russell was inducted as a member of the founding class of the FIBA Hall of Fame.
He made a free throw, blocked a shot by Sixers player Chet Walker, grabbed a rebound off a miss by Sixers player Hal Greer, and finally passed the ball to teammate Sam Jones, who scored to clinch the win.
During the season, Russell contributed 12.9 points and 22.8 rebounds per game.
It would be to our advantage if we paid him off for five years to get away from us in the rest of this series."
While Russell still has sore feelings towards the city, there has been something of a reconciliation; and he has even visited the city regularly in recent years, something he never did in the years immediately after his retirement.
He thanked Chamberlain for taking him to the limit and "making him a better player" and the crowd for "allowing him to be a part of their lives."
On November 3, 1979, Russell hosted Saturday Night Live, in which he appeared in several sports-related sketches.
Russell, who was sensitive to any racial prejudice, was enraged by the fact that owner Abe Saperstein would only discuss the matter with Woolpert.
In Game 4, the Celtics were trailing by one point with seven seconds left and the Lakers having the ball, but then Baylor stepped out of bounds, and in the last play, Sam Jones used a triple screen by Bailey Howell, Larry Siegfried and Havlicek and hit a buzzer beater which equalized the series.
But Russell and little-used fifth forward Gene Guarilia successfully pressured Baylor into missed shots.
The teams split the first six games, and Game 7 was tied one second before the end of regular time when Lakers guard Rod Hundley faked a shot and instead passed out to Frank Selvy, who missed an open eight-foot last-second shot that would have won L.A. the title.
Russell, who had a difficult relationship with the media, was not present at either event.
Russell's public statements became increasingly militant, so far that he was quoted in a 1963 ''Sports Illustrated'' interview with the words: "I dislike most white people because they are people&nbsp;...
Russell scored 15.0 ppg and grabbed a career-high 24.7 rebounds per game, leading the NBA in rebounds for the first time since Chamberlain entered the league.
With eight of the ten starting players on Sixers and Celtics being African American, both teams were in deep shock, and there were calls to cancel the series.
However, when the Sixers' Hall-of-Fame guard Hal Greer inbounded, John Havlicek stole the ball, causing Celtics commentator Johnny Most to scream: "Havlicek stole the ball!
Besides basketball, Russell represented USF in track and field events.
With the Celtics leading 125–123 with one second left, the Hawks had the ball at their own baseline.
In the 1959 NBA Finals, the Celtics recaptured the NBA title, sweeping the Minneapolis Lakers 4–0.
His Celtics teammate K. C. Jones joined him on the Olympic squad and contributed 10.9 points per game.
When his father attempted to leave and find a different station, the attendant stuck a shotgun in his face and threatened to kill him if he didn't stay and wait his turn.
In the 1959–60 season, the NBA witnessed the debut of legendary  Philadelphia Warriors center Wilt Chamberlain, who averaged a record 37.6 points per game in his rookie year.
Initially, he had wanted his old player Frank Ramsey as coach, but Ramsey was too occupied running his three lucrative nursing homes.
The FBI described Russell in his file as "an arrogant Negro who won't sign autographs for white children".
However, when his white Celtics teammate Frank Ramsey asked whether he hated him, Russell claimed to be misquoted, but few believed it.
In 2009, ''SLAM Magazine'' named Russell the #3 player of all time behind Michael Jordan and Wilt Chamberlain.
In Russell's first NBA playoff game, he finished with 16 points and 31 rebounds, along with a reported 7 blocks.
On November 7, 1959, Russell's Celtics hosted Chamberlain's Warriors, and pundits called the matchup between the best offensive and best defensive center "The Big Collision" and "Battle of the Titans".
That did not happen&nbsp;... My junior year in college, I had what I thought was the one of the best college seasons ever.
