A limit is placed on the number of visitors permitted to enter certain fragile areas.
This is a functional classification that we impose and not an intrinsic feature of life or diversity.
A 2007 study conducted by the National Science Foundation found that biodiversity and genetic diversity are codependent—that diversity among species requires diversity within a species and vice versa.
The Phanerozoic eon (the last 540&nbsp;million years) marked a rapid growth in biodiversity via the Cambrian explosion—a period during which the majority of multicellular phyla first appeared.
It plays a part in regulating the chemistry of our atmosphere and water supply.
This is despite the fact that high-income countries use five times the ecological resources of low-income countries, which was explained as a result of process whereby wealthy nations are outsourcing resource depletion to poorer nations, which are suffering the greatest ecosystem losses.
On the other hand, changes through the Phanerozoic correlate much better with the hyperbolic model (widely used in population biology, demography and macrosociology, as well as fossil biodiversity) than with exponential and logistic models.
Even though terrestrial biodiversity declines from the equator to the poles, some studies claim that this characteristic is unverified in aquatic ecosystems, especially in marine ecosystems.
In reserved forests, rights to activities like hunting and grazing are sometimes given to communities living on the fringes of the forest, who sustain their livelihood partially or wholly from forest resources or products.
Hyperbolic model implies a second-order positive feedback.
Sovereignty principles can rely upon what is better known as Access and Benefit Sharing Agreements (ABAs).
Climate change has seen many claims about potential to affect biodiversity but evidence supporting the statement is tenuous.
#Hunting and poaching should be banned.
The history of biodiversity during the Phanerozoic (the last 540 million years), starts with rapid growth during the Cambrian explosion—a period during which nearly every phylum of multicellular organisms first appeared.
Hybridization and introgression are side-effects of introduction and invasion.
Biodiversity is the result of 3.5 billion years of evolution.
We have not documented major extinctions yet, even as climate change drastically alters the biology of many species.
Experiments with controlled environments have shown that humans cannot easily build ecosystems to support human needs; for example insect pollination cannot be mimicked, and that activity alone represented between $2.1-14.6 billions in 2003.
Generally, there is an increase in biodiversity from the poles to the tropics.
The forests play a vital role in harbouring more than 45,000 floral and 81,000 faunal species of which 5150 floral and 1837 faunal species are endemic.
The most recent, the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, occurred 65&nbsp;million years ago and has often attracted more attention than others because it resulted in the extinction of the dinosaurs.
A biodiversity hotspot is a region with a high level of endemic species that has experienced great habitat loss.
Conversely, biodiversity impacts human health in a number of ways, both positively and negatively.
National and other boundaries can complicate corridor creation.
* taxonomic diversity (usually measured at the species diversity level)
#Many of these are unoccupied.
According to one of the researchers, "If life arose relatively quickly on Earth .. then it could be common in the universe."
It first appeared in a publication in 1988 when sociobiologist E. O. Wilson used it as the title of the proceedings of that forum.
The number of species involved in such pursuits is in the tens of thousands, though the majority do not enter commerce.
The hyperbolic pattern of the world population growth arises from a second-order positive feedback between the population size and the rate of technological growth.
The island of Madagascar and India are also particularly notable.
* 5–10 million bacteria;
Popular activities such as gardening, fishkeeping and specimen collecting strongly depend on biodiversity.
Genetic erosion coupled with genetic pollution may be destroying unique genotypes, thereby creating a hidden crisis which could result in a severe threat to our food security.
The relationships between the original natural areas of these often exotic animals and plants and commercial collectors, suppliers, breeders, propagators and those who promote their understanding and enjoyment are complex and poorly understood.
: alpha diversity) diversity, which decreases turnover of diversity (i.e.
While the distribution of clean water increases, in some parts of the world it remains unequal.
The most authoritative classification in use today is IUCN's Classification of Direct Threats which has been adopted by major international conservation organizations such as the US Nature Conservancy, the World Wildlife Fund, Conservation International and BirdLife International.
On monoculture farms, the approach is generally to eradicate associated diversity using a suite of biologically destructive pesticides, mechanized tools and transgenic engineering techniques, then to rotate crops.
A recent study predicts that up to 35% of the world terrestrial carnivores and ungulates will be at higher risk of extinction by 2050 because of the joint effects of predicted climate and land-use change under business-as-usual human development scenarios.
The growing demand and lack of drinkable water on the planet presents an additional challenge to the future of human health.
Biodiversity took the biggest hit in Latin America, plummeting 83 percent.
The latter models imply that changes in diversity are guided by a first-order positive feedback (more ancestors, more descendants) and/or a negative feedback arising from resource limitation.
Others report confounding evidence that occasionally suggest that species-rich communities harbor many native and exotic species simultaneously while some say that diverse ecosystems are more resilient and resist invasive plants and animals.
Exotic species that have become pests can be identified taxonomically (e.g.,&nbsp;with Digital Automated Identification SYstem (DAISY), using the barcode of life).
Without barriers, such species occupy new territory, often supplanting native species by occupying their niches, or by using resources that would normally sustain native species.
This definition is used in the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity.
Evidence from market analysis and biodiversity science indicates that the decline in output from the pharmaceutical sector since the mid-1980s can be attributed to a move away from natural product exploration ("bioprospecting") in favor of genomics and synthetic chemistry, indeed claims about the value of undiscovered pharmaceuticals may not provide enough incentive for companies in free markets to search for them because of the high cost of development; meanwhile, natural products have a long history of supporting significant economic and health innovation.
"On the tree of life, based on analyses of small-subunit ribosomal RNA, visible life consists of barely noticeable twigs.
However, hybridization with or without introgression may, nevertheless, threaten a rare species' existence.
Some 0.075 million species of fungi had been documented by 2001)
Local governments and industry have been pushing hybridization.
Thus localities at lower latitudes have more species than localities at higher latitudes.
In zoological parks or zoos, live animals are kept for public recreation, education and conservation purposes.
The control of associated biodiversity is one of the great agricultural challenges that farmers face.
This dramatic rise in diversity was marked by periodic, massive losses of diversity classified as mass extinction events.
The overkill hypothesis, a pattern of large animal extinctions connected with human migration patterns, can be used explain why megafaunal extinctions can occur within a relatively short time period.
changes in populations and distribution of disease vectors, scarcity of fresh water, impacts on agricultural biodiversity and food resources etc.)
Vertebrates took 30 million years to recover from this event.
In agriculture and animal husbandry, the Green Revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to increase yield.
Many studies cite effects of invasive species on natives, but not extinctions.
Since the rate of extinction has increased, many extant species may become extinct before they are described.
Introducing new species often leaves endemic and other local species unable to compete with the exotic species and unable to survive.
Bioprospecting can become a type of biopiracy when such principles are not respected.
(GM organisms) have genetic material altered by genetic engineering procedures such as recombinant DNA technology.
Biodiversity has been critical to advances throughout the field of bionics.
One example is the Australian Native Vegetation Management Framework.
Zoos play a major role in creating awareness among common people about the need to conserve nature.
The total amount of related DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0 x 1037 and weighs 50 billion tonnes.
"If any one type is removed from the system, the cycle can break down and the community becomes dominated by a single species."
Biodiversity is not distributed evenly on Earth.
#They are ecologically and economically less important.
For example, the introduction of kudzu from Southeast Asia to Canada and the United States has threatened biodiversity in certain areas.
In addition, it includes a collection of dried plants or herbarium and such facilities as lecture rooms, laboratories, libraries, museums and experimental or research plantings.
The term biological diversity was used first by wildlife scientist and conservationist Raymond F. Dasmann in the year 1968 lay book ''A Different Kind of Country'' advocating conservation.
The term was widely adopted only after more than a decade, when in the 1980s it came into common usage in science and environmental policy.
Named the Holocene extinction, the reduction is caused primarily by human impacts, particularly habitat destruction.
A significant proportion of drugs are derived, directly or indirectly, from biological sources: at least 50% of the pharmaceutical compounds on the US market are derived from plants, animals and micro-organisms, while about 80% of the world population depends on medicines from nature (used in either modern or traditional medical practice) for primary healthcare.
* 0.7-1 million marine species
Estimates of the present global macroscopic species diversity vary from 2 million to 100 million, with a best estimate of somewhere near 9 million, the vast majority arthropods.
There is mounting evidence that biodiversity increases the stability of ecosystem functions through time...
Physically larger species and those living at lower latitudes or in forests or oceans are more sensitive to reduction in habitat area.
Some scientists believe that corrected for sampling artifacts, modern biodiversity may not be much different from biodiversity 300 million years ago., whereas others consider the fossil record reasonably reflective of the diversification of life.
In July 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms living on Earth.
Although some polyculture farmers use the same techniques, they also employ integrated pest management strategies as well as strategies that are more labor-intensive, but generally less dependent on capital, biotechnology and energy.
More recently, in May 2016, scientists reported that 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of one percent described.
Barriers such as large rivers, seas, oceans, mountains and deserts encourage diversity by enabling independent evolution on either side of the barrier, via the process of allopatric speciation.
As of 2012, some studies suggest that 25% of all mammal species could be extinct in 20 years.
High-income countries showed a 10% increase in biodiversity, which was canceled out by a loss in low-income countries.
Biodiversity is not evenly distributed, rather it varies greatly across the globe as well as within regions.
The visitors are allowed to enter only for study, cultural and recreation purposes.
Planned diversity includes the crops which a farmer has encouraged, planted or raised (e.g.
Interspecific crop diversity is, in part, responsible for offering variety in what we eat.
* 1.5-3 million fungi, estimates based on data from the tropics, long-term non-tropical sites and molecular studies that have revealed cryptic speciation.
It is a measure of the variety of organisms present in different ecosystems.
Often hybridized breeds originated in developed countries and were further hybridized with local varieties in the developing world to create high yield strains resistant to local climate and diseases.
The similarity between the curves of biodiversity and human population probably comes from the fact that both are derived from the interference of the hyperbolic trend with cyclical and stochastic dynamics.
Biodiversity inspires musicians, painters, sculptors, writers and other artists.
The period since the emergence of humans has displayed an ongoing biodiversity reduction and an accompanying loss of genetic diversity.
Loss of biodiversity results in the loss of natural capital that supplies ecosystem goods and services.
: in the U.S. we might compare russet potatoes with new potatoes or purple potatoes, all different, but all part of the same species, ''S.
Rapid environmental changes typically cause mass extinctions.
Marine ecosystems are particularly important, although inappropriate bioprospecting can increase biodiversity loss, as well as violating the laws of the communities and states from which the resources are taken.
If a wheat crop is destroyed by a pest we may plant a hardier variety of wheat the next year, relying on intraspecific diversity.
The unclassed forests covers 6.4 percent of the total forest area and they are marked by the following characteristics:
* The number of microbial species is not reliably known, but the Global Ocean Sampling Expedition dramatically increased the estimates of genetic diversity by identifying an enormous number of new genes from near-surface plankton samples at various marine locations, initially over the 2004-2006 period.
Philosophically it could be argued that biodiversity has intrinsic aesthetic and spiritual value to mankind ''in and of itself''.
*Location-specific approaches may be less useful for protecting migratory species.
uncontrolled hybridization, introgression and genetic swamping.
Modern zoos offer veterinary facilities, provide opportunities for threatened species to breed in captivity and usually build environments that simulate the native habitats of the animals in their care.
Broader than biodiversity, it includes geology and landforms.
In some cases the invaders are causing drastic changes and damage to their new habitats (e.g.
While records of life in the sea shows a logistic pattern of growth, life on land (insects, plants and tetrapods)shows an exponential rise in diversity.
However, not all scientists support this view, since there is uncertainty as to how strongly the fossil record is biased by the greater availability and preservation of recent geologic sections.
Less than 1% of all species that have been described have been studied beyond simply noting their existence.
Madagascar dry deciduous forests and lowland rainforests possess a high ratio of endemism.
There have been many claims about biodiversity's effect on these ecosystem services, especially provisioning and regulating services.
Endemic species can be threatened with extinction through the process of genetic pollution, i.e.
The hyperbolic character of biodiversity growth can be similarly accounted for by a feedback between diversity and community structure complexity.
The findings may eventually cause a significant change in the way science defines species and other taxonomic categories.
This is often referred to as the latitudinal gradient in species diversity.
"We need to limit climate change or we wind up with a lot of species in trouble, possibly extinct," said Dr. Lee Hannah, a co-author of the paper and chief climate change biologist at the Center for Applied Biodiversity Science at Conservation International.
Rates of decline in biodiversity in this sixth mass extinction match or exceed rates of loss in the five previous mass extinction events in the fossil record.
All species of plants taken together are known as flora and about 70,000 species of plants are known to date.
*Reduction of and better targeting of pesticides allows more species to survive in agricultural and urbanized areas.
The number and variety of plants, animals and other organisms that exist is known as biodiversity.
Removal of exotic species will allow the species that they have negatively impacted to recover their ecological niches.
Diversity consistently measures higher in the tropics and in other localized regions such as the Cape Floristic Region and lower in polar regions generally.
Wilcox's definition was "Biological diversity is the variety of life forms...at all levels of biological systems (i.e., molecular, organismic, population, species and ecosystem)...".
Most of the terrestrial diversity is found in tropical forests and in general, land has more species than the ocean; some 8.7 million species may exists on Earth, of which some 2.1 million live in the ocean
In 2003 Professor Anthony Campbell at Cardiff University, UK and the Darwin Centre, Pembrokeshire, defined a fourth level: Molecular Diversity.
Thinking about this diversity we might note that many small vegetable farmers grow many different crops like potatoes and also carrots, peppers, lettuce etc.
This is because the species most likely to disappear are those that buffer against infectious disease transmission, while surviving species tend to be the ones that increase disease transmission, such as that of West Nile Virus, Lyme disease and Hantavirus, according to a study done co-authored by Felicia Keesing, an ecologist at Bard College and Drew Harvell, associate director for Environment of the Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future (ACSF) at Cornell University.
GM crops have become a common source for genetic pollution, not only of wild varieties but also of domesticated varieties derived from classical hybridization.
In 2004, an international collaborative study on four continents estimated that 10 percent of species would become extinct by 2050 because of global warming.
Some degree of gene flow is normal adaptation and not all gene and genotype constellations can be preserved.
Removal is practical only given large groups of individuals due to the economic cost.
"Biodiversity" is most commonly used to replace the more clearly defined and long established terms, species diversity and species richness.
An advantage of this definition is that it seems to describe most circumstances and presents a unified view of the traditional types of biological variety previously identified:
These are typically non-urbanized, non-agricultural areas.
Human activities therefore allow species to migrate to new areas (and thus become invasive) occurred on time scales much shorter than historically have been required for a species to extend its range.
Accurately measuring differences in biodiversity can be difficult.
Other estimates include:
A second strategy focuses on areas that retain most of their original diversity, which typically require little or no restoration.
Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide certainly affects plant morphology and is acidifying oceans, and temperature affects species ranges, phenology, and weather, but the major impacts that have been predicted are still just ''potential'' impacts.
Marine biodiversity tends to be highest along coasts in the Western Pacific, where sea surface temperature is highest and in the mid-latitudinal band in all oceans.
All species of animals taken together are known as fauna which includes birds, mammals, fish, reptiles, insects, crustaceans, molluscs, etc.
Protected areas have been set up all over the world with the specific aim of protecting and conserving plants and animals.
It was the result of planting only two potato varieties, both vulnerable to the blight, ''Phytophthora infestans'', which arrived in 1845
Several ecological mechanisms may contribute to the gradient, but the ultimate factor behind many of them is the greater mean temperature at the equator compared to that of the poles.
Selection bias amongst researchers may contribute to biased empirical research for modern estimates of biodiversity.
*Gene banks are collections of specimens and genetic material.
It is an essential component of nature and it ensures the survival of human species by providing food, fuel, shelter, medicines and other resources to mankind.
Insect extinction rates are high—supporting the Holocene extinction hypothesis.
Almost all scientists acknowledge that the rate of species loss is greater now than at any time in human history, with extinctions occurring at rates hundreds of times higher than background extinction rates.
In the Carboniferous, rainforest collapse led to a great loss of plant and animal life.
Maintaining multiple ecosystem processes at multiple places and times requires higher levels of biodiversity than does a single process at a single place and time."
Designated trails or roads are created.
Jared Diamond describes an "Evil Quartet" of habitat destruction, overkill, introduced species and secondary extinctions.
Over the next 400 million years or so, invertebrate diversity showed little overall trend and vertebrate diversity shows an overall exponential trend.
Although about 80 percent of humans' food supply comes from just 20 kinds of plants, humans use at least 40,000 species.
Not all introduced species are invasive, nor all invasive species deliberately introduced.
Extirpation, population decline and homogenization of regional biodiversity are much more common.
Action plans identify ways of sustaining human well-being, employing natural capital, market capital and ecosystem services.
Biodiversity is also known to have an important role in reducing disaster risk and in post-disaster relief and recovery efforts.
It has been argued that the present rate of extinction is sufficient to eliminate most species on the planet Earth within 100 years.
Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.7 billion-year-old meta-sedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland.
"There is now unequivocal evidence that biodiversity loss reduces the efficiency by which ecological communities capture biologically essential resources, produce biomass, decompose and recycle biologically essential nutrients...
Many people depend on these species for food, shelter and clothing.
National park and nature reserve is the area selected by governments or private organizations for special protection against damage or degradation with the objective of biodiversity and landscape conservation.
After an exhaustive survey through peer-reviewed literature to evaluate 36 different claims about biodiversity's effect on ecosystem services, 14 of those claims have been validated, 6 demonstrate mixed support or are unsupported, 3 are incorrect and 13 lack enough evidence to draw definitive conclusions.
* morphological diversity which stems from genetic diversity
Genetic pollution leads to homogenization or replacement of local genomes as a result of either a numerical and/or fitness advantage of an introduced species.
Many cultures view themselves as an integral part of the natural world which requires them to respect other living organisms.
One textbook's definition is "variation of life at all levels of biological organization".
The inverse relationship of size and population recurs higher on the evolutionary ladder—"to a first approximation, all multicellular species on Earth are insects".
In some countries lack of property rights or lax law/regulatory enforcement necessarily leads to biodiversity loss (degradation costs having to be supported by the community).
Co-extinctions are a form of habitat destruction.
The worst was the Permian-Triassic extinction event, 251 million years ago.
Terrestrial biodiversity tends to be greater near the equator, which seems to be the result of the warm climate and high primary productivity.
During the last century, decreases in biodiversity have been increasingly observed.
Biodiversity is directly involved in water purification, recycling nutrients and providing fertile soils.
These include building materials, fibers, dyes, rubber and oil.
This has resulted in loss of genetic diversity and biodiversity as a whole.
Since the island separated from mainland Africa 66 million years ago, many species and ecosystems have evolved independently.
Human activities have frequently been the cause of invasive species circumventing their barriers,  by introducing them for food and other purposes.
There are microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia.
This idea can be used as a counterweight to the notion that tropical forests and other ecological realms are only worthy of conservation because of the services they provide.
Botanical garden is a garden in which plants are grown and displayed primarily for scientific and educational purposes.
Earth's surviving biodiversity provides resources for increasing the range of food and other products suitable for human use, although the present extinction rate shrinks that potential.
Protected areas is meant for affording protection to wild animals and their habitat which also includes forest reserves and biosphere reserves.
: herbivores, weed species and pathogens, among others).
This problem is not always apparent from morphological (outward appearance) observations alone.
In 2007, German Federal Environment Minister Sigmar Gabriel cited estimates that up to 30% of all species will be extinct by 2050.
It is richest in the tropics.
Diversity appears to increase continually in the absence of natural selection.
In absolute terms, the planet has lost 52% of its biodiversity since 1970 according to a 2014 study by the World Wildlife Fund.
Indonesia's 17,000 islands cover  and contain 10% of the world's flowering plants, 12% of mammals and 17% of reptiles, amphibians and birds—along with nearly 240 million people.
The abundant species can interbreed with the rare species, swamping its gene pool.
They study processes such as mutation and gene transfer that drive evolution.
