Key to the concept is not only that the functions are unconscious but that conditioning processes themselves may be unconscious to the organism.
Mulholland and Peper (1971) showed that occipital alpha increases with eyes open and not focused, and is disrupted by visual focusing; a rediscovery of alpha blocking.
Kamiya (1968) demonstrated that the alpha rhythm in humans could be operantly conditioned.
The publication of white papers and rigorous evaluation of biofeedback interventions can address these legitimate questions and educate medical professionals, third-party payers, and the public about the value of these services.
Biofeedback therapists use heart rate variability (HRV) biofeedback when treating asthma, COPD, depression, anxiety, fibromyalgia, heart disease, and unexplained abdominal pain.
"While Marinacci used EMG to treat neuromuscular disorders, his colleagues used the EMG only for diagnosis.
Schwartz (1971, 1972) examined whether specific patterns of cardiovascular activity are easier to learn than others due to biological constraints.
when there is rectal distension).
Delta is the dominant frequency from ages 1 to 2, and is associated in adults with deep sleep and brain pathology like trauma and tumors, and learning disability.
Peper has similarly taught asthmatics who wheeze to better control their breathing.
Level 4: '''Efficacious.'''
It is also unknown if one type has benefits over another.
When blood pressure goes up, the baroreflex makes heart rate go down.
One of these measures are used to relay the muscular activity or anal canal pressure during anal sphincter exercise.
Shearn (1962) operantly trained human subjects to increase their heart rates by 5 beats-per-minute to avoid electric shock.
They were unable to recognize its potential as a teaching tool even when the evidence stared them in the face!
The synchronous sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) ranges from 12 to 15&nbsp;Hz and is located over the sensorimotor cortex (central sulcus).
These clinicians applied EMG biofeedback to diverse functional problems like headache and hypertension.
A photoplethysmograph (PPG) measures the relative blood flow through a digit using a photoplethysmographic (PPG) sensor attached by a Velcro band to the fingers or to the temple to monitor the temporal artery.
The strain gauge method can provide feedback about the relative expansion/contraction of the chest and abdomen, and can measure respiration rate (the number of breaths per minute).
Successively smaller volume reinflations of the balloon aim to help the person detect rectal distension at a lower threshold, giving more time to contract the EAS and prevent incontinence, or to journey to the toilet.
The technology company Philips and the Dutch bank ABN AMRO developed a biofeedback device for retail investors based on a galvanic skin response sensor.
Research shows that HRV biofeedback can also be used to improve physiological and psychological wellbeing in healthy individuals.
deCharms mentions that clinical trials with  rtfMRI  is measuring a 44 to 64 percent decrease in chronic pain.
Over the years, biofeedback as a discipline and a technology has continued to mature and express new versions of the method with novel interpretations in areas utilizing the electromyograph, electrodermograph, electroencephalograph and electrocardiogram among others.
He improved Berger's electroencephalograph and pioneered EEG topography.
The ratings for each disorder depend on the nature of research studies available on each disorder, ranging from anecdotal reports to double blind studies with a control group.
Research continues to determine its reliability, validity, and clinical applicability.
Ancient Hindu practices like yoga and Pranayama (breathing techniques) are essentially biofeedback methods.
The presentation of this information—often in conjunction with changes in thinking, emotions, and behavior—supports desired physiological changes.
The meaning of "information" is largely affected by the context of usage.
Strength training may involve electromyography (EMG) skin electrodes, manometric pressures, intra-anal EMG, or endoanal ultrasound.
Other techniques have been shown to improve HRV, such as strenuous aerobic exercise, and meditation.
The opposite happens when blood pressure goes down.
This therapy directly evolved from the investigation anorectal manometry where a probe that can record pressure is placed in the anal canal.
Basmajian demonstrated practical applications for neuromuscular rehabilitation, pain management, and headache treatment.
Lehrer collaborated with Smetankin and Potapova in treating pediatric asthma patients and published influential articles on HRV asthma treatment in the medical journal ''Chest''.
Professional Conduct.
The mode of action of vaginal cones, for instance involves a biological biofeedback mechanism.
The primary hand-warming mechanism is beta-adrenergic (hormonal), while the main hand-cooling mechanism is alpha-adrenergic and involves sympathetic C-fibers.
Biofeedback that increased HRV and shifted power toward HF (high-frequencies) has been shown to lower blood pressure On the other hand, LF (low-frequency) power in the heart is associated with sympathetic vagal activity, which is known to increase the risk of heart attack.
Freedman and colleagues' studies support the view that hand-warming and hand-cooling represent entirely different skills.
In 1901, J. H. Bair studied voluntary control of the retrahens aurem muscle that wiggles the ear, discovering that subjects learned this skill by inhibiting interfering muscles and demonstrating that skeletal muscles are self-regulated.
A photoplethysmograph can provide useful feedback when temperature feedback shows minimal change.
This move has been caused by the general change in the population norms in the past 20 years (most likely due to the change in the average amount of sleep in young people).
The 2008 edition reviewed the efficacy of biofeedback for over 40 clinical disorders, ranging from alcoholism/substance abuse to vulvar vestibulitis.
This is pertinent to physiotherapy.
Dr. deCharms believes this will revolutionize the treatment of chronic pain.
Level 1: '''Not empirically supported.'''
Yucha and Montgomery (2008) assigned eating disorders, immune function, spinal cord injury, and syncope to this category.
In ''skin potential'', a therapist places an active electrode over an active site (e.g., the palmar surface of the hand) and a reference electrode over a relatively inactive site (e.g., forearm).
This designation requires the satisfaction of six criteria:
At first he believed that he had discovered the physical mechanism for telepathy but was disappointed that the electromagnetic variations disappear only millimeters away from the skull.
Fahrion and colleagues (1986) reported on an 18-26 session treatment program for hypertensive patients.
Bracing your shoulders when you hear a loud sound illustrates dysponesis, since this action does not protect against injury.
(1994) split the participants into two groups, then measured the intensity of pain, the participants' perceived disability, and depression before treatment, after treatment and again six months later.
Biofeedback therapists use temperature biofeedback when treating chronic pain, edema, headache (migraine and tension-type headache), essential hypertension, Raynaud's disease, anxiety, and stress.
Their demonstration of EEG recording at the 1935 Physiological Society meetings in England caused its widespread acceptance.
An electronic device called a rheoencephalograph from Greek rheos stream, anything flowing, from rhein to flow is utilized in brain blood flow biofeedback.
A capnometer or capnograph uses an infrared detector to measure end-tidal  (the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in expired air at the end of expiration) exhaled through the nostril into a latex tube.
This study helped make the frontalis muscle the placement-of-choice in EMG assessment and treatment of headache and other psychophysiological disorders.
compared if the injection of a bulking agent in the anal canal was superior to sphincter training with biofeedback to treat fecal incontinence.
The former translated sound vibrations into tracings on smoked glass to show their acoustic waveforms, while the latter allowed sound to be displayed as patterns of light.
Alpha activity can be observed in about 75% of awake, relaxed individuals and is replaced by low-amplitude desynchronized beta activity during movement, complex problem-solving, and visual focusing.
Physical therapists have also used EMG biofeedback for evaluating muscle activation and providing feedback for their patients.
Critics question how these treatments compare with conventional behavioral and medical interventions on efficacy and cost.
Meyer and Reich discussed similar material in a British publication.
The Biofeedback Foundation of Europe (BFE) sponsors international education, training, and research activities in biofeedback and neurofeedback.
Wolf (1983) integrated EMG biofeedback into physical therapy to treat stroke patients and conducted landmark stroke outcome studies.
Adjunctive Interventions, and VIII.
As its name describes, it measures the differences in the color of light reflected back through the scalp based on the relative amount of oxygenated and unoxygenated blood in the brain.
Yucha and Montgomery (2008) assigned asthma, autism, Bell palsy, cerebral palsy, COPD, coronary artery disease, cystic fibrosis, depression, erectile dysfunction, fibromyalgia, hand dystonia, irritable bowel syndrome, PTSD, repetitive strain injury, respiratory failure, stroke, tinnitus, and urinary incontinence in children to this category.
They must recertify every 3 years, complete 36 hours of continuing education or complete the written exam, and attest that their license/credential has not been suspended, investigated, or revoked.
The sensorimotor rhythm is associated with the inhibition of movement and reduced muscle tone.
The Southeast Biofeedback and Clinical Neuroscience Association (SBCNA) is a non-profit regional organization supporting biofeedback professionals with continuing education, ethics guidelines, and public awareness promoting the efficacy and safety of professional biofeedback.
The Pelvic Muscle Dysfunction Biofeedback areas include: I.
Peper (1997) applied SEMG to the workplace, studied the ergonomics of computer use, and promoted "healthy computing."
Fast cortical potentials range from 0.5&nbsp;Hz to 100&nbsp;Hz.
He demonstrated that alterations in consciousness are associated with changes in the EEG and associated the beta rhythm with alertness.
In a healthcare environment that emphasizes cost containment and evidence-based practice, biofeedback and neurofeedback professionals continue to address skepticism in the medical community about the cost-effectiveness and efficacy of their treatments.
He also studied the EEG correlates of meditative states.
Sterman (1972) showed that cats and human subjects could be operantly trained to increase the amplitude of the sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) recorded from the sensorimotor cortex.
Newton-John, Spense, and Schotte (1994) compared the effectiveness of Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT) and Electromyographic Biofeedback (EMG-Biofeedback) for 44 participants with chronic low back pain.
In rectal sensitivity training, a balloon is placed in the rectum, and is gradually distended until there is a sensation of rectal filling.
Biofeedback therapists use EMG biofeedback when treating anxiety and worry, chronic pain, computer-related disorder, essential hypertension, headache (migraine, mixed headache, and tension-type headache), low back pain, physical rehabilitation (cerebral palsy, incomplete spinal cord lesions, and stroke), temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD), torticollis, and fecal incontinence, urinary incontinence, and pelvic pain.
This seems to indicate that biofeedback is as effective as CBT in chronic low back pain.
The thresholds or boundaries defining the frequency ranges vary considerably among professionals.
This processing allows for a unified signal that is then able to be compared to other signals using the same processing techniques.
The SBCNA was formally the North Carolina Biofeedback Society (NCBS), serving Biofeedback since the 1970s.
He believed that the EEG had diagnostic and therapeutic promise in measuring the impact of clinical interventions.
They brought portable biofeedback equipment to India and monitored practitioners as they demonstrated self-regulation.
Information coded biofeedback relies primarily on the behavior conditioning aspect of biofeedback in promoting significant changes in the functioning of the organism.
Low beta is associated with activation and focused thinking.
This study was then repeated with 8 patients with chronic intractable pain.
Finally, he performed the first QEEG, which is the measurement of the signal strength of EEG frequencies.
The interbeat interval, divided into 60 seconds, determines the heart rate at that moment.
Thus HRV biofeedback exercises the baroreflex, and strengthens it.
Skin temperature mainly reflects arteriole diameter.
Yucha and Montgomery (2008) assigned attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anxiety, chronic pain, epilepsy, constipation (adult), headache (adult), hypertension, motion sickness, Raynaud's disease, and temporomandibular joint dysfunction to this category.
Contradicting this, a 2013 randomized controlled trial found no benefit of adding biofeedback to pelvic floor muscle exercise in stress urinary incontinence.
(1994) found no significant differences between the group which received CBT and the group which received EMG-Biofeedback.
Engel conceptualized this training protocol as illness onset training, since patients were taught to produce and then suppress a symptom.
An infrared light source is transmitted through or reflected off the tissue, detected by a phototransistor, and quantified in arbitrary units.
Gamma activity is associated with perception of meaning and meditative awareness.
He established the Stanford University Sleep Research Center in 1970.
There is a significant increase in the ability of healthy subjects to control their pain with repeated training.
These reports may have contributed to the perception of alpha biofeedback as a shortcut to a meditative state.
A photoplethysmograph can measure blood volume pulse (BVP), which is the phasic change in blood volume with each heartbeat, heart rate, and heart rate variability (HRV), which consists of beat-to-beat differences in intervals between successive heartbeats.
He examined the constraints on learning integrated (two autonomic responses change in the same direction) and differentiated (two autonomic responses change inversely) patterns of blood pressure and heart rate change.
Some examine this concept and do not necessarily ascribe it simply to a willful acquisition of a new learned skill but also extend the dynamics into the realms of a behavioristic conditioning (7).
They developed alpha-theta training at the Menninger Foundation from the 1960s to the 1990s.
He then used this approach to teach patients to control their rate of premature ventricular contractions (PVCs), where the ventricles contract too soon.
The EEG records both excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) that largely occur in dendrites in pyramidal cells located in macrocolumns, several millimeters in diameter, in the upper cortical layers.
Prior to placing surface electrodes, the skin is normally shaved, cleaned and exfoliated to get the best signal.
An electromyograph (EMG) uses surface electrodes to detect muscle action potentials from underlying skeletal muscles that initiate muscle contraction.
The work of B.F. Skinner led researchers to apply operant conditioning to biofeedback, decide which responses could be voluntarily controlled and which could not.
A capnometer is a sensitive index of the quality of patient breathing.
After World War II, mathematician Norbert Wiener developed cybernetic theory, that proposed that systems are controlled by monitoring their results.
The most direct effect of HRV biofeedback is on the baroreflex, a homeostatic reflex that helps control blood pressure fluctuations.
A control group that received noncontingent (false) auditory feedback did not improve.
Research has shown that biofeedback can improve the efficacy of pelvic floor exercises and help restore proper bladder functions.
The beta rhythm consists of asynchronous waves and can be divided into low beta and high beta ranges (13–21&nbsp;Hz and 20–32&nbsp;Hz).
The average value of end-tidal  for a resting adult is 5% ().
He described interictal activity (EEG potentials between seizures) and recorded a partial complex seizure in 1933.
Distance mentoring trains candidates from their residence or office.
The principle of "information" is both complex and, in part, controversial.
That subjects can learn to voluntarily control brain activity in a specific region of the brain, and 2.
In addition, electrodermal measures have long served as one of the central tools in polygraphy (lie detection) because they reflect changes in anxiety or emotional activation.
The Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback (AAPB) is a non-profit scientific and professional society for biofeedback and neurofeedback.
Gibbs, Davis, and Lennox inaugurated clinical electroencephalography in 1935 by identifying abnormal EEG rhythms associated with epilepsy, including interictal spike waves and 3&nbsp;Hz activity in absence seizures.
Because it takes about 5 seconds for blood pressure to change after changes in heart rate (think of different amounts of blood flowing through the same sized tube), the baroreflex produces a rhythm in heart rate with a period of about 10 seconds.
Biofeedback therapists use electrodermal biofeedback when treating anxiety disorders, hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating), and stress.
He located an occipital lobe source for alpha waves and demonstrated that delta waves can help locate brain lesions like tumors.
(d) The data are subjected to appropriate data analysis.
In the first experimental demonstration of biofeedback Shearn used these procedures with heart rate.
During HRV biofeedback, these two reflexes stimulate each other, stimulating resonance properties of the cardiovascular system caused by the inherent rhythm in the baroreflex, and thus causing very big oscillations in heart rate and large-amplitude stimulation of the baroreflex.
In another randomized controlled trial the addition of biofeedback to the training of pelvic floor muscles for the treatment of stress urinary incontinence, improved pelvic floor muscle function, reduced urinary symptoms, and improved of the quality of life.
The conference resulted in the founding of the Bio-Feedback Research Society, which permitted normally isolated researchers to contact and collaborate with each other, as well as popularizing the term "biofeedback."
Hand-warming and hand-cooling are produced by separate mechanisms, and their regulation involves different skills.
Christopher deCharms (of Omneuron in San Francisco) in conjunction with Stanford University School of Medicine has developed a real-time fMRI for the purpose of training the brain to activate its own endogenous opiates.
He published an influential article in ''Psychology Today'' that summarized research that showed that subjects could learn to discriminate when alpha was present or absent, and that they could use feedback to shift the dominant alpha frequency about 1&nbsp;Hz.
(2005) demonstrated that subjects can control the pain of heat stimulus, by visually observing in real time their brain activity.
The General Biofeedback Blueprint of Knowledge areas include: I. Orientation to Biofeedback, II.
They must recertify every 4 years, complete 55 hours of continuing education during each review period or complete the written exam, and attest that their license/credential (or their supervisor's license/credential) has not been suspended, investigated, or revoked.
Skin conductance is measured in microsiemens (millionths of a siemens).
(a) In a comparison with a no-treatment control group, alternative treatment group, or sham (placebo) control using randomized assignment, the investigational treatment is shown to be statistically significantly superior to the control condition or the investigational treatment is equivalent to a treatment of established efficacy in a study with sufficient power to detect moderate differences.
A feedback thermometer detects skin temperature with a thermistor (a temperature-sensitive resistor) that is usually attached to a finger or toe and measured in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit.
Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, II.
Changes in bio-impedance are generated by blood volume and blood flow and registered by a rheographic device.
program combined breathing modification, autogenic biofeedback for the hands and feet, and frontal EMG training.
Vaschillo and colleagues (1983) published the first studies of heart rate variability (HRV) biofeedback with cosmonauts and treated patients diagnosed with psychiatric and psychophysiological disorders.
The biofeedback process is designed to interface with select aspects of these "unconscious" processes.
Biofeedback therapists can use a photoplethysmograph to supplement temperature biofeedback when treating chronic pain, edema, headache (migraine and tension-type headache), essential hypertension, Raynaud's disease, anxiety, and stress.
When anxiety raises the level of sweat in a sweat duct, conductance increases.
In 2013, the NCBS reorganized as the SBCNA supporting and representing biofeedback and neurofeedback in the Southeast Region of the United States of America.
The traditional model asserts that, when firing is slow, hands warm; when firing is rapid, hands cool.
Green and Green (1986) investigated voluntary control of internal states by individuals like Swami Rama and American Indian medicine man Rolling Thunder both in India and at the Menninger Foundation.
Over time, these changes can endure without continued use of an instrument.
The patient can control his own pain by visually looking at his rtfMRI, watching his own reactions in real time, and then blocking the pathways causing pain.
The SEMG is measured in microvolts (millionths of a volt).
Thus, a lower rating may reflect the lack of research rather than the ineffectiveness of biofeedback for the problem.
In ''skin conductance'', an electrodermograph imposes an imperceptible current across the skin and measures how easily it travels through the skin.
Level 5: '''Efficacious and specific.'''
A 2013 review classified biofeedback among the techniques that might be of benefit in the management of chronic migraine.
Hemoencephalography or HEG biofeedback is a functional infrared imaging technique.
Neurofeedback monitors both slow and fast cortical potentials.
Because the baroreflex is controlled through brain stem mechanisms that communicate directly with the insula and amygdala, which control emotion, HRV biofeedback also appears to modulate emotional reactivity, and to help people suffering from anxiety, stress, and depression
They have demonstrated that subjects can learn to control these DC potentials and have studied the efficacy of slow cortical potential biofeedback in treating ADHD, epilepsy, migraine, and schizophrenia.
Engel and Chism (1967) operantly trained subjects to decrease, increase, and then decrease their heart rates (this was analogous to ON-OFF-ON EEG training).
Skin potential is the voltage that develops between eccrine sweat glands and internal tissues and is measured in millivolts (thousandths of a volt).
Biofeedback has its modern conventional roots in the early 1970s.
This is because the PPG sensor is more sensitive than a thermistor to minute blood flow changes.
Whatmore and Kohli (1968) introduced the concept of dysponesis (misplaced effort) to explain how functional disorders (where body activity is disturbed) develop.
(Emphasis added by author.)
They hypothesized that theta states allow access to unconscious memories and increase the impact of prepared images or suggestions.
When the subject 'controlled the pain' the virtual flame on the fMRI got dimmer.
Electrodermal biofeedback is used as an adjunct to psychotherapy to increase client awareness of their emotions.
Bremer used the EEG to show how sensory signals affect vigilance in 1935.
Biofeedback systems have been known in India and some other countries for millennia.
Alternatively, the patient may actively grip or press against an air-filled cushion of custom shape.
Skin resistance is measured in kΩ (thousands of ohms).
The ECG method is more accurate than the PPG method in measuring heart rate variability.
Co-ordination training aims to teach voluntary contraction of EAS when the RAIR occurs (i.e.
Both methods lead to an improvement of FI, but comparisons of St Mark's scores between the groups showed no differences in effect between treatments.
Last, they wrote ''The Pathophysiology and Treatment of Functional Disorders'' (1974) that outlined their treatment of functional disorders.
The main frequency ranges include delta, theta, alpha, the sensorimotor rhythm, low beta, high beta, and gamma.
Rheoencephalography (REG), or brain blood flow biofeedback, is a biofeedback technique of a conscious control of blood flow.
He demonstrated that SMR production protects cats against drug-induced generalized seizures (tonic-clonic seizures involving loss of consciousness) and reduces the frequency of seizures in humans diagnosed with epilepsy.
This contradicts the traditional view that finger blood flow is controlled exclusively by sympathetic C-fibers.
This designation requires at least one study of sufficient statistical power with well-identified outcome measures but lacking randomized assignment to a control condition internal to the study.
While this is more painful and often costly, the signal is more reliable since surface electrodes pick up cross talk from nearby muscles.
Comparing the results of the groups before treatment and after treatment, indicates that EMG-Biofeedback reduced pain, disability, and depression as much as by half.
With 8 participants in the study, deCharms et al.
Precise instruments measure physiological activity such as brainwaves, heart function, breathing, muscle activity, and skin temperature.
He recorded electrical potentials from his son Klaus's scalp.
(He did continue to believe in telepathy throughout his life, however, having had a particularly confirming event regarding his sister).
The SBCNA offers an Annual Conference for professional continuing education as well as promoting biofeedback as an adjunct to the allied health professions.
The definition reads:
Almost half of his subjects reported experiencing a pleasant "alpha state" characterized as an "alert calmness."
Kleitman has been recognized as the "Father of American sleep research" for his seminal work in the regulation of sleep-wake cycles, circadian rhythms, the sleep patterns of different age groups, and the effects of sleep deprivation.
