The honour and dignity of a Lord Mayoralty was conferred on Birmingham by Letters Patent on 3 June 1896.
Birmingham's GVA was £24.1bn (2013 est.,), and the economy grew relatively slowly between 2002 and 2012, where growth was 30% below the national average.
Outside the Broad Street area are many stylish and underground venues.
The oldest surviving synagogue in Birmingham is the 1825 Greek Revival Severn Street Synagogue, now a Freemasons' Lodge hall.
In 2010 it was described by ''The Guardian'' as "far and away the most powerful example that I've experienced in this country of how and why opera can still matter."
Birmingham artists were prominent in several post-war developments in art: Peter Phillips was among the central figures in the birth of Pop Art; John Salt was the only major European figure among the pioneers of photo-realism; and the BLK Art Group used painting, collage and multimedia to examine the politics and culture of Black British identity.
A short distance from Five Ways the Birmingham Oratory was completed in 1910 on the site of Cardinal Newman's original foundation.
25.9% of all households owned their accommodation outright, another 29.3% owned their accommodation with a mortgage or loan.
St Philip's Cathedral was upgraded from church status when the Anglican Diocese of Birmingham was created in 1905.
These include Free Radio Birmingham & Free Radio 80s, Capital Birmingham, Heart West Midlands, Absolute Radio, and Smooth Radio.
The original parish church of Birmingham, St Martin in the Bull Ring, is Grade II* listed.
Most of Birminghams water is supplied by the Elan aqueduct, opened in 1904; water is fed by gravity to Frankley Reservoir, Frankley, and Bartley Reservoir, Bartley Green, from reservoirs in the Elan Valley, Wales.
During the late 1990s Ghamkol Shariff Masjid was built in Small Heath.
The Medicine Bar in the Custard Factory, hmv Institute, Rainbow Pub and Air are large clubs and bars in Digbeth.
Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls first described how a practical nuclear weapon could be constructed in the Frisch–Peierls memorandum of 1940, the same year that the cavity magnetron, the key component of radar and later of microwave ovens, was invented by John Randall and Henry Boot.
bus routes are the longest urban bus routes in Europe, being  long with 272 bus stops.
Christianity is the largest religion within Birmingham, with 46.1% of residents identifying as Christians in the 2011 Census.
Until 1986, the West Midlands County Council was based in Birmingham City Centre.
This originates from the city's dialect name, Brummagem, which may in turn have been derived from one of the city's earlier names, Bromwicham.
In 1746 John Roebuck invented the lead chamber process, enabling the large-scale manufacture of sulphuric acid, and in 1780 James Keir developed a process for the bulk manufacture of alkali, together marking the birth of the modern chemical industry.
Consequently, relatively few buildings survive from its earlier history and those that do are protected.
Birmingham has several major local newspapers – the daily ''Birmingham Mail'' and the weekly ''Birmingham Post'' and ''Sunday Mercury'', all owned by the Trinity Mirror.
The city's infant mortality rate is high, around 60% worse than the national average.
Albert Bore, leader of Birmingham City Council called on the government to change radically how local services are funded and provided.
A medium-sized market town in the medieval period, Birmingham grew to international prominence in the 18th century at the heart of the Midlands Enlightenment and subsequent Industrial Revolution, which saw the town at the forefront of worldwide advances in science, technology and economic development, producing a series of innovations that laid many of the foundations of modern industrial society.
During the coldest night recorded, 14 January 1982, the temperature fell to  at Birmingham Airport on the city's eastern edge, but just  at Edgbaston, near the city centre.
During the Victorian era, the population of Birmingham grew rapidly to well over half a million and Birmingham became the second largest population centre in England.
In the inner-city wards of Aston and Washwood Heath, the figure is higher than 30%.
Due to budget cuts, four of the branch libraries risk closure whilst services may be reduced elsewhere.
Winners' Chapel also maintains physical presence in Digbeth.
Recent years have seen these businesses increasingly showcased at farmers markets, popular street food events and food festivals including Birmingham Independent Food Fair.
The Birmingham Conservatoire, Birmingham School of Acting and Birmingham Institute of Art and Design, all now part of Birmingham City University, offer higher education in specific arts subjects.
Law enforcement in Birmingham is carried out by West Midlands Police, whose headquarters are at Lloyd House in Birmingham City Centre.
This also makes Birmingham the 9th most populous metropolitan area in Europe.
The city's name comes from the Old English ''Beormingahām'', meaning the home or settlement of the ''Beormingas'' – indicating that Birmingham was established in the 6th or early 7th century as the primary settlement of an Anglian tribal grouping and ''regio'' of that name.
The author J. R. R. Tolkien was brought up in Birmingham, with many locations in the city such as Moseley bog, Sarehole Mill and Perrott's Folly supposedly being the inspiration for various scenes in ''The Lord of the Rings''.
More traditional industries also remain: 40% of the jewellery made in the UK is still produced by the 300 independent manufacturers of the city's Jewellery Quarter, continuing a trade first recorded in Birmingham in 1308.
Much of the area now occupied by the city was originally a northern reach of the ancient Forest of Arden, whose former presence can still be felt in the city's dense oak tree-cover and in the large number of districts such as Moseley, Saltley, Yardley, Stirchley and Hockley with names ending in "-ley": the Old English ''-lēah'' meaning "woodland clearing".
Birmingham is home to five universities: Aston University, University of Birmingham, Birmingham City University, University College Birmingham and Newman University.
A number of Georgian buildings survive, including St Philip's Cathedral, Soho House, Perrott's Folly, the Town Hall and much of St Paul's Square.
This included the construction of large tower block estates, such as Castle Vale.
According to figures from the 2011 census, 57.9% of the population was White (53.1% White British, 2.1% White Irish, 2.7% Other White), 4.4% of mixed race (2.3% White and Black Caribbean, 0.3% White and Black African, 1.0% White and Asian, 0.8% Other Mixed), 26.6% Asian (13.5% Pakistani, 6.0% Indian, 3.0% Bangladeshi, 1.2% Chinese, 2.9% Other Asian), 8.9% Black (2.8% African, 4.4% Caribbean, 1.7% Other Black),  1.0% Arab and 1.0% of other ethnic heritage.
Birmingham was the birthplace of modern bhangra in the 1960s, and by the 1980s had established itself as the global centre of bhangra culture, which has grown into a global phenomenon embraced by members of the Indian diaspora worldwide from Los Angeles to Singapore.
In 2011 of all households in Birmingham, 0.12% were same-sex civil partnership households, compared to the English national average of 0.16%.
The many burnt mounds that can still be seen around the city indicate that modern humans first intensively settled and cultivated the area during the bronze age, when a substantial but short-lived influx of population occurred between 1700&nbsp;BC and 1000&nbsp;BC, possibly caused by conflict or immigration in the surrounding area.
All other religions remained proportionately similar.
In Birmingham 60.4% of the population was aged between 16 and 74, compared to 66.7% in England as a whole.
The AEGON Classic is, alongside Wimbledon and Eastbourne, one of only three UK tennis tournaments on the WTA Tour.
The city was extensively redeveloped during the 1950s and 1960s.
Outside the city centre is Star City entertainment complex on the former site of Nechells Power Station.
Birmingham's role as a manufacturing and printing centre has supported strong local traditions of graphic design and product design.
Geologically, Birmingham is dominated by the ''Birmingham Fault'' which runs diagonally through the city from the Lickey Hills in the south west, passing through Edgbaston and the Bull Ring, to Erdington and Sutton Coldfield in the north east.
Music was specially composed, conducted or performed by Mendelssohn, Gounod, Sullivan, Dvořák, Bantock and Edward Elgar, who wrote four of his most famous choral pieces for Birmingham.
Birmingham's explosive industrial expansion started earlier than that of the textile-manufacturing towns of the North of England, and was driven by different factors.
The Guru Nanak Nishkam Sewak Jatha Sikh Gurdwara was built on Soho Road in Handsworth in the late 1970s and the Buddhist Dhammatalaka Peace Pagoda near Edgbaston Reservoir in the 1990s.
238,313 Birmingham residents were born overseas, of these, 44% (103,682) have been resident in the UK for less than 10 years.
In 1709 the Birmingham-trained Abraham Darby I moved to Coalbrookdale in Shropshire and built the first blast furnace to successfully smelt iron ore with coke, transforming the quality, volume and scale on which it was possible to produce cast iron.
Cadbury World is a museum showing visitors the stages and steps of chocolate production and the history of chocolate and the company.
Manufacturing accounted for 8% of employment within Birmingham in 2012, a figure beneath the average for the UK as a whole.
Birmingham Museums Trust runs other museums in the city including Aston Hall, Blakesley Hall, the Museum of the Jewellery Quarter, Soho House and Sarehole Mill.
There are 571 parks within Birmingham – more than any other European city – totalling over  of public open space.
Thinktank is Birmingham's main science museum, with a giant screen cinema, a planetarium and a collection that includes the ''Smethwick Engine'', the world's oldest working steam engine.
Birmingham schoolteacher Rowland Hill invented the postage stamp and created the first modern universal postal system in 1839.
It is resident at the Birmingham Hippodrome and tours extensively nationally and internationally.
Birmingham has a temperate maritime climate, like much of the British Isles, with average maximum temperatures in summer (July) being around ; and in winter (January) around .
The WMCA will gain devolved powers in transport, development planning, and economic growth.
The city's largest single-day event is its St. Patrick's Day parade (Europe's second largest, after Dublin).
The city is a major international commercial centre, ranked as a beta− world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network; and an important transport, retail, events and conference hub.
Birmingham's sporting heritage can be felt worldwide, with the concept of the Football League and lawn tennis both originating from the city.
The Alexander Stadium in Perry Barr is the headquarters of UK Athletics, and one of only two British venues to host fixtures in the elite international IAAF Diamond League.
9.1% of people said their day-to-day activities were limited a lot by their health which was higher than the national average.
Birmingham has a vibrant contemporary literary scene, with local authors including David Lodge, Jim Crace, Jonathan Coe, Joel Lane and Judith Cutler.
45.5% of people said they were in very good health which was below the national average.
Birmingham Repertory Theatre is Britain's longest-established producing theatre, presenting a wide variety of work in its three auditoria on Centenary Square and touring nationally and internationally.
Birmingham rose to national political prominence in the campaign for political reform in the early 19th century, with Thomas Attwood and the Birmingham Political Union bringing the country to the brink of civil war during the Days of May that preceded the passing of the Great Reform Act in 1832.
Famous food brands that originated in Birmingham include Typhoo tea, Bird's Custard, Cadbury's chocolate and HP Sauce.
The city's population peaked in 1951 at 1,113,000 residents.
The M6 passes through the city on the Bromford Viaduct, which at  is the longest bridge in the United Kingdom.
The West Midlands conurbation had a population of 2,441,00 (2011 est.,), and 2,762,700 people live in the West Midlands (county) (2012 est.,).
Since 2001, the population has grown by 99,500, or 10.1%.
The close relationship between Enlightenment Birmingham's leading thinkers and its major manufacturers – in men like Matthew Boulton and James Keir they were often in fact the same people – made it particularly important for the exchange of knowledge between pure science and the practical world of manufacturing and technology.
''The Archers'', the world's longest running radio soap, is recorded in Birmingham for BBC Radio 4.
These were also the main hub for CITV, until that was moved to Manchester in 2004.
The differences are most marked in the oldest age group reflecting greater female longevity, where more women were 70 or over.
Birmingham based breweries included Ansells, Davenport's and Mitchells & Butlers.
These figures were below the national average.
Based on the 2011 census, Birmingham's population is projected to reach 1,160,100 by 2021, an increase of 8.0%.
The Birmingham Back to Backs are the last surviving court of back-to-back houses in the city.
Birmingham was the terminus for both of the world's first two long-distance railway lines: the 82 mile Grand Junction Railway of 1837 and the 112 mile London and Birmingham Railway of 1838.
The city absorbed Sutton Coldfield in 1974 and became a metropolitan borough in the new West Midlands county.
It is the largest and most populous British city outside London, with a population in 2014 of 1,101,360.
Other science-based museums include the National Sea Life Centre in Brindleyplace, the Lapworth Museum of Geology at the University of Birmingham and the Centre of the Earth environmental education centre in Winson Green.
South & City College Birmingham has nine campuses spread throughout the city.
It is played annually at the Edgbaston Priory Club, which in 2010 announced plans for a multimillion-pound redevelopment, including a new showcase centre court and a museum celebrating the game's Birmingham origins.
Musicians Jeff Lynne, Ozzy Osbourne, Tony Iommi, Bill Ward, Geezer Butler, John Lodge, Roy Wood, Joan Armatrading, Toyah Willcox, Denny Laine, Sukshinder Shinda, Apache Indian, Steve Winwood, Jamelia, Fyfe Dangerfield and Laura Mvula all grew up in the city.
Lloyds Bank was founded in the town in 1765, and Ketley's Building Society, the world's first building society, in 1775.
Birmingham is home to many national, religious and spiritual festivals including a St. George's Day party.
Partly because of its central location, Birmingham is a major transport hub on the motorway, rail and canal networks.
Summer Row, The Mailbox, O2 Academy in Bristol Street, Snobs Nightclub, St Philips/Colmore Row, St Paul's Square and the Jewellery Quarter all have a vibrant night life.
Another 33.9% said they were in good health, which was also below the national average.
Birmingham is the largest local Authority area and city outside London.
Children around age 10 are a relatively small group, reflecting the decline in birth rates around the turn of the century.
Caribbean and African culture are celebrated with parades and street performances by buskers.
The Birmingham Larger Urban Zone, a Eurostat measure of the functional city-region approximated to local government districts, has a population of 2,357,100 in 2004.
With 87.92 recorded offences per 1000 population in 2009–10, Birmingham's crime rate is above the average for England and Wales, but lower than any of England's other major core cities and lower than many smaller cities such as Oxford, Cambridge or Brighton.
The city is served by the M5, M6, M40, and M42 motorways, and probably the best known motorway junction in the UK: Spaghetti Junction.
In the decades following World War II, the ethnic makeup of Birmingham changed significantly, as it received waves of immigration from the Commonwealth of Nations and beyond.
in inner-city districts.
Jazz has been popular in the city since the 1920s, and there are many regular festivals such as the Harmonic Festival, the Mostly Jazz Festival and the annual International Jazz Festival.
There are 1,946 listed buildings in Birmingham and thirteen scheduled ancient monuments.
A top-level government body, the West Midlands Combined Authority, will be formed in April 2016.
Sutton Park, which covers  in the north of the city, is the largest urban park in Europe and a National Nature Reserve.
In 2011 Birmingham had 78,259 full-time students aged 18–74 resident in the city during term time, more than any other city in the United Kingdom outside London.
Snow showers often pass through the city via the Cheshire gap on north westerly airstreams, but can also come off the North Sea from north easterly airstreams.
The city's leading contemporary literary publisher is the Tindal Street Press, whose authors include prize-winning novelists Catherine O'Flynn, Clare Morrall and Austin Clarke.
Birmingham is a snowy city relative to other large UK conurbations, due to its inland location and comparatively high elevation.
The next decade saw the influential metal bands Napalm Death and Godflesh arise from the city.
According to the 2014 Mercer Quality of Living Survey, Birmingham was placed 51st in the world in, which was the second highest rating in the UK.
Birmingham is chiefly a product of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries; its growth began during the Industrial Revolution.
Nightlife in Birmingham is mainly concentrated along Broad Street and into Brindleyplace.
Touring theatre companies include the politically radical Banner Theatre, the Maverick Theatre Company and Kindle Theatre.
Birmingham was the first city to be named National City of Sport by the Sports Council.
Instead of the economies of scale of a low-paid, unskilled workforce producing a single bulk commodity such as cotton or wool in large, mechanised units of production, Birmingham's industrial development was built on the adaptability and creativity of a highly paid workforce with a strong division of labour, practising a broad variety of skilled specialist trades and producing a constantly diversifying range of products, in a highly entrepreneurial economy of small, often self-owned workshops.
This is an improvement on the city's 56th place in 2008.
People from Birmingham are called Brummies, a term derived from the city's nickname of Brum.
Birmingham New Street is the busiest railway station in the United Kingdom outside London, both for passenger entries and exits and for passenger interchanges.
Alexander Parkes invented the first man-made plastic in the Jewellery Quarter in 1855.
Birmingham's early history is that of a remote and marginal area.
By 1791 it was being hailed as "the first manufacturing town in the world".
Freeing for the first time the manufacturing capacity of human society from the limited availability of hand, water and animal power, this was arguably the pivotal moment of the entire industrial revolution and a key factor in the worldwide increases in productivity that would follow over the following century.
Extreme weather is rare but the city has been known to experience tornados – the most recent being in July 2005 in the south of the city, damaging homes and businesses in the area.
Local and regional services are operated from all of Birmingham's stations by London Midland.
Birmingham has many areas of wildlife that lie in both informal settings such as the Project Kingfisher and Woodgate Valley Country Park and in a selection of parks such as Lickey Hills Country Park, Handsworth Park, Kings Heath Park, and Cannon Hill Park; the latter also housing the Birmingham Nature Centre.
Despite this early importance, by the time of the Domesday Book of 1086 the manor of Birmingham was one of the poorest and least populated in Warwickshire, valued at only 20 shillings, with the area of the modern city divided between the counties of Warwickshire, Staffordshire and Worcestershire.
Nowadays the canals are mainly used for leisure purposes, and canalside regeneration schemes such as Brindleyplace have turned the canals into tourist attractions.
The city's religious profile is highly diverse, however: outside London, Birmingham has the United Kingdom's largest Muslim, Sikh and Buddhist communities; its second largest Hindu community; and its seventh largest Jewish community.
Birmingham Airport, located  east of the city centre in the neighbouring borough of Solihull, is the seventh busiest by passenger traffic in the United Kingdom and the third busiest outside the London area after Manchester and Edinburgh.
The Alexandra Theatre and the Birmingham Hippodrome host large-scale touring productions, while professional drama is performed on a wide range of stages across the city, including the Crescent Theatre, the Custard Factory, the Old Joint Stock Theatre, the Drum in Aston and the ''mac'' in Cannon Hill Park.
The National Indoor Arena hosted the 2007 European Athletics Indoor Championships and 2003 IAAF World Indoor Championships, as well as hosting the annual Aviva Indoor Grand Prix – the only British indoor athletics fixture to qualify as an IAAF Indoor Permit Meeting – and a wide variety of other sporting events.
Birmingham, Alabama, USA, is named after the city and shares an industrial kinship.
The company's associated ballet school – Elmhurst School for Dance in Edgbaston – is the oldest vocational dance school in the country.
It is the national hub for CrossCountry, the most extensive long-distance train network in Britain, and a major destination for Virgin Trains services from London Euston, Glasgow Central and Edinburgh Waverley.
The Victorian era saw extensive building across the city.
The damage done to the city's infrastructure, in addition to a deliberate policy of demolition and new building by planners, led to extensive demolition and redevelopment in subsequent decades.
In Birmingham libraries, leisure centres, parks, play areas, transport, street cleaning and waste collection face cuts among other services.
Other popular bands from Birmingham include Duran Duran, Fine Young Cannibals, Ocean Colour Scene, The Streets, The Twang, Deluka and Dexys Midnight Runners.
Traces of medieval Birmingham can be seen in the oldest churches, notably the original parish church, St Martin in the Bull Ring.
The National Express Group headquarters are located in Digbeth, in offices above Birmingham Coach Station, which forms the national hub of the company's coach network.
Between 1961 and 1990 Birmingham Airport averaged 13.0 days of snow lying annually, compared to 5.33 at London Heathrow.
The area of modern Birmingham lay in between, on the upland Birmingham Plateau and within the densely wooded and sparsely populated Forest of Arden.
In 1732 Lewis Paul and John Wyatt invented roller spinning, the "one novel idea of the first importance" in the development of the mechanised cotton industry.
From the summer of 1940 to the spring of 1943, Birmingham was bombed heavily by the German Luftwaffe in what is known as the Birmingham Blitz.
See also Healthcare in West Midlands.
The 2012 mid-year estimate for the population of Birmingham was 1,085,400.
Some 11.2 days each year rose to a temperature of  or above and 51.6 nights reported an air frost.
The Bull Ring was reconstructed and New Street station was redeveloped.
Economic inequality within Birmingham is greater than in any other major English city, and is exceeded only by Glasgow in the United Kingdom.
The town's reputation for political radicalism and its strongly Parliamentarian sympathies saw it attacked by Royalist forces in the Battle of Birmingham in 1643, and it developed into a centre of Puritanism in the 1630s and as a haven for Nonconformists from the 1660s.
The venue will host the World Indoor Athletics Championships for a second time, when they come to Birmingham in 2018.
It is claimed government cuts to local authorities have hit Birmingham disproportionately.
Aston Manor Brewery is currently the only brewery of any significant size.
The Birmingham Royal Ballet is one of the United Kingdom's five major ballet companies and one of three based outside London.
Central/ATV studios in Birmingham were the location for the recording of many programmes for ITV including ''Tiswas'' and ''Crossroads'', until the complex was closed in 1997, and Central moved to its current Gas Street studios.
Birmingham's tradition of innovation continued into the 19th century.
Relationships were built around pragmatic commercial linkages rather than the rigid paternalism and deference of feudal society, and loyalties to the traditional hierarchies of the established church and aristocracy were weak.
These trading links gave Birmingham's metalworkers access to much wider markets, allowing them to diversify away from lower-skilled trades producing basic goods for local sale, towards a broader range of specialist, higher-skilled and more lucrative activities.
In recent years, many parts of Birmingham has been transformed, with the redevelopment of the Bullring Shopping Centre and regeneration of old industrial areas such as Brindleyplace, The Mailbox and the International Convention Centre.
In addition to Birmingham itself, the LUZ includes the Metropolitan Boroughs of Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull and Walsall, along with the districts of Lichfield, Tamworth, North Warwickshire and Bromsgrove.
Birmingham was granted city status in 1889 by Queen Victoria.
There are 41 local libraries in Birmingham, plus a regular mobile library service.
It was replaced in 1856 by the Grade II* listed Singers Hill Synagogue.
It is also the home of Birchfield Harriers, which has many international athletes among its members.
St Mary's College, Oscott is one of the three seminaries of the Catholic Church in England and Wales; Woodbrooke is the only Quaker study centre in Europe; and Queen's College, Edgbaston is an ecumenical theological college serving the Church of England, the Methodist Church and the United Reformed Church.
Birmingham City Council is the largest local authority in Europe with 120 councillors representing 40 wards.
It is home to Europe's largest leisure and entertainment complex Star City as well as Europe's first out-of-city-centre entertainment and leisure complex Resorts World Birmingham owned by the Genting Group.
The city also has a rugby league club, the Birmingham Bulldogs, who compete in the Co-operative RLC Midlands Premier League (RLC).
There are a number of late night pubs in the Irish Quarter.
Birmingham Moor Street and Birmingham Snow Hill form the northern termini for Chiltern Railways express trains running from London Marylebone.
Birmingham has a long cinematic history; The Electric on Station Street is the oldest working cinema in the UK, and Oscar Deutsch opened his first Odeon cinema in Brierley Hill during the 1920s.
The development of Birmingham into a significant urban and commercial centre began in 1166, when the Lord of the Manor Peter de Bermingham obtained a charter to hold a market at his castle, and followed this with the creation of a planned market town and seigneurial borough within his ''demesne'' or manorial estate, around the site that became the Bull Ring.
Child protection services within Birmingham were rated "inadequate" by OFSTED for four years running between 2009 and 2013, with 20 child deaths since 2007 being investigated.
Edgbaston was the scene of the highest ever score by a batsman in first-class cricket, when Brian Lara scored 501 not out for Warwickshire in 1994.
The Caribbean-style Birmingham International Carnival takes place in odd numbered years.
Birmingham is the home of the UK's longest-established local science fiction group, launched in 1971 (although there were earlier incarnations in the 1940s and 1960s) and which organises the annual science fiction event Novacon.
Birmingham Metropolitan College is one of the largest further education colleges in the country, with fourteen campuses spread across Birmingham and into the Black Country and Worcestershire.
Perhaps the most important invention in British history, the industrial steam engine, was invented in Birmingham.
There is also a thriving independent and artisan food sector in Birmingham, encompassing microbreweries like Two Towers, and collective bakeries such as Loaf.
Levels of unemployment are among the highest in the country, with 14.4% of the economically active population unemployed (Dec 2013).
There is a distinctive Brummie accent and dialect.
By 1800 the West Midlands had more banking offices per head than any other region in Britain, including London.
The Ikon Gallery hosts displays of contemporary art, as does Eastside Projects.
Notable independent schools in the city include the Birmingham Blue Coat School, King Edward VI High School for Girls and Edgbaston High School for Girls.
There is evidence of early human activity in the Birmingham area dating back 10,000 years, with stone age artefacts suggesting seasonal settlements, overnight hunting parties and woodland activities such as tree felling.
Other notable professional orchestras based in the city include the Birmingham Contemporary Music Group, the Royal Ballet Sinfonia and Ex Cathedra, a Baroque chamber choir and period instrument orchestra.
Birmingham is the fourth-most visited city in the UK by foreign visitors.
The Barber Institute of Fine Arts in Edgbaston is one of the finest small art galleries in the world, with a collection of exceptional quality representing Western art from the 13th century to the present day.
Queen Alexandra College is a specialist college based in Harborne offering further education to visually impaired or disabled students from all over the United Kingdom.
The city established its own university in 1900.
Most significant, however, was the development in 1776 of the industrial steam engine by James Watt and Matthew Boulton.
It also holds a significant selection of old masters – including major works by Bellini, Rubens, Canaletto and Claude – and particularly strong collections of 17th-century Italian Baroque painting and English watercolours.
