Cramping can be treated with NSAIDs.
Deliberate non-penetrative sex without vaginal sex or deliberate oral sex without vaginal sex are also sometimes considered birth control.
This is followed by a number of hormone based methods including oral pills, patches, vaginal rings, and injections.
In 1921, Sanger founded the American Birth Control League, which later became the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
The clinic, run by midwives and supported by visiting doctors, offered women's birth-control advice and taught them the use of a cervical cap.
By lengthening the time between pregnancies, birth control can improve adult women's delivery outcomes and the survival of their children.
The birth control movement developed during the 19th and early 20th centuries.
For a child born in 2011, an average US family will spend $235,000 over 17 years to raise them.
Pregnancy success rates after tubal reversal are between 31 and 88 percent, with complications including an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy.
Although sterilization is considered a permanent procedure, it is possible to attempt a tubal reversal to reconnect the fallopian tubes or a vasectomy reversal to reconnect the vasa deferentia.
Feeding formula, pumping instead of nursing, the use of a pacifier, and feeding solids all increase its failure rate.
Some argue not having sex as a form of birth control, but abstinence-only sex education may increase teenage pregnancies if offered without birth control education, due to non-compliance.
In large animals the surgery is known as castration.
Mifepristone is also more effective than levonorgestrel while copper IUDs are the most effective method.
In a survey of biological parents, 9% stated they would not have had children if they were able to do it over again.
Emergency contraceptive methods are medications (sometimes misleadingly referred to as "morning-after pills") or devices used after unprotected sexual intercourse with the hope of preventing pregnancy.
Making condoms available to teenagers does not appear to affect the age of onset of sexual activity or its frequency.
Allergic reactions and more severe adverse effects such as toxic shock syndrome have been reported.
In women the desire for a reversal is often associated with a change in spouse.
In 1971, Eisenstadt v. Baird extended this right to privacy to single people.
A national survey in 1937 showed 71 percent of the adult population supported the use of contraception.
Other methods of birth control do not protect against sexually transmitted diseases.
The most common method in the developed world is condoms and oral contraceptives, while in Africa it is oral contraceptives and in Latin America and Asia it is sterilization.
Gregory Pincus and John Rock with help from the Planned Parenthood Federation of America developed the first birth control pills in the 1950s, such as mestranol/noretynodrel, which became publicly available in the 1960s through the Food and Drug Administration under the name ''Enovid''.
Among Protestants there is a wide range of views from supporting none to allowing all methods of birth control.
Part of the reason that many women are without birth control is that many countries limit access due to religious or political reasons, while another contributor is poverty.
Additionally, they aim to eradicate discrimination against girls and young women who seek contraceptives.
File:Condom unrolled durex.jpg|An unrolled male latex condom|alt=an unrolled condom
Sanger was mainly active in the United States but had gained an international reputation by the 1930s.
Usage of male forms of birth control has decreased between 1985 and 2009.
Sperm extraction followed by in vitro fertilization may also be an option in men.
If used perfectly the first-year failure rate may be around 3.4%, however if used poorly first-year failure rates may approach 85%.
In women who are breastfeeding, progestin-only methods are preferred over combined oral birth control pills.
Safe sex practices, such as with the use of male or female condoms, can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections.
Globally, as of 2009, approximately 60% of those who are married and able to have children use birth control.
Globally, condoms are the most common method of birth control.
They have typical first-year failure rates of 24%; perfect use first-year failure rates depend on which method is used and range from 0.4% to 5%.
Comprehensive sex education and access to birth control are effective in decreasing pregnancy rates in this age group.
In those who are exclusively breastfeeding, about 10% begin having periods before three months and 20% before six months.
Hindus may use both natural and artificial contraceptives.
With tubal ligation, complications occur in 1 to 2 percent of procedures with serious complications usually due to the anesthesia.
The number of males who request reversal is between 2 and 6 percent.
Due to restrictive abortion laws in Sub-Saharan Africa, many women turn to unlicensed abortion providers for unintended pregnancy, resulting in about 2–4% obtaining unsafe abortions each year.
File:Contraceptive diaphragm.jpg|A diaphragm vaginal-cervical barrier, in its case with a quarter U.S. coin.
It is supported by a group of governments and international NGOs, including the Office of Population Affairs, the Asian Pacific Council on Contraception, Centro Latinamericano Salud y Mujer, the European Society of Contraception and Reproductive Health, the German Foundation for World Population, the International Federation of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, International Planned Parenthood Federation, the Marie Stopes International, Population Services International, the Population Council, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and Women Deliver.
Globally, they are used by about 3.6% of couples.
Women's earnings, assets, body mass index, and their children's schooling and body mass index all improve with greater access to birth control.
The least effective methods are spermicides and withdrawal by the male before ejaculation.
At the time, under the Comstock Law, distribution of birth control information was illegal.
They work primarily by preventing ovulation or fertilization.
A device called Essure, which expands when placed in the fallopian tubes and blocks them, was approved in the United States in 2002.
Like diaphragms, they are inserted vaginally before intercourse and must be placed over the cervix to be effective.
In teenagers, pregnancies are at greater risk of poor outcomes.
Birth control increases economic growth because of fewer dependent children, more women participating in the workforce, and less use of scarce resources.
A number of options exist, including high dose birth control pills, levonorgestrel, mifepristone, ulipristal and IUDs.
The Malthusian League, based on the ideas of Thomas Malthus, was established in 1877 in the United Kingdom to educate the public about the importance of family planning and to advocate for getting rid of penalties for promoting birth control.
IUDs do not affect breastfeeding and can be inserted immediately after delivery.
If based on both basal body temperature and another primary sign, the method is referred to as symptothermal.
File:Éponge spermicide.jpg|A contraceptive sponge set inside its open package.|alt=a contraceptive sponge
In 1909, Richard Richter developed the first intrauterine device made from silkworm gut, which was further developed and marketed in Germany by Ernst Gräfenberg in the late 1920s.
An injection with sodium bicarbonate washes out the substance and restores fertility.
They were made of animal gut, and were most likely used to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases during the English Civil War.
Neutering or spaying, which involves removing some of the reproductive organs, is often carried out as a method of birth control in household pets.
For women who rarely have sex, the taking of the hormonal birth control levonorgestrel around the time of sex looks promising.
In 2010, the United Nations launched the ''Every Woman Every Child'' movement to assess the progress toward meeting women's contraceptive needs.
Abstinence-only sex education does not reduce teenage pregnancy.
Male condoms and the diaphragm with spermicide have typical use first-year failure rates of 18% and 12%, respectively.
Contraceptive use among women in Sub-Saharan Africa has risen from about 5% in 1991 to about 30% in 2006.
File:Préservatif féminin.jpg|A polyurethane female condom|alt=a female condom
A previous model of the intrauterine device (the Dalkon shield) was associated with an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease, however the risk is not affected with current models in those without sexually transmitted infections around the time of insertion.
Male condoms are put on a man's erect penis and physically block ejaculated sperm from entering the body of a sexual partner.
There are a number of common misconceptions regarding sex and pregnancy.
Behavioral methods involve regulating the timing or method of intercourse to prevent introduction of sperm into the female reproductive tract, either altogether or when an egg may be present.
As of 2012, 57% of women of childbearing age want to avoid pregnancy (867 of 1520&nbsp;million).
While copper IUDs may increase menstrual bleeding and result in more painful cramps hormonal IUDs may reduce menstrual bleeding or stop menstruation altogether.
In those who are overweight or obese levonorgestrel is less effective and an IUD or ulipristal is recommended.
About 222&nbsp;million women who want to avoid pregnancy in developing countries are not using a modern birth control method.
In America, Griswold v. Connecticut overturned a state law prohibiting dissemination of contraception information based on a constitutional right to privacy for marital relationships.
Birth control is also being considered as an alternative to hunting as a means of controlling overpopulation in wild animals.
This results in 54&nbsp;million unplanned pregnancies and nearly 80,000 maternal deaths a year.
The oldest condoms discovered to date were recovered in the ruins of Dudley Castle in England, and are dated back to 1640.
The evidence on which these estimates are based, however, is poor as the majority of people in trials stop their use early.
All methods have minimal side effects.
There are no significant long-term side effects, and tubal ligation decreases the risk of ovarian cancer.
Less effective methods include physical barriers such as condoms, diaphragms and birth control sponges and fertility awareness methods.
This decision may cause regret in some men and women.
Birth control also improves child survival in the developing world by lengthening the time between pregnancies.
Religions vary widely in their views of the ethics of birth control.
If pregnancy is a high concern using two methods at the same time is reasonable, and two forms of birth control is recommended in those taking the anti-acne drug isotretinoin, due to the high risk of birth defects if taken during pregnancy.
Contraceptive sponges combine a barrier with a spermicide.
They are unlikely to affect implantation, but this has not been completely exclude.
The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommended in 2014 that oral birth control pills should be over the counter medications.
While the procedure is inexpensive and does not require surgical skills, there are concerns regarding long-term side effects.
Sterilization, while highly effective, is not usually reversible; all other methods are reversible, most immediately upon stopping them.
Human rights agreements require most governments to provide family planning and contraceptive information and services.
Sanger established a short-lived birth-control clinic based in the Brownville section of Brooklyn, New York  in 1916, which was shut down after eleven days and resulted in her arrest.
After a vasectomy, there may be swelling and pain of the scrotum which usually resolves in a week or two.
Women can become pregnant the first time they have sexual intercourse and in any sexual position.
They are one form of long-acting reversible contraception which are the most effective types of reversible birth control.
This usually requires the presence of no periods, exclusively breastfeeding the infant, and a child younger than six months.
Another substance, polidocanol, which functions in the same manner is being looked at.
Family planning via the use of modern birth control is one of the most cost-effective health interventions.
If governments fail to do the above it may put them in breach of binding international treaty obligations.
Techniques for determining fertility include monitoring basal body temperature, cervical secretions, or the day of the cycle.
Additionally, it is associated with a number of health problems and thus is not recommended.
While all forms of birth control can generally be used by young people, long-acting reversible birth control such as implants, IUDs, or vaginal rings are more successful in reducing rates of teenage pregnancy.
Failure rates increase to 4–7% at one year and 13% at two years.
With perfect use condoms are more effective with a 2% first-year failure rate versus a 6% first-year rate with the diaphragm.
The World Health Organization states that if breastfeeding is the infant's only source of nutrition, the failure rate is 2% in the six months following delivery.
Some authorities recommend that those using abstinence as a primary method have backup method(s) available (such as condoms or emergency contraceptive pills).
Teen pregnancy rates are higher in students given abstinence-only education, as compared with comprehensive sex education.
One involves putting quinacrine in the uterus which causes scarring and infertility.
Comprehensive sex education and access to birth control decreases the rate of unwanted pregnancies in this age group.
These include the requirement to create a national plan for family planning services, remove laws that limit access to family planning, ensure that a wide variety of safe and effective birth control methods are available including emergency contraceptives, make sure there are appropriately trained healthcare providers and facilities at an affordable price, and create a process to review the programs implemented.
Ulipristal, when used within 5&nbsp;days, decreases the chance of pregnancy by about 85% (pregnancy rate 1.4%) and might be a little more effective than levonorgestrel.
A number of methods to perform sterilization via the cervix are being studied.
Throughout the 1920s, Stopes and other feminist pioneers, including Dora Russell and Stella Browne, played a major role in breaking down taboos about sex.
In April 1930 the Birth Control Conference assembled 700 delegates and was successful in bringing birth control and abortion into the political sphere – three months later, the Ministry of Health, in the United Kingdom, allowed local authorities to give birth-control advice in welfare centres.
How frequently different methods are used varies widely between countries.
The most effective methods of birth control are sterilization by means of vasectomy in males and tubal ligation in females, intrauterine devices (IUDs), and implantable birth control.
Condoms have the additional benefit of helping to prevent the spread of some sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS.
In Japan about 80% of couples who are using birth control use condoms, while in Germany this number is about 25%, and in the United States it is 18%.
While less used in the developed countries than the developing world, the number of women using IUDs as of 2007 was more than 180&nbsp;million.
Male condoms have the advantage of being inexpensive, easy to use, and have few adverse effects.
Douching after sexual intercourse is not an effective form of birth control.
Female condoms are also available, most often made of nitrile, latex or polyurethane.
While all methods are beneficial financially, the use of copper IUDs resulted in the greatest savings.
The first permanent birth-control clinic was established in Britain in 1921 by Marie Stopes working with the Malthusian League.
The publicity surrounding the arrest, trial, and appeal sparked birth control activism across the United States.
File:NuvaRing in hand.jpg|A NuvaRing vaginal ring|alt=a vaginal ring
Delaying another pregnancy after a miscarriage however does not appear to alter risk and women are advised to attempt pregnancy in this situation whenever they are ready.
The initiative has set a goal of increasing the number of users of modern birth control by 120 million women in the world's 69 poorest countries by the year 2020.
In the developing world overall, 35% of birth control is via female sterilization, 30% is via IUDs, 12% is via oral contraceptives, 11% is via condoms, and 4% is via male sterilization.
Among types of birth control, they along with birth control implants result in the greatest satisfaction among users.
Women in the Middle Ages were also encouraged to tie weasel testicles around their thighs during sex to prevent pregnancy.
Other potential complications include expulsion (2–5%) and rarely perforation of the uterus (less than 0.7%).
A common Buddhist view is that preventing conception is acceptable, while intervening after conception has occurred is not.
It was founded during the "Knowlton trial" of Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh, who were prosecuted for publishing on various methods of birth control.
Surgical sterilization is available in the form of tubal ligation for women and vasectomy for men.
These include barrier methods, hormonal methods, implanted devices, emergency contraceptives, and sterilization procedures.
This makes them the most effective form of emergency contraceptive.
Views in Judaism range from the stricter Orthodox sect to the more relaxed Reform sect.
In those who are not breastfeeding, fertility may return four weeks after delivery.
Birth control methods have been used since ancient times, but effective and safe methods only became available in the 20th century.
About 222 million women however were not able to access birth control, 53&nbsp;million of whom were in sub-Saharan Africa and 97&nbsp;million of whom were in Asia.
She jumped bail in 1914 after her arrest for distributing birth control information and left the United States for the United Kingdom to return in 1915.
Planning, making available, and use of birth control is called family planning.
In Islam, contraceptives are allowed if they do not threaten health, although their use is discouraged by some.
Medical abortion became an alternative to surgical abortion with the availability of prostaglandin analogs in the 1970s and mifepristone in the 1980s.
Men more likely to regret sterilization are younger, have young or no children, or have an unstable marriage.
Methods of male birth control include condoms, vasectomies and withdrawal.
Her clinic made contraception acceptable during the 1920s by presenting it in scientific terms.
The lactational amenorrhea method involves the use of a woman's natural postpartum infertility which occurs after delivery and may be extended by breastfeeding.
This vaginal ring appears to be effective for three or four months and is currently available in some areas of the world.
Of women aged over 30 who have undergone tubal ligation, about 5% regret their decision, as compared with 20% of women aged under 30.
The total medical cost for a pregnancy, delivery and care of a newborn in the United States is on average $21,000 for a vaginal delivery and $31,000 for a Caesarean section as of 2012.
The Roman Catholic Church officially only accepts natural family planning, although large numbers of Catholics in developed countries accept and use modern methods of birth control.
Some cultures limit or discourage access to birth control because they consider it to be morally, religiously, or politically undesirable.
Modern condoms are most often made from latex, but some are made from other materials such as polyurethane, or lamb's intestine.
Contraceptive vaccines have been found to be effective in a number of different animal populations.
Once removed, even after long term use, fertility returns to normal immediately.
In most other countries the cost is less than half.
In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson started endorsing public funding for family planning services, and the Federal Government began subsidizing birth control services for low-income families.
A reversible surgical method under investigation is reversible inhibition of sperm under guidance (RISUG) which consists of injecting a polymer gel, styrene maleic anhydride in dimethyl sulfoxide, into the vas deferens.
Teenage pregnancies, especially among younger teens, are at greater risk of adverse outcomes including early birth, low birth weight, and death of the infant.
Between 25 and 75% of males who are sexually active would use hormonal birth control if it was available for them.
After the delivery of a child, a woman who is not exclusively breastfeeding may become pregnant again after as few as four to six weeks.
Typical failure rates during the first year depend on whether or not a woman has previously given birth, being 24% in those who have and 12% in those who have not.
Rates of success in fathering another child after reversal are between 38 and 84 percent; with success being lower the longer the time period between the original procedure and the reversal.
September 26 is World Contraception Day, devoted to raising awareness and improving education about sexual and reproductive health, with a vision of ''a world where every pregnancy is wanted.''
As of 2005, 12% of couples are using a male form of birth control (either condoms or a vasectomy) with higher rates in the developed world.
Casanova, living in 18th century Italy, described the use of a lambskin covering to prevent pregnancy; however, condoms only became widely available in the 20th century.
The current intrauterine devices (IUD) are small devices, often 'T'-shaped, often containing either copper or levonorgestrel, which are inserted into the uterus.
In 1936 the U.S. court ruled in U.S. v. One Package that medically prescribing contraception to save a persons life or well being was not illegal under the Comstock Law; following this decision, the American Medical Association Committee on Contraception revoked its 1936 statement condemning birth control.
Some methods of birth control can be started immediately following the birth, while others require a delay of up to six months.
First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt publicly supported birth control and family planning.
The Affordable Care Act, passed into law on March 23, 2010 under President Barack Obama, requires all plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace to cover contraceptive methods.
For every dollar spent, the United Nations estimates that two to six dollars are saved.
A combination of an androgen and a progestin seems promising, as do selective androgen receptor modulators.
Neither method offers protection from sexually transmitted infections.
'''Birth control''', also known as '''contraception''' and '''fertility control''', is a method or device used to prevent pregnancy.
Six uncontrolled studies of lactational amenorrhea method users found failure rates at 6 months postpartum between 0% and 7.5%.
Levonorgestrel pills, when used within 3&nbsp;days, decrease the chance of pregnancy after a single episode of unprotected sex or condom failure by 70% (resulting in a pregnancy rate of 2.2%).
In this population, outcomes are worse when a mother gets pregnant within eighteen months of a previous delivery.
It is possible, although not very likely, to become pregnant during menstruation.
While this generally avoids pregnancy, pregnancy can still occur with intercrural sex and other forms of penis-near-vagina sex (genital rubbing, and the penis exiting from anal intercourse) where sperm can be deposited near the entrance to the vagina and can travel along the vagina's lubricating fluids.
Providing emergency contraceptive pills to women in advance does not affect rates of sexually transmitted infections, condom use, pregnancy rates, or sexual risk-taking behavior.
Another is an intravas device which involves putting a urethane plug into the vas deferens to block it.
As of 2007, IUDs are the most widely used form of reversible contraception, with more than 180&nbsp;million users worldwide.
Fertility awareness methods involve determining the most fertile days of the menstrual cycle and avoiding unprotected intercourse.
Avoiding sex when fertile is used by about 3.6% of women of childbearing age, with usage as high as 20% in areas of South America.
By 1938 347 birth control clinics were running in the United States despite their advertisement still being illegal.
The sponge can be inserted up to 24&nbsp;hours before intercourse and must be left in place for at least six hours afterward.
Birth control use in developing countries has decreased the number of deaths during or around the time of pregnancy by 40% (about 270,000 deaths prevented in 2008) and could prevent 70% if the full demand for birth control were met.
Evidence supports effectiveness and safety in adolescents and those who have and have not previously had children.
In 1924 the Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics was founded to campaign for municipal clinics; this led to the opening of a second clinic in Greengate, Salford in 1926.
Short term complications are twenty times less likely from a vasectomy than a tubal ligation.
In the United States, Margaret Sanger and Otto Bobsein popularized the phrase "birth control" in 1914.
These cost savings are related to preventing unplanned pregnancies and decreasing the spread of sexually transmitted illnesses.
Emergency birth control can prevent pregnancy if taken within the 72 to 120 hours after unprotected sex.
