Ninety-five percent of the park is water, and the shore of the bay is the location of an extensive mangrove forest.
Reef environments in Biscayne National Park have seen declines in species richness and diversity across all fish species from 1977 to 1981 to 2006–2007.
A selection of wrecks have been the subjects of ranger-led snorkeling tours and have been organized as the Maritime Heritage Trail, the only underwater archaeological trail in the National Park Service system.
Stiltsville was established by Eddie "Crawfish" Walker in the 1930s as a small community of shacks built on pilings in a shallow section of Biscayne Bay, not far from Key Biscayne.
Additionally, lobstering is prohibited in the Biscayne Bay-Card Sound Lobster Sanctuary, administered by the state of Florida to protect spiny lobster breeding areas, which overlaps much of Biscayne Bay.
Few people lived in the park area until 1897, when Israel Lafayette Jones, an African-American property manager, bought Porgy Key for $300 US.
The Joneses also provided the club with fish, lobster and crabs.
Hundreds of species of fish are present in park waters, including more than fifty crustacean species ranging from isopods to giant blue land crabs, about two hundred species of birds and about 27 mammal species, both terrestrial and marine.
The house was destroyed and Jones remained in Miami until his death in 1997 at 99&nbsp;years.
Every coral species in park waters is considered protected by either federal or state regulations.
When proposals to develop Elliott Key surfaced in 1960, Lloyd Miller asked Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall to send a Park Service reconnaissance team to review the Biscayne Bay area for inclusion in the national park system.
Boca Chita Key is the most-visited island, with a campground and picnic areas.
Insects include Schaus' swallowtail, an endangered species, as well as dense clouds of mosquitoes in the wet season, preyed upon by dragonflies.
Biscayne also has a small population of threatened American crocodiles and a few American alligators.
Declines in populations were noted in both gamefish and in fish species not exposed to fishing pressure.
Rare and endangered plant species on the islands include Sargent's cherry palm and the semaphore prickly-pear cactus (''Consolea corallicola'').
Elliott Key in particular was used by the Central Intelligence Agency as a training area in the early 1960s in preparation for Bay of Pigs invasion.
Biscayne Bay lies between low ridges of oolitic Miami Limestone on the west, forming Cutler Ridge, and the coral-based Key Largo Limestone that underlies Elliott Key and the keys to the south.
Boca Chita Key was developed with several structures including an imitation lighthouse, built using coral rock and topped with a wire cage resembling a lighthouse lantern, and the end of a jetty on the north side of the key.
The Fowey Rocks light station transmitted weather data with winds peaking at a two-minute wind speed of  and a gust to  before the station ceased transmitting, presumably due to damage from stronger gusts.
Wilson's plovers nest on Boca Chita Key, where nesting zones are closed during breeding season.
The mainland shorelines are dominated by a marshy transitional zone chiefly populated by red mangrove and black mangrove growing from the shallow water, with white mangrove growing farther back from the water's edge.
More modest homesteads include the now-abandoned plantations developed by Israel Jones and his sons, and the Sweeting Homestead on Elliott Key.
Other Spanish explorers arrived later in the 16th century and Florida came under Spanish rule.
The southwestern boundary adjoins the Turkey Point Nuclear Generating Station and its system of cooling canals.
Bird life on the shoreline includes yellow-crowned night herons, loggerhead shrikes, prairie warblers and shorebirds.
The ''Alicia'', ''Erl King'' and ''Lugano'' are relatively deep wrecks, best suited for scuba dives.
The first permanent European settlers in the Miami area did not come until the early 19th century.
The hiring of a police chief in 1989 prompted questions from the National Park Service to the Dade County state attorney's office, headed by Janet Reno.
A site on Sands Key has yielded potsherds, worked shells and other artifacts indicating occupation from at latest 1000&nbsp;AD to about 1650, after contact was made with Europeans.
Fishing is limited to designated sport fish, spiny lobster, stone crab, blue crab and shrimp.
The park's popularity as a destination for boaters has led to a high rate of accidents, some of them fatal.
The park's western boundary is a fringe of property on the mainland, extending a few hundred meters inland between Cutler Ridge and Mangrove Point.
As a result of efforts to control water resources in Florida and projects to drain the Everglades during the early and mid-20th century, water flow into Biscayne Bay has been altered by the construction of canals.
On August 24, 1992, Hurricane Andrew came ashore just south of Miami, passing directly across Biscayne National Park with maximum sustained winds of , with gusts to .
Wet season temperatures average between  with an average monthly rainfall of .
John James Audubon visited Elliott Key in 1832.
Because the carbon in the leaves is sequestered by incorporation into animals, the mangrove swamp is estimated to have two to three times the ability to sequester carbon of terrestrial forests.
Most tours are operated during the peak winter season from January to April.
The key was owned by Honeywell until 1945.
Deprived of a rationale for existence by the national monument's establishment, Islandia languished.
The bay also provides habitat for juvenile sea animals that have left the shelter of the mangrove belts.
The coral reefs may themselves be subdivided into the outer reef on the edge of the Florida carbonate platform, the patch reefs between the outer reef and the keys, and the reefs in the shoals on either side of the keys.
The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) was established in 2000 to mitigate the effects of human intervention into the natural water flow of the Everglades.
The trees' aerial root structure provides a sheltered habitat for crabs, fish and wading birds.
The park is heavily used by boaters, and apart from the park's visitor center on the mainland, its land and sea areas are accessible only by boat.
Elliott Key was a brief stopping point for John C. Breckinridge during his flight to Cuba.
President Lyndon B. Johnson signed Public Law 90-606 to create Biscayne National Monument on October 18, 1968.
The L-31E coastal storm surge levee inland of the park's western boundary has played a significant role in isolating former freshwater marshlands from their water sources.
Spanish treasure fleets regularly sailed past the Florida Keys and were often caught in hurricanes.
Private concessioners provide full day tours in the park that include snorkeling, hiking, paddling and sailing from the park headquarters.
Northbound spring migrants do likewise on Elliott Key.
In 1962 an industrial seaport was proposed for the mainland shores of Biscayne Bay, to be known as SeaDade.
The discovery of the ship in 1975 resulted in a landmark court case that established the wreck as an archaeological site rather than a salvage site.
Camping is most practical in winter months, when mosquitoes are less troublesome on the keys.
Israel Jones' sons Lancelot and Arthur dropped out of the lime-growing business after competition from Mexican limes made their business less profitable, and after a series of devastating hurricanes in 1938 they became full-time fishing guides at the Cocolobo Club.
In the early 20th century the islands became secluded destinations for wealthy Miamians who built getaway homes and social clubs.
He lived in a two-room shack for the next ten years, riding out hurricanes on Porgy Key, but left his home permanently just before Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
Mark C. Honeywell's guesthouse on Boca Chita Key was the area's most elaborate private retreat, featuring a mock lighthouse.
Dry season temperatures average between  with an average monthly rainfall of .
The present name has been attributed to a shipwrecked Basque sailor known as the "Biscaino" or "Viscayno" who lived in the area for a time, or to a more general allusion to the Bay of Biscay.
Before Israel Jones' death in 1932 the Jones plantations were for a while among the largest lime producers on the Florida east coast.
All are fringed with mangroves, with subtropical vegetation and hardwood forests in the interiors, including gumbo limbo, mahogany, ironwood, torchwood and satinleaf.
Biscayne Bay is a shallow semi-enclosed lagoon which averages  in depth.
Miami-Dade County operates four marina parks near the park.
The Key Largo Limestone is a coarse stone formed from stony corals, between  in thickness.
The endangered Johnson's seagrass is also found in small quantities in the bay, which is at the southern end of the grass's range.
The reef, composed of living corals, is inhabited by more than 200 species of fish, as well as molluscs, crustaceans and worms.
Biscayne Bay and Florida Bay are major nurseries for red grouper and gray snapper.
The ''Mandalay'' is at a shallower depth and is especially popular for snorkeling.
The next year Jones bought the adjoining Old Rhodes Key and moved his family there, clearing land to grow limes and pineapples.
The shallowness of the lagoon makes it suitable habitat for diving birds such as anhinga, cormorants and diving ducks.
Although Ludwig's SeaDade plans were not supported by Miami-area politicians or the state of Florida, Islandia's supporters continued to lobby for development support.
In addition to the physical structures, it would have been necessary to dredge a  channel through the bay for large ships to access the refinery.
There are 44 documented shipwrecks in the park from the 16th through the 20th centuries.
The earliest evidence of human presence in Biscayne dates to about 2500&nbsp;years before the present, with piles of conch and whelk shells left by the Glades culture.
Manatees frequent the quiet waters of the bay.
The Miami Limestone was deposited in turbulent lagoon waters.
Although most of Biscayne National Park's area is water, the islands have a number of protected historical structures and districts.
As a consequence of their origins as reefs, the beaches of Elliott Key and Old Rhodes Key are rocky.
The 1966 report noted that the proposed park contained the best remaining areas of tropical forest in Florida and a rare combination of "terrestrial, marine and amphibious life," as well as significant recreational value.
The Boca Chita Key structures are administered as a cultural landscape, interpreting the area's use as a retreat for the rich.
A backlash against development led to the 1968 designation of Biscayne National Monument.
Since all park lands are no more than a few feet above sea level, they are vulnerable to rising sea levels.
Reef life species such as coral and sponges are also protected from collecting by visitors.
In 1968, when it appeared the area was about to become a national monument, Islandia supporters bulldozed a highway six lanes wide right down the center of the island, destroying the forest for .
While the park's islands were farmed during the 19th and early 20th centuries, their rocky soil and periodic hurricanes made agriculture difficult to sustain.
Most of Biscayne's permanent facilities are on the offshore keys.
Prior to canal construction, most fresh water inflow came from rain and groundwater, but the canals are now altering the salinity profile of the bay, conveying sediment and pollutants and leading to saltwater intrusion into the Biscayne aquifer.
Homestead Bayfront Park is directly adjacent to the park headquarters at Convoy Point.
Both its mainland margins and the keys are covered by mangrove forest.
The offshore reefs are dominated by elkhorn coral to  water depth, and staghorn coral below 10 meters.
A direct hit by a powerful hurricane can produce severe consequences, primarily by its impact on human interventions in the environment rather than on the natural environment of the park, which is well-adapted to these events.
The monument was expanded in 1974 under Public Law 93-477 and expanded again when the monument was redesignated a national park by an act of Congress through Public Law 96-287, effective June 28, 1980.
The bay also has a resident population of common bottlenose dolphins.
The bottom of the lagoon hosts sponges and soft corals in places where grasses cannot not grow.
Three primary species of seagrass are found in the park: turtlegrass, shoal grass and manatee grass.
Coastal zones are habitat for ruddy turnstones and least sandpipers.
In 1999 The Air Force prohibited major commercial development at Homestead as a result.
A single loop trail runs from the harbor to the oceanfront, and a path following the Spite Highway runs the length of the island.
A wide shallow opening in the island chain, located between the Ragged Keys and Key Biscayne just north of the park's boundary, is called the Safety Valve, as it allows storm surge water to flow out of the bay after the passage of tropical storms.
The report found that the most significant virtues of the potential park were "the clear, sparkling waters, marine life, and the submerged lands of Biscayne Bay and the Atlantic Ocean.
Islandia landowners called it Elliott Key Boulevard, but called it "Spite Highway" privately.
The park can be affected by wave action from more distant tropical storms such as 2012's Hurricane Sandy, which damaged facilities on Elliott Key.
After extensive negotiations and litigation with both the state and with Ludwig, who owned lands needed for cooling water canals, a closed-loop canal system was built south of the power plants and the nuclear units became operational in the early 1970s.
The wet season roughly coincides with hurricane season, with frequent thunderstorms.
As late as 1988 a group of Cuban exiles were arrested when they tried to use the key for a mock landing.
The park's eastern boundary is the ten-fathom line () of water depth in the Atlantic Ocean on the Florida Reef.
The passage of roller-frame trawl nets does not harm grasses, but damages soft corals and sponges.
An environmental impact study concluded that the resulting flight paths over the bay, only  to the east, would result in degradation of the park.
Despite efforts to propagate the plant, there are now 16 Sargent's palms on Elliott Key, with about 123 propagated on Long Key.
Biscayne National Park includes a number of navigational aids, as well as an ornamental structure built to resemble a lighthouse.
The interior of the keys are frequented by warblers and the hawks that prey on them.
Other neighboring influences on the bay are the agricultural lands of south Miami-Dade County, a sewage treatment facility on the park boundary at Black Point, and its neighbor, the South Miami-Dade Landfill.
The inscription reads in part:
Nest sites are identified by daily morning beach patrols and are protected with mesh screen against the predation by abundant raccoon population.
The oil-fired Turkey Point power stations were completed in 1967–68 and experienced immediate problems from the discharge of hot cooling water into Biscayne Bay, where the heat killed marine grasses.
The park includes four distinct ecosystems, each supporting its own flora and fauna.
The only direct mainland access to the park is at the Convoy Point Visitor Center, adjacent to the park headquarters.
The park's margins are habitat for the threatened American crocodile.
The Spanish galleon ''Nuestra Senora del Popolo'' is believed to have been wrecked in park waters in 1733, though the site has not been found.
About 200 such incidents are documented each year, with full re-growth requiring up to 15 years.
One vision of Islandia, supported by land owners, would have connected the northern Florida Keys&nbsp;– from Key Biscayne to Key Largo&nbsp;– with bridges and created new islands using the fill from the SeaDade channel.
Portions of the present park were used for recreation prior to the park's establishment.
Led by Lloyd Miller, the president of the local chapter of the Izaak Walton League, ''Miami Herald'' reporter Juanita Greene, and Art Marshall, the opponents of industrialization proposed the creation of a national park unit that would protect the reefs, islands and bay.
Matheson Hammock Park is near the north end of the park, and Crandon Park is on Key Biscayne.
The strongest part of the eyewall had not reached Fowey Rocks when it stopped transmitting.
Shipwrecks are also protected within the park, and the park's offshore waters are a protected historic district.
A fifth generating unit fueled by natural gas and oil was added to the Turkey Point generating station in 2007.
The smalltooth sawfish is similarly rare in park waters and endangered.
Mangrove cuckoos, a notoriously difficult-to-observe species, may be seen at Convoy Point and Black Point.
The two-story club building had ten guest rooms, a dining room, and a separate recreation lodge.
The sheltered open waters of the bay and the outlying chain of keys provide resting areas for migrating birds on their way between North American, the Caribbean islands, and South America.
Biscayne Bay is a shallow lagoon with little vertical density or salinity gradient due to its lack of depth.
Molluscs include a variety of bivalves, terrestrial and marine snails, sea hares, sea slugs and two cephalopods, the Caribbean reef octopus and the Caribbean reef squid.
The original 1921 structure was replaced in 2000 and its lantern was placed on display in a park in Islamorada.
Extending from just south of Key Biscayne southward to just north of Key Largo, the park includes Soldier Key, the Ragged Keys, Sands Key, Elliott Key, Totten Key and Old Rhodes Key, as well as smaller islands that form the northernmost extension of the Florida Keys.
As an extension of the Everglades ecosystem, much of the park was originally proposed to be included in Everglades National Park, but was excluded in order to obtain a consensus for the establishment of the Everglades park in 1947.
Roughly 75 percent of the central bay floor is covered by grasses.
Originally proposed for inclusion in Everglades National Park, Biscayne Bay was cut from the proposed park to ensure Everglades' establishment.
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) authorized a capture and captive breeding program for Schaus' swallowtail after only five of the butterflies were found by surveyors in the park, down from 35 in 2011, of a total surveyed Florida population of 41.
The earliest proposals for the protection of Biscayne Bay were included in proposals by Everglades National Park advocate Ernest F. Coe, whose proposed Everglades park boundaries included Biscayne Bay, its keys, interior country including what are now Homestead and Florida City, and Key Largo.
Scarring of seagrass beds by vessel groundings or propellers is a significant problem.
Jones' house built by Lancelot, his father and his brother, burned down in 1982.
Archeologists believe that any traces left by the peoples of that era are now submerged; none now exist on dry lands in the park.
Most storms require temporary closings and occasional repairs to park facilities.
A sampling program showed declines at all sampling sites.
The offshore portion of the park includes the northernmost region of the Florida Reef, one of the largest coral reefs in the world.
The first Islandia property owner to sell land to the National Park Service was Lancelot Jones, together with Katherine Jones, Arthur's widow.
Biscayne National Park protects four distinct ecosystems: the shoreline mangrove swamp, the shallow waters of Biscayne Bay, the coral limestone keys and the offshore Florida Reef.
Anglers in Biscayne are required to have a Florida recreational saltwater fishing license.
Threatened coral species include elkhorn and staghorn corals, as well as pillar coral, listed as endangered in Florida.
During the 18th century, Elliott Key was the reputed base of two different pirates, both of whom were called Black Caesar, commemorated by Caesar's Creek between Elliott and Old Rhodes Key.
Loggerhead turtles are the most common sea turtle species and account for nearly all of the turtle nests in the park.
A seasonally staffed ranger station is located on Elliott Key, as well as a campground and 36 boat slips.
In this semi-tropical environment, the seasons are differentiated mainly by rainfall.
It is known for its voracious appetite and its ability to establish itself in new waters, rapidly replacing other species.
A correlation has been posited between the observed decline in coral reef coverage throughout the Florida Reef tract and the decline in fish species.
The town was incorporated to encourage Dade County to improve access to Elliott Key in particular, which landowners viewed as a potential rival to Miami Beach.
The 1980 expansion extended the park almost to Key Biscayne and included Boca Chita Key, the Ragged Keys and the Safety Valve shoal region, together with the corresponding offshore reefs and a substantial portion of central Biscayne Bay
The lionfish (''Pterois volitans'' and ''Pterois miles'') is a tropical fish from the Indian-Pacific Ocean area.
It was a compact Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale.
Bay salinity reaches a peak in June.
Following the Cuban Revolution of 1959, Elliott Key was used as a training ground for infiltrators into Fidel Castro's Cuba by the Central Intelligence Agency and by Cuban exile groups.
The Biscayne Bay Coastal Wetlands Project (BBCW) is a CERP component specifically intended to redistribute water flow so that fresh water is introduced gradually through creeks and marshes rather than short, heavy discharges through drainage canals.
Shoreline and island mangrove swamps, together with the bay, represent a significant nursery for the marine life of southeast Florida.
Only  of the park's area are on land, with the offshore keys comprising  and mainland mangrove swamps account for the remaining .
Nest protection efforts have reduced predation from 100% of nests disturbed per year to no disturbed nests in 2007, with a more usual average of more than 50% nest disturbance in most years.
Comprising 27 structures at its height in the 1960s, Stiltsville lost shacks to fires and hurricanes, with only seven surviving in 2012, none of them dating to the 1960s or earlier.
If built, the new reactors would make Turkey Point one of the largest generating sites in the United States.
The Boca Chita Lighthouse is occasionally open to visitors when staffing permits.
Native Americans were present in lower Florida 10,000&nbsp;years ago, when ocean levels were low and Biscayne Bay was comparatively empty of water.
The first settlements around Biscayne Bay were small farms on Elliott Key growing crops like key limes and pineapples.
The amphibious community of Stiltsville was established in the 1930s in the shoals of northern Biscayne Bay, taking advantage of its remoteness from land to offer offshore gambling and alcohol during Prohibition.
Beyond the keys in the Atlantic Ocean the seafloor slopes gradually down before rising in an almost continuous coral reef.
The island shoal reefs mainly consist of lesser starlet coral and ''Porites'' finger corals.
The offshore waters harbor brown pelicans, magnificent frigatebirds, brown boobies, particularly around the offshore lights,  and pelagic birds such as shearwaters and petrels.
Park staff actively assist turtle nesting by removing debris from beaches that might pose an obstacle to adults and hatchlings.
During the Cold War the future park area was used as a training ground for Cuban exiles training for missions in Fidel Castro's Cuba.
Among the Joneses' clients was avid fisherman Herbert Hoover and his family.
Hurricane Andrew destroyed most of Stiltsville in 1992.
More recent lionfish sightings are probably from more established populations in the Florida Keys to the south of the park.
The largest facility was Ledbury Lodge, the only hotel ever built on the key.
Winter residents include northern gannets, American white pelicans and common loons.
Areas farther offshore are protected within the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary, which extends eastward to a boundary corresponding  to a depth of .
Biscayne's tropical climate reflects its location in extreme South Florida.
The new city lobbied for causeway access and formed a negotiating bloc to attract potential developers.
The reefs have been the cause of many shipwrecks.
Boat excursions to Boca Chita and Adams Key are also available.
Colonel Robert E. Lee surveyed the area around Biscayne Bay for potential fortification sites in 1849.
Jones was given a life estate on  at the age of 70.
Reefs claimed ships from Spanish times through the 20th century, with more than 40 documented wrecks within the park's boundaries.
Many southbound land birds stop in the fall at Bill Baggs Cape Florida State Park, just north of the park on Key Biscayne, before venturing across the open waters of Biscayne Bay.
All other portions of the park are reachable only by private or concessioner boats.
It was hoped that since there was so much environmental damage, no one would want it for a national monument.
South Florida is a transitional zone between the Nearctic and Neotropical ecozones, resulting in a wide variety of plant and animal life.
The undeveloped keys south of Key Biscayne were viewed as prime development territory.
Fewer than 50 grew on the key in 1991.
The park abuts the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary on the east and south sides of the park and John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park to the south.
Sixteen endangered species including Schaus' swallowtail butterflies, smalltooth sawfish, manatees, and green and hawksbill sea turtles may be observed in the park.
