It was immoral to have sex with another freeborn man's wife, his marriageable daughter, his underage son, or with the man himself; sexual use of another man's slave was subject to the owner's permission.
''The Janus Report on Sexual Behavior'', published in 1993, showed that 5 percent of men and 3 percent of women considered themselves bisexual and 4 percent of men and 2 percent of women considered themselves homosexual.
Studies measuring the fingers found a statistically significant skew in the 2D:4D ratio (long ring finger) towards homosexuality with an even lower ratio in bisexuals.
Rather, LGB individuals are often raised in communities that are either ignorant of or openly hostile toward homosexuality.
More recently, it has been suggested that same-sex alliances may have helped males climb the social hierarchy giving access to females and reproductive opportunities.
But Lenius (2011) does emphasize that the pansexual promoting BDSM community helped advance greater acceptance of alternative sexualities.
Similarly for most bisexual women, high sex drive is associated with increased sexual attraction to both women and men; while for bisexual men, high sex drive is associated with increased attraction to one sex, and weakened attraction to the other.
I suppose it's the best thing that ever happened to me."
This finding defined bisexuals as self-assured and less likely to suffer from mental instabilities.
The American Institute of Bisexuality stated that Bailey's study was misinterpreted and misreported by both ''The New York Times'' and its critics.
What he found in 2001, was that people in BDSM were open to discussion about the topic of bisexuality and pansexuality and all controversies they bring to the table, but personal biases and issues stood in the way of actively using such labels.
Therefore, the brain could be feminized while other features, such as the 2D:4D ratio could be over-masculinized.
Psychologist Jim McKnight writes that while the idea that bisexuality is a form of sexual orientation intermediate between homosexuality and heterosexuality is implicit in the Kinsey scale, that conception has been "severely challenged" since the publication of ''Homosexualities'' (1978), by Weinberg and Alan P. Bell.
I mean, it's something that I've always been interested in.
The assertion of Bailey that "for men arousal is orientation" was criticized by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) as a simplification which neglects to account for behavior and self-identification.
There is also evidence that women's sexuality may be more strongly affected by cultural and contextual factors.
Lady Gaga has also stated that she is bisexual, and has acknowledged that her song "Poker Face" is about fantasizing about a woman while being with a man.
Fat little ugly women.
In the monosexist view, it is believed that people cannot be bisexual unless they are equally sexually attracted to both sexes, regulating sexual orientation to being about the sex or gender one prefers.
In Episode 1, heterosexual Owen Harper kisses a man to escape a fight when he is about to take the man's girlfriend.
Freud's belief in innate bisexuality was rejected by Sándor Radó in 1940 and, following Radó, by many later psychoanalysts.
By contrast, a longitudinal study by Lisa M. Diamond, which followed women identifying as lesbian, bisexual, or unlabeled, found that "more women adopted bisexual/unlabeled identities than relinquished these identities," over a ten-year period.
Other films in which bisexual characters conceal murderous neuroses include ''Black Widow'', ''Blue Velvet'', ''Cruising'', ''Single White Female'', and ''Girl, Interrupted''.
The subjects were recruited from a Craigslist group for men seeking intimacy with both members of a heterosexual couple.
Quiet Toshiko Sato is in love with Owen, but has also has brief romantic relationships with a female alien and a male human.
The American Psychiatric Association stated: "To date there are no replicated scientific studies supporting any specific biological etiology for homosexuality.
A bisexual woman filed a lawsuit against the magazine ''Common Lives/Lesbian Lives'', alleging discrimination against bisexuals when her submission was not published.
Also, in a 2008 study, its authors stated that "There is considerable evidence that human sexual orientation is genetically influenced, so it is not known how homosexuality, which tends to lower reproductive success, is maintained in the population at a relatively high frequency."
The terms ''queer'', ''polysexual'', ''heteroflexible'', ''homoflexible,'' ''men who have sex with men'' and ''women who have sex with women'' may also be used to describe sexual identity or identify sexual behavior.
A difference in attitude between homosexual men and women has also been reported, with men more likely to regard their sexuality as biological, "reflecting the universal male experience in this culture, not the complexities of the lesbian world."
In a 1983 interview, he said it was "the biggest mistake I ever made", elaborating in 2002 he explained "I don't think it was a mistake in Europe, but it was a lot tougher in America.
Contemporary novelist Bret Easton Ellis' novels, such as ''Less Than Zero'' (1985) and ''The Rules of Attraction'' (1987) frequently feature bisexual male characters; this "casual approach" to bisexual characters recurs throughout Ellis' work.
Van Wyk and Geist argue that this is a problem for sexuality research because the few studies that have observed bisexuals separately have found that bisexuals are often different from both heterosexuals and homosexuals.
While heterosexual, homosexual and bisexual men have been found to exhibit similar patterns of hearing, there was a notable differential within a sub-group of males identified as hyperfeminized homosexual males who exhibited test results similar to heterosexual women.
In 2005, researchers Gerulf Rieger, Meredith L. Chivers, and J. Michael Bailey used penile plethysmography to measure the arousal of self-identified bisexual men to pornography involving only men and pornography involving only women.
They concluded that "bisexual-identified men with bisexual arousal patterns do indeed exist", but could not establish whether such a pattern is typical of bisexual-identified men in general.
In the story arc she is involved in a love triangle between Dyson, a wolf-shapeshifter (played by Kris Holden-Ried), and Lauren Lewis, a human doctor (played by Zoie Palmer) in servitude to the leader of the Light Fae clan.
There are several studies suggesting that bisexuals have a high degree of masculinization.
The prenatal hormonal theory suggests that a homosexual orientation results from exposure to excessive testosterone causing an over-masculinized brain.
This stems from two views: In the heterosexist view, people are presumed to be sexually attracted to the opposite sex, and it is sometimes reasoned that a bisexual person is simply a heterosexual person who is sexually experimenting.
The prenatal hormonal theory of sexual orientation suggests that people who are exposed to excess levels of sex hormones have masculinized brains and show increased homosexuality or bisexuality.
There is increasing inclusion and visibility of bisexuals, particularly in the LGBT community.
The pronouns switch from male to female as Orlando's gender changes.
Green Day frontman Billie Joe Armstrong has also identified himself as bisexual, saying in a 1995 interview with ''The Advocate'', "I think I've always been bisexual.
This study did not explore societal norms, prejudices, or the feminization of homosexual males.
Of youths who had identified only as bisexual at earlier assessments, 60 to 70 percent continued to thus identify, while approximately 30 to 40 percent assumed a gay/lesbian identity over time.
The article also stated: "Unlike most humans, however, individual animals generally cannot be classified as gay or straight: an animal that engages in a same-sex flirtation or partnership does not necessarily shun heterosexual encounters.
LaTorre and Wendenberg (1983) found differing personality characteristics for bisexual, heterosexual and homosexual women.
There was some stigma attached to young men who continued their relationships with their mentors into adulthood.
But I can't deny that I've used that fact very well.
Ric Ocasek of The Cars said that he was bisexual in an interview in 1986, stating, "I like beautiful women.
He argued that the black bisexual is often described as a ''duplicitous heterosexual'' man spreading the HIV/AIDS virus.
Research indicates that bisexuality is influenced by biological, cognitive and cultural variables in interaction, and this leads to different types of bisexuality.
A widely studied example of lesbian-bisexual conflict within feminism was the Northampton Pride March during the years between 1989 and 1993, where many feminists involved debated over whether bisexuals should be included and whether or not bisexuality was compatible with feminism.
Kinsey's 1948 work ''Sexual Behavior in the Human Male'' found that "46% of the male population had engaged in both heterosexual and homosexual activities, or 'reacted to' persons of both sexes, in the course of their adult lives".
In 2014 Armstrong discussed songs such as "Coming Clean" stating, "It was a song about questioning myself.
Others have had homosexual experiences but do not consider themselves to be gay, lesbian, or bisexual.
Unlike members of other minority groups (e.g., ethnic and racial minorities), most LGB individuals are not raised in a community of similar others from whom they learn about their identity and who reinforce and support that identity.
In a research comparison, published in the ''Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology'', women usually have a better hearing sensitivity than males, assumed by researchers as a genetic disposition connected to child bearing.
Rock musician David Bowie famously declared himself bisexual in an interview with ''Melody Maker'' in January 1972, a move coinciding with the first shots in his campaign for stardom as Ziggy Stardust.
Her 1925 book ''Mrs Dalloway'' focused on a bisexual man and a bisexual woman in sexually unfulfilled heterosexual marriages in later life.
In the BBC TV science fiction show ''Torchwood'', several of the main characters appear to have fluid sexuality.
There are these other feelings you may have about the same sex, the opposite sex, especially being in Berkeley and San Francisco then.
According to Rosario, Schrimshaw, Hunter, Braun (2006):...the development of a lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) sexual identity is a complex and often difficult process.
Bisexuals were found to have fewer personal insecurities than heterosexuals and homosexuals.
I think people are born bisexual, and it's just that our parents and society kind of veer us off into this feeling of 'Oh, I can't.'
Harvard Shakespeare professor Marjorie Garber made an academic case for bisexuality with her 1995 book ''Vice Versa: Bisexuality and the Eroticism of Everyday Life,'' which argued that most people would be bisexual if not for repression and other factors such as lack of sexual opportunity.
The authors said that this change in recruitment strategy was an important difference, but it may not have been a representative sample of bisexual-identified men.
More modern studies estimating the demographics for bisexuality have varied.
Using a content analysis of more than 170 articles written between 2001 and 2006, sociologist Richard N. Pitt, Jr. concluded that the media pathologized black bisexual men's behavior while either ignoring or sympathizing with white bisexual men's similar actions.
Of his female exes, significantly at least one ex-wife and at least one woman with whom he has had a child have been indicated.
In 2007, an article in the 'Health' section of ''The New York Times'' stated that "1.5 percent of American women and 1.7 percent of American men identify themselves as bisexual."
For heterosexual character Gwen Cooper, for whom Jack harbors romantic feelings, the new experiences she confronts at Torchwood, in the form of "affairs and homosexuality and the threat of death", connote not only the Other but a "missing side" to the Self.
The main character in Patrick White's novel, ''The Twyborn Affair'' (1979), is bisexual.
In his view, this was true anatomically and therefore also psychologically, with sexual attraction to both sexes being an aspect of this psychological bisexuality.
I had no problem with people knowing I was bisexual.
The subtexts varied, from the mystical to the didactic.
They found that the self-identified bisexual men in their sample had genital arousal patterns similar to either homosexual or heterosexual men.
Sexual orientation develops across a person's lifetime–different people realize at different points in their lives that they are heterosexual, bisexual or homosexual."
Both women and young men were considered normal objects of desire, but outside marriage a man was supposed to act on his desires only with slaves, prostitutes (who were often slaves), and the ''infames''.
Jack's ex, Captain John Hart is also bisexual.
The authors concluded that "in terms of behavior and identity, bisexual men clearly exist", but that male bisexuality had not been shown to exist with respect to arousal or attraction.
Some sources state that bisexuality encompasses romantic or sexual attraction to all gender identities or that it is romantic or sexual attraction to a person irrespective of that person's biological sex or gender, equating it to or rendering it interchangeable with pansexuality.
Tall, thin, beautiful women.
Masculinization of women and hypermasculinization of men has been a central theme in sexual orientation research.
In other words, someone does not have to be exclusively homosexual or heterosexual, but can feel varying degrees of both.
Human bisexuality has mainly been studied alongside homosexuality.
Directed by bisexual rights advocate Kyle Schickner, the plot centers around a lesbian-identified woman who falls in love with a straight man and discovers she is actually bisexual.
The American Psychological Association has stated that "there are probably many reasons for a person's sexual orientation and the reasons may be different for different people".
They say it's taboo.
Brian Molko, lead singer of Placebo is openly bisexual.
The concept of pansexuality deliberately rejects the gender binary, the "notion of two genders and indeed of specific sexual orientations", as pansexual people are open to relationships with people who do not identify as strictly men or women.
It further stated that, for most people, sexual orientation is determined at an early age.
For men, however, high sex drive is associated with increased attraction to one sex or the other, but not to both, depending on sexual orientation.
Likewise, self-identified gay or lesbian individuals may occasionally sexually interact with members of the opposite sex but do not identify as bisexual.
Similarly, in ancient Rome, gender did not determine whether a sexual partner was acceptable, as long as a man's enjoyment did not encroach on another's man integrity.
Hirschfeld created a ten-point scale to measure the strength of sexual desire, with the direction of desire being represented by the letters A (for heterosexuality), B (for homosexuality), and A + B (for bisexuality).
In a longitudinal study about sexual identity development among lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) youths, Rosario et al.
And that opens up something in society that becomes more acceptable.
Now we have gay marriage becoming recognized...
The Kinsey scale is used to describe a person's sexual experience or response at a given time.
'', which for a time featured bisexual Alex Kelly (also played by Olivia Wilde), the local rebellious hangout spot's manager, as a love interest of Marissa Cooper.
In 1995, Jill Sobule sang about bi-curiosity in her song "I Kissed a Girl", with a video that alternated images of Sobule and a boyfriend along with images of her with a girlfriend.
In its most extreme form, bisexual erasure includes denying that bisexuality exists.
It's a very beautiful thing."
Same-sex allies could have helped females to move to the safer and resource richer center of the group, which increased their chances of raising their offspring successfully.
Haraway's essay states that the cyborg "has no truck with bisexuality, pre-oedipal symbiosis, unalienated labor, or other seductions to organic wholeness through a final appropriation of all powers of the parts into a higher unity."
American psychologist  Beth Firestone writes that since she wrote her first book on bisexuality, in 1996, "bisexuality has gained visibility, although progress is uneven and awareness of bisexuality is still minimal or absent in many of the more remote regions of our country and internationally."
A 2002 survey in the United States by National Center for Health Statistics found that 1.8 percent of men ages 18–44 considered themselves bisexual, 2.3 percent homosexual, and 3.9 percent as "something else".
Many species of animals are involved in the acts of forming sexual and non-sexual relationship bonds between the same sex; even when offered the opportunity to breed with members of the opposite sex, they pick the same sex.
Examples of birds include some species of gulls and Humboldt penguins.
Animals don't do sexual identity.
Participants were recruited via advertisements in gay-oriented magazines and an alternative paper.
Some evidence supports the concept of biological precursors of bisexual orientation in genetic males.
LeVay compares Hirschfeld's scale to that developed by Kinsey decades later.
Studies providing evidence for the masculinization of the brain have, however, not been conducted to date.
In the HBO drama ''Oz'', Chris Keller was a bisexual serial killer who tortured and raped various men and women.
Brandy Lin Simula (2012), on the other hand, argues that BDSM actively resists gender conforming and identified three different types of BDSM bisexuality: gender-switching, gender-based styles (taking on a different gendered style depending on gender of partner when playing), and rejection of gender (resisting the idea that gender matters in their play partners).
Research suggests that, for most women, high sex drive is associated with increased sexual attraction to both women and men.
She has also made tongue-in-cheek comparisons of bisexuals to cat fanciers and devil worshippers.
Bisexual erasure (or bisexual invisibility) is the tendency to ignore, remove, falsify, or reexplain evidence of bisexuality in culture, history, academia, news media and other primary sources.
On this scale, someone who was A3, B9 would be weakly attracted to the opposite sex and very strongly attracted to the same sex, an A0, B0 would be asexual, and an A10, B10 would be very attracted to both sexes.
Magnus Hirschfeld argued that adult sexual orientation can be explained in terms of the bisexual nature of the developing fetus: he believed that in every embryo there is one rudimentary neutral center for attraction to males and another for attraction to females.
For some, BDSM and kink provides a platform in creating identities that are fluid, ever-changing.
Rather, many species seem to have ingrained homosexual tendencies that are a regular part of their society.
The term ''bisexuality'', however, like the terms ''hetero-'' and ''homosexuality'', was coined in the 19th century.
Similarly, no specific psychosocial or family dynamic cause for homosexuality has been identified, including histories of childhood sexual abuse."
In a September 1976 interview with ''Playboy'', Bowie said, "It's true—I am a bisexual.
Creator Russell T Davies says one of pitfalls of writing a bisexual character is you "fall into the trap" of "only having them sleep with men" He describes of the show's fourth series, "You'll see the full range of his appetites, in a really properly done way."
The study also found that "bisexual/unlabeled women had stable overall distributions of same-sex/other-sex attractions."
Among some tribes, it appears to be non-existent while in others a universal, including the Sambia of New Guinea and similar Melanesian cultures.
Kinsey himself disliked the use of the term ''bisexual'' to describe individuals who engage in sexual activity with both males and females, preferring to use ''bisexual'' in its original, biological sense as hermaphroditic, stating, "Until it is demonstrated that taste in a sexual relation is dependent upon the individual containing within his anatomy both male and female structures, or male and female physiological capacities, it is unfortunate to call such individuals bisexual."
In ''Scientific American Mind'', scientist Emily V. Driscoll stated that homosexual and bisexual behavior is quite common in several species and that it fosters bonding: "The more homosexuality, the more peaceful the species".
Same-sex sexual activity can also be seasonal in some animals, like male walruses who often engage in same-sex sexual activity with each other outside of the breeding season and will revert to heterosexual sexual activity during breeding season.
Spartans thought that love and erotic relationships between experienced and novice soldiers would solidify combat loyalty and unit cohesion, and encourage heroic tactics as men vied to impress their lovers.
Some individuals identify themselves as heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual without having had any sexual experience.
However, ''Cyberfeminism and Bisexuality'' by Jane Cyborg, a short essay published as a book in 2015, states, "Cyborgs can be bisexual, and cyberfeminism can and should be accepting of bisexuality."
Assertions that one cannot be bisexual unless equally sexually attracted to both sexes, however, are disputed by various researchers, who have reported bisexuality to fall on a continuum, like sexuality in general.
Further, some researchers hold that the technique used in the study to measure genital arousal is too crude to capture the richness (erotic sensations, affection, admiration) that constitutes sexual attraction.
According to Money (1988), genetic males with an extra Y chromosome are more likely to be bisexual, paraphilic and impulsive.
suggested that "although there were youths who consistently self-identified as bisexual throughout the study, for other youths, a bisexual identity served as a transitional identity to a subsequent gay/lesbian identity."
British newspaper ''The Sun'' ran the headline "Dr Ooh gets four gay pals" prior to the first series, describing all of ''Torchwood''s cast as being bisexual.
Goode and Haber (1977) found bisexual women to be sexually mature earlier, masturbate and enjoy masturbation more and to be more experienced in different types of heterosexual contact.
Simon LeVay has criticized Hirschfeld's theory of an early bisexual stage of development, calling it confusing; LeVay maintains that Hirschfeld failed to distinguish between saying that the brain is sexually undifferentiated at an early stage of development and saying that an individual actually experiences sexual attraction to both men and women.
Under the influence of an alien pheromone, Gwen kisses a woman in Episode 2 of the series.
They also found that marriages with a bisexual female were happier than heterosexual unions, observed less instance of hidden infidelity, and ended in divorce less frequently.
Male bisexuality is particularly presumed to be non-existent, with sexual fluidity studies adding to the debate.
Bisexuality is romantic or sexual attraction to males and females.
I'm always attracted to the opposite sex.
Dixon (1985) found that bisexual men had more sexual activities with women than did heterosexual men.
I like all kinds of women.
In some cases, animals will choose to engage in sexual activity with different sexes at different times in their lives, and will sometimes engage in sexual activity with different sexes at random.
Bindel has described female bisexuality as a "fashionable trend" being promoted due to "sexual hedonism" and broached the question of whether bisexuality even exists.
Therefore, a double moon symbol was devised specifically to avoid the use of triangles.
Sigmund Freud believed that every human being is bisexual in the sense of incorporating general attributes of both sexes.
The same study found that 2.8 percent of women ages 18–44 considered themselves bisexual, 1.3 percent homosexual, and 3.8 percent as "something else".
The belief that everyone is bisexual (especially women as opposed to men), or that bisexuality does not exist as a unique identity, is common.
The preoccupation with bisexuality has been seen by critics as complementary to other aspects of the show's themes.
Sexual attraction, behavior and identity may also be incongruent, as sexual attraction or behavior may not necessarily be consistent with identity.
In Steve Lenius' original 2001 paper, he explored the acceptance of bisexuality in a supposedly pansexual BDSM community.
People are acting out what they're feeling: gay, bisexual, transgender, whatever.
Following Sackille-West's death, her son Nigel Nicolson published ''Portrait of a Marriage'', one of her diaries recounting her affair with a woman during her marriage to Harold Nicolson.
Bisexuality has been observed in various human societies and elsewhere in the animal kingdom throughout recorded history.
A number of women who were at one time involved in lesbian-feminist activism have since come out as bisexual after realizing their attractions to men.
In the first large-scale government survey measuring Americans' sexual orientation, the NHIS reported in July 2014 that only 0.7 percent of Americans identify as bisexual.
Psychologist Beth Firestein states that bisexuals tend to internalize social tensions related to their choice of partners and feel pressured to label themselves as homosexuals instead of occupying the difficult middle ground where attraction to people of both sexes would defy society's value on monogamy.
I knew what I wanted to be, which was a songwriter and a performer ...  America is a very puritanical place, and I think it stood in the way of so much I wanted to do."
The same network had earlier aired the television series ''The O.C.
Kinsey studied human sexuality and argued that people have the capability of being hetero- or homosexual even if this trait does not present itself in the current circumstances.
Several studies comparing bisexuals with hetero- or homosexuals have indicated that bisexuals have higher rates of sexual activity, fantasy or erotic interest.
Because testosterone in general is important for sexual differentiation, this view offers an alternative to the suggestion that male homosexuality is genetic.
There is research evidence that the digit ratio of the length of the 2nd and 4th digits (index finger and ring finger) is somewhat negatively related to prenatal testosterone and positively to estrogen.
For example, Aristophanes calls them ''euryprôktoi'', meaning "wide arses", and depicts them like women.
Radó argued that there is no biological bisexuality in humans.
The story, of a man who changes into a woman without a second thought, was based on the life of Woolf's lover Vita Sackville-West.
Bisexual men masturbated more but had fewer happy marriages than heterosexuals.
Bisexual behaviors are also associated in popular culture with men who engage in same-sex activity while otherwise presenting as heterosexual.
Many homosexual and bisexual individuals have a problem with the use of the pink triangle symbol, as it was the symbol that Hitler's regime use to tag and persecute homosexuals (similar to the yellow Star of David constituted of two opposed, overlapping triangles).
It is suggested that exposure to high prenatal testosterone and low prenatal estrogen concentrations is one cause of homosexuality whereas exposure to very high testosterone levels may be associated with bisexuality.
The majority of such men&nbsp;— said to be ''living on the down-low''&nbsp;— do not self-identify as bisexual.
Common lesbian-feminist critiques leveled at bisexuality were that bisexuality was anti-feminist, that bisexuality was a form of false consciousness, and that bisexual women who pursue relationships with men were "deluded and desperate."
Furthermore, when broken down by gender, only 12% of bisexual men said that they were "out" vs. 33% of bisexual women.
Sociologists Martin S. Weinberg and Colin J. Williams write that, in principle, people who rank anywhere from 1 to 5 could be considered bisexual.
Feminist positions on bisexuality range greatly, from acceptance of bisexuality as a feminist issue to rejection of bisexuality as reactionary and anti-feminist backlash to lesbian feminism.
The double moon symbol is common in Germany and surrounding countries.
Donna Haraway was the inspiration and genesis for cyberfeminism with her 1985 essay "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century" which was reprinted in ''Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature'' (1991).
However, this may be a cultural misperception closely related to that of other LGBT individuals who hide their actual orientation due to societal pressures, a phenomenon colloquially called ''"being closeted"''.
Some who identify as bisexual may merge themselves into either homosexual or heterosexual society.
Freud believed that in the course of sexual development the masculine side of this bisexual disposition would normally become dominant in men and the feminine side in women, but that all adults still have desires derived from both the masculine and the feminine sides of their natures.
Both effects are associated with bisexuality rather than homosexuality.
Many non-human animal species exhibit bisexual behavior.
That is, there are probably no strictly gay critters, just bisexual ones.
Examples of mammals that display such behavior include the bonobo (formerly known as the pygmy chimpanzee), orca, and the bottlenose dolphin.
A study in the journal ''Biological Psychology'' in 2011 reported that there were men who identify themselves as ''bisexuals'' and who were aroused by both men and women.
The confidence of a secure identity consistently translated to more masculinity than other subjects.
In this view, people are either exclusively homosexual (gay/lesbian) or exclusively heterosexual (straight), closeted homosexual people who wish to appear heterosexual, or heterosexuals who are experimenting with their sexuality.
Jeffreys states that while gay men are unlikely to sexually harass women, bisexual men are just as likely to be bothersome to women as heterosexual men.
But I had no inclination to hold any banners or be a representative of any group of people.
The Showcase supernatural crime drama, ''Lost Girl'', about creatures called Fae who live secretly among humans, features a bisexual protagonist, Bo, played by Anna Silk.
Diamond has also studied male bisexuality, noting that survey research found "almost as many men transitioned at some point from a gay identity to a bisexual, queer or unlabeled one, as did from a bisexual identity to a gay identity."
