; Presiding Bishop or President Bishop: These titles are often used for the head of a national Anglican church, but the title is not usually associated with a particular episcopal see like the title of a primate.
Each bishop is selected from resident members of the ward by the stake presidency with approval of the First Presidency, and chooses two ''counselors'' to form a ''bishopric''.
A bishop is the president of the Aaronic priesthood in his ward (and is thus a form of Mormon Kohen; in fact, a literal descendant of Aaron has "legal right" to act as a Bishop after being found worthy and ordained by the First Presidency).
In a few cases, a bishop came to preside over a number of dioceses, i.e., Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria.
It should be noted that the second largest of the three predecessor bodies of the ELCA, the American Lutheran Church, was a congregationalist body, with national and synod presidents before they were re-titled as bishops (borrowing from the Lutheran churches in Germany) in the 1980s.
United Methodist bishops may be male or female, with Marjorie Matthews being the first woman to be consecrated a bishop in 1980.
In the Church of Scotland, which has a Presbyterian church structure, the word "bishop" refers to an ordained person, usually a normal parish minister, who has temporary oversight of a trainee minister.
At the Fourth Ecumenical Council at Chalcedon in 451, Constantinople was given jurisdiction over three dioceses for the reason that the city was "the residence of the emperor and senate".
Roman Catholic doctrine holds that one bishop can validly ordain another male (priest) as a bishop.
The ''Conference of Methodist Bishops'' includes the United Methodist ''Council of Bishops'' plus bishops from affiliated autonomous Methodist or United Churches.
Because it is a part-time position, all able members are expected to assist in the management of the ward by holding delegated lay positions (for example, women's and youth leaders, teachers) referred to as 'callings.'
Chorbishops are not generally ordained bishops – they are not given the sacrament of Holy Orders in that degree – but function as assistants to the diocesan bishop with certain honorary privileges.
The Caeremoniale Episcoporum no longer makes mention of episcopal gloves, episcopal sandals, liturgical stockings (also known as buskins), or the accoutrements that it once prescribed for the bishop's horse.
As well as being arch chancellors of the Holy Roman Empire after the 9th century, bishops generally served as chancellors to medieval monarchs, acting as head of the ''justiciary'' and chief chaplain.
As the Church continued to expand, new churches in important cities gained their own bishop.
The term is traceable to the 1789 Form of Government of the PC (U.S.A.) and the Presbyterian understanding of the pastoral office.
While most patriarchs in the Eastern Catholic Churches have jurisdiction over a "ritual church" (a group or diocese of a particular Eastern tradition), all Latin Rite patriarchs, except for the Pope, have only honorary titles.
Although Hollingworth gave up his episcopal position to accept the appointment, it still attracted considerable opposition in a country which maintains a formal separation between Church and State.
Recent popes have appointed a few priests, most of them influential theologians, to the College of Cardinals without requiring them to be ordained as bishops; invariably, these men are near or over the age of 80, and consequently not eligible to take part in a conclave.
Of the several kinds of priest....ministries, the bishop is the highest.
Often, the word ''presbyter'' was not yet distinguished from ''overseer'' ( ''episkopos'', later used exclusively to mean ''bishop''), as in (,  and ) The earliest writings of the Apostolic Fathers, the Didache and the First Epistle of Clement, for example, show the church used two terms for local church offices—presbyters (seen by many as an interchangeable term with ''episcopos'' or overseer) and deacon.
Early sources are unclear but various groups of Christian communities may have had the bishop surrounded by a group or college functioning as leaders of the local churches.
The titles, in this meaning, are not used by the Roman Catholic Church.
&mdash; Epistle of Ignatius to the Trallesians 3:1.
The Salvation Army does not have bishops but has appointed leaders of geographical areas, known as Divisional Commanders.
However, in the Byzantine and other Eastern rites, whether Eastern or Oriental Orthodox or Eastern Catholic, chrismation is done immediately after baptism, and thus the priest is the one who confirms, using chrism blessed by a bishop.
In 391, Theodosius I decreed that any land that had been confiscated from the church by Roman authorities be returned.
In the 21st century, the more senior bishops of the Church of England continue to sit in the House of Lords of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, as representatives of the established church, and are known as Lords Spiritual.
In most provinces of the Anglican Communion, however, an archbishop has metropolitical and primatial power.
In practice, "extraordinary" circumstance have included disagreeing with Episcopalian views of the episcopate, and as a result, ELCA pastors ordained by other pastors are not permitted to be deployed to Episcopal Churches (they can, however, serve in Presbyterian Church USA, United Methodist Church, Reformed Church in America, and Moravian Church congregations, as the ELCA is in full communion with these denominations).
; Supreme Bishop: The Obispo Maximo, or Supreme Bishop, of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente is elected by the General Assembly of the Church.
Churches in the regions outside an important city were served by Chorbishop, an official rank of bishops.
The Anglican divine, Richard Hooker, objected to this claim in his famous work ''Of the Laws of Ecclesiastic Polity'' while, at the same time, defending Presbyterian ordination as valid (in particular Calvin's ordination of Beza).
The arms of Oriental Orthodox bishops will display the episcopal insignia (mitre or turban) specific to their own liturgical traditions.
In ( and ), we see a collegiate system of government in Jerusalem chaired by James the Just, according to tradition the first bishop of the city.
The title of archbishop or metropolitan may be granted to a senior bishop, usually one who is in charge of a large ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
; Auxiliary bishop: An auxiliary bishop is a full-time assistant to a diocesan bishop (the Orthodox and Catholic equivalent of an Anglican suffragan bishop).
Nearly all bishops are set in line directly from the chief apostle.
In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Bishop is the leader of a local congregation, called a ward.
Elder referred to the status or rank of the office, while bishop denoted the duty or responsibility of the office—"overseer."
Church members frequently refer to a former bishop as "Bishop" as a sign of respect and affection.
In the polity of the Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), the international leader is the Presiding Bishop, and the members of the Executive Committee are Executive Bishops.
Their authority within their ''sui juris'' church is equal to that of a patriarch, but they receive fewer ceremonial honors.
Sometimes this carries jurisdiction over metropolitan bishops, but usually it is purely honorific.
The title Bishop is used for both the General (International leader) and the district (state) leaders.
; Major archbishop:Major archbishops are the heads of some of the Eastern Catholic Churches.
The Catholic Church does recognise as valid (though illicit) ordinations done by breakaway Catholic, Old Catholic or Oriental bishops, and groups descended from them; it also regards as both valid and licit those ordinations done by bishops of the Eastern churches, so long as those receiving the ordination conform to other canonical requirements (for example, is an adult male) and an orthodox rite of episcopal ordination, expressing the proper functions and sacramental status of a bishop, is used; this has given rise to the phenomenon of ''episcopi vagantes'' (for example, clergy of the Independent Catholic groups which claim apostolic succession, though this claim is rejected by both Orthodoxy and Catholicism).
Paul used these terms interchangeably, equating elders with overseers or bishops (Acts 20:17, 28; Titus 1:5, 7).
In 692, the Quinisext Council formally recognized and ranked the sees of the Pentarchy in order of preeminence, at that time Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem.
Eastern Orthodox bishops, along with all other members of the clergy, are canonically forbidden to hold political office.
&mdash; Lightfoot translation.
Within the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican, Old Catholic and Independent Catholic churches and in the Assyrian Church of the East, bishops claim apostolic succession, a direct historical lineage dating back to the original Twelve Apostles.
According to the writer Timothy Dufort, by 1969, all Church of England bishops had acquired Old Catholic lines of apostolic succession recognised by the Holy See.
Around the end of the 1st century, the church's organization became clearer in historical documents.
Since Pope Leo XIII issued the bull ''Apostolicae curae'' in 1896, the Catholic Church has insisted that Anglican orders are invalid because of changes in the Anglican ordination rites of the 16th century and divergence in understanding of the theology of priesthood, episcopacy and Eucharist.
As Roman authority began to fail in the western portion of the empire, the church took over much of the civil administration.
As with most LDS priesthood holders, the bishop is a part-time lay minister and earns a living through other employment; in all cases, he is a married man.
The world wide Seventh-day Adventist church is organized into local districts, conferences or missions, union conferences or union missions, divisions, and finally at the top is the general conference.
CME Church bishops may be male or female.
Whereas, the bishop of the larger administrative district, diocese, came to be called an exarch.
In special circumstances (such as a ward consisting entirely of young university students), a bishop may be chosen from outside the ward.
The papal nuncio usually solicits names from the bishops of a country, and then selects three to be forwarded to the Holy See.
Within his own diocese and when celebrating solemnly elsewhere with the consent of the local ordinary, he also uses the crosier.
Indeed, Presbyterianism was the polity of most Reformed Churches in Europe, and had been favored by many in England since the English Reformation.
During the period of the English Civil War, the role of bishops as wielders of political power and as upholders of the established church became a matter of heated political controversy.
Larger geographical areas, called Territories, are led by a Territorial Commander, who is the highest-ranking officer in that Territory.
&mdash; Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians 7:1.
His position was similar to that of the one who had supervision of the synagogue.
* They hold that the continuing practice among many Independent clergy of one person receiving multiple ordinations in order to secure apostolic succession, betrays an incorrect and mechanistic theology of ordination.
Anglican bishops generally make use of the mitre, crosier, ecclesiastical ring, purple cassock, purple zucchetto, and pectoral cross.
According to the ''Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church'', a bishop's responsibilities are
Catholic, Orthodox, Anglican, Old Catholic and some Lutheran bishops claim to be part of the continuous sequence of ordained bishops since the days of the apostles referred to as apostolic succession.
In the United Methodist Church bishops remain members of the "Order of Elders" while being consecrated to the "Office of the Episcopacy".
There are also other reasons why the Holy See does not recognise the validity of the orders of the Independent clergy:
This also applies in those Eastern churches which are in union with the pope, though it is required that he give assent.
; Patriarch:Patriarchs are the bishops who head certain ancient autocephalous or sui iuris churches, which are a collection of metropolitan sees or provinces.
Most cardinals are already bishops at the time of their appointment, the majority being archbishops of important archdioceses or patriarchs, and a substantial portion of the rest already titular archbishops serving in the Vatican.
The term bishop means "overseer."
Sometimes a metropolitan may also be the head of an autocephalous, ''sui iuris'', or autonomous church when the number of adherents of that tradition are small.
In 2006, Pope Benedict XVI gave up the title of Patriarch of the West.
In the Eastern liturgical tradition, a priest can celebrate the Divine Liturgy only with the blessing of a bishop.
Bishops of the same category rank according to date of consecration.
The title is sometimes used in conjunction with the previous thus becoming General (District) Superintendent/Bishop.
This can be clearly seen in the ministry of two popes: Pope Leo I in the 5th century, and Pope Gregory I in the 6th century.
Paul commands Titus to ordain presbyters/bishops and to exercise general oversight, telling him to "rebuke with all authority" ().
In the Ottoman Empire, the Patriarch of Constantinople, for example, had de facto administrative, fiscal, cultural and legal jurisdiction, as well as spiritual, over all the Christians of the empire.
* They hold that the practice within Independent groups of ordaining women demonstrates an understanding of Priesthood that they vindicate is totally unacceptable to the Catholic and Orthodox churches as they believe that the Universal Church does not possess such authority; thus, they uphold that any ceremonies performed by these women should be considered being sacramentally invalid.
Since going into ecumenical communion with their respective Anglican body, bishops in the ELCA or the ELCIC not only approve the "rostering" of all ordained pastors, diaconal ministers, and associates in ministry, but they serve as the principal celebrant of all pastoral ordination and installation ceremonies, diaconal consecration ceremonies, as well as serving as the "chief pastor" of the local synod, upholding the teachings of Martin Luther as well as the documentations of the Ninety-Five Theses and the Augsburg Confession.
While Ignatius of Antioch offers the earliest clear description of monarchial bishops (a single bishop over all house churches in a city) he is an advocate of monepiscopal structure rather than describing an accepted reality.
In those instances where the pope does grant reconciliation, those deemed to be clerics within the Independent Old Catholic movement are invariably admitted as laity and not priests or bishops.
"the bishop presiding after the likeness of God and the presbyters after the likeness of the council of the Apostles, with the deacons also who are most dear to me, having been entrusted with the diaconate of Jesus Christ" &mdash; Epistle of Ignatius to the Magnesians 6:1.
Ordination of a bishop, and thus continuation of apostolic succession, takes place through a ritual centred on the imposition of hands and prayer.
The Orthodox Churches would not accept the validity of any ordinations performed by the Independent Catholic groups, as Orthodoxy considers to be spurious any consecration outside of the Church as a whole.
Under modern canon law, a man who is not a bishop who is appointed a cardinal must accept ordination as a bishop, or seek special permission from the pope to decline ordination.
The Council of Bishops speaks to the Church and through the Church into the world and gives leadership in the quest for Christian unity and interreligious relationships.
However, soon, presbyters and deacons were sent from bishop of a city church.
In each Annual Conference, CME bishops serve for four-year terms.
Later, the heads of various national churches became Patriarchs, but they are ranked below the Pentarchy.
When celebrating Mass, a bishop, like a priest, wears the chasuble.
The coat of arms of a Latin Rite Catholic bishop usually displays a galero with a cross and crosier behind the escutcheon; the specifics differ by location and ecclesiastical rank (see Ecclesiastical heraldry).
In 2006, Katharine Jefferts Schori, the Episcopal Bishop of Nevada, became the first woman to become the Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church.
And today, the principality of Andorra is headed by two Co-Princes, one of whom is a Catholic Bishop (and the other, the President of France).
Furthermore, individual bishops, or the Council of Bishops as a whole, often serve a prophetic role, making statements on important social issues and setting forth a vision for the denomination, though they have no legislative authority of their own.
; Area bishop: Some Anglican suffragans are given the responsibility for a geographical area within the diocese (for example, the Bishop of Stepney is an ''area bishop'' within the Diocese of London).
Titular bishops often serve as auxiliary bishops.
In the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States, bishops are administrative superintendents of the church; they are elected by "delegate" votes for as many years deemed until the age of 74, then he/she must retire.
Some provinces of the Anglican Communion have begun ordaining women as bishops in recent decades for example, the United States, New Zealand, Canada and Cuba.
In (), the Apostle Paul ordains presbyters in churches in Anatolia.
The bishop is the ordinary minister of the sacrament of confirmation in the Latin Rite Catholic Church, and in the Anglican and Old Catholic communion only a bishop may administer this sacrament.
The Presiding Bishop oversees the temporal affairs (buildings, properties, commercial corporations, and so on) of the worldwide Church, including the Church's massive global humanitarian aid and social welfare programs.
In each Annual Conference, United Methodist bishops serve for four-year terms, and may serve up to three terms before either retirement or appointment to a new Conference.
Orthodoxy considers apostolic succession to exist only within the Universal Church, and not through any authority held by individual bishops; thus, if a bishop ordains someone to serve outside of the (Orthodox) Church, the ceremony is ineffectual, and no ordination has taken place regardless of the ritual used or the ordaining prelate's position within the Orthodox Churches.
In the Anglican Communion, the term applies to a bishop who is a full-time assistant to a diocesan bishop: the Bishop of Warwick is suffragan to the Bishop of Coventry (the diocesan), though both live in Coventry.
The first woman to be consecrated a bishop within Anglicanism was Barbara Harris, who was ordained in the United States in 1989.
In Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Anglican cathedrals there is a special chair set aside for the exclusive use of the bishop.
This body is empowered to elect a new pope in sede vacante, but cardinals over the age of 80 may not be electors.
Although the former bishop is released from his duties, he continues to hold the Aaronic priesthood office of Bishop.
The earliest organization of the Church in Jerusalem was, according to most scholars, similar to that of Jewish synagogues, but it had a council or college of ordained presbyters ( ''elders'').
The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS), the second and third largest Lutheran bodies in the United States and the two largest Confessional Lutheran bodies in North America, do not follow an episcopal form of governance, settling instead on a form of quasi-congregationalism patterned off what they believe to be the practice of the early church.
(''cheirothetei ou cheirotonei'')
The General Conference, a meeting every four years, has an equal number of clergy and lay delegates.
Within the United Methodist Church only bishops are empowered to consecrate bishops and ordain clergy.
Some dioceses around the Mediterranean Sea which were Christianised early are rather compact, whereas dioceses in areas of rapid modern growth in Christian commitment—as in some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, South America and the Far East—are much larger and more populous.
At each level (with exception to the local districts), there is an elder who is elected president and a group of elders who serve on the executive committee with the elected president.
"Plainly therefore we ought to regard the bishop as the Lord Himself" &mdash; Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians 6:1.
He is the Chief Executive Officer of the Church.
The first recorded use of the title by a Roman Pope was by Theodore I in 620.
He may, or may not, have provincial oversight of suffragan bishops and may possibly have auxiliary bishops assisting him.
"In like manner let all men respect the deacons as Jesus Christ, even as they should respect the bishop as being a type of the Father and the presbyters as the council of God and as the college of Apostles.
In the Eastern Churches (Eastern Orthodox, Eastern Rite Catholic) a bishop will wear the mandyas, panagia (and perhaps an enkolpion), sakkos, omophorion and an Eastern-style mitre.
In the Coptic Orthodox Church the episcopal ranks from highest to lowest are metropolitan archbishops, metropolitan bishops, diocesan bishops, bishops exarchs of the throne, suffragan bishops, auxiliary bishops, general bishops, and finally chorbishops.
An auxiliary bishop is a titular bishop, and he is to be appointed as a vicar general or at least as an episcopal vicar of the diocese in which he serves.
They are elected for life from among the ordained elders (presbyters) by vote of the delegates in regional (called jurisdictional) conferences, and are consecrated by the other bishops present at the conference through the laying on of hands.
For liturgical functions other than the Mass the bishop typically wears the cope.
To the bishops and house churches to which he writes, he offers strategies on how to pressure house churches who don't recognize the bishop into compliance.
Within these churches, bishops are seen as those who possess the full priesthood and can ordain clergy – including other bishops.
The Holy See accepts as valid the ordinations of the Old Catholics in communion with Utrecht, as well as the Polish National Catholic Church (which received its orders directly from Utrecht, and was—until recently—part of that communion); but Roman Catholicism does not recognise the orders of any group whose teaching is at variance with what they consider the core tenets of Christianity; this is the case even though the clergy of the Independent Catholic groups may use the proper ordination ritual.
We are told that Paul had left Timothy in Ephesus and Titus in Crete to oversee the local church ( and ).
As the church moved from the shadows of privacy into the public forum it acquired land for churches, burials and clergy.
The words bishop and ordination are used in their technical meaning by the same Clement of Alexandria.
The Bishop of Sodor and Man, whose diocese lies outside of the United Kingdom, is an ''ex officio'' member of the Legislative Council of the Isle of Man.
The bishop is also responsible for the physical welfare of the ward, and thus collects tithing and fast offerings and distributes financial assistance where needed.
; Catholicos:  churches (notably the Armenian), roughly similar to a Patriarch (see above).
An Eastern bishop's coat of arms will normally display an Eastern-style mitre, cross, eastern style crosier and a red and white (or red and gold) mantle.
Bishops (as well as other members of the priesthood) can trace their line of authority back to Joseph Smith, who, according to church doctrine, was ordained to lead the Church in modern times by the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John, who were ordained to lead the Church by Jesus Christ.
However, the traditional choir dress of Anglican bishops retains its late mediaeval form, and looks quite different from that of their Catholic counterparts; it consists of a long rochet which is worn with a chimere.
"He that honoureth the bishop is honoured of God; he that doeth aught without the knowledge of the bishop rendereth service to the devil" &mdash; Epistle of Ignatius to the Smyrnans 9:1.
As well as traditional diocesan bishops, many churches have a well-developed structure of church leadership that involves a number of layers of authority and responsibility.
In the Catholic Church, Patriarchs sometimes call their leaders ''Catholicos''; the Patriarch of the Orthodox Church of Alexandria, Egypt, is called ''Pope'', meaning 'Father'.
While traditional teaching maintains that any bishop with apostolic succession can validly perform the ordination of another bishop, some churches require two or three bishops participate, either to ensure sacramental validity or to conform with church law.
A bishop is typically released after about five years and a new bishop is called to the position.
The primate of the Scottish Episcopal Church is chosen from among the diocesan bishops, and, while retaining diocesan responsibility, is called ''Primus''.
Both of these men were statesmen and public administrators in addition to their role as Christian pastors, teachers and leaders.
Additionally, Jerusalem was recognized at the Council of Chalcedon as one of the major sees.
"Therefore as the Lord did nothing without the Father, being united with Him, either by Himself or by the Apostles, so neither do ye anything without the bishop and the presbyters."
In Byzantine usage, an antimension signed by the bishop is kept on the altar partly as a reminder of whose altar it is and under whose omophorion the priest at a local parish is serving.
An explanation suggests that the delegates were bishops in the actual sense of the term, but that they did not possess fixed sees nor had they a special title.
This was the official stance of the English Church until the Commonwealth, during which time, the views of Presbyterians and Independents (Congregationalists) were more freely expressed and practiced.
Among their most critical duties is the ordination and appointment of clergy to serve local churches as pastor, presiding at sessions of the Annual, Jurisdictional, and General Conferences, providing pastoral ministry for the clergy under their charge, and safeguarding the doctrine and discipline of the Church.
Latter-day Saint bishops do not wear any special clothing or insignia the way clergy in many other churches do, but are expected to dress and groom themselves neatly and conservatively per their local culture, especially when performing official duties.
Although ELCA agreed with the Episcopal Church to limit ordination to the bishop "ordinarily", ELCA pastor-''ordinators'' are given permission to perform the rites in "extraordinary" circumstance.
While not considered orthodox Christian, the Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica uses roles and titles derived from Christianity for its clerical hierarchy, including bishops who have much the same authority and responsibilities as in Roman Catholicism.
Clement of Alexandria (end of the 2nd century) writes about the ordination of a certain Zachæus as bishop by the imposition of Simon Peter Bar-Jonah's hands.
Most Eastern Orthodox churches allow varying amounts of formalised laity and/or lower clergy influence on the choice of bishops.
The most usual term for the geographic area of a bishop's authority and ministry, the diocese, began as part of the structure of the Roman Empire under Diocletian.
* The theology of male clergy within the Independent movement is also suspect according to the Roman Catholics, as they presumably approve of the ordination of females, and may have even undergone an (invalid) ordination ceremony conducted by a woman.
In some Christian denominations, for example, the Anglican Communion, parish churches may maintain a chair for the use of the bishop when he visits; this is to signify the parish's union with the bishop.
The collegial expression of episcopal leadership in the United Methodist Church is known as the Council of Bishops.
It is therefore believed that he has both the right and ability to receive divine inspiration (through the Holy Spirit) for the ward under his direction.
The Caeremoniale Episcoporum recommends, but does not impose, that in solemn celebrations a bishop should also wear a dalmatic, which can always be white, beneath the chasuble, especially when administering the sacrament of holy orders, blessing an abbot or abbess, and dedicating a church or an altar.
The position of Roman Catholicism is slightly different.
Collectively, they supervise and appoint national and state leaders across the world.
; Suffragan bishop: A suffragan bishop is a bishop subordinate to a Metropolitan.
In the Latin Rite, metropolitans are always archbishops; in many Eastern churches, the title is "metropolitan," with some of these churches using "archbishop" as a separate office.
As such, it is his duty to preside at services, call local leaders, and judge the worthiness of members for service.
Eastern bishops do not normally wear an episcopal ring; the faithful kiss (or, alternatively, touch their forehead to) the bishop's hand.
Priests, deacons and lay ministers cooperate and assist their bishop(s) in shepherding a flock.
This development has muddied the waters somewhat as it could be argued that the strain of apostolic succession has been re-introduced into Anglicanism, at least within the Church of England.
The traditional role of a bishop is as pastor of a diocese (also called a bishopric, synod, eparchy or see), and so to serve as a "diocesan bishop," or "eparch" as it is called in many Eastern Christian churches.
; General bishop: a title and role in some churches, not associated with a diocese.
In Timothy and Titus in the New Testament a more clearly defined episcopate can be seen.
The above understanding is part of the basis of Adventist organizational structure.
Whilst it does recognise the validity of the orders of certain groups which separated from communion with Holy See.
Each bishop within the Latin Rite is answerable directly to the Pope and not any other bishop except to metropolitans in certain oversight instances.
This is the bishop's ''cathedra'' and is often called the throne.
In 2001, Peter Hollingworth, AC, OBE – then the Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane – was controversially appointed Governor-General of Australia.
Other contemporary Christian writers do not describe monarchial bishops, either continuing to equate them with the presbyters or speaking of episkopoi (bishops, plural) in a city.
He also holds an important pastoral role being the Spiritual Head and Chief Pastor of the Church.
Though a minimum of three bishops participating is desirable (there are usually several more) in order to demonstrate collegiality, canonically only one bishop is necessary.
According to the view held unanimously among the Catholic writers, this does not mean that the episcopate, in the sense of the holder of the order or office of bishop, must have developed only later, or have been plural, because in each church the college or presbyter-overseers (also called "presbyter-bishops") did not exercise an independent supreme power; it was subject to the Apostles or to their delegates.
In the Ecumenical Patriarchate, bishops of modern dioceses are often given a titular see alongside their modern one (for example, the Archbishop of Thyateira ''and'' Great Britain).
Gradually priests replaced the chorbishops.
The pope previously used the title ''Patriarch of the West'', but this title was dropped from use in 2006 a move which caused some concern within the Orthodox Communion as, to them, it implied wider papal jurisdiction.
The bishops in the 2nd century are defined also as the only clergy to whom the ordination to priesthood (presbyterate) and diaconate is entrusted: "a priest (presbyter) lays on hands, but does not ordain."
; Primate:A primate is usually the bishop of the oldest church of a nation.
They support and help their superior apostle.
Occasional exceptions to this rule are tolerated when the alternative is political chaos.
Rather, the bishop is head of a titular see, which is usually an ancient city that used to have a bishop, but, for some reason or other, does not have one now.
Among their duties, are responsibility for appointing clergy to serve local churches as pastor, for performing ordinations, and for safeguarding the doctrine and discipline of the Church.
The cappa magna may be worn, but only within the bishop's own diocese and on especially solemn occasions.
