The shell became associated with the pilgrimage and came to be used as a symbol showing hostelries along the route and later as a sign of hospitality, food and lodging elsewhere.
Scallops have simple eyes around the margin of the mantle and can clap their valves shut to move sharply, hinge first, to escape from danger.
For example, the cilia on the gills, which originally served to remove unwanted sediment, have become adapted to capture food particles, and transport them in a steady stream of mucus to the mouth.
The shell is composed of two calcareous valves held together by a ligament.
''Anisomyaria'' consisted of forms that had either a single adductor muscle or one adductor muscle much smaller than the other.
The osphradium is a patch of sensory cells located below the posterior adductor muscle that may serve to taste the water or measure its turbidity, but is probably not homologous with the structure of the same name found in snails and slugs.
The giant mussel, ''Bathymodiolus thermophilus'', and the giant white clam, ''Calyptogena magnifica'', both live clustered around hydrothermal vents at abyssal depths in the Pacific Ocean.
This is visible on the inside of the valve as an indentation on the pallial line which is known as the pallial sinus.
The anterior or front of the shell is where the byssus (when present) and foot are located, and the posterior of the shell is where the siphons are located.
Crabs crack the shells with their pincers and starfish use their water vascular system to force the valves apart and then insert part of their stomach between the valves to digest the bivalve's body.
Other bivalves, such as mussels, attach themselves to hard surfaces using tough byssus threads made of keratin and proteins.
This arrangement allows the shell to be opened and closed without the two halves detaching.
Examinations of these deposits in Peru has provided a means of dating long past El Niño events because of the disruption these caused to bivalve shell growth.
The sexes are usually separate in bivalves but some hermaphroditism is known.
Scallops and file clams can swim by opening and closing their valves rapidly; water is ejected on either side of the hinge area and they move with the flapping valves in front.
All bivalves have light-sensitive cells that can detect a shadow falling over the animal.
In the United States and Canada, a regulatory limit of 20&nbsp;µg/g of domoic acid in shellfish meat is set.
Pearl oysters (the common name of two very different families in salt water and fresh water) are the most common source of natural pearls.
Mother-of-pearl or nacre is the naturally occurring lustrous layer that lines some mollusc shells.
In this geologically brief period, all the major animal phyla diverged and these included the first creatures with mineralized skeletons.
Moore, in Moore, Lalicker, and Fischer, 1952, ''Invertebrate Fossils'', gives a practical and useful classification of pelecypods (Bivalvia) even if somewhat antiquated, based on shell structure, gill type, and hinge teeth configuration.
or by viruses and bacteria from sewage effluent that sometimes contaminates coastal waters.
: Subclass:Teleodesmacea
From this, the scallop and other bivalve shells came to be used as a symbol for fertility.
By the middle of the Paleozoic, around 400 Mya, the brachiopods were among the most abundant filter feeders in the ocean, and over 12,000 fossil species are recognized.
The common mussel (''Mytilus edulis'') produces 10 times as many eggs that hatch into larvae and soon need to feed to survive and grow.
:: Taxodonta: Many teeth (e.g.
Brachiopods have a lophophore, a coiled, rigid cartilaginous internal apparatus adapted for filter feeding, a feature shared with two other major groups of marine invertebrates, the bryozoans and the phoronids.
They work in opposition to the ligament which tends to pull the valves apart.
Many juveniles are further reared off the seabed in suspended rafts, on floating trays or cemented to ropes.
In other taxa, alternate layers of calcite and aragonite are laid down.
The biotoxin remains potent even when the shellfish are well-cooked.
Its depiction is used in architecture, furniture and fabric design and it is the logo of Royal Dutch Shell, the global oil and gas company.
In oysters the lower valve may be almost flat while the upper valve develops layer upon layer of thin horny material reinforced with calcium carbonate.
As filter feeders, bivalves pass large quantities of water through their gills, filtering out the organic particles, including the microbial pathogens.
Most are infaunal and live buried in sediment on the seabed, or in the sediment in freshwater habitats.
Teleodesmacea on the other hand have a porcelanous and partly nacreous shell structure; Mantle lobes that are generally connected, well developed siphons, and specialized hinge teeth.
When a Pacific razor clam (''Siliqua patula'') is laid on the surface of the beach it can bury itself completely in seven seconds  and the Atlantic jackknife clam, ''Ensis directus'', can do the same within fifteen seconds.
Both groups have a shell consisting of two valves, but the organization of the shell is quite different in the two groups.
The oysters are ready for harvesting in 18 to 30 months depending on the size required.
Some of the species in the freshwater mussel family, Unionidae, commonly known as pocketbook mussels, have evolved an unusual reproductive strategy.
This distinguishes between Protobranchia, Filibranchia and Eulamellibranchia.
Carnivorous bivalves have a greatly reduced style, and a chitinous gizzard that helps grind up the food before digestion.
Metabolic waste is voided from the bladders through a pair of openings near the front of the upper part of the mantle cavity, from where it joins the stream of exhalant water.
In 1978, an oyster-associated gastrointestinal infection affecting more than 2,000 people occurred in Australia.
:: Pachydonta: Large, different, deformed teeth (e.g.
Hatchery production provides some control of the broodstock but remains problematic because disease-resistant strains of this oyster have not yet been developed.
Modern knowledge of molluscan reproductive cycles has led to the development of hatcheries and new culture techniques.
Some experts still maintain that Anomalodesmacea should be considered a separate subclass, whereas the new system treats it as the order Anomalodesmata, within the subclass Heterodonta.
Late Jurassic&nbsp;– Upper Cretaceous
Bivalves can become toxic when they filter these microalgae out of the water.
Bivalves have been an important source of food for humans at least since Roman times and empty shells found in middens at archaeological sites are evidence of earlier consumption.
In the carnivorous genus ''Poromya'', the hemolymph has red amoebocytes containing a haemoglobin pigment.
Here they are largely free from bottom-dwelling predators such as starfish and crabs but more labour is required to tend them.
Cilia in the sac cause the style to rotate, winding in a stream of food-containing mucus from the mouth, and churning the stomach contents.
These primitive bivalves hold on to the substratum with a pair of tentacles at the edge of the mouth, each of which has a single palp, or flap.
The shell of a bivalve is composed of calcium carbonate, and consists of two, usually similar, parts called valves.
In temperate regions, about 25% of species are lecithotrophic, depending on nutrients stored in the yolk of the egg where the main energy source is lipids.
The ventricle is muscular and pumps hemolymph into the aorta, and then to the rest of the body.
They are abundant in the Arctic, about 140 species being known from that zone.
This series of actions is repeated to dig deeper.
It lives above the high tide mark in the tropical Indo-Pacific on the underside of mangrove leaves, on mangrove branches, and on sea walls in the splash zone.
This has meant that there is sometimes a shortage of regulated shellfish, with consequent higher prices.
When buried in the sediment, burrowing bivalves are protected from the pounding of waves, desiccation, and overheating during low tide, and variations in salinity caused by rainwater.
The chemoreceptor cells taste the water and are sensitive to touch.
Bivalves adapted to tidal environments can survive for several hours out of water by closing their shells tightly.
They approach for a closer look and the mussel releases huge numbers of larvae from its gills, dousing the inquisitive fish with its tiny, parasitic young.
By the Permian&ndash;Triassic extinction event 250 Mya, bivalves were undergoing a huge radiation of diversity.
Statocysts within the organism help the bivalve to sense and correct its orientation.
Shells have had various uses in the past as body decorations, utensils, scrapers and cutting implements.
Oysters, scallops, clams, ark clams, mussels and cockles are the most commonly consumed kinds of bivalve, and are eaten cooked or raw.
The sea cucumber is unharmed.
Some freshwater species, when exposed to the air, can gape the shell slightly and gas exchange can take place.
There are limitations to the use of bivalves as bioindicators.
It is used to make pearl buttons and in artisan craftwork to make organic jewellery.
Sea otters feed on a variety of bivalve species and have been observed to use stones balanced on their chests as anvils on which to crack open the shells.
In burrowing species, there may be two elongated, retractable siphons reaching up to the seabed, one each for the inhalant and exhalant streams of water.
Many of these live in the intertidal zone where the sediment remains damp even when the tide is out.
Sperm is drawn into a female's gills with the inhalant water and internal fertilization takes place.
They used them as scrapers for removing flesh from hides and for separating the scalps of their victims.
The Pacific walrus (''Odobenus rosmarus divergens'') is one of the main predators feeding on bivalves in Arctic waters.
In 1937, researchers in California established the connection between blooms of these phytoplankton and PSP.
Spawning may take place continually or be triggered by environmental factors such as day length, water temperature, or the presence of sperm in the water.
In the United States, there is a regulatory limit of 80&nbsp;µg/g of saxitoxin equivalent in shellfish meat.
It also has certain advantages in that bivalves can be used in monitoring the presence and quantity of pollutants in their environment.
In the Filibranchia and Eulamellibranchia, water is drawn into the shell from the posterior ventral surface of the animal, passes upwards through the gills, and doubles back to be expelled just above the intake.
Waste material is consolidated in the rectum and voided as pellets into the exhalent water stream through an anal pore.
The standard view now is that it resides within the subclass Heterodonta.
In filter-feeding bivalves, an elongated rod of solidified mucus referred to as the "crystalline style" projects into the stomach from an associated sac.
The shells were cut, rolled, polished and drilled before being strung together and woven into belts.
Survival rates are low at about 5%.
Bivalves have also been used in the biocontrol of pollution.
When the sea cucumber sucks in sediment, the bivalve allows the water to pass over its gills and extracts fine organic particles.
Bivalves with long siphons may also have siphonal ganglia to control them.
Saxitoxin is the most virulent of these.
Evidence given for this included the fact that bivalves needed less food to subsist because of their energetically efficient ligament-muscle system for opening and closing valves.
In the United States and the European Union, since the early 1990s regulations have been in place that are designed to prevent shellfish from contaminated waters entering the food chain.
These are retained in the animals' tissues and become concentrated in their liver-like digestive glands.
The larvae hatching out of these rely on the energy reserves and do not feed.
Typically, a short stage lasts a few hours or days before the eggs hatch into trochophore larvae.
Bivalve fossils are formed when the sediment in which the shells are buried hardens into rock.
''Eulamellibranchiata'' consisted of forms with ctenidial gills.
Most bivalves are filter feeders, using their gills to capture particulate food such as phytoplankton from the water.
Bivalves appear in the fossil record first in the early Cambrian more than 500 million years ago.
Conchology is the scientific study of mollusc shells, but the term conchologist is also sometimes used to describe a collector of shells.
Brachiopods are shelled marine organisms that superficially resembled bivalves in that they are of similar size and have a hinged shell in two parts.
Finding pearls inside oysters is a very chancy business as hundreds of shells may need to be pried open before a single pearl can be found.
Similar techniques are used in different parts of the world to cultivate other species including the Sydney rock oyster (''Saccostrea commercialis''), the northern quahog (''Mercenaria mercenaria''), the blue mussel (''Mytilus edulis''), the Mediterranean mussel (''Mytilus galloprovincialis''), the New Zealand green-lipped mussel (''Perna canaliculus''), the grooved carpet shell (''Ruditapes decussatus''), the Japanese carpet shell (''Venerupis philippinarum''), the pullet carpet shell (''Venerupis pullastra'') and the Yesso scallop (''Patinopecten yessoensis'').
The pericardial glands either line the auricles of the heart or attach to the pericardium, and serve as extra filtration organs.
During neap tides, they exhibit much longer closing periods than during spring tides.
A number of species can survive and even flourish in extreme conditions.
Octopuses either pull bivalves apart by force, or they bore a hole into the shell and insert a digestive fluid before sucking out the liquified contents.
Most bivalves bury themselves in sediment, where they are relatively safe from predation.
The Antarctic scallop, ''Adamussium colbecki'', lives under the sea ice at the other end of the globe, where the subzero temperatures mean that growth rates are very slow.
Adult shell sizes of bivalves vary from fractions of a millimetre to over a metre in length, but the majority of species do not exceed 10&nbsp;cm (4&nbsp;in).
To prevent itself from being swept away, it attaches itself with byssal threads to the host's throat.
They can disperse more widely as they remain planktonic for a much longer time.
The animal can be opened to extract the pearl after about two years and reseeded so that it produces another pearl.
They are more exposed to attack by predators than the burrowing bivalves.
Because features such as hinge morphology, dentition, mineralogy, shell morphology and shell composition change slowly over time, these characteristics can be used to define major taxonomic groups.
It was an expensive fabric and overfishing has much reduced populations of the pen shell.
The freshwater bivalves include seven families, the largest of which are the Unionidae, with about 700 species.
Most pearls are now obtained from cultured shells where an irritant substance has been purposefully introduced to induce the formation of a pearl.
Bivalves have an open circulatory system that bathes the organs in hemolymph.
These two taxa appeared in textbooks as an example of replacement by competition.
The reason for this was thought to be that the bivalves in these locations did not need to filter so much water as elsewhere because of the water's high nutritional content.
Some bivalves have a single aorta, but most also have a second, usually smaller, aorta serving the hind parts of the animal.
Oyster shell and cockle shell are often used for this purpose and are obtained as a by-product from other industries.
Often, the impression made by the valves remains as the fossil rather than the valves.
Levels of zinc and iron tended to rise in the wet season due to run-off from the galvanized roofing sheets used in many of the houses.
Although many non-sessile bivalves use their muscular foot to move around, or to dig, members of the freshwater family Sphaeriidae are exceptional in that these small clams climb about quite nimbly on weeds using their long and flexible foot.
Like most other molluscs, the excretory organs of bivalves are a pair of nephridia.
The Pacific oyster (''Crassostrea gigas'') is cultivated by similar methods but in larger volumes and in many more regions of the world.
Mass spawning events sometimes take place when all the bivalves in an area synchronise their release of spawn.
The gills have evolved into ctenidia, specialised organs for feeding and breathing.
Others, such as the razor clams, are burrowing specialists with elongated shells and a powerful foot adapted for rapid digging.
By the early Silurian, the gills were becoming adapted for filter feeding, and during the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, siphons first appeared, which, with the newly developed muscular foot, allowed the animals to bury themselves deep in the sediment.
These glochidia larvae are drawn into the fish's gills, where they attach and trigger a tissue response that forms a small cyst around each larva.
Certain carnivorous gastropod snails such as whelks (Buccinidae) and murex snails (Muricidae) feed on bivalves by boring into their shells, although many Busyconine whelks (e.g., Busycon sinistrum, Busycon carica) are "chipping-style" predators.
:: Desmodonta: Hinge-teeth absent or irregular with ligaments (e.g.
After about four days, they become D-stage larvae, when they first develop hinged, D-shaped valves.
The channeled whelk (''Busycotypus canaliculatus'') and the quahog (''Mercenaria mercenaria'') were used to make white and purple traditional patterns.
Along the hinge line of the shell are, in most cases, a number of hinge teeth which prevent the valves from moving laterally relative to one another.
The figures included 5,554,348 (3,152,826) tons of clams, cockles and ark shells, 1,901,314 (1,568,417) tons of mussels, 4,592,529 (3,858,911) tons of oysters and 2,567,981 (1,713,453) tons of scallops.
Feeding and digestion are synchronized with diurnal and tidal cycles.
These included increasing relative buoyancy in soft sediments by developing spines on the shell, gaining the ability to swim, and in a few cases, adopting predatory habits.
The ability of some bivalves to burrow and thus avoid predators may have been a major factor in their success.
This has led to illegal harvesting and sale of shellfish on the black market, which can be a health hazard.
They use their muscular foot to dig into the substrate.
Many bivalves have no eyes, but a few members of the Arcoidea, Limopsoidea, Mytiloidea, Anomioidea, Ostreoidea, and Limoidea have simple eyes on the margin of the mantle.
In earlier taxonomic systems, experts used a single characteristic feature for their classifications, choosing among shell morphology, hinge type or gill type.
A "mabe" (irregular) pearl can be grown by the insertion of an implant, usually made of plastic, under a flap of the mantle and next to the mother-of-pearl interior of the shell.
The bivalves are a highly successful class of invertebrates found in aquatic habitats throughout the world.
''Taxodonta'' consisted of forms that had taxodont dentition, with a series of small parallel teeth perpendicular to the hinge line.
These larvae have a relatively small dispersal potential before settling out.
The bivalves were hard hit by this event, but re-established themselves and thrived during the Triassic period that followed.
Razor shells can dig themselves into the sand with great speed to escape predation.
Later they are released and attach themselves parasitically to the gills or fins of a fish host.
In most, gills are eulamellibranch.
In more severe cases, the muscles of the chest wall may be affected leading to paralysis and even death.
Other new adaptations within various families allowed species to occupy previously unused evolutionary niches.
They can be stacked up and glued together to make ornaments.
Different initial structures have been adapted to solve the same problems, a case of convergent evolution.
Freshwater bivalves in the order Unionoida have a different lifecycle.
In his 1935 work ''Handbuch der systematischen Weichtierkunde'' (Handbook of Systematic Malacology), Johannes Thiele introduced a mollusc taxonomy based upon the 1909 work by Cossmann and Peyrot.
Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) is primarily caused by the consumption of bivalves that have accumulated toxins by feeding on toxic dinoflagellates, single-celled protists found naturally in the sea and inland waters.
Many people pick up shells on the beach or purchase them and display them in their homes.
In these animals, the gills are relatively small, and form a perforated barrier separating the main mantle cavity from a smaller chamber through which the water is exhaled.
They can be harvested by hand when they reach a suitable size.
The saddle oyster, ''Enigmonia aenigmatica'', is a marine species that could be considered amphibious.
In some species, such as those in the genus ''Lasaea'', females draw water containing sperm in through their inhalant siphons and fertilization takes place inside the female.
These then sort the particles, rejecting those that are unsuitable or too large to digest, and conveying others to the mouth.
Many species of demersal fish feed on them including the common carp (''Cyprinus carpio''), which is being used in the upper Mississippi River to try to control the invasive zebra mussel (''Dreissena polymorpha'').
Birds such as the Eurasian oystercatcher (''Haematopus ostralegus'') have specially adapted beaks which can pry open their shells.
:: Isodonta: Equal teeth (e.g.
Gills range from protobranch to eulamellibranch.
In all but the most primitive bivalves, two cerebropleural ganglia are on either side of the oesophagus.
Other juveniles are laid directly on the seabed at the rate of  per hectare.
They notched them to provide knives, graters and saws.
They are also out of the reach of many predators.
An advantage of this to the molluscs is that they can disperse upstream along with their temporary hosts, rather than being constantly swept downstream by the water flow.
The name "bivalve" is derived from the Latin ''bis'', meaning "two", and ''valvae'', meaning "leaves of a door".
The dog whelk (''Nucella lamellosa'') drills a hole with its radula assisted by a shell-dissolving secretion.
A pearl is created in the mantle of a mollusk when an irritant particle is surrounded by layers of nacre.
In 1816 in France, a physician, J. P. A. Pasquier, described an outbreak of typhoid linked to the consumption of raw oysters.
Often, a pocket-like space occurs into which the siphons fit when they are retracted.
The import and export of goods made with nacre are controlled in many countries under the International Convention of Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
For example, the Ouachita creekshell mussel, ''Villosa arkansasensis'', is known only from the streams of the Ouachita Mountains in Arkansas and Oklahoma, and like several other freshwater mussel species from the southeastern US, it is in danger of extinction.
For example, the soft-shell clam (''Mya arenaria'') was thought to be short-lived, but has now been shown to have a lifespan of at least 28 years.
Invertebrate predators include crabs, starfish and octopuses.
They grow on for about two years before being harvested by dredging.
In 1950, the year in which the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) started making such information available, world trade in bivalve molluscs was 1,007,419 tons.
Each statocyst consists of a small sac lined with sensory cilia that detect the movement of a mineral mass, a statolith, under gravity.
The first corresponds to Newell's Palaeotaxodonta and Cryptodonta, the second to his Pteriomorphia, with the last corresponding to all other groups.
A few bivalves, such as the granular poromya (''Poromya granulata''), are carnivorous, eating much larger prey than the tiny microalgae consumed by other bivalves.
The herring gull (''Larus argentatus'') sometimes drops heavy shells onto rocks in order to crack them open.
The level of pollutants found in the tissues varies with species, age, size, time of year and other factors.
This line (known as the pallial line) exists because, parallel to the opening edge of the bivalve's shell, the mantle is attached to the shell by a continuous narrow row of minute mantle retractor muscles.
The cases peak in mid-summer and autumn with no cases being reported in mid winter so there may be a link between the temperature at which the oysters are held between harvesting and consumption.
It has been used to decorate musical instruments, watches, pistols, fans and other products.
