In Christianity, the devil is often called the "prince of darkness."
Other designers contributed to the trend of the little black dress.
File:Lady Amaranth.jpg|The goth fashion model Lady Amaranth.
They believed that Odin, the king of the Nordic pantheon, had two black crows, Huginn and Muninn, who served as his agents, traveling the world for him, watching and listening.
In 1960, John F. Kennedy was the last American President to be inaugurated wearing formal dress; President Lyndon Johnson and all his successors were inaugurated wearing business suits.
Black can be defined as the visual impression experienced when no visible light reaches the eye.
In China, the color black is associated with water, one of the five fundamental elements believed to compose all things;  and with winter, cold, and the direction north, usually symbolized by a black tortoise.
The emblem of the Holy Roman Empire of Germany was a black eagle.
File:Flag of South Africa.svg|The Flag of South Africa (1994).
Black is frequently used as a color of power, law and authority.
(This was the same root as the English word ''atrocious''.)
Black is often used to represent darkness; it is the symbolic opposite of white (or brightness).
Nineteen women and men were hanged as witches.
Red, white and black were the colors of the flag of the German Empire from 1870 to 1918.
In fashion, black did not have the prestige of red, the color of the nobility.
Absorption of light is contrasted by transmission, reflection and diffusion, where the light is only redirected, causing objects to appear transparent, reflective or white respectively.
The mortarboard hat worn by graduates is adapted from a square cap called a biretta worn by Medieval professors and clerics
For women's fashion, the defining moment was the invention of the simple black dress by Coco Chanel in 1926.
In some traditional societies, for example in Greece and Italy, some widows wear black for the rest of their lives.
*In the 2000 and 2012 census, the category "Black or African-American" was used, defined as "a person having their origin in any of the racial groups in Africa."
But Édouard Manet used blacks for their strength and dramatic effect.
File:Živočišné uhlí (Carbocit).jpg|Ivory black or bone char, a natural black pigment made by burning animal bones.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, many machines and devices, large and small, were painted black, to stress their functionality.
It is the color traditionally worn at funerals and memorial services.
Thanks to coal smoke, the buildings of the large cities of Europe and America gradually turned black.
File:Flag of Germany.svg|(The black in the modern flag of Germany (1949) dates back to the flag of the Holy Roman Empire, the 19th-century flag of the German Confederation, the flag of Prussia, and the flag of the Weimar Republic.
File:Charcoal sticks 051907.jpg|Sticks of vine charcoal and compressed charcoal.
File:March on Rome.jpg|Benito Mussolini and his blackshirt followers during his March on Rome in 1922.
*In Christian theology, black was the color of the universe before God created light.
Because of its contrast and clarity, black ink on white paper continued to be the standard for printing books, newspapers and documents; and for the same reason black text on a white background is the most common format used on computer screens.
Black was the color of melancholy, the dominant theme of romanticism.
File:Anneke Grönloh 1964 Eurovision dress.jpg|A "simple black dress" from 1964.
Of the total UK population in 2001, 1.01 percent identified themselves as Black Caribbean, .8 percent as Black African, and .2 percent as Black (others).
Since the impressionists it seems to have made continuous progress, taking a more and more important part in color orchestration, comparable to that of the double bass as a solo instrument."
In the Protestant Netherlands, Rembrandt Van Rijn used this sober new palette of blacks and browns to create portraits whose faces emerged from the shadows expressing the deepest human emotions.
This glossy black fur, from an animal of the marten family, was the finest and most expensive fur in Europe.
The black swastika was meant to symbolize the Aryan race, which, according to the Nazis, "was always anti-Semitic and will always be anti-Semitic."
Bright colors were banished and replaced by blacks, browns and grays; women and children were recommended to wear white.
The fashion designer Christian Dior said, "elegance is a combination of distinction, naturalness, care and simplicity," and black exemplified elegance.
The Romans marked ''fasti'' days with white stones and ''nefasti'' days with black.
File:Collection of old phones and PDA-BlackBerry.jpg|The first model BlackBerry (2000)
These included telephones, sewing machines, steamships, railroad locomotives, and automobiles.
There were also small but influential movements in the United States and Russia.
However, the background color of outer space is black.
The smoke that comes off the flame will hit the bottom of the pan and gather, becoming thick.
In men's fashion, black gradually ceded its dominance to navy blue, particularly in business suits.
In the evening it was the custom of the men to leave the women after dinner to go to a special smoking room to enjoy cigars or cigarettes.
In black-figure pottery, the artist would paint figures with a glossy clay slip on a red clay pot.
File:Dore London.jpg|A view of London by Gustave Doré from 1872 showed how coal and the industrial revolution had blackened the buildings and air of the great cities of Europe.
Early Chinese inks similar to the modern inkstick have been found dating to about 256 BC at the end of the Warring States period.
take the pan and brush this pigment (that is, this smoke) onto paper or into a pot with something.
wearing a necklace adorned with severed heads and hands.
The American Civil Rights Movement in the 1950s was a struggle for the political equality of African Americans.
During the notorious Salem witch trials in New England in 1692–93, one of those on trial was accused of being able turn into a "black thing with a blue cap,"  and others of having familiars in the form of a black dog, a black cat and a black bird.
A "black day" (or week or month) usually refers to tragic date.
File:Japanese Wedding Day.jpg| Japanese men traditionally wear a black kimono with some white decoration on their wedding day
A material is said to be black if most incoming light is absorbed equally in the material.
But European Catholics of all classes, like Protestants, eventually adopted a sober wardrobe that was mostly black, brown and gray.
Artists and calligraphists could vary the thickness of the resulting ink by reducing or increasing the intensity and time of ink grinding.
The wealthy bankers and merchants of northern Italy responded by changing to black robes and gowns, made with the most expensive fabrics.
File:Portrait of Philip II of Spain by Sofonisba Anguissola - 002b.jpg|Portrait of Philip II of Spain (1527–1598)
It was worn by Benedictine monks as a sign of humility and penitence.
For the ancient Greeks, black was also the color of the underworld, separated from the world of the living by the river Acheron, whose water was black.
* The term "black" is often used in the West to describe people whose skin is darker.
In the 2006 census, 2.3 percent of Australians identified themselves as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islanders.
Many performers of both popular and European classical music, including French singers Edith Piaf and Juliette Greco, and violinist Joshua Bell have traditionally worn black on stage during performances.
The phrase also occurs in ''King Lear'' by William Shakespeare (c. 1606), Act III, Scene IV, l. 14:
Kali does not eat meat, but it is the śāstra's injunction that those who are unable to give up meat-eating, they may sacrifice one goat, not cow, one small animal before the goddess Kali, on amāvāsya (new moon) day, night, not day, and they can eat it.
A Benedictine abbot, Pierre the Venerable, accused the Cistercians of excessive pride in wearing white instead of black.
Thereafter the jacket became known as a tuxedo in the U.S.
File:Johnny-Cash 1972.jpg|Country-western singer Johnny Cash called himself "the man in black."
Around a black hole there is a mathematically defined surface called an event horizon that marks the point of no return.
File:Whistlers Mother high res.jpg|Arrangement in Grey and Black Number 1 (1871) by James McNeil Whistler better known as Whistler's Mother.
They also held sacred the crow.
As they move, the wavelength of their light becomes longer, through the Doppler effect, and shifts toward red, or even becomes invisible.
They also feared Hel, the goddess of the kingdom of the dead, whose skin was black on one side and red on the other.
It says, "Death to all who stand in the way of freedom for working people."
A much richer and deeper black dye was eventually found made from the Oak apple or '''gall-nut'''.
The powdered charcoal was then mixed with gum arabic or the yellow of an egg to make a paint.
The black beret and the color black is also a symbol of special forces in many countries.
The leading poets of the movement were usually portrayed dressed in black, usually with a white shirt and open collar, and a scarf carelessly over their shoulder, Percy Bysshe Shelley and Lord Byron helped create the enduring stereotype of the romantic poet.
Henri Matisse quoted the French impressionist Pissarro telling him, "Manet is stronger than us all - he made light with black."
The Black Standard (, also known as  "banner of the eagle" or simply as  "the banner") is the historical flag flown by Muhammad in Islamic tradition, an eschatological symbol in Shi'a Islam (heralding the advent of the Mahdi), and a symbol used in Islamism and Jihadism.
Light from stars farther away has not reached Earth, and cannot contribute to making the sky bright.
File:ShababFlag.svg|Flag of Ansar al-Sharia Islamic movement in Yemen.
Women's fashion was revolutionized and simplified in 1926 by the French designer Coco Chanel, who published a drawing of a simple black dress in ''Vogue'' magazine.
Black today is the most common color for limousines and the official cars of government officials.
This is 1/30 of the light reflected by the current standard for blackness, and one third the light reflected by the previous record holder for darkest substance.
His painting of black crows over a cornfield, painted shortly before he died, was particularly agitated and haunting.
Pigments or dyes that absorb light rather than reflect it back to the eye "look black".
File:Increase Mather.jpg|Increase Mather, an American Puritan clergyman (1688).
File:Queen Victoria by Heinrich von Angeli.jpg|Queen Victoria wore black in mourning for her husband Prince Albert (1899)
Manet's portrait of painter Berthe Morisot was a study in black which perfectly captured her spirit of independence.
The 15th-century painter Cennino Cennini described how this pigment was made during the Renaissance in his famous handbook for artists: "...there is a black which is made from the tendrils of vines.
*In Hinduism, the goddess Kali, goddess of time and change, is portrayed with black or dark blue skin.
A black beret is also worn by military police in the Canadian, Czech, Croatian, Portuguese, Spanish and Serbian armies.
In the United States, it is particularly used to describe African Americans.
Black shirts were also worn by the British Union of Fascists before World War II, and members of fascist movements in the Netherlands.
The flag was a symbol of Estonian nationalism, when Estonia was part of the Russian Empire and Soviet Union.
File:Petrus Christus - Portrait of a Young Woman - Google Art Project.jpg|''Portrait of a Young Woman'' by Petrus Christus (about 1470)
File:Raiders in huddle at Falcons at Raiders 11-2-08 1.JPG|The black uniforms of the Oakland Raiders professional football team matched their "outlaw" image.
The flag used the colors of the failed Brabant Revolution of 1789–90 against the Habsburg Monarchy.
Other possible categories were African British, African Scottish, Caribbean British and Caribbean Scottish.
Black is the queen of colors.
The 15th century Florentine painter Cennino Cennini described how it was made during the Renaissance:  "... take a lamp full of linseed oil and fill the lamp with the oil and light the lamp.
File:Jacob1207b.JPG|American academic dress for a bachelor's degree
it is said to be the banner carried by Muhammad and his soldiers.
File:Lascaux painting.jpg|Neolithic paintings of bulls in the Lascaux Cave, more than 17,000 years old
A black pigment can, however, result from a ''combination'' of several pigments that collectively absorb all colors.
The novels of the period were filled with castles, ruins, dungeons, storms, and meetings at midnight.
Combined with white, it can symbolize intuition.
To make ink from an inkstick, the stick is continuously ground against an inkstone with a small quantity of water to produce a dark liquid which is then applied with an ink brush.
In Japan in the 10th and 11th century, it was believed that wearing black could bring misfortune.
*In the 1970 census, the category "Negro or black" was used for the first time.
The daytime sky on Earth is blue because the light from the Sun strikes molecules in Earth's atmosphere and scatters in all directions.
In 1971, Cash wrote the song "Man in Black" to explain why he dressed in that color: "We're doing mighty fine I do suppose / In our streak of lightning cars and fancy clothes / But just so we're reminded of the ones who are held back / Up front there ought to be a man in black."
Thereafter, a long black gown was used for formal occasions, while the simple black dress could be used for everything else.
The emblem of the Italian fascists was a black flag with fasces, an axe in a bundle of sticks, an ancient Roman symbol of authority.
Inksticks are used in Chinese calligraphy and brush painting.
In the 1990s, the Black Standard became the banner of several Islamic extremist, jihadist groups.
They range in size from 2–5&nbsp;cm, and are caused by chemicals injected by the larva of certain kinds of gall wasp in the family Cynipidae.
In Canada, census respondents can identify themselves as Black.
And this is a lean and black pigment and is one of the perfect pigments that we use."
Black evening dress and formal dress in general were worn less and less.
File:The Dowager Electress Palatine in mourning.jpg|The dowager Electress of Palatine in mourning (1717)
'''Anarchism''' is a political philosophy, most popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, which holds that governments and capitalism are harmful and undesirable.
File:Manet bal opera.jpg|''Le Bal de l'Opera'' (1873) by Édouard Manet, shows the dominance of black in Parisian evening dress.
It is a species of flowering tree in the legume family, Fabaceae, that is native to southern Mexico and northern Central America.
The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass will deform spacetime to form a black hole.
File:NGC 406 Hubble WikiSky.jpg|Image of the NGC 406 galaxy from the Hubble Space Telescope
Black evening dress is still worn at many solemn occasions or ceremonies, from graduations to formal balls.
In the Roman Empire, it became the color of mourning, and over the centuries it was frequently associated with death, evil, witches and magic.
File:BenedictineVespers.jpg|Modern-day monks of the Order of Saint Benedict in New Jersey
The cloth had to be dyed several times to darken the color.
Thus, there is not enough light to undergo Rayleigh scattering and make the sky blue.
The dye was very expensive;  a great quantity of gall-nuts were needed for a very small amount of dye.
It became the color worn by English romantic poets, businessmen and statesmen in the 19th century, and a high fashion color in the 20th century.
File:Jan Polack - Portrait of a Benedictine Monk - WGA18020.jpg|Portrait of a monk of the Benedictine Order  (1484)
Gall-nuts were also used for making fine black writing ink.
The vampire of literature and films, such as Count Dracula of the Bram Stoker novel,  dressed in black, and could only move at night.
I tried to replace black with a mixture of red and blue, I tried using cobalt blue or ultramarine, but I always came back to ivory black."
Thus, the best radiative cooling, out of sunlight, is by using black paint, though it is important that it be black (a nearly perfect absorber) in the infrared as well.
File:George-Henry-Boughton-Pilgrims-Going-To-Church.jpg|American Pilgrims in New England going to church (painting by George Henry Boughton, 1867)
They used natural plant dyes and minerals such as graphite ground with water and applied with an ink brush.
In Medieval paintings, the devil was usually depicted as having human form, but with wings and black skin or hair.
This created magnificent red figures against a glossy black background.
In the 1950s, black came to be a symbol of individuality and intellectual and social rebellion, the color of those who didn't accept established norms and values.
File:Duccio di Buoninsegna 040.jpg|The Italian painter Duccio di Buoninsegna showed Christ expelling the Devil, shown covered with bristly black hair (1308–11).
They were the root of the English words "atrocious" and "atrocity".
File:Flag of Jihad.svg|Variants of the Black Standard flag are used by many militant Islamist groups that have adopted militant interpretations of jihad.
By 1846 the industrial area of the West Midlands of England was "commonly called 'the Black Country'”.
By the end of the 16th century, it was the color worn by almost all the monarchs of Europe and their courts.
* Black sky refers to the appearance of space as one emerges from Earth's atmosphere.
In the early Middle Ages, princes, nobles and the wealthy usually wore bright colors, particularly scarlet cloaks from Italy.
'''Black''' is the darkest color, the result of the absence or complete absorption of light.
In ''Mein Kampf'', Hitler explained that they were "revered colors expressive of our homage to the glorious past."
(See history above).
In the social hierarchy of ancient Rome, purple was the color reserved for the Emperor; red was the color worn by soldiers (red cloaks for the officers, red tunics for the soldiers); white the color worn by the priests, and black was worn by craftsmen and artisans.
If appropriate proportions of three primary pigments are mixed, the result reflects so little light as to be called "black".
Charcoal, along with red and yellow ochre, was one of the first pigments used by Paleolithic man.
In Medieval Flanders, in a ceremony called ''Kattenstoet,'' black cats were thrown from the belfry of the Cloth Hall of Ypres to ward off witchcraft.
A black costume was usually chosen as part of their image or stage persona, or because it did not distract from the music, or sometimes for a political reason.
India ink (or '''Indian ink''' in British English) is a black ink once widely used for writing and printing and now more commonly used for drawing, especially when inking comic books and comic strips.
File:Flag of Estonia.svg|Flag of Estonia (1918).
*Ivory black, also known as bone char, was originally produced by burning ivory and mixing the resulting charcoal powder with oil.
It is also associated with disorder, including the positive disorder which leads to change and new life.
File:Edouard Manet - Berthe Morisot With a Bouquet of Violets - Google Art Project.jpg|''Berthe Morisot with a Bouquet of Violets'', by Édouard Manet (1872).
Black was rarely part of the wardrobe of a noble family.
File:Rembrandt van Rijn - Self-Portrait - Google Art Project.jpg|Rembrandt Van Rijn, ''Self-portrait'' (1659)
A third reason was the passage of sumptuary laws in some parts of Europe which prohibited the wearing of costly clothes and certain colors by anyone except members of the nobility.
The Italian designer Gianni Versace said, "Black is the quintessence of simplicity and elegance," and French designer Yves Saint Laurent said, "black is the liaison which connects art and fashion.
It moved to England at the end of the reign of King Richard II (1377–1399), where all the court began to wear black.
"Black is a force: I used black as ballast to simplify the construction&nbsp;...
By the end of the 20th century, black was the emblematic color of the punk subculture punk fashion, and the goth subculture.
In 1949 the Federal Republic of Germany returned to the original flag and colors of the students and professors of 1815, which is the flag of Germany today.
Similar fine blacks were made by burning the pits of the peach, cherry or apricot.
File:Gisele Bundchen4.jpg|Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen at the Fashion Rio Inverno 2006.
Iron gall ink (also known as iron gall nut ink or oak gall ink) was a purple-black or brown-black ink made from iron salts and tannic acids from gall nut.
File:Akhilleus Aias MGEt 16757.jpg|Greek black-figure pottery.
In 1419–20, black became the color of the powerful Duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good.
More recently the black triangle has been adopted as a symbol in lesbian culture and by disabled activists.
Its main industrial uses are as a colorant for lacquers and varnishes and in marker-pen inks.
File:Joshua Bell Indiana University cropped.jpg|American violinist Joshua Bell wears black on stage.
Light (electromagnetic radiation in the visible spectrum) interacts with the atoms and molecules, which causes the energy of the light to be converted into other forms of energy, usually heat.
"When I didn't know what color to put down, I put down black," he said in 1945.
In Protestant doctrine, clothing was required to be sober, simple and discreet.
It was worn at court by those who wanted to set themselves apart from the established powers or who had renounced material possessions.
In contrast, across much of Africa and parts of Asia like Vietnam, white is a color of mourning and is worn during funerals.
Only when the Han Dynasty appeared in 206 AD was red restored as the imperial color.
It is commonly used in water-colors and oil painting.
Blue light is scattered more than other colors, and reaches the eye in greater quantities, making the daytime sky look blue.
File:Black cat eyes.jpg|Black cats have been accused for centuries of being the familiar spirits of witches or of bringing bad luck.
They began by using charcoal, and then made more vivid black pigments by burning bones or grinding a powder of manganese oxide.
The Lützow Free Corps, composed of volunteer German students and academics fighting against Napoleon in 1813, could not afford to make special uniforms and therefore adopted black, as the only color that could be used to dye their civilian clothing without the original color showing.
Later, under the Empire, the family of the deceased also wore dark colors for a long period; then, after a banquet to mark the end of mourning, exchanged the black for a white toga.
It moved to Spain, where it became the color of the Spanish Habsburgs, of Charles V and of his son, Philip II of Spain (1527–1598).
File:Édith Piaf 914-6438.jpg|French singer Edith Piaf always wore black on stage.
(See political movements.)
In the 19th century gradually black became the most popular color of business dress of the upper and middle classes in England, the Continent, and America.
File:Supreme Court US 2009.jpg|The United States Supreme Court (2009)
