in area) is on the outskirts of the town.
The council until recently had two members for the England First party, Mark Cotterill for Meadowhead ward and Michael Johnson for Fernhurst.
;Nationalists / Localists
This equates to roughly 45,500 people within Blackburn with Darwen being of a black minority ethnic group.
However, in January 2009 the directors of the company announced that the shop would close following a 30-day statutory consultation, unless they change their mind or a buyer is found.
The club was established in 1875, becoming a founder member of The Football League in 1888.
B. has been associated with many improvements in the mfr.
A tower block extension was constructed in 1969 at a cost of £650,000, equal to about £6.6&nbsp;million as at 2008.
You can never say they won't put candidates in Blackburn but we will work hard on community relations."
However, as powerlooms were introduced into the mills after 1825, the percentage of handloom weavers began to decline and this occurred more rapidly in areas closer to the town.
''John Bartholomew's Gazetteer of the British Isles'' provides a profile of Blackburn in 1887:
Although children’s services, adult social care and GCSE results were praised, the commission did highlight "significant health problems" and increased "levels of repeat victims of domestic violence" as causes for concern.
Commenting on the elections, Blackburn MP Jack Straw said: "It is very sad.
Despite the post-war boom, the cotton industry continued to decline and only 25%&nbsp;of the town's population were employed in textiles by 1951; this : this figure had stood at 60% up to the beginning of the Great Depression in 1929.
Blackburn has had significant investment and redevelopment since 1958 through government funding and the European Regional Development Fund.
There are several fine churches and public buildings.
It first opened on this site in 1964, where there was a 3-day market (Wednesday, Friday, Saturday) and the Market Hall (Monday-Saturday).
Textile manufacturing in Blackburn dates from the mid-13th&nbsp;century, when wool produced locally by farmers was woven in their homes.
Blackburn's Boulevard bus station (closed 2010) was located outside the train station.
After his conviction, the police destroyed all fingerprints they had taken.
The 2005 British film ''Love + Hate'', directed by Dominic Savage, was shot in Blackburn.
In 1890 Rovers moved to its permanent home ground at Ewood Park.
In 1990 Nick Broomfield returned to Blackburn to film a follow up.
By 1960 there were 30&nbsp;mills operating in Blackburn.
Manchester Airport, the busiest airport in the UK outside London, is about  to the southeast of the town.
Barbara Castle Way (named after the former Blackburn MP) runs from Montague Street to Eanam Roundabout, passing close to the town centre, the road is part of the A6078 town centre orbital route.
The A666 runs from the A59 near the village of Langho, approximately  to the north-west of Blackburn.
In the political arena, William Henry Hornby, a leading industrialist, the first mayor of Blackburn, and Chairman of the Conservative Party was born in the town in 1805.
The towns annual Armistice parade concludes at the war memorial.
A large amount of their film stock, some 800 negatives, was found in their old premises on Northgate in 1994 and is now in the safekeeping of the British Film Institute.
Thwaites Brewery, which produces cask ale, has had a position in the centre of the town since 1870.
The foundation stone of the Technical School building was laid on 9 May 1888 by the Prince and Princess of Wales; the building was completed towards the end of 1894.
During the 12th&nbsp;century, the town's importance declined as Clitheroe became the regional centre.
A former mill town, textiles have been produced in Blackburn since the middle of the 13th century, when wool was woven in people's houses in the domestic system.
The adjacent Townsmoor Retail Park and Peel Leisure and Retail Park are more recent developments.
Over £25 million was invested in educational initiatives in Blackburn with Darwen in the late 2000s, including new schools, city learning centres and children's centres.
After 1775, spinning mills were built in the town.
Blackburn Northern Cricket Club state they have recently leased the Ribchester Cricket Ground for their matches.
The town does not have a university, but some higher education courses are provided by the East Lancashire Institute of Higher Education (ELIHE), which provides degree-levels courses for students over the age of 18.
Archaeologists found that nearly half of the bodies were those of young children, who appeared to have died quickly during the mid-19th century from illnesses affected the lungs and gastrointestinal system.
A new interchange was built outside the station as part of the Cathedral Quarter redevelopment where all buses continue to Blackburn Bus Station.
The architect was James Paterson and the contractors were Richard Hacking and William Stones.
The arena is the home of the Blackburn Hawks and Lancashire Raptors ice hockey teams, both of which play in the English National Ice Hockey League.
Whalley Range in the north was a popular destination for Asian immigrants, who make up the majority of the district's population.
After finishing runners-up to regional arch rivals Manchester United in 1993–1994, Rovers won the English Premier League the following year.
It passes through the town centre and continues south through the towns of Darwen and Bolton then south-west to the town of Pendlebury, near Manchester, where the road joins the A6 at Irlams o' th' Height.
The crowd began to disperse at around 6:00&nbsp;pm, troops having arrived at 3:30&nbsp;pm to try to quell the rioting.
51.3% of pupils achieve grades A*-C in Blackburn with Darwen compared with 56.5% nationally.
The Victorian filmmakers Mitchell and Kenyon were based in Blackburn in the early 20th century.
Made mainly of red brick and yellow terracotta, it is profusely decorated and features ornate gables, a round arched entrance with angle turrets and balcony above, and a frieze below the top storey with panels depicting art and craft skills.
The route of the road passed east of Blackburn Cathedral and probably crossed the river in the Salford neighbourhood just east of the modern town centre.
This caused the number of stopped mills to increase to 47, with 43,000&nbsp;looms lying idle.
In addition, there were deposits of iron ore in the Furness and Ulverston districts.
The tower block is not strictly an extension to the earlier building: the two buildings are connected only by an elevated, enclosed footbridge.
At the 1955 general election, Blackburn East and Blackburn West were merged into the modern-day constituency which is relatively tightly-formed and returns a single MP.
In 18th&nbsp;century Blackburn, weaving was primarily undertaken by handloom weavers working from their own cottages.
The previous market was based on the other side of Ainsworth Street.
The Leeds and Liverpool Canal runs through Blackburn from Feniscowles in the SW to Whitebirk in the NE, skirting the town centre to the east of Blackburn railway station.
The Wainwright Bridge was opened in June 2008.
The next resurgence of support for the far right came after 2000.
The Coal Measures in the area overlie the Millstone Grit which has been quarried in the past for millstones and, along with local limestone deposits, used as a construction material for roads and buildings.
The coat of arms of the former Blackburn Borough Council has many distinctive emblems.
It is not clear whether the road predated the settlement.
Numerous business parks exist in and around the town.
Two additional bowling greens and a pavilion were added in 1932.
In 1976 there were 2,100&nbsp;looms in operation in the town, compared with 79,405 in 1907.
Blackburn has an Olympic-sized ice rink housed at the 3,200-seat Blackburn Arena.
The average GCE/VCE A/AS and Equivalent Point Score per Student is 649.7 compared with 716.7 nationally.
Other major roads in and around Blackburn include the A666 and the A677.
The merchants arranged for cloth to be bleached and dyed.
The borough has Beacon Council status and shares its best practice in education policy with other councils as part of the scheme.
Although some towns in the North of England suffered race riots in the summer of 2001, the streets of Blackburn were undisturbed and the disturbance of the Summer 2011 riots was minimal.
St Anne's Roman Catholic Church is also situated in the centre of the town, is a Lombard Romanesque church, built in 1926, destroyed by arson in 2002 and rebuilt in 2004.
A conservatory was opened in the park on 16 May 1900.
In 1926 the Diocese of Blackburn was created and the church gained cathedral status.
Blackburn had two council members from the National Party in the 1970s.
This led to high rates of unemployment: according to figures published in March 1826, some 60% of all handloom weavers in Blackburn and Rishton, Lower Darwen and Oswaldtwistle were unemployed.
Previous MPs for Blackburn include former Labour cabinet minister Barbara Castle, who represented the town in Westminster from 1945 to 1979.
They then turned their attention to John Houghton and Sons' Park Place factory, located nearby, and destroyed another 25 looms, before seeking more machinery to attack.
'''Blackburn'''  is a large town in Lancashire, England.
Archaeological evidence from the demolition of the medieval parish church on the site of the cathedral in 1820 suggests that a church was built during the late 11th or early 12th century.
The TV show Hetty Wainthropp Investigates, screened on BBC One from 1996 to 1998, included many scenes shot in Blackburn.
It joins the A59 about  west of Blackburn, approximately halfway between Blackburn and Preston.
The statue is  high and weighs , while the plinth is  high and weighs .
Blackburn was a boomtown of the Industrial Revolution and amongst the first industrialised towns in the world.
Blackburn has smaller libraries serving the Mill Hill, Livesey and Roman Road parts of the town, as well as a mobile library service.
By 1650 the town was known for the manufacture of blue and white "Blackburn checks", and "Blackburn greys" became famous not long afterwards.
Blackburn with Darwen council has twice had Beacon Status for education in the "Fostering School Improvement" and "Transforming the School Workforce" categories.
Early mills were warehouse conversions; the first purpose-built spinning mill was constructed in 1797 and by 1824 there were 24.
By the start of 1930, 50&nbsp;mills had shut and 21,000&nbsp;people were unemployed.
Junction six of the motorway is located at the eastern edge of Blackburn, near the Intack area; junctions five and four are located to the south, near the village of Guide and the Lower Darwen area respectively; and junction three is located at the south-western edge of the town, close to the Feniscowles area.
But there the whole community decided they wouldn't have it.
The station was renovated in 2000.
Blackburn experiences a temperate maritime climate, like much of the British Isles, with relatively cool summers and mild winters.
The bridge is named after Alfred Wainwright following a vote by the townspeople.
The last handloom shop in Blackburn closed in 1894.
Football League Championship Football side Blackburn Rovers is based at the Ewood Park stadium.
John Morley, 1st Viscount Morley of Blackburn, OM, PC, Liberal statesman, writer and newspaper editor was born in the town in 1838.
Blackburn Arena, which houses an ice rink and is home to the Blackburn Hawks ice hockey team, opened in 1991.
Blackburn with Darwen forms a unitary authority.
Members of the BNP have previously won a council seat in the town in November 2002 following elections in May which saw three of their colleagues elected in nearby Burnley.
The school has been a success in school league tables, with 82% of pupils gaining five or more GCSEs at grade C or above in 2007, compared to the national average of 46.7%.
The incumbent Liberal Democrats were pushed into third place behind Labour.
Handloom weavers continued to make up a sizable portion of the workforce in outlying rural areas.
The Mall Blackburn (formerly known as Blackburn Shopping Centre) is the main shopping centre in Blackburn with over 130&nbsp;shops and 400&nbsp;further outlets close by.
Walsh's Sarsaparilla stall decided not to move into the new market development.
The numbers are taken as reflecting the massive increase in the city's population during that period due to its booming textile industry, which led to unhealthy living situations among the working classes.
The number of spindles reached 2.5&nbsp;million&nbsp; by 1870 and spinning mills were constructed up to that time – 24 since 1850.
The sitting MP is former Secretary of State for Justice and former Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw.
Improvements in powerloom efficiency meant that weaving, the primary source of wealth and income for handloom weavers, began to transfer from the cottage industry to factories.
91,958; bor., 6974 ac., pop.
The town's oldest store, Mercer & Sons, also closed after a decline in sales blamed on the credit crunch.
In common with other towns in the UK, Blackburn has seen an increase in the number of immigrants from Eastern Europe, many of whom have settled into the community and opened businesses.
The 2001 census also records the social grade of the constituency's 72,418&nbsp;people aged 16&nbsp;and over: using the NRS social grades system, 10,748&nbsp;were classed as AB (higher and intermediate managerial / administrative / professional), 17,514&nbsp;as C1 (supervisory, clerical, junior managerial / administrative / professional), 11,691&nbsp;as C2 (skilled manual workers), 19,212&nbsp;as D (semi-skilled and unskilled manual workers), and 13,253&nbsp;as E (on state benefit, unemployed, lowest grade workers).
With regard to the economic activity of those aged 16–74, the 2001 Census indicates that 33.93% were full-time employees (average for England 40.81%), 11.72% were part-time employees, 5.97% were self-employed (average for England 8.32%), and 4.5% were unemployed (average for England 3.35%).
The manor came into the possession of Henry de&nbsp;Blackburn, who divided it between his two sons.
In terms of religion, 57.53% of residents were Christian (average for England 71.74%), 25.74% Muslim (average for England 3.1%) and 15.98% no religion or not stated.
A section of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal runs through the town.
An article in the ''Daily Mail'' about a plan to fill potholes in the town caught John Lennon's eye as he was writing the song, giving birth to the lyric "I read the news today, oh boy / 4,000 holes in Blackburn, Lancashire / And though the holes were rather small / They had to count them all / Now they know how many holes it takes to fill the Albert Hall."
In 1908, another slump saw 43 mills stop production and a quarter of the town's looms lay idle.
Between the 1930s and 1960s an enlarged cathedral was built using the existing building as the nave.
At  (53.7449°, −2.4769°), and  north-northwest of London, Blackburn stands  above sea level,  east of Preston and  north-northeast of Manchester.
In the 1970s Blackburn experienced its first significant wave of Asian immigration, and became a focus for far-right politics.
The Ribble Valley and West Pennine Moors lie to the north and south respectively.
The M65 links Blackburn to the national motorway network, connecting to junction nine of the M61 and junction 29 of the M6.
Juvenile Liaison 2 revisits some of the residents from the first film, in some sort of attempt to measure the success of the scheme.
A financial crisis in 1931 led to 24,000&nbsp;unemployed, with 1,000&nbsp;houses and 166&nbsp;shops lying empty in the town.
The tower block was  high and the top was   above sea-level when built, although it has since been re-clad and these figures may have altered slightly.
In 1976, two National Party councillors were briefly elected, including John Kingsley Read.
At 3:00&nbsp;pm on 24 April 1826 a mob arrived in Blackburn after attacking powerlooms in Accrington.
It depicts eight famous faces associated with the town, including Mohandas Gandhi, who visited nearby Darwen in 1931.
A market cross was also erected nearby in 1101.
The presence of a sacred spring—perhaps in use during the Iron Age—provides evidence of prehistoric activity in the town centre, at All Hallows Spring on Railway Road.
The town's Queen's Park was opened in June 1887, having been laid out at a cost of £10,000 on land acquired by Blackburn Corporation from the Ecclesiastical Commissioners in 1882.
In 2007, all four parks described above were winners of Green Flag awards.
There are also factories for making cotton machinery and steam-engines.
Blackburn Cathedral was formerly St Mary's Parish Church.
It runs from Colne, about  north-east of Blackburn, to a point close to the village of Lostock Hall near Preston, about  to the west.
St Mary's was reconsecrated in 1826 on the site of the previous church that had stood for several hundred years.
British Waterways residential moorings are to be found at Finnington Lane Bridge on the western edge of the borough.
Blackpool International Airport, about  to the west, is Blackburn's nearest airport.
Almost two years later, on 18 November 1995, the newly redeveloped Ewood Park was officially opened.
An ICT training suite at the library has been named the "Bill Gates Room".
A memorial service conducted by Julian Henderson, the Bishop of Blackburn, for those being re-buried was scheduled to be held during the summer of 2016.
The road linked Bremetennacum Veteranorum (Ribchester) and Mamucium (a major Roman fort that occupied Castlefield in Manchester).
One of the town's most well-known shops, the shoe store Tommy Ball's, closed in May 2008 after going into administration.
An image of the cathedral is used behind BBC interviews held in Blackburn, which are filmed at BBC Radio Lancashire on Darwen Street, opposite the cathedral.
A trade park, ''Drumstone Trade Park'' near the town centre, has trade outlets.
Since then Tauheedul Islam Boys' High School has been established and Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School joined the state-funded sector.
Griffiths admitted his guilt and his trial ascertained if he was sane or not.
The markets continue to offer a wide range of local produce—Lancashire cheeses, tripe, Bowland beef and lamb can all be found.
The remains were to be relocated to another section of the cemetery.
Blackburn's textile sector fell into terminal decline from the mid-20th century and subsequently faced similar challenges to other post-industrial northern towns, including deindustrialisation, economic deprivation and housing issues.
The title of the unofficial fanzine of the town's football club, Blackburn Rovers, is ''4,000 Holes''.
It opened in 1840 and was originally an ironmonger but the public store converted to selling toys, household goods and hardware.
The college is celebrating its 125th anniversary in 2013.
Mark Cotterill has since stood down and Michael Johnson joined the For Darwen party.
Although the plans had been blocked by the time of the poll, proposals to convert a nursing home in the ward into a centre for asylum seekers were seen as a key election issue.
The geology of the Blackburn area yields numerous resources which underpinned its development as a centre of manufacturing during the Industrial Revolution.
The land was purchased in 1946 and was the ancestral home of the Feilden family.
Supplied with cotton by merchants, and paid by the piece, cottagers spun cotton into thread and wove it into cloth.
Blackburn was recorded in the Domesday Book as Blacheborne in 1086.
St Thomas's and Sunnyhurst Pupil Referral Unit educates children who are unable to attend mainstream school for health reasons or other difficulties.
The town centre was expanded by construction of the Grimshaw Park retail development (including Blackburn Arena) in the 1990s.
Within Corporation Park is the Blackburn War Memorial which commemorates people who lost their lives in World War I and World War II.
Suspension of trade with India during the First World War resulted in the expansion of colonial British India's cotton industry at the expense of Britain's, and the imposition of an 11%&nbsp;import tariff by the colonial British Government led to a dramatic slump in trade in 1921, a situation which worsened in 1922 after the Indian Government raised the tariff to 14%.
Blackburn council and its successor have been predominantly controlled by the Labour Party since 1945 and continuously for 19&nbsp;years until May 2007 when it fell into no overall control.
A Corporation Park (50 ac.
Roe Lee Park, in the north of the town, was opened on Wednesday 30 May 1923 and was intended to commemorate the visit of George V. It was originally a  site with five tennis courts and three bowling greens.
The £12&nbsp;million bowstring arch bridge crosses the East Lancashire and Ribble Valley railway lines west of the town centre and forms part of the A6078 Town Centre Orbital Route.
Witton Park High School is located within the park, as are three astroturf football pitches and a full-size athletic track, which is home to the Blackburn Harriers.
Two years into the slump, Foundry and Limbrick Mills became the first to close permanently.
Proceeding to Bannister Eccles' Jubilee Factory on Jubilee Street, the mob destroyed 212&nbsp;powerlooms in the space of 35&nbsp;minutes.
This segregation has been identified as a problem for racial integration within the town.
By 1955 more cloth was imported from India than was exported and between 1955 and 1958 another 16&nbsp;mills closed.
Blackburn is mentioned in the Beatles' song "A Day in the Life".
In 2002 they won the League Cup.
Witton Country Park is a  space to the west of the town.
Blackburn railway station features a  mural by Ormskirk-based contemporary artist Stephen Charnock.
There is little evidence of prehistoric settlement in the Blakewater valley, in which Blackburn developed.
Blackburn is administered by Blackburn with Darwen unitary authority, which encompasses Blackburn and the small town of Darwen to the south.
The town also has a few special schools.
Work on the current, redeveloped, all-seater stadium got underway in February 1993 when the old Darwen End stand was demolished.
Fingerprints on a bottle underneath her cot led the police to fingerprint every male over the age of 16 who was present in Blackburn on 14 and 15 May 1948.
After deliberating for 23 minutes, the jury found him sane and he was hanged at Liverpool Prison on Friday 19 November 1948.
According to further statistics from the same census, this time defining Blackburn as a Westminster parliamentary constituency, the population was 69.22% White British (national average for England 89.99%) with significant Indian (14.31%) and Pakistani (11.45%) ethnic minorities.
The blazon of the arms is: ''Argent a Fesse wavy Sable between three Bees volant proper on a Chief Vert a Bugle stringed Argent between two Fusils Or.
Around 20% of Blackburn's population come from ethnic minorities and in recent years the town has witnessed a resurgence in the fortunes of far-right political parties in local elections.
In 1975 documentary film maker Nick Broomfield made Juvenile Liaison about a juvenile liaison project in the town.
Flemish weavers who settled in the area in the 14th century developed the industry.
Over 11,000 adults are taking part in some form of educational programme.
It is larger than all the town's other parks and playing fields put together.
Mineable coal seams have been used since the mid-late 16th&nbsp;century.
This important early industrial artery arrived in the town in 1810 and became the chief focus for industrial growth in the 19th century, with raw cotton imported via Liverpool.
The borough council's website describes the park as a  "urban fringe park with bowling greens, kick around area and children's playground".
The construction of Blackburn's original, Italian renaissance style town hall was completed in 1856 at a cost of £35,000, equivalent to about £1.5&nbsp;million as at 2008.
It has been suggested that it may be a combination of an Old English word for bleach, together with a form of the word "burn", meaning stream, and may be associated with a bleaching process.
The ground was officially opened in AprIl 1882.
After its production, the film was banned by the BFI for many years; Juvenile Liaison revolved mainly around the activities of Sergeant Ray, whose preventative measures when dealing with young trouble makers fell mainly in the strong-arm category of approach.
The two further education colleges in the town are Blackburn College and the sixth-form St. Mary's College.
