The Pleasure Beach's Horseshoe Show Bar was home to professional wrestling events throughout the season.
An extension of the new service to Blackpool North Railway Station is planned to open by April 2019.
Booths such as these had been a foundation stone of the professional wrestling industry since the 19th century – Barron's booth is reputed to have been the last of its kind in the world.
Their home is in the grounds of Stanley Park, which also hosts Lancashire County Cricket Club.
Albattikhi allegedly boasted that he had sold her remains in kebabs.
No plaque is erected to remember the injured or dead.
Vickers assembled many Wellington bombers here and Beaufighters were repaired for the RAF.
Songwriters Christopher Wadsworth and Daniel Leicester of pop/punk outfit Three-Quarters (band) were born in Blackpool
In April 2012, the tramway reopened after the major reconstruction.
TVR formerly produced sports cars at its Bispham factory.
In the 1990s, the town began to be promoted as a gay tourist destination.
Ultimately, Manchester was selected for the initial trial by the Government's Casinos Advisory Panel.
Blackpool has a pioneering publicly owned ''Municipal wireless network'', Wi-Fi which covers the entire town centre & promenade & beach front.
The five-man group bungled the raid on Preston's Jewellers in the Strand.
Other Christian groups in the town include Blackpool Baptist Tabernacle, Blackpool Christian Centre, Blackpool Community Church, Kings Christian Centre, Liberty Church, (Metropolitan Community Church) and New Life Community Church.
The town expanded southward beyond what is today known as the Golden Mile, towards South Shore, and South Pier was completed in 1893, making Blackpool the only town in the United Kingdom with three piers.
In 2006 Lion Television filmed ''The Great British Summer'', which featured many iconic buildings in Blackpool.
The ban was lifted forty-four years later in March 2008.
Blackpool, Blackpool Wren Rovers and Squires Gate.
Holiday'' found that Blackpool Airport was the favourite among its members in a major independent survey.
Formed in Blackpool in 1963, The Rockin' Vickers were a rock and roll beat combo most notable for featuring Ian "Lemmy" Kilmister, then known as Ian Willis, later of Hawkwind and more famously Motörhead, as a guitarist.
They won the Lancashire Cup on eight occasions between 1973 and 1996 and were League Champions fourteen times.
The Membranes who featured John Robb initially set up their own Vinyl Drip record label in 1981 before achieving three indie top 20 hits from 1984–86, reaching number 6 in John Peel's Festive Fifty in 1984 and making a pre-recorded appearance on Channel 4 rock show The Tube.
The synagogue closed in May 2012 due to a declining orthodox Jewish population, the last minister Rabbi David Braunold having retired in 2011.
303 Polish Fighter Squadron was formed in Blackpool, and became the most successful Fighter Command unit shooting down 126 German machines in only 42 days during the Battle of Britain.
Thousands of competitors run on the closed Promenade, organised by Fylde Coast Runners.
The government contributed £60.3m of the total £85.3m cost.
On 1 April 1998, however, Blackpool was made a unitary authority and re-formed as an autonomous local government unit.
Blackpool has played host to the Punk rock Rebellion Festival, an annual event which after a couple of intervening years in nearby Morecambe made its permanent home in Blackpool.
There are other, smaller football clubs located within Blackpool, including A.F.C.
The decline of the textile industry led to a de-emphasis of the traditional week-long break, known as wakes week.
The hangars from the old airport are still in use as the elephant enclosure for the zoo.
The illuminations extended the holiday season into September and early October.
The absolute maximum temperature recorded at Blackpool was  during July 1976.
Several double deck 'Balloon' trams from the older fleet have been widened to work alongside the new trams to provide additional capacity in the summer months.
In 1885 one of the world's first electric tramways was laid down as a conduit line running from Cocker Street to Dean Street on the Promenade.
Between 1904 and 1974, Blackpool formed a county borough independent of the administrative county of Lancashire.
Blackpool Symphony Orchestra was founded by Percy Dayman in 1920.
In medieval times Blackpool emerged as a few farmsteads on the coast within Layton-with-Warbreck, the name coming from "le pull", a stream that drained Marton Mere and Marton Moss into the sea close to what is now Manchester Square.
Local radio is provided by Radio Wave, a commercial radio station based on Mowbray Drive in Blackpool which covers the Fylde Coast area.
*Bonny Street Market
In 1879, it became the first municipality in the world to have electric street lighting, as large parts of the promenade were wired.
The Pleasure Beach was first established about this time.
In 1899 the conduit system was replaced by overhead wires.
'''Blackpool'''  is a seaside resort and unitary authority area in Lancashire, England, on England's northwest coast.
Famously, in 1897, HMS ''Foudroyant'', Nelson's flagship before HMS ''Victory'', was grounded close to North Pier in a storm.
Consumer champion ''Which?
The National Union of Students last held its Annual Conference in Blackpool in 2009; they will now be hosted by the Sage Gateshead.
Since this decision, Blackpool's council and MPs have lobbied Parliament extensively, claiming their bid was misunderstood.
However, they eventually folded after leaving the town in 1987.
The town went into decline when cheap air travel arrived in the 1960s and the same workers decamped to the Mediterranean coastal resorts due to competitive prices and the more reliable weather.
The radio station broadcasts on 96.5FM and is owned by media company UTV.
The 'Young Farmers' convention has been held regularly in Blackpool since the late 1960s.
Airlines that served Blackpool before its temporary closure in late 2014 included Jet2.com and Aer Arran.
Much of Blackpool's growth and character from the 1870s on was predicated on the town's pioneering use of electrical power.
The same act also provided for the layout of a number of long straight roads that would be built in the areas south of the town centre, such as Lytham Road, St. Annes Road, Watson Road and Highfield Road.
This practice continued until 1938 when the nearby Winter Gardens Opera House was constructed.
The success of the Grand continued through World War I and on until the 1930s.
£1&nbsp;million of public investment is helping to improve the public realm and act as a catalyst for the regeneration of South Shore.
A few amenities, including four hotels, an archery stall and bowling greens, were developed, and the town grew slowly.
The band continued to play until 1978 when they disbanded with the onset of punk.
When Barry Lights relocated his Lightbeat record label from Leeds to Blackpool in 1981, the label's first Blackpool signing was electronic rock band Zoo Boutique.
*The Blackpool Tower Dungeon
Holiday'' (now ''Which?
Blackpool, like other English resorts, has had a reputation for being a safe community for gay people.
Their home ground is Norbreck Rugby Ground.
Blackpool's population boom was complete by 1951, by which time some 147,000 people were living in the town – compared to 47,000 in 1901 and a mere 14,000 in 1881.
Each supplies a variety of music broadcast throughout the world 24-hours a day.
After a gap, it has been active from the 1930s to mid 2014 and from December 2014 to date.
The opening line of Soft Cell's 1982 ''"Say Hello, Wave Goodbye"'' hit (later a hit for David Gray in 1998) "Standing at the door of the Pink Flamingo, Crying in the rain" is a reference to Blackpool's famous gay nightclub The Flamingo.
* Fylde Community Radio for the Fylde Borough, who are aiming for a FM licence for 2013, available on line.
In March 2010 it was confirmed that a deal had been made between Blackpool Council and Leisure Parcs to purchase some of Blackpool's most notable landmarks.
The town's professional football club is Blackpool F.C., who have spent 31 seasons in the top division and won the 1953 FA Cup Final.
Simply scratch off the silver panel on the voucher and enter the individual Username and Password into the relevant boxes on the Wireless Blackpool landing page.
Now displayed in the Harris Museum this provided the first evidence of humans living on the Fylde as far back as the Palaeolithic era.
Supt Richardson was posthumously awarded the George Cross in 1972.
A number of bands from Blackpool achieved a level of success during the punk and post-punk era.
On 29 March 2007, the Advisory Panel's recommendations were approved by the House of Commons, but rejected by the House of Lords, meaning the bill would be reconsidered by parliament.
These were promoted by Bobby Baron.
If the jury at that trial had swallowed the lies and been duped by the manipulation then a grave miscarriage of justice would have occurred."
It remains part of Lancashire for ceremonial purposes, however.
By the middle of the 18th century, the practice of sea bathing to cure diseases was becoming fashionable among the wealthier classes, and visitors began making the arduous trek to Blackpool for that purpose.
It was also announced that the Tower would be run by Merlin Entertainments Group (who run the London Eye) as well as it seeing a programme of repairs totalling £10m, the first phase was scheduled to be complete for the 2011 season.
MMA fighters Leeroy Barnes who fights out of Cage Warriors, Shak Khan who is also a Pro wrestler/Street (Shoot) fighter and Karl Etherington the son of Judo champ Bill Etherington are also from Blackpool.
The original pass included visits to Merlin Entertainments attractions and Blackpool Pleasure Beach.
Blackpool tramway runs from Starr Gate in Blackpool to Fleetwood and is the only surviving first-generation tramway in the United Kingdom.
It is linked to the Interfaith Network of UK.
The Talbot Gateway is a planned £285m civic quarter, for which international project management specialist AMEC has been chosen to transform a currently rundown area around Blackpool North railway station into what Blackpool Council hope will be a world-class gateway with new office and retail space as well as a public square, dubbed the Talbot Plaza.
The economy, however, remains relatively undiversified, and firmly rooted in the tourism sector.
Some though had 9th and 10th century Viking place names.
In 1602, entries in Bispham Parish Church baptismal register include both ''Poole'' and for the first time ''blackpoole''.
* Radio Vibe (Blackpool Fylde & Wyre), an online music service only.
These challenges would be taken by shooters: wrestlers skilled in the brutal submission holds of Catch Wrestling, which they could deploy to defend the prize money even against skilled amateur wrestlers.
In 1781, Thomas Clifton and Sir Henry Hoghton built a private road to Blackpool, and a regular stagecoach service from Manchester and Halifax was established.
The number of annual visitors, many staying for a week, was estimated at three million.
The Blackpool Faith Forum was established in 2001 in conjunction with Blackpool Council to provide interfaith dialogue between the various faith groups in the town, to raise awareness of the various faiths in the town and to promote a multifaith community.
In 1937, Littlewoods opened its first department store in the town.
Early in the campaign a survey indicated 95% of Blackpool residents would prefer non-gambling related regeneration.
In 1999, Stuart Michael Diamond was convicted of the brutal murder of a homeless 17-year-old heroin addict, Christopher Hartley.
By 1920, Blackpool claimed around eight million visitors per year, three times as many as its nearest British rivals, still drawn largely from the mill towns of East Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire.
In 1863, the North Pier was completed, rapidly becoming a centre of attraction for elite visitors.
Blackpool rose to prominence as a major centre of tourism in England when a railway was built in the 1840s connecting it to the industrialised regions of Northern England.
Blackpool Cricket Club are Blackpool's major cricketing team; they won the League Cup in 2013, and were National Champions in 1990.
Regeneration work was completed in July 2009 on Waterloo Road in South Shore that transformed the area into a modern shopping centre.
Blackpool Gay Radio provides a part-time radio service catering for the local gay community featuring a mix of music, local features, news and celebrity interviews.
The project was conceived and financed by local theatre manager Thomas Sergenson who had been using the site of the Grand for several years to stage a circus.
The airfield closed in 1947.
However, there are now a number of other tramways, including Manchester Metrolink, South London Tramlink, Nottingham Express Transit and Sheffield Supertram.
This has recently been redeveloped with the opening of a new Debenhams department store along with other major high street names.
A 13,500-year-old elk skeleton was found with man-made barbed bone points (probably from spears) on Blackpool Old Road in Carleton in 1970.
By the 1890s, the town had a population of 35,000, and could accommodate 250,000 holidaymakers.
An 'orrible day, we got drunk on the way And spent our money on chips and bingo...") and Mike Harding's single ''"Talking Blackpool Blues"'' ("Well my Mam and Dad and Gran and me / We went to Blackpool by the sea / It rained and rained for most of the day / But we all got tanned in a funny sort of way").
It was also the UK's first electric system.
By 1851, the town's population was over 2,500.
Wounded Inspector Carl Walker also received the George Cross.
*The Sea Life Centre
Day to day services are run by the 16 Flexity 2 trams.
The lowest temperature to occur in recent years is  during December 2010.
The theatre's return was further confirmed in May of the same year when a Royal Variety Performance was staged in the presence of Prince Charles.
Fleetwood declined as a resort, as its founder and principal financial backer, Peter Hesketh-Fleetwood, went bankrupt.
They ground-shared at Woodlands Memorial Ground, the home of Fylde Rugby Club in the neighbouring town of Lytham St Annes.
It presents an annual series of concerts and organises educational and community outreach projects.
There are two synagogues in Blackpool for its Jewish population.
During the war, Stanley Park was used as a Royal Air Force training station, known as No.
The annual Blackpool Marathon is staged on the Promenade each April.
On 1 February 2008 it was announced that the Government had agreed to a joint Blackpool Transport and Blackpool Council bid for funding toward the total upgrade of the track.
In addition to its sandy beaches, Blackpool's major attractions and landmarks include Blackpool Tower, Blackpool Illuminations, the Pleasure Beach, Blackpool Zoo, Sandcastle Water Park, the Winter Gardens, and the UK's only surviving first-generation tramway.
Only 99 copies of their self-titled debut were pressed and this extremely rare vinyl album has since been described as "one of the "Holy Trinity" items of rare British Psychedelia".
The Grand Theatre (locally known as 'The Grand') was designed by Victorian theatre architect Frank Matcham and was opened in 1894 after a construction period of seven months, at a cost of £20,000 between December 1893 and July 1894.
The conductor David Atherton, co-founder of the London Sinfonietta, was born in Blackpool.
St John's Church in Blackpool was consecrated in 1821.
In the Hollywood remake of the film (2004), directed by Peter Chelsom, Blackpool is mentioned but not shown.
The local newspaper, the ''Blackpool Gazette'', sent a petition signed by over 11,500 local residents and visitors demanding the decision be reconsidered.
The Blackpool Reform Jewish Congregation is located on Raikes Parade with a synagogue hall and classroom facilities, a purpose-built sanctuary hall and an assembly room.
The railway made it much easier and cheaper for visitors to reach Blackpool, triggering an influx of settlers, such that in 1876 Blackpool was incorporated as a borough, governed by its own town council and aldermen.
Limited edition remastered versions of both Complex albums were released by Guersson in 2012.
The town also plays host to the longest running seaside show in Britain, Legends, which features multiple tribute artistes with a live band and dance troupe, first appearing at the North Pier in 1999, then at the Central Pier from 2000 to 2012 and now at the Sands Venue, located in the Palatine buildings (formerly the Palace nightclub) on the promenade near Blackpool Tower.
Blackpool punk band The Fits were amongst the first to benefit, eventually releasing four indie chart hit singles in 1982–85.
In contrast, Blackpool boomed.
However, with the opening of Squires Gate Airport a decision was announced in 1936 by the Ministry of Transport to close the Stanley Park airfield.
The town would become a county borough in 1904.
Each town's mills would close for a different week, allowing Blackpool to manage a steady and reliable stream of visitors over a prolonged period in the summer.
The town also features heavily in the BBC television serial ''Blackpool'', starring David Morrissey, Sarah Parish and David Tennant and first broadcast in 2004, and the one-off follow-up ''Viva Blackpool'', broadcast in June 2006.
The Vikings and Anglo-Saxons seem to have co-existed peacefully, with some Anglo-Saxon and Viking placenames later being joined together – such as Layton-with-Warbreck and Bispham-with-Norbreck.
The line was operated by the Blackpool Electric Tramway Company until 1892 when their lease expired and Blackpool Corporation took over running the line.
''"Blackpool"'' is also the title song from a production co-written with author Irvine Welsh and Vic Godard (Subway Sect) in 2002, later released as a four song EP called ''"Blackpool"''.
The Winter Gardens were purchased by Blackpool Council; the complex is operated by Crown Entertainment Centres Ltd.
In February 2007 a youth forum was established, Blackpool Faith Forum for Youth (BIFFY).
Cocker, son of Dr John Cocker, and therefore grandson of Henry Banks, was its first mayor.
Blackpool was also the original site of Swallow Sidecar Company, forerunner of Jaguar Cars.
The stream ran through peatlands that discoloured the water, so the name for the area became "Black Poole".
In the late 20th century and early 21st century, pollution in the seawater at Blackpool caused considerable concern.
Current tribute artistes include "Neil Diamond", "Adele", "Elton John" and "Robbie Williams".
Blackpool Borough were the first professional rugby league club in the town.
John Bromley-Davenport, for the defence, said: "We have uncovered within the Blackpool Police force an astonishing catalogue of incompetence, failure to disclose, manipulation and lies, some of which were uttered on oath during the trial last year.
The most recent occurrence has been the grounding of the MS ''Riverdance'' in January 2008.
To access the World Wide Web you will then need to use a Wireless Blackpool voucher.
There are two mosques: the purpose-built Blackpool Central Mosque & Islamic Community Centre is located on Revoe Street and provides prayer facilities for local Muslims, and the Blackpool Islamic Community Centre (BICC) which offers Islamic education.
The numerous urban regeneration projects, the property prices which are among the most affordable in the UK, and the high rental yields create a very favourable environment for real estate investors.
Despite this, on 11 September 1940, German bombs fell near Blackpool North railway station and eight people were killed in nearby houses in Seed Street This site today is occupied by the new Town Hall offices and Sainsbury's Supermarket.
In February 2012, a number of tourist attractions in Blackpool collaborated to produce the Blackpool Resort Pass which allows for discounted access in one ticket.
The Fylde was also home to a British tribe, the Setantii (the "dwellers in the water") a sub-tribe of the Brigantes, who from about AD80 were controlled by Romans from their fort at Dowbridge, Kirkham.
The line into Blackpool via Lytham St Annes now has a station serving Blackpool Pleasure Beach but terminates at Blackpool South station.
The airport opened in 1929 and was officially opened by then British Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald in 1931.
After releasing the debut single by Fleetwood punk band One Way System, Lights set up specialist hardcore punk ''Beat the System'' label.
Between 10 September 2012 and 19 November 2012 the resort was featured in Channel 4's ''999: What's Your Emergency?
There is a residential Buddhist Centre in North Shore, Keajra Kadampa Buddhist Centre, a member of the New Kadampa Tradition – International Kadampa Buddhist Union.
The town was granted a Charter of Incorporation as a municipal borough in 1876.
The band recorded four singles before splitting in 1967.
Franz Ferdinand's 2013 ''"Love Illumination"'' single was originally called ''"Blackpool Illuminati"''.
Blackpool has a pioneering publicly owned Municipal wireless network Wi-Fi, which covers the entire town centre, promenade and beach front.
Seasonal static illuminations were first set up in 1912, although due to World War I and its aftermath they only enjoyed two seasons until they were re-introduced in 1925.
Both the Northwest Development Agency (NWDA) and Blackpool's regeneration company ReBlackpool were crucial players in securing the deal.
Plots of the land were allocated to landowners in Bispham, Layton, Great Marton and Little Marton.
Ian Anderson and Jeffrey Hammond (of Jethro Tull), David Boyne (of Soft Cell), singer-songwriter Roy Harper, Chris Lowe (of Pet Shop Boys), Nick McCarthy (of Franz Ferdinand), Larry Cassidy (of Section 25), Gary Miller (who had a hit with The Yellow Rose of Texas), Graham Nash (of The Hollies / Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young), Robert Smith (of The Cure) and folk singer Maddy Prior.
The opening scenes were filmed in the Flamingo.
Diamond murdered Hartley and dismembered his body before 'dumping' the remains in a hotel 'swill bin'; Hartley's head was never recovered.
In 1927 the local council announced that an airfield would be built near Stanley Park, which would become Stanley Park Aerodrome offering flights to the Isle of Man for £1-16s–0d (£1.80).
The nearby Layton Cemetery contains the war graves of 26 Polish airmen.
(1996) closes with a scene at the World Ballroom Dancing Championships in Blackpool.
Radio Victoria, based in Victoria Hospital broadcasts throughout the hospital and is aiming for an FM licence for 2013
*Indoor Golf Centre
The Gazette also publishes a daily online version in Polish, ''Witryna Polska'' (''Polish Gazette'') to cater for the local Polish community.
He had also transformed the fortunes of other local theatres.
The land on which the airport stood now covers Blackpool Zoo and a hotel and golf course.
The theatre was able to stay open during World War II but the post-war rise in the popularity of television was probably the cause of the theatre's dwindling popularity toward the 1960s.
Both men were acquitted of the alleged offence.
It received five stars for the efficiency of check-in, the time it takes to clear security and distance from check-in to the gate, and the overall airport experience, including signage, design of the airport and attitude of staff.
The absolute minimum temperature stands at , recorded during December 1981.
The deal, totalling £38.9m, had national and local government backing and included the purchase of:
Blackpool is the setting for ''Bhaji on the Beach'' (1993) directed by Gurinder Chadha.
Blackpool also falls in the coverage area of BBC Radio Lancashire, Rock FM, Magic 999, Smooth FM 100.4 and 105.4 Real Radio.
In the early 19th century, Henry Banks and his son-in-law John Cocker erected new buildings in Blackpool such that its population grew from less than 500 in 1801 to over 2,500 in 1851.
In 1781, visitors attracted to Blackpool's  sandy beach were able to use a new private road, built by Thomas Clifton and Sir Henry Hoghton.
In a more normal winter, the coldest night averages .
Other Blackpool recording artists on JSNTGM include Sick 56, Erase Today and Litterbug.
They also publish a free weekly newspaper, the ''Blackpool Reporter'', which is delivered to householders in Blackpool.
Many of them were Anglo-Saxon settlements.
During the Roman occupation the area was covered by oak forests and bog land.
In a more normal summer, the warmest day will likely average , with slightly fewer than 5 days a year attaining a temperature of  or above.
