He may have arrived in the Caribbean in the last years of the 17th century, on a merchant vessel (possibly a slave ship).
They then sailed to the wrecks of the 1715 Spanish fleet, off the eastern coast of Florida.
On the other side of the island, Teach was busy entertaining guests and had not set a lookout.
Gregory Keyes' fictional ''The Age of Unreason'' has him appearing as the governor of a colony, and Tim Powers' 1988 novel ''On Stranger Tides'' tells of his forming an alliance of pirates.
Lieutenant Maynard remained at Ocracoke for several more days, making repairs and burying the dead.
Little is known about Blackbeard's early life.
One early source claims that his surname was Drummond, but the lack of any supporting documentation makes this unlikely.
The island then was not the popular tourist destination it later became; the author George Woodbury described it as "no city of homes; it was a place of temporary sojourn and refreshment for a literally floating population," continuing, "The only permanent residents were the piratical camp followers, the traders, and the hangers-on; all others were transient."
Maynard found the pirates anchored on the inner side of Ocracoke Island, on the evening of 21&nbsp;November.
What is certain though is that ''Adventure'' turned her guns on the two ships and fired.
In September he told Eden that he had found the French ship at sea, deserted.
He also found several items of correspondence, including a letter to the pirate from Tobias Knight.
The goods which Brand seized were officially North Carolinian property and Eden considered him a thief.
He also wrote to the Lords of Trade, suggesting that the Crown might benefit financially from Teach's capture.
Despite being very sick and close to death, he questioned the reliability of Spotswood's witnesses.
Spotswood learnt that William Howard, the former quartermaster of ''Queen Anne's Revenge'', was in the area, and believing that he might know of Teach's whereabouts had the pirate and his two slaves arrested.
He had ascertained their position from ships he had stopped along his journey, but unfamiliar with the local channels and shoals he decided to wait until the following morning to make his attack.
By May 1718 Teach had awarded himself the rank of Commodore and was at the height of his power.
In 1716 Hornigold placed Teach in charge of a sloop he had taken as a prize.
Badly wounded, he was then attacked and killed by several more of Maynard's crew.
He was given 57&nbsp;men—33&nbsp;from HMS ''Pearl'' and 24 from HMS ''Lyme''.
He argued for the secrecy of the operation by suggesting that Eden "could contribute nothing to the Success of the Design", and told Eden that his authority to capture the pirates came from the king.
As of 2009 more than 250,000 artifacts have been recovered.
Another version claimed that ''Jane'' and ''Ranger'' ran aground, although Maynard made no mention of this in his log.
Later descriptions mention that his thick black beard was braided into pigtails, sometimes tied in with small coloured ribbons.
The sugar, he argued, was stored at his house legally, and Teach had visited him only on business, in his official capacity.
Teach continued on to Bath, where in June 1718—only days after Bonnet had departed with his pardon—he and his much-reduced crew received their pardon from Governor Eden.
Teach's corpse was thrown into the inlet while his head was suspended from the bowsprit of Maynard's sloop so that the reward could be collected.
Over the next five or six days about nine vessels were stopped and ransacked as they attempted to sail past Charleston Bar, where Teach's fleet was anchored.
No records of the day's proceedings remain, but 14&nbsp;of the 16&nbsp;accused were found guilty.
All but four were tried and hanged in Charleston.
The small craft was quickly spotted by ''Adventure'' and fired at as soon as it was within range of her guns.
Eden was heavily criticised for his involvement with Teach and was accused of being his accomplice.
Maynard and the detachment from HMS ''Pearl'' took the larger of the two vessels and named her ''Jane''; the rest took ''Ranger'', commanded by one of Maynard's officers, a Mister Hyde.
He suggested that Bonnet do the same, and as war between the Quadruple Alliance of 1718 and Spain was threatening, to consider taking a privateer's commission from England.
Unexplained lights at sea are often referred to as "Teach's light", and some recitals claim that the notorious pirate now roams the afterlife searching for his head, for fear that his friends, and the Devil, will not recognise him.
Teach and his crews sailed the vessel south along Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to Bequia, where they disembarked her crew and cargo, and converted the ship for their own use.
Wragg agreed to Teach's demands, and a Mr Marks and two pirates were given two days to collect the drugs.
A selection is on public display at the North Carolina Maritime Museum.
He had also been pursued by Teach's old commander, Benjamin Hornigold, who was by then a pirate hunter.
Teach's movements between late 1717 and early 1718 are not known.
Official views on pirates were sometimes quite different from those held by contemporary authors, who often described their subjects as despicable rogues of the sea.
Bonnet's crew of about 70&nbsp;were reportedly dissatisfied with his command, so with Bonnet's permission, Teach took control of his ship ''Revenge''.
Although little is known about his early life, he was probably born in Bristol, England.
Various superstitious tales exist of Teach's ghost.
Eden was annoyed that the accusations against Knight arose during a trial in which he played no part.
''A General Historie'', though, is generally considered to be a reliable source.
New Providence's harbour could easily accommodate hundreds of ships, and was too shallow for the Royal Navy's larger vessels to navigate.
Ocracoke Inlet was Teach's favourite anchorage.
Several were black, prompting Spotswood to ask his council what could be done about "the Circumstances of these Negroes to exempt them from undergoing the same Tryal as other pirates."
Brand set out for North Carolina six days later, arriving within three miles of Bath on 23&nbsp;November.
Governor Eden was certainly embarrassed by Spotswood's invasion of North Carolina, while Spotswood disavowed himself of any part of the seizure.
Governor Spotswood used a portion of this to pay for the entire operation.
Teach immediately renamed ''La Concorde'' as ''Queen Anne's Revenge'' and equipped her with 40&nbsp;guns.
In September Teach and Hornigold encountered Stede Bonnet, a landowner and military officer from a wealthy family who had turned to piracy earlier that year.
About 20&nbsp;on ''Jane'' were either wounded or killed and 9&nbsp;on ''Ranger''.
On his arrival he had presented the pirates' demands to the Governor and the drugs had been quickly gathered, but the two pirates sent to escort him had proved difficult to find; they had been busy drinking with friends and were finally discovered, drunk.
Maynard and Teach fired their flintlocks at each other, then threw them away.
As the smoke cleared, Teach led his men aboard, buoyant at the sight of Maynard's apparently empty ship, his men firing at the small group formed by the lieutenant and his men at the stern.
He took two French ships leaving the Caribbean, moved one crew across to the other, and sailed the remaining ship back to Ocracoke.
Spotswood arranged for a party of soldiers and sailors to try to capture the pirate, which they did on 22&nbsp;November 1718.
Some from the two ships' civilian crews remained aboard.
The rest of Maynard's men then burst from the hold, shouting and firing.
A few days later they stopped a vessel sailing from Madeira to Charleston, South Carolina.
The pardon was open to all pirates who surrendered on or before 5&nbsp;September 1718, but contained a caveat stipulating that immunity was offered only against crimes committed before 5&nbsp;January.
Teach granted a reprieve of two days, but still the party did not return.
An extra incentive for Teach's capture was the offer of a reward from the Assembly of Virginia, over and above any that might be received from the Crown.
He parted company with Bonnet and settled in Bath Town, where he accepted a royal pardon.
Teach's crew had apparently informed Bostock that they had destroyed several other vessels, and that they intended to sail to Hispaniola and lie in wait for an expected Spanish armada, supposedly laden with money to pay the garrisons.
He stopped all traffic from entering the inlet—preventing any warning of his presence—and posted a lookout on both sloops to ensure that Teach could not escape to sea.
It was during this cruise with Hornigold that the earliest known report of Teach was made, in which he is recorded as a pirate in his own right, in command of a large crew.
In late November, near Saint Vincent, he attacked the ''Great Allen''.
Privateers who became pirates were generally considered by the English government to be reserve naval forces, and were sometimes given active encouragement; as far back as 1581 Francis Drake was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, when he returned to England from a round-the-world expedition with plunder worth an estimated £1,500,000.
A North Carolinian tale holds that Teach's skull was used as the basis for a silver drinking chalice; a local judge even claimed to have drunk from it one night in the 1930s.
Of the remaining two, one proved that he had partaken of the fight out of necessity, having been on Teach's ship only as a guest at a drinking party the night before, and not as a pirate.
Teach and Vane spent several nights on the southern tip of Ocracoke Island, accompanied by such notorious figures as Israel Hands, Robert Deal and Calico Jack.
The only pirate ever known to bury treasure was William Kidd; the only treasure so far recovered from Teach's exploits is that taken from the wreckage of what is presumed to be the ''Queen Anne's Revenge'', which was found in 1996.
The sloops ''Robert'' of Philadelphia and ''Good Intent'' of Dublin were stopped on 22&nbsp;October 1717, and their cargo holds emptied.
Teach's loot—sugar, cocoa, indigo and cotton—found "in pirate sloops and ashore in a tent where the sloops lay", was sold at auction along with sugar and cotton found in Tobias Knight's barn, for £2,238.
They were unsuccessful, but Governor of Virginia Alexander Spotswood was also concerned that the supposedly retired freebooter and his crew were living in nearby North Carolina.
He defended his actions, writing to Lord Carteret, a shareholder of the Province of Carolina, that he might benefit from the sale of the seized property and reminding the Earl of the number of Virginians who had died to protect his interests.
Despite his ferocious reputation though, there are no verified accounts of his ever having murdered or harmed those he held captive.
Teach watched as the gap between the vessels closed,  and ordered his men to be ready.
Since the end of this so-called golden age of piracy, Teach and his exploits have become the stuff of lore, inspiring books, films and even amusement park rides.
He settled in Bath, on the eastern side of Bath Creek at Plum Point, near Eden's home.
In the aftermath of Teach's overwhelming attack, ''Jane'' and ''Ranger'' may also have been grounded; the battle thenceforth would have become a race to see who could float their ship first.
Whether Johnson's description was entirely truthful or embellished is unclear, but it seems likely that Teach understood the value of appearances; better to strike fear into the heart of one's enemies, than rely on bluster alone.
In contemporary records his name is most often given as Blackbeard, Edward Thatch or Edward Teach; the latter is most often used today.
Teach was tall, with broad shoulders.
Johnson claimed that there was an exchange of small-arms fire following which ''Adventure'' ran aground on a sandbar, while Maynard anchored and then lightened his ship to pass over the obstacle.
Recent genealogical research indicates his family moved to Jamaica where Edward Thatch, Jr. is listed as being a mariner in the Royal Navy aboard   in 1706.
The prize money for capturing Teach was to have been about £400, but it was split between the crews of HMS ''Lyme'' and HMS ''Pearl''.
He may have done this to stifle any protest they made, if they guessed their captain's plans.
Varying accounts exist of the battle's list of casualties; Maynard reported that&nbsp;8 of his men and 12&nbsp;pirates were killed.
Teach moved his fleet, and the captured ships, to within about five or six leagues from land.
Again, contemporary accounts of what happened next are confused, but small-arms fire from ''Jane'' may have cut ''Adventure''s jib sheet, causing her to lose control and run onto the sandbar.
All vessels entering or leaving the port were stopped, and as the town had no guard ship, its pilot boat was the first to be captured.
They captured a boat carrying 120&nbsp;barrels of flour out of Havana, and shortly thereafter took 100&nbsp;barrels of wine from a sloop out of Bermuda.
The 17th-century rise of Britain's American colonies and the rapid 18th-century expansion of the Atlantic slave trade had made Bristol an important international sea port, and Teach was most likely raised in what was the second-largest city in England.
Despite his infamy, Teach was not the most successful of pirates.
With Israel Hands ashore in Bath with about&nbsp;24 of ''Adventure''s sailors, he also had a much-reduced crew.
Lee considers it plausible that Teach let Bonnet in on his plan to accept a pardon from Governor Eden.
Bostock's deposition describes Teach as a "tall spare man with a very black beard which he wore very long".
He could almost certainly read and write; he communicated with merchants and when killed had in his possession a letter addressed to him by the Chief Justice and Secretary of the Province of Carolina, Tobias Knight.
Although no confirmation exists that these two ships were controlled by Teach and Bonnet, author Angus Konstam believes it very likely they were.
He was romanticised after his death and became the inspiration for pirate-themed works of fiction across a range of genres.
Although in theory this left Bonnet and Teach at risk of being hanged for their actions at Charleston Bar, most authorities could waive such conditions.
As Captain Brand and his troops had not been the ones fighting for their lives, Maynard thought this extremely unfair.
The remainder of Teach's crew and former associates were found by Brand, in Bath, and were transported to Williamsburg, Virginia, where they were jailed on charges of piracy.
Johnson may have been an assumed alias.
Those left on the ''Adventure'' were captured by the ''Ranger''s crew, including one who planned to set fire to the powder room and blow up the ship.
In his 1951 work ''The Great Days of Piracy'', author George Woodbury wrote that Johnson is "obviously a pseudonym", continuing "one cannot help suspecting that he may have been a pirate himself."
Some tales suggest that pirates often killed a prisoner on the spot where they buried their loot, and Teach is no exception in these stories, but that no finds have come to light is not exceptional; buried pirate treasure is often considered a modern myth for which almost no supporting evidence exists.
Bonnet rescued them two days later.
Readers were titillated by his stories and a second edition was quickly published, though author Angus Konstam suspects that Johnson's entry on Blackbeard was "coloured a little to make a more sensational story."
He then called a meeting of his fellow sailors and moved eight ships into the harbour, causing panic within the town.
In March 1718, while taking on water at Turneffe Island east of Belize, both ships spotted the Jamaican logwood cutting sloop ''Adventure'' making for the harbour.
After successfully ransoming its inhabitants, he ran ''Queen Anne's Revenge'' aground on a sandbar near Beaufort, North Carolina.
The other, Israel Hands, was not present at the fight.
As a former British privateer, Hornigold attacked only his old enemies, but for his crew, the sight of British vessels filled with valuable cargo passing by unharmed became too much, and at some point toward the end of 1717 he was demoted.
Johnson's account states that he married the daughter of a local plantation owner, although there is no supporting evidence for this.
With its history of colonialism, trade and piracy, the West Indies was the setting for many 17th and 18th-century maritime incidents.
''Adventure'' then turned toward the beach of Ocracoke Island, heading for a narrow channel.
Bonnet left immediately on a small sailing boat for Bath Town, where he surrendered to Governor Eden, and received his pardon.
He then travelled back to Beaufort Inlet to collect the ''Revenge'' and the remainder of his crew, intending to sail to Saint Thomas Island to receive a commission.
Johnson also described Teach in times of battle as wearing "a sling over his shoulders, with three brace of pistols, hanging in holsters like bandoliers; and stuck lighted matches under his hat", the latter apparently to emphasise the fearsome appearance he wished to present to his enemies.
As it spread throughout the neighbouring colonies, the news of Teach and Vane's impromptu party worried the Governor of Pennsylvania enough to send out two sloops to capture the pirates.
There Teach disembarked the crew of the captured Spanish sloop, before proceeding north to the port of Charleston, South Carolina, attacking three vessels along the way.
Lee (1974) concludes that although Spotswood may have thought that the ends justified the means, he had no legal authority to invade North Carolina, to capture the pirates and to seize and auction their goods.
Teach may have used other aliases; on 30&nbsp;November, the ''Monserrat Merchant'' encountered two ships and a sloop, commanded by a Captain Kentish and Captain Edwards (the latter a known alias of Stede Bonnet).
He lost much of any support he may have had though when it was discovered that he and his crew had helped themselves to about £90 of Teach's booty.
As Maynard drew back to fire once again, Teach moved in to attack him, but was slashed across the neck by one of Maynard's men.
Spotswood claimed ten&nbsp;pirates and ten&nbsp;of the King's men dead.
They returned two days later and reported on what eventually transpired.
When Marks finally returned to the fleet, he explained what had happened.
By the end of August he had returned to piracy, and in the same month the Governor of Pennsylvania issued a warrant for his arrest, but by then Teach was probably operating in Delaware Bay, some distance away.
Teach was one of those who came to enjoy the island's benefits.
Their numbers were boosted by the addition to their fleet of two more ships, one of which was commanded by Stede Bonnet, but toward the end of 1717 Hornigold retired from piracy, taking two vessels with him.
Teach rallied his men and the two groups fought across the deck, which was already slick with blood from those killed or injured by Teach's broadside.
Unfortunately for him, Teach had stripped the vessel of its valuables and provisions, and had marooned its crew; Bonnet set out for revenge, but was unable to find him.
Probably shortly after the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht, he moved there from Jamaica, and with most privateers once involved in the war, became involved in piracy.
The 18th-century author Charles Johnson claimed that Teach was for some time a sailor operating from Jamaica on privateer ships during Queen Anne's War, and that "he had often distinguished himself for his uncommon boldness and personal courage".
They each fired a broadside across its bulwarks, killing several of its crew, and forcing its captain to surrender.
Contrary to the modern-day picture of the traditional tyrannical pirate, he commanded his vessels with the permission of their crews and there is no known account of his ever having harmed or murdered those he held captive.
A recognised authority on the pirates of his time, Johnson's descriptions of such figures as Anne Bonny and Mary Read were for years required reading for those interested in the subject.
He is the main subject of Matilda Douglas's fictional 1835 work ''Blackbeard: A page from the colonial history of Philadelphia''.
The argument raged back and forth between the colonies until Eden's death on 17&nbsp;March 1722.
Teach's flotilla sailed northward along the Atlantic coast and into Topsail Inlet (commonly known as Beaufort Inlet), off the coast of North Carolina.
Harriot and his crew accepted the invitation, and Teach sent over a crew to sail ''Adventure'' making Israel Hands the captain.
Possibly about 1716, he joined the crew of Captain Benjamin Hornigold, a renowned pirate who operated from New Providence's safe waters.
Film renditions of his life include ''Blackbeard the Pirate'' (1952), ''Blackbeard's Ghost'' (1968), ''Blackbeard: Terror at Sea'' (2005), and the 2006 Hallmark Channel miniseries ''Blackbeard''.
Several months earlier Vane had rejected the pardon brought by Woodes Rogers and escaped the men-of-war the English captain brought with him to Nassau.
Against superior training and a slight advantage in numbers, the pirates were pushed back toward the bow, allowing the ''Jane''s crew to surround Maynard and Teach, who was by then completely isolated.
Konstam (2007) proposes a similar idea, explaining that Teach began to see ''Queen Anne's Revenge'' as something of a liability; while a pirate fleet was anchored, news of this was sent to neighbouring towns and colonies, and any vessels nearby would delay sailing.
They sailed from Kecoughtan, along the James River, on 17&nbsp;November.
Eden gave Teach permission to sail to St Thomas to seek a commission as a privateer (a useful way of removing bored and troublesome pirates from the small settlement), and Teach was given official title to his remaining sloop, which he renamed ''Adventure''.
On 5&nbsp;December 1717 Teach stopped the merchant sloop ''Margaret'' off the coast of Crab Island, near Anguilla.
He wore knee-length boots and dark clothing, topped with a wide hat and sometimes a long coat of brightly coloured silk or velvet.
He gained the support of two men keen to discredit North Carolina's Governor—Edward Moseley and Colonel Maurice Moore.
Teach ordered several sloops to throw ropes across the flagship in an attempt to free her.
Teach may have recruited some of their slaves, but the remainder were left on the island and were later recaptured by the returning crew of ''Mauvaise Rencontre''.
They sailed for the Bay of Honduras, where they added another ship and four sloops to their flotilla.
As Spotswood had also accused Tobias Knight of being in league with Teach, on 4&nbsp;April 1719, Eden had Knight brought in for questioning.
Law and order were unheard of; in New Providence, pirates found a welcome respite.
A sloop commanded by Israel Hands of ''Adventure'' also ran aground, and both vessels appeared to be damaged beyond repair, leaving only ''Revenge'' and the captured Spanish sloop.
Before sailing northward on his remaining sloop to Ocracoke Inlet, Teach marooned about 25&nbsp;men on a small sandy island about a league from the mainland.
Such hoards would necessitate a wealthy owner, and their supposed existence ignores the command structure of a pirate vessel, in which the crew often served by free suffrage.
Pirates habitually used fictitious surnames while engaged in the business of piracy, so as not to tarnish the family name, and this makes it unlikely that Teach's real name will ever be known.
The next day, Brand sent two canoes down Pamlico River to Ocracoke Inlet, to see if Teach could be seen.
Economist Peter Leeson believes that pirates were generally shrewd businessmen, far removed from the modern, romanticised view of them as murderous tyrants.
Maynard later examined Teach's body, noting that it had been shot no fewer than five times and cut about twenty.
Hornigold placed him in command of a sloop he had captured, and the two engaged in numerous acts of piracy.
She was stopped and her captain, David Harriot, invited to join the pirates.
In a report made by a Captain Mathew Munthe on an anti-piracy patrol for North Carolina, "Thatch" was described as operating "a sloop 6 gunns  and about 70 men".
Whether Teach had any involvement in this decision is unknown, but Hornigold quickly retired from piracy.
The charges referred to several acts of piracy supposedly committed after the pardon's cut-off date, in "a sloop belonging to ye subjects of the King of Spain", but ignored the fact that they took place outside Spotswood's jurisdiction and in a vessel then legally owned.
Bostock's deposition details Teach's command of two vessels: a sloop and a large French guineaman, Dutch-built, with 36&nbsp;cannon and a crew of 300&nbsp;men.
The broadside was devastating; in an instant, Maynard had lost as much as a third of his forces.
Teach informed the prisoners that his fleet required medical supplies from the colonial government of South Carolina, and that if none were forthcoming, all prisoners would be executed, their heads sent to the Governor and all captured ships burnt.
Parallels have also been drawn between Johnson's Blackbeard and the character of Captain Jack Sparrow in the 2003 adventure film, ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl''.
Regardless, the men were tried with their comrades in Williamsburg's Capitol building, under admiralty law, on 12&nbsp;March 1719.
When or where Teach collected the ten gun Briganteen is unknown, but by that time he may have been in command of at least 150&nbsp;men split between three vessels.
A shrewd and calculating leader, Teach spurned the use of force, relying instead on his fearsome image to elicit the response he desired from those he robbed.
During a ferocious battle, Teach and several of his crew were killed by a small force of sailors led by Lieutenant Robert Maynard.
Teach probably sailed toward Havana, where he may have captured a small Spanish vessel that had left the Cuban port.
The remaining pirates were hanged, then left to rot in gibbets along Williamsburg's Capitol Landing Road (known for some time after as "Gallows Road").
Whilst at Charleston, Teach learned that Woodes Rogers had left England with several men-of-war, with orders to purge the West Indies of pirates.
But he was soon back at sea, where he attracted the attention of Alexander Spotswood, the Governor of Virginia.
It is the first recorded account of Teach's appearance and is the source of his cognomen, Blackbeard.
Johnson (1724) described him as "such a figure that imagination cannot form an idea of a fury from hell to look more frightful."
Johnson (1724) reported that the pirate had "no more than twenty-five men on board" and that he "gave out to all the vessels that he spoke with that he had forty".
The ship was judged as a derelict found at sea, and of its cargo 20&nbsp;hogsheads of sugar were awarded to Knight and sixty&nbsp;to Eden; Teach and his crew were given what remained in the vessel's hold.
Much of what is known about him can be sourced to Charles Johnson's ''A General Historie of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious Pyrates'', published in Britain in 1724.
Teach thought that Governor Charles Eden was a man he could trust, but to make sure, he waited to see what would happen to another captain.
The two companies did not receive their prize money for another four years, and despite his bravery Maynard was not promoted; instead, he faded into obscurity.
During July and August he travelled between his base in the town and his sloop off Ocracoke.
He also sued on Howard's behalf for damages of £500, claiming wrongful arrest.
Konstam speculates further, suggesting that Johnson may have been the English playwright Charles Johnson, the British publisher Charles Rivington, or the writer Daniel Defoe.
Israel Hands had, weeks earlier, testified that Knight had been on board the ''Adventure'' in August 1718, shortly after Teach had brought a French ship to North Carolina as a prize.
Her passengers were questioned about the vessels still in port and then locked below decks for about half a day.
