This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.
Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere.
However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects, and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.
In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.
The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star.
In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass.
The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.
The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet).
Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped.
They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle.
Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients.
However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.
In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.
If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.
On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon.
A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.
The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.
Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.
It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.
By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations.
Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered.
Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.
Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.
This follows from the fact that the gravitational field ''external'' to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.
Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.
According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.
Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.
This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers.
Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (''i.e.
The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster and Paul Murdin in 1972.
Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e.
They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way.
These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star.
As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.
For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.
As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object.
However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as .
These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit).
This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.
Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity.
Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon.
These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.
Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun.
The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article ''"'Black Holes' in Space"'',
Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit.
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object.
Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds.
Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.
The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass ''M'' through
In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.
This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years.
However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.
The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.
Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum ''J'' or electric charge ''Q''.
For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.
The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter.
These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed ''unphysical''.
Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it, it appears to have no locally detectable features.
The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away.
Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission.
Considering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations.
No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.
A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24&nbsp;m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun.
Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.
where ''r''sh is the Schwarzschild radius and ''MSun'' is the mass of the Sun.
Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star.
Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.
The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.
In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.
The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.
Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.
The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator.
As such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes.
This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.
Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."
Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost.
Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.
While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass.
If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.
As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy.
Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.
Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes.
Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.
Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in.
Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.
In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes.
Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.
The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.
Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255  and the Sombrero Galaxy.
By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses () may form.
Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole.
Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres.
It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.
The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.
Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.
This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.
The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.
On 15 June 2016, a second detection of a gravitational wave event from colliding black holes was announced.
Such explosions and pulsations lead to planetary nebula.
These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole.
These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature.
If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe.
Remnants exceeding  are produced by stars that were over  before the collapse.
For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350&nbsp;km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses).
This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible.
This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967, which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.
Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved.
The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature.
Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects.
At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.
Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.
On 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger.
The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.
Gravitational collapse requires great density.
For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects.
Based on calculations  for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.
The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon.
In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity.
For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object.
This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.
On 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves.
The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole.
Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace.
Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.
The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.
A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.
It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity.
For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature.
Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.
One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole.
However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.
After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use.
Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years.
In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.
When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole.
Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved, general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within.
From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown.
Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.
If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole.
Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant.
A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes.
This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.
The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958.
To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7&nbsp;K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon.
A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.
+ Black hole classifications
The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections.
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity.
This mass can be substantially less than the original star.
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies.
In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity.
Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").
The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.
NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.
However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.
Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.
Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying.
It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.
It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.
Solutions describing more general black holes also exist.
Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1&nbsp;TeV/''c''2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely.
His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.
This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions.
'', non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon.
Another possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes.
More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state.
At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations.
The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.
Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a  black hole is comparable to that of water).
The no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum.
These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.
The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.
The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.
The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state.
This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes.
Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.
At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.
In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.
The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time.
It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.
During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period.
New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.
If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's  mass and location.
This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite.
Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal.
Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle.
Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to .
In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away.
In 2002, much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory.
After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings.
To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity.
If the mass of the remnant exceeds about  (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse.
The result is one of the various types of compact star.
For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.
Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.
In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole.
The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.
According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.
By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million  object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.
