An experienced smith selects the finish based on the metal and on the intended use of the item.
During the 1790s Henry Maudslay created the first screw-cutting lathe, a watershed event that signaled the start of blacksmiths being replaced by machinists in factories for the hardware needs of the populace.
s, with the expressed purpose of providing Native Americans with iron tools and repair services.
In 1973 the Artists Blacksmiths’ Association of North America was formed with 27 members.
Likewise the British Artist Blacksmiths Association was created in 1978, with 30 charter members and had 2013 about 600 members and publish for members a quarterly magazine.
The melting point of iron is much higher than that of bronze.
Any foreign material in the weld, such as the oxides or "scale" that typically form in the fire, can weaken it and cause it to fail.
(Charcoal is almost pure carbon.)
This extreme temperature range of variable solidity is the fundamental material property upon which blacksmithing practice depends.
For example, in preparation for making a hammerhead, a smith would punch a hole in a heavy bar or rod for the hammer handle.
He was captured by king Níðuðr, who cruelly hamstringed him and imprisoned him on an island.
One form is to heat the end of a rod and then hammer on it as one would drive a nail: the rod gets shorter, and the hot part widens.
With the introduction of automobiles, the number of blacksmiths continued to decrease, many former blacksmiths becoming the initial generation of automobile Mechanics.
Iron is a stronger and tougher metal than bronze, and iron ores are found nearly everywhere.
This can leave a piece of steel with an effective layer of unhardenable iron on its surface.
The Hittites of Anatolia first discovered or developed the smelting of iron ores around 1500 BC.
The smith first cleans parts to be joined with a wire brush, then puts them in the fire to heat.
The Anglo-Saxon Wayland Smith, known in Old Norse as Völundr, is a heroic blacksmith in Germanic mythology.
These smiths primarily worked at a traveling forge that when combined with a limber, comprised wagons specifically designed and constructed as blacksmith shops on wheels to carry the essential equipment necessary for their work.
Copper and Tin deposits, by contrast, are scattered and few, and expensive to exploit.
Coal ''can be'' an inferior fuel for blacksmithing, because much of the world's coal is contaminated with sulfur.
The dressed metal goes back in the fire, is brought near to welding heat, removed from the fire, and brushed.
It also includes cutting, slitting, and drifting—all done with a chisel.
A shoer-of-horses was historically known as a farrier in English.
In forge welding, the pieces to join are heated to what is generally referred to as ''welding heat''.
During the 20th century various gases (natural gas, acetylene, etc.)
Another method for drawing is to use a tool called a fuller, or the peen of the hammer, to hasten the drawing out of a thick piece of metal.
Much of the copper used by the Mediterranean World came from the island of Cyprus.
Two typical methods using only hammer and anvil would be hammering on the anvil horn, and hammering on the anvil face using the cross peen of a hammer.
The nadir of blacksmithing in the United States was reached during the 1960s, when most of the former blacksmiths had left the trade, and few if any new people were entering the trade.
Ogun, the god of iron, is one of the pantheon of "orisa" traditionally worshipped by the Yoruba of Nigeria.
Very few artifacts remain, due to loss from corrosion, and re-use of iron as a valuable commodity.
Punching may be done to create a decorative pattern, or to make a hole.
Wrought iron was produced by a labor-intensive process called ''puddling'', so this material is now a difficult-to-find specialty product.
(Note that smiths don't always use flux, especially in the UK.)
To this end a smith makes sure the fire is a reducing fire: a fire where, at the heart, there is a great deal of heat and very little oxygen.
This forces the metal to grow in length (and width if left unchecked) much faster than just hammering with the flat face of the hammer.
Fullering consists of hammering a series of indentations with corresponding ridges, perpendicular to the long section of the piece being drawn.
Sulfur contamination of iron and steel make them "red short", so that at red heat they become "crumbly" instead of "plastic".
During the early to mid-nineteenth century, both European armies as well as both the U.S. Federal and Confederate armies employed  blacksmiths to shoe horses and repair equipment such as wagons, horse tack, and artillery equipment.
This is similar to the process by which a '''case''' of steel is developed on a piece of iron in preparation for case hardening.
Modern blacksmiths generally substitute mild steel for making objects traditionally of wrought iron.
Drawing does not have to be uniform.
In the western (Europe & the Mideast) tradition, the technology to make fires hot enough to melt iron did not arise until the 16th century, when smelting operations grew large enough to require overly large bellows.
Coal did not begin to replace charcoal until the forests of first Britain (during the AD 17th century), and then the eastern United States of America (during the 19th century) were largely depleted.
As of 2015, the Blacksmiths' Competition is an invitational competition consisting of four teams of four blacksmiths competing for an $8000 prize.
The techniques of smithing can be roughly divided into forging (sometimes called "sculpting"), welding, heat-treating, and finishing.
Finishes include (among others): paint, varnish, bluing, browning, oil, and wax.
The striker then delivers a heavy blow to the indicated spot with a sledgehammer.
Hephaestus (Latin: Vulcan) was the blacksmith of the gods in Greek and Roman mythology.
In a properly regulated charcoal/coal fire, the air in and immediately around the fire should be a reducing atmosphere.
Although iron is quite abundant, good quality steel remained rare and expensive until the industrial developments of Bessemer process ''et al.''
As demand for their products declined, many more blacksmiths augmented their incomes by taking in work shoeing horses.
The original fuel for forge fires was charcoal.
The Romans record that during battle, their Celtic opponents could only swing their swords two or three times before having to step on their swords to straighten them.
Close examination of blacksmith-made antique tools clearly shows where small pieces of steel were forge-welded into iron to provide the hardened steel cutting edges of tools (notably in axes, adzes, chisels, etc.).
Flux is sometimes applied, which prevents oxygen from reaching and burning the metal during forging, and it is returned to the fire.
Then the smith turns the hammer over to use the flat face to hammer the tops of the ridges down level with the bottoms of the indentations.
H2O is a solid (ice) at -1 C (31 F), and a liquid (water) at +1 C (33 F).
While developed nations saw a decline and re-awakening of interest in blacksmithing, in many developing nations blacksmiths continued doing what blacksmiths have been doing for 3500 years: making and repairing iron and steel tools and hardware for people in their local area.
Because they must be able to see the glowing color of the metal, some blacksmiths work in dim, low-light conditions, but most work in well-lit conditions.
Copper and bronze cannot be hardened by heat-treatment, they can only be hardened by work-hardening.
The hammering would continue—upsetting and then drawing—until the curve had been properly shaped.
Samuel Colt neither invented nor perfected interchangeable parts, but his insistence (and other industrialists at this time) that his firearms be manufactured with this property, was another step towards the obsolescence of metal-working artisans and blacksmiths.
China, in a separate developmental tradition, was producing cast iron at least 1000 years before this.
Concurrent with the advent of alphabetic characters in the Iron Age, humans became aware of the metal iron.
With a mix of drawing and upsetting the smith shapes the faces so that when finally brought together, the center of the weld connects first and the connection spreads outward under the hammer blows, pushing out the flux (if used) and foreign material.
Most of the tin came from the Cornwall region of the island of Great Britain, transported by sea-borne Phoenician and Greek traders.
So they would hammer the ends of the stock down into the bend, 'upsetting' it at the point of the bend.
The events described probably occurred around 1200 BC, but Homer is thought to have composed this epic poem around 700 BC; so exactitude must remain suspect.
European blacksmiths before and through the medieval era spent a great deal of time heating and hammering iron before forging it into finished articles.
When the carbon content is below 0.25%, the metal is either "wrought iron (wrought iron is not smelted and cannot come from this process) " or "mild steel."
Springs must be made of hardened steel.
(See also Eli Whitney).
They would then dress the bend by drawing the sides of the bend to keep the correct thickness.
Instead, the smith hammers the iron into shape.
The amount of carbon significantly affects the properties of the metal.
The weld begins with the taps, but often the joint is weak and incomplete, so the smith reheats the joint to welding temperature and works the weld with light blows to "set" the weld and finally to dress it to the shape.
Every year since 1979, the world’s top blacksmiths compete in Calgary, Alberta; performing their craft in front of thousands of spectators to educate and entertain the public with their skills and abilities.
A supremely skilled artisan whose forge was a volcano, he constructed most of the weapons of the gods, as well as beautiful assistants for his smithy and a metal fishing-net of astonishing intricacy.
Despite being subject to rust, iron replaced bronze as soon as iron-wielding hordes could invade Bronze Age societies and literally slice through their obsolete bronze defenses.
A blacksmith's striker is an assistant (frequently an apprentice), whose job it is to swing a large sledgehammer in heavy forging operations, as directed by the blacksmith.
have also come to be used as fuels for blacksmithing.
These operations generally require at least a hammer and anvil, but smiths also use other tools and techniques to accommodate odd-sized or repetitive jobs.
Iron is different from most other materials (including bronze), in that it does not immediately go from a solid to a liquid at its melting point.
This is a problem for some blade-making steels, which must be worked carefully to avoid developing hidden cracks that would cause failure in the future.
Color is important for indicating the temperature and workability of the metal.
On the Indian subcontinent, Wootz steel was, and continues to be, produced in small quantities.
In practice, the blacksmith holds the hot iron at the anvil (with tongs) in one hand, and indicates where to strike the iron by tapping it with a small hammer in the other hand.
The resulting effect looks somewhat like waves along the top of the piece.
Then, to "fatten up" the outside radius of the bend, one or both arms of the bend would need to be pushed back to fill the outer radius of the curve.
In a traditional charcoal or coal forge, the fuel is really just carbon.
The terms are never interchangeable.
The hardened bronze can then be ground to sharpen it to make edged tools.
This iron had a very low carbon content, and also included up to 5% of glassy iron silicate slag in the form of numerous very fine stringers.
When iron ore is smelted into usable metal, a certain amount of carbon is usually alloyed with the iron.
* Shrinking (a type of upsetting)
If the carbon content is over 2%, the metal is called cast iron, because it has a relatively low melting point and is easily cast.
Each time a piece of steel is heated, there is a tendency for the carbon content to leave the steel (decarburization).
They  seem to have maintained a near monopoly on the knowledge of iron production for several hundred years, but when their empire collapsed during the Eastern Mediterranean upheavals around 1200 BC, the knowledge seems to have escaped in all directions.
Coal sold and purchased for blacksmithing should be largely free of sulfur.
The Romans (who ensured that their own weapons were made with good steel) noted (in the 4th century BC) that the Celts of the Po River Valley had iron, but not good steel.
A taper can result as in making a wedge or a woodworking chisel blade.
If the carbon content is between 0.25% and 2%, the resulting metal is tool grade steel, which can be heat treated as discussed above.
During the (north) Polar Exploration of the early 20th century, Inughuit, northern Greenlandic Inuit, were found to be making iron knives from two particularly large nickel-iron meteors.
During the 20th century and into the 21st century, this role has been increasingly obviated and automated through the use of trip hammers or reciprocating power hammers.
As iron heats to higher temperatures, it first glows red, then orange, yellow, and finally white.
The competition uses six tons of coke (fuel made from coal) and 1,300 linear feet of steel bar stock.
At this temperature the steel is near molten.
In southern Asia and western Africa, blacksmiths form endogenous castes that sometimes speak distinct languages.
Bronze is an alloy of copper and approximately 10% to 20% Tin.
Bronze is superior to just copper, by being harder, being more resistant to corrosion, and by having a lower melting point (thereby requiring less fuel to melt and cast).
Or, if a smith needed to put a 90-degree bend in a bar and wanted a sharp corner on the outside of the bend, they would begin by hammering an unsupported end to make the curved bend.
Another major difference between bronze and iron fabrication techniques is that bronze ''can'' be melted.
In the Iliad of Homer (describing the Trojan War and Bronze Age Greek and Trojan warriors), most of the armor and weapons (swords and spears) are stated to have been of bronze.
Thus the mating surfaces to be joined must be kept clean.
A range of treatments and finishes can inhibit oxidation and enhance or change the appearance of the piece.
The origin of "smith" is debated, it may come from the old English word "smythe" meaning "to strike" or it may have originated from the Proto-German "smithaz" meaning "skilled worker."
The Poetic Edda states that he forged beautiful gold rings with wonderful gems.
During the Chalcolithic era and the Bronze Age, humans in the Mideast learned how to smelt, melt, cast, rivet, and (to a limited extent) forge copper and bronze.
Iron, by contrast, is definitely a solid at , but over the next  it becomes increasingly plastic and more "taffy-like" as its temperature increases.
Aluminum and titanium may also be forged by the blacksmith's process.
As this source of this iron is extremely rare and fortuitous, little development of smithing skills peculiar to iron can be assumed to have occurred.
There is some challenge to this because, to see the color of the metal, the smith must remove it from the fire—exposing it to air, which can rapidly oxidize it.
At this time, the processes for making steel produced an extremely variable product—quality was not ensured at the initial point of sale.
It is quite brittle, however, and cannot be forged so therefore not used for blacksmithing.
Much of the fame of Sheffield cutlery (knives, shears, etc.)
Clocksmiths as recently as the 19th century used work hardening techniques to harden the teeth of brass gears and ratchets.
Forging—the process smiths use to shape metal by hammering—differs from machining in that forging does not remove material.
Though rarely hand-worked, titanium is notably hot short.
He was the god of metalworking, fire, and craftsmen.
Many blacksmiths also incorporate materials such as bronze, copper, or brass in artistic products.
The competition consists of a series of forging, horseshoeing and team events, which sees competitors earn points to qualify as one of the top 10 finalists as they compete for $35,000 in prize money.
Even punching and cutting operations (except when trimming waste) by smiths usually re-arrange metal around the hole, rather than drilling it out as swarf.
That we still possess any such artifacts of meteoric iron may be ascribed to the vagaries of climate, and the increased corrosion-resistance conferred on iron by the presence of nickel.
These produced blast-furnace temperatures high enough to melt partially refined ores, resulting in ''cast iron''.
The re-use of quality steel is another reason for the lack of artifacts.
By 2013 it had almost 4000 members.
Although they were unaware of the chemical basis, they were aware that the quality of the iron was thus improved.
Direct sunlight obscures the colors.
Forging uses seven basic operations or techniques:
The smith also carefully shapes mating faces so that as they come together foreign material squeezes out as the metal is joined.
An alternative to hammering on the hot end is to place the hot end on the anvil and hammer on the cold end.
Examples of ancient iron work still extant are very much the exception to the norm.
From a scientific point of view, the reducing atmosphere of the forge was both removing oxygen (rust), and soaking more carbon into the iron, thereby developing increasingly higher grades of steel as the process was continued.
Tubal-Cain is mentioned in the book of Genesis of the Torah as the original smith.
Currently there are many books, organizations and individuals working to help educate the public about blacksmithing, including local groups of smiths who have formed clubs, with some of those smiths demonstrating at historical sites and living history events.
Thus cast iron frying pans and cookware did not become possible in Europe until 3000 years after the introduction of iron smelting.
The key is to have consistent lighting, but not too bright.
Sometimes they use electrolytic-process pure iron.
What information exists indicates that all of the basic operations of blacksmithing were in use as soon as the Iron Age reached a particular locality.
Some modern blacksmiths who produce decorative metalwork refer to themselves as artist-blacksmiths.
If tapered in two dimensions, a point results.
He then seduced the king's daughter and escaped laughing on wings he himself had forged.
The scarcity of records and artifacts, and the rapidity of the switch from Bronze Age to Iron Age, is a reason to use evidence of bronze smithing to infer about the early development of blacksmithing.
By this time, most of the working blacksmiths were those performing farrier work, so the term ''blacksmith'' was effectively co-opted by the farrier trade.
A few light hammer taps bring the mating faces into complete contact and squeeze out the flux—and finally, the smith returns the work to the fire.
Seppo Ilmarinen, the Eternal Hammerer, blacksmith and inventor in the Kalevala, is an archetypal artificer from Finnish mythology.
In Celtic mythology, the role of Smith is held by eponymous (their names do mean 'smith') characters : Goibhniu  (Irish myths of the Tuatha Dé Danann cycle) or Gofannon (Welsh myths/ the Mabinogion  )
The smith now watches carefully to avoid overheating the metal.
was due to the extreme lengths the companies took to ensure they used high-grade steel.
Springs that had survived cracking through hard use over the rough roads of the time, had proven to be of a better quality steel.
Upsetting is the process of making metal thicker in one dimension through shortening in the other.
Iron is not unknown, however, as arrowheads are described as iron, and a "ball of iron" is listed as a prize awarded for winning a competition.
Forge welding is more difficult with modern mild steel, because it welds in a narrower temperature band.
Now the smith moves with rapid purpose, quickly taking the metal from the fire to the anvil and bringing the mating faces together.
Blacksmiths produce objects such as gates, grilles, railings, light fixtures, furniture, sculpture, tools, agricultural implements, decorative and religious items, cooking utensils and weapons.
When historical records resume after the 1200 BC upheavals and the ensuing Greek Dark Age, iron work (and presumably blacksmiths) seem to have sprung like Athena, fully-grown from the head of Zeus.
The winner is crowned ''The World Champion Blacksmith''.
Lathes, patterned largely on their woodturning counterparts, had been used by some blacksmiths since the middle-ages.
One of these meteors was taken to Washington, D.C., where it was remitted to the custody of the Smithsonian Institution.
The "black" in "blacksmith" refers to the black fire scale, a layer of oxides that forms on the surface of the metal during heating.
The localized stress-cycling causes the necessary crystalline changes.
(The technique is called fullering from the tool.)
In the primary operation was the bend, but the drawing and upsetting are done to refine the shape.
By contrast, the rest of the gear was left in a softer and tougher state, more capable of resisting cracking.
Accordingly, museums frequently preserve more examples of Bronze Age metal-work than examples of artifacts from the much younger Iron Age.
Buried iron artifacts may completely rust away in less than 100 years.
This slag content made the iron very tough, gave it considerable resistance to rusting, and allowed it to be more easily "forge welded," a process in which the blacksmith permanently joins two pieces of iron, or a piece of iron and a piece of steel, by heating them nearly to a white heat and hammering them together.
During the eighteenth century, agents for the Sheffield cutlery industry scoured the British country-side, offering new carriage springs for old.
Some metals are "hot short", meaning they lose their tensile strength when heated.
While there are many people who work with metal such as farriers, wheelwrights, and armorers, the blacksmith had a general knowledge of how to make and repair many things, from the most complex of weapons and armor to simple things like nails or lengths of chain.
Iron artifacts, composed of meteoric iron, have the chemical composition containing up to 40% nickel.
In this case, and at elevated temperatures, there is a tendency for vaporized carbon to soak ''into'' steel and iron, counteracting or negating the decarburizing tendency.
Völundr eventually had his revenge by killing Níðuðr's sons and forging objects to the king from their skulls, teeth and eyes.
Modern steel is produced using either the blast furnace or arc furnaces.
To clean the faces, protect them from oxidation, and provide a medium to carry foreign material out of the weld, the smith sometimes uses flux—typically powdered borax, silica sand, or both.
A '''blacksmith''' is a metalsmith who creates objects from wrought iron or steel by forging the metal, using tools to hammer, bend, and cut (cf.
In earlier ages, iron's qualities, in contrast to those of bronze, were not generally understood though.
For mild steel most smiths judge this temperature by color: the metal glows an intense yellow or white.
Bronze is sufficiently corrosion-resistant that artifacts of bronze may last thousands of years relatively unscathed.
The ideal heat for most forging is the bright yellow-orange color that indicates ''forging heat''.
The '''World Championship Blacksmiths'/Farrier Competition''' is held annually, during the Calgary Stampede.
They become like Plasticine: although they may still be manipulated by squeezing, an attempt to stretch them, even by bending or twisting, is likely to have them crack and break apart.
The fibrous nature of wrought iron required knowledge and skill to properly form any tool which would be subject to stress.
The smith commonly places the metal in the fire so he can see it without letting surrounding air contact the surface.
So the smith might probe into the fire with a bit of steel wire, prodding lightly at the mating faces.
While these are fine for blacksmithing iron, special care must be taken when using them to blacksmith steel.
In preindustrial times, the material of choice for blacksmiths was wrought iron.
Even such common smithing processes as decoratively twisting a bar are impossible with it.
