In July 1943 the ''Wehrmacht'' conducted Operation  (Citadel) against a salient at Kursk that was heavily defended by Soviet troops.
The surprise attack resulted in the near annihilation of the Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily (VVS, Soviet Air Force) by simultaneous attacks on airfields, allowing the Luftwaffe to achieve total air supremacy over all the battlefields within the first week.
It was only after the improvised plan for the Battle of France in 1940 was unexpectedly successful, that the German General Staff came to believe that ''vernichtungskrieg'' was still feasible.
Milward described an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy.
The Luftwaffe (the German air force) was established, and development began on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines.
("Kick, don't spatter them!
In the second article (1938), launching a swift strategic knock-out is described as an attractive idea for Germany but difficult to achieve on land under modern conditions (especially against systems of fortification like the Maginot Line), unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise could be achieved.
Terror bombing was deemed to be "counter-productive", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist.
By the time of the Second World War, their reports had led to doctrinal and training publications, including H. Dv.
Hitler had intended for a rapid unlimited war to occur much later than 1939, but the ''Third Reich's'' aggressive foreign policy forced the Nazi state into war before it was ready.
German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German ''Luftwaffe'' was able to control the air war in early campaigns in Europe and the Soviet Union.
He was later asked to write an explanatory book, which was titled ''Achtung Panzer!''
Hitler claimed that relying on surprise alone was "criminal" and that "we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack".
In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote "until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanks—properly employed, needless to say—are today the best means available for land attack."
To break through, armoured forces would attack an opposing defensive line frontally, supported by motorised infantry, artillery fire and aerial bombardment, to create a breach.
The French president of the Ministerial Council, Reynaud, attributed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:
Through constant pressure by infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus (Battle of Megiddo).
Their views had limited impact in the British army; the War Office permitted the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, lorried infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorised engineers but the force was disbanded in 1928 on the grounds that it had served its purpose.
Attacks were to rely on speed and surprise rather than on weight of numbers.
In this way they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced.
A third relatively early use of the term in German occurs in ''Die Deutsche Kriegsstärke'' (German War Strength) by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish, Marxist, political economist and refugee from the Third Reich, published in 1938 in Paris and in London as ''Germany and a Lightning War''.
Adam Tooze wrote that the German economy was being prepared for a long war.
Modern historians now understand blitzkrieg as the outcome of the rejuvenation of the traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century with the latest weapon systems of the interwar period.
The early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian.
It was later applied to the bombing of Britain, particularly London, hence "The Blitz" .
Hermann Göring promised that the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies but aerial operations failed to prevent the evacuation of the majority of the Allied troops.
The French armies were much reduced in strength and the confidence of their commanders shaken.
He thus transformed it into an army of commanders, who could cover at least the next level of command.
Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow.
Against these 600 sorties the Luftwaffe on average flew 1,500 sorties a day.
On May 13, ''Fliegerkorps'' VIII flew 1,000 sorties in support of the crossing of the Meuse.
The Allied air forces had no close air support aircraft, training or doctrine.
Thus, "the image of the German 'Blitzkrieg' army is a figment of propaganda imagination".
Blitzkrieg had been called a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) but many writers and historians have concluded that the Germans did not invent a new form of warfare but applied new technologies to traditional ideas of ''Bewegungskrieg'' (manoeuvre warfare) to achieve decisive victory.
He read Guderian's book ''Achtung – Panzer!''
This style, along with the shockingly rapid collapse in the armies that opposed it, came to be branded as blitzkrieg warfare.
At the Battle of Kursk the Red Army employed a combination of defence in great depth, extensive minefields, and tenacious defence of breakthrough shoulders.
Decision-making required time to gather information, make a decision, give orders to subordinates to implement the decision.
Rather the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German wars of unification.
Hitler was a strong supporter of this new strategy.
Specialist light infantry (''Sturmtruppen'' storm troops) were to exploit soft spots, to make gaps for larger infantry units to advance with heavier weapons and exploit the success, leaving isolated strong points to troops following up.
Blitzkrieg was not an official doctrine and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion that it did not exist as such.
On the ground, four German panzer groups outflanked and encircled disorganised Red Army units, while the marching infantry completed the encirclements and defeated the trapped forces.
Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior's intent and the role which his unit was to fill in this concept.
In fact, far from it being a specialist panzer spearhead arm, fewer than 15 percent of the Luftwaffe was intended for close support of the army in 1939.
Half of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready but less well-equipped than the British and French or the Imperial German Army of 1914.
Against this on 6 June the Luftwaffe flew some 300 sorties.
In  1942, Hitler dismissed it as "Italian phraseology".
Tactically, blitzkrieg is a coordinated military effort by tanks, motorized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to defeat the opponent and break through its defenses.
Launched in poor weather against a thinly held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air power was grounded by cloud cover.
The term had appeared in 1935, in a German military periodical  ("German Defense"), in connection to quick or lightning warfare.
Kielmansegg asserted that what many regarded as blitzkrieg was nothing more than "ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation".
Most academic historians regard the notion of blitzkrieg as military doctrine to be a myth.
487, ''Führung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen'' (Command and Battle of the Combined Arms), known as das Fug (1921–23) and ''Truppenführung'' (1933–34), containing standard procedures for combined-arms warfare.
The four editions of ''Field Service Regulations'' published after 1918 held that only combined-arms operations could create enough fire power to enable mobility on a battlefield.
Studies of operations in the east led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat power than large, uncoordinated forces.
The word, meaning "lightning war", in its strategic sense describes a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it could fully mobilize.
Guderian's leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalised by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s.
Frieser wrote that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German army concluded that decisive battles were no longer possible in the changed conditions of the twentieth century.
Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (1935–38), whom he alleged was sceptical that armoured forces could be decisive.
There has been a great deal of debate about whether it existed as a coherent military strategy.
In World War II, German Panzer forces used motorised mobility, to paralyse the opponent's ability to react.
The construction and training of motorised forces and a full mobilisation of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944 respectively.
Through his indoctrinated idealisation of an ostentatious concept, he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg.
Tooze wrote that the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy.
Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht."
The expenditure for this war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain.
Colonel Charles de Gaulle was an advocate of concentration of armour and aeroplanes.
It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological warfare by using Fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operations.
It was here that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the mass capture of prisoners and weapons.
The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940 and instead bombs sometimes had whistles attached.
The concept of a blitzkrieg ''Luftwaffe'' was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s.
He developed Plan 1919 for massive, independent tank operations, which he claimed were subsequently studied by the German military.
The Germans conquered large areas of the Soviet Union but their failure to destroy the Red Army before the winter of 1941 was a strategic failure that made German tactical superiority and territorial gains irrelevant.
Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote a number of articles concerning military movement.
A blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanised army.
The Allies flew 434 French and 160 British sorties a day but methods of attacking ground targets had yet to be developed; therefore Allied aircraft caused negligible damage.
The French and British frequently used their tanks in the dispersed role of infantry support rather than concentrating force at the point of attack, to create overwhelming firepower.
Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft returned to the battlefield.
The British army took lessons from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918.
The German army, contrary to the blitzkrieg legend, was not fully motorised and had only 120,000 vehicles, compared to the 300,000 of the French Army.
Hutier tactics were combined with short hurricane artillery bombardments using massed artillery, devised by Colonel Georg Bruchmüller.
With much of their own armour and heavy equipment lost in Northern France, they lacked the means to fight a mobile war.
Tanks and other motorised units could break out of the fortified zone without the encumbrance of slow-moving infantry moving on foot.
In English and other languages, the term had been used since the 1920s.
German gains were ultimately limited by Hitler diverting forces from the attack on Stalingrad and driving towards the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously.
The Red Army was to be destroyed west of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers, which were about  east of the Soviet border, to be followed by a mopping-up operation.
The method of execution was then a matter for the discretion of the subordinate commander.
General Edmund Allenby used infantry to attack the strong Ottoman front line in co-operation with supporting artillery, augmented by the guns of two destroyers.
It was flexible and it was able to carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing.
Robert M. Citino argues:
Later all Allied armies would copy this innovation.
A new experimental brigade was intended for the next year and became a permanent formation in 1933, during the cuts of the  financial years.
The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second, was partly the employment of a relatively small number of mechanised divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force.
Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938.
Mechanization of the army was considered a means to avoid mass casualties and indecisive nature of offensives, as part of a combined-arms theory of war.
and upon observing armoured field exercises at Kummersdorf he remarked, "That is what I want – and that is what I will have."
By April 1943, the Stavka had learned of German intentions through intelligence supplied by front line reconnaissance and Ultra intercepts.
In 2002, H. P. Willmott had noted that deep battle contained two important differences: it was a doctrine of total war, not limited operations, and decisive battle was rejected in favour of several large, simultaneous offensives.
During the Polish campaign, the performance of armoured troops, under the influence of Guderian's ideas,  won over a number of skeptics who had initially expressed doubt about armoured warfare, such as von Rundstedt and Rommel.
During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to re-form defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on.
In the summer of 1942, Germany launched another offensive in the southern USSR against Stalingrad and the Caucasus, the Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter.
Guderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war.
Guderian additionally required that tactical radios be widely used to facilitate co-ordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.
Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced Germany into war before rearmament was complete.
Although production of ''Luftwaffe'' fighter aircraft continued, they would be unable to fly for lack of fuel.
The German General Staff was abolished by the treaty but continued covertly as the ''Truppenamt'' (Troop Office), disguised as an administrative body.
It is variously argued that Fuller's wartime plans and post-war writings were an inspiration or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention.
Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, Georgii Isserson and other members of the Red Army developed a concept of deep battle from the experience of the Polish–Soviet War.
His views little endeared him to the French high command but are claimed by some to have influenced Heinz Guderian.
Of those Tiger tanks lost against the United States Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel.
During the Battle of Moscow, the Red Army defeated the German Army Group Center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative.
Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armoured corps and paratroopers.
Directive control was a fast and flexible method of command.
Some senior officers, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, even disputed the idea that it was a military concept.
"If the tanks succeed, then victory follows", he wrote.
In Operation Dynamo some  French and British troops escaped.
When the Allies counter-attacked at Arras using the heavily armoured British Matilda I and Matilda II tanks, a brief panic was created in the German High Command.
Strategies based on manoeuvre have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines, and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front (as opposed to, for example, the Dutch who had no territory to sacrifice).
After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and the Rotterdam Blitz in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of ''Luftwaffe'' doctrine.
Frieser wrote that surviving German economists and General Staff officers denied that Germany went to war with a blitzkrieg strategy.
The German popular press followed suit nine months later, after the fall of France in 1940; hence although the word had been used in German, it was first popularized by British journalism.
''Blitzkrieg'' as used by Germany had considerable psychological, or "terror" elements, such as the ''Jericho Trompete'', a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive-bomber, to affect the morale of enemy forces.
Steven Zaloga wrote, "Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzer and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units.
Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany; indeed, late in the war many panzer "divisions" had no more than a few dozen tanks.
The German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (''Fall Gelb'') and Operation Red (''Fall Rot'').
At the start of the war, only the German army was thus prepared with all tanks "radio equipped".
To obtain the best co-operation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, rigid control and adherence to orders.
What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of rocket launchers, guns and mortars.
The ''Schwerpunkt'' was the centre of gravity, point of main effort, where a decisive result was to be achieved.
The Germans did not achieve surprise and were not able to outflank or break through into enemy rear areas during the operation.
As the ideas of making use of the combustible engine in a protected encasement to bring mobility back to warfare developed in the German army, Guderian was a  leading proponent of the formations that would be used for this purpose.
Hermann Göring had consistently stated that the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war.
The German view of themselves as the losers of the war, may be linked to the senior and experienced officers' undertaking a thorough review, studying and rewriting of all their Army doctrine and training manuals.
While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the ''Luftwaffe'' deployed its resources in a more general, operational way.
Most of the German armoured forces were placed in Panzer Group von Kleist, which attacked through the Ardennes, a lightly defended sector that the French planned to reinforce if need be, before the Germans could bring up heavy and siege artillery.
Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could act quicker than the forces opposing them.
The Soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of German plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations, and the German commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced.
This is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funnelling forces into the spearhead, or lacks the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack.
Shimon Naveh wrote "The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations".
The Germans followed their initial success with Operation Red, a triple-pronged offensive.
Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimize interference by Allied aircraft.
On D-Day the Allies flew 14,500 sorties over the battlefield area alone, not including sorties flown over north-western Europe.
Overy disagreed with the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war, because the once popular belief that the Nazi state organised their economy to carry out its grand strategy in short campaigns was false.
Liddell Hart considered that important aspects of the operation were the extent to which Ottoman commanders were denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority and air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, which paralyzed attempts to react to the rapidly deteriorating situation.
However, the ''Luftwaffe'' was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine, other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy.
Prior to the German offensive in May, Winston Churchill had said "Thank God for the French Army".
His book offers scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won.
Blitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and that does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area.
French doctrine in the mid-war years was defence-oriented.
In an advance of , captures were estimated at "at least  prisoners and 260 guns."
Despite its ubiquity in German and British journalism during World War II,  was practically never used as official military terminology of the Wehrmacht during the war.
By Guderian's account he single handedly created the German tactical and operational methodology.
Frieser wrote that the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), which was created in 1938 had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long war of exhaustion (''ermattungskrieg'').
The Germans quickly advanced through the forest, knocking down the trees the French thought would impede this tactic.
Close air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber.
The rearmament of the ''Kriegsmarine'' was to have been completed in 1949 and the ''Luftwaffe'' rearmament program was to have matured in 1942, with a force capable of strategic bombing with heavy bombers.
Milward's theory was contrary to Hitler's and German planners' intentions.
He continued, "We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, and—what is perhaps even more important—that we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made."
Key elements in the "blitzkrieg warfare" at the decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed; success depended on attacking only in terrain favoring the movement of large formations around the battlefield and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack.
As the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade.
The German armies pushed on towards Amiens and then Paris, coming within  before supply difficulties and Allied reinforcements halted the advance.
The British methods induced "strategic paralysis" among the Ottomans and led to their rapid and complete collapse.
Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the ''Luftwaffe's'' main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces.
Military planners and bureaucrats in the war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term ''blitzkrieg'' in official documents.
Guderian said that the tank deployment was "on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made."
In the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited.
It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German army or air force, and no "coherent doctrine" or "unifying concept of blitzkrieg" existed.
This may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance.
General Hoth submitted an official report which declared that Rommel had "explored new paths in the command of Panzer divisions."
J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short, decisive campaigns – but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions.
What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then they were not able to operate normally.
After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions, after the event, claiming that the mobile tank warfare practised by the ''Wehrmacht'' was a result of his influence.
Determined defence by US troops in places throughout the Ardennes, the lack of good roads German supply shortages caused delays.
Heinz Guderian is widely regarded as being highly influential in developing the military methods of warfare used by Germany's tank men at the start of the Second World War.
Robert Watt (2008) wrote that blitzkrieg holds little in common with Soviet deep battle.
At the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war.
John Harris wrote that the Wehrmacht never used the word, and it did not appear in German army or air force field manuals; the word was coined in September 1939, by a ''Times'' newspaper reporter.
If it was instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armour would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed.
Other historians wrote that blitzkrieg was an operational doctrine of the German armed forces and a strategic concept on which the leadership of the ''Third Reich'' based its strategic and economic planning.
The term seems rarely to have been used in the German military press before 1939 and recent research at the German ''Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt'' at Potsdam found it in only two military articles from the 1930s.
Guderian met with opposition from some in the General Staff, who were distrustful of the new weapons and who continued to view the infantry as the primary weapon of the army.
During the Battle of France, the German blitzkrieg-style attack on France went through the Ardennes.
The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges.
Hutier-Bruchmüller tactics met with great success in Operation Michael, the spring offensive of 1918 and restored temporarily the war of movement, once the Allied trench system had been overrun.
Although effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years.
This was in shocking contrast to the four years of trench warfare they had engaged in during the First World War.
In 1939–40, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old and 50 percent of the soldiers had only a few weeks' training.
Richard Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939.
The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944.
J. P. Harris wrote that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed (as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States) that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that
This document, which the ''Luftwaffe'' adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet's theory of terror bombing.
After the war, the ''Reichswehr'' modified Hutier tactics.
In the summer of 1944, the Red Army destroyed Army Group Centre in Operation Bagration, using combined-arms tactics for armour, infantry and air power in a coordinated strategic assault, known as deep operations, which led to an advance of  in six weeks.
In addition, German air parity or superiority allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, their unhindered assembly into concentrated attack formations, aerial reconnaissance, aerial resupply of fast moving formations and close air support at the point of attack.
There is little doubt that the hilly, heavily wooded Ardennes could have been relatively easily defended by the Allies, even against the bulk of the German armoured units.
The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century.
It was Rommel who created the first archetype of Blitzkrieg, leading his division far ahead of flanking divisions.
Blitzkrieg operations capitalized on surprise penetrations (e.g., the penetration of the Ardennes forest region), general enemy unreadiness and their inability to match the pace of the German attack.
The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon and the XIX Panzer Corps encircled the Maginot Line.
