Catherine Sanderson, a.k.a.
Justin Hall, who began personal blogging in 1994 while a student at Swarthmore College, is generally recognized as one of the earlier bloggers, as is Jerry Pournelle.
However, success has been elusive offline, with many of these books not selling as well as their blogs.
Shortly thereafter, Evan Williams at Pyra Labs used "blog" as both a noun and verb ("to blog", meaning "to edit one's weblog or to post to one's weblog") and devised the term "blogger" in connection with Pyra Labs' Blogger product, leading to the popularization of the terms.
The basic conclusion from studies of the structure of blogs is that while it takes time for a blog to become popular through blogrolls, permalinks can boost popularity more quickly, and are perhaps more indicative of popularity and authority than blogrolls, since they denote that people are actually reading the blog's content and deem it valuable or noteworthy in specific cases.
Blogging can result in a range of legal liabilities and other unforeseen consequences.
Interest-specific blogging platforms are also available.
Egyptian blogger Abdel Monem Mahmoud was arrested in April 2007 for anti-government writings in his blog.
This is the first such legal case against bloggers in the country.
Daily Net News ran links and daily reviews of new websites, mostly in Australia.
On the other hand, Penelope Trunk wrote an upbeat article in the ''Boston Globe'' in 2006, entitled "Blogs 'essential' to a good career".
In some countries, Internet police or secret police may monitor blogs and arrest blog authors of commentators.
The suit was postponed while Delta was in bankruptcy proceedings.
The impact of blogging upon the mainstream media has also been acknowledged by governments.
He was fired two days after he complied with his employer's request to remove the sensitive material from his blog.
Companies and other organizations also use  external, publicly accessible blogs for marketing, branding, or public relations purposes.
In Singapore, two ethnic Chinese individuals were imprisoned under the country’s anti-sedition law for posting anti-Muslim remarks in their blogs.
Microblogging offers a portable communication mode that feels organic and spontaneous to many users.
The case addressed the murky legal question of who is liable for comments posted on blogs.
;Corporate and organizational blogs: A blog can be private, as in most cases, or it can be for business or not-for-profit organization or government purposes.
Others function as more personal online diaries, and others function more as online brand advertising of a particular individual or company.
A '''blog''' (a truncation of the expression '''''weblog''''') is a discussion or informational website published on the World Wide Web consisting of discrete, often informal diary-style text entries ("posts").
To wit: (television journalist) Dan Rather presented documents (on the CBS show ''60 Minutes'') that conflicted with accepted accounts of President Bush's military service record.
In education, blogs can be used as instructional resources.
In a bizarre twist, the Cahills were able to obtain the identity of John Doe, who turned out to be the person they suspected: the town's mayor, Councilman Cahill's political rival.
Bloggers such as Rustem Adagamov and Alexei Navalny have many followers and the latter's nickname for the ruling United Russia party as the "party of crooks and thieves" has been adopted by anti-regime protesters.
This practice of semi-automated blogging with live video together with text was referred to as sousveillance.
Kathy Sierra, author of the blog "Creating Passionate Users", was the target of threats and misogynistic insults to the point that she canceled her keynote speech at a technology conference in San Diego, fearing for her safety.
The book based on Julie Powell's blog "The Julie/Julia Project" was made into the film ''Julie & Julia'', apparently the first to do so.
In January 2007, two prominent Malaysian political bloggers, Jeff Ooi and Ahirudin Attan, were sued by a pro-government newspaper, The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad, Kalimullah bin Masheerul Hassan, Hishamuddin bin Aun and Brenden John a/l John Pereira over an alleged defamation.
Chinese media Xinhua reported that this blog received more than 50 million page views, claiming it to be the most popular blog in the world.
It can, therefore, be considered the first instantiation of a memetracker.
Simonetti took legal action against the airline for "wrongful termination, defamation of character and lost future wages".
This view was reinforced by documents and recorded interviews dug up by bloggers.
One can see such behaviour as co-optation into commodity culture insofar as it sometimes collaborates with corporate interests, but one can also see it as increasing the diversity of media culture, providing opportunities for greater inclusiveness, and making more responsive to consumers."
Internal corporate blogs can be used to communicate news about company policies or procedures, build employee esprit de corps and improve morale.
As the popularity of blogging continues to rise, the commercialisation of blogging is rapidly increasing.
Petite Anglaise, lost her job in Paris at a British accountancy firm because of blogging.
A wide and growing range of add-on tools enables sophisticated updates and interaction with other applications.
Companies use internal corporate blogs enhance the communication, culture and employee engagement in a corporation.
Monem is a member of the then banned Muslim Brotherhood.
After expressing opinions in his personal blog about the state of the Sudanese armed forces, Jan Pronk, United Nations Special Representative for the Sudan, was given three days notice to leave Sudan.
Discussion emerged as to whether the newspaper industry would benefit from a stimulus package by the federal government.
Some organizations have a blog authored by their executive; in practice, many of these executive blog posts are penned by a ghostwriter, who makes posts in the style of the credited author.
Wall and other "white hat" search engine optimization consultants had exposed Traffic Power in what they claim was an effort to protect the public.
However, there are many people who look negatively on this new development.
O'Reilly and others came up with a list of seven proposed ideas:
These can be written by several contributing authors on a topic, or opened up for anyone to write.
In the 2010s, "multi-author blogs" (MABs) have developed, with posts written by large numbers of authors and sometimes professionally edited.
The first known use of a blog on a news site was in August 1998, when Jonathan Dube of The ''Charlotte Observer'' published one chronicling Hurricane Bonnie.
Jessica Cutler, aka "The Washingtonienne", blogged about her sex life while employed as a congressional assistant.
It is the first time in the history of Egypt that a blogger was prosecuted.
In the United States, blogger Aaron Wall was sued by Traffic Power for defamation and publication of trade secrets in 2005.
Israel was among the first national governments to set up an official blog.
Although given in the blog in a fairly anonymous manner, some of the descriptions of the firm and some of its people were less than flattering.
Senator Strom Thurmond, praised Senator Thurmond by suggesting that the United States would have been better off had Thurmond been elected president.
;By device: A blog can also be defined by which type of device is used to compose it.
#Take responsibility not just for your own words, but for the comments you allow on your blog.
In some cases, bloggers have faced cyberbullying.
;Aggregated blogs: Individuals or organization may aggregate selected feeds on specific topic, product or service and provide combined view for its readers.
U.S. payouts related to blogging totaled $17.4 million by 2009; in some cases these have been covered by umbrella insurance.
The plaintiff was supported by the Malaysian government.
#If you know someone who is behaving badly, tell them so.
;Blog search engines: Several blog search engines have been used to search blog contents, such as Bloglines, BlogScope, and Technorati.
Before blogging became popular, digital communities took many forms, including Usenet, commercial online services such as GEnie, Byte Information Exchange (BIX) and the early CompuServe, e-mail lists, and Bulletin Board Systems (BBS).
Blog-based books have been given the name blook.
On 20 February 2014, there were around 172 million Tumblr and 75.8 million WordPress blogs in existence worldwide.
;Personal blogs: The personal blog is an ongoing online diary or commentary written by an individual, rather than a corporation or organization.
In recent years, the blogosphere has seen the emergence and growing popularity of more collaborative efforts, often set up by already established bloggers wishing to pool time and resources, both to reduce the pressure of maintaining a popular website and to attract a larger readership.
MABs from newspapers, other media outlets, universities, think tanks, advocacy groups, and similar institutions account for an increasing quantity of blog traffic.
These ideas were predictably intensely discussed on the Web and in the media.
The popularity of blogs has also given rise to "fake blogs" in which a company will create a fictional blog as a marketing tool to promote a product.
;Microblogging: Microblogging is the practice of posting small pieces of digital content—which could be text, pictures, links, short videos, or other media—on the Internet.
The Blogger's Code of Conduct is a proposal by Tim O'Reilly for bloggers to enforce civility on their blogs by being civil themselves and moderating comments on their blog.
There are examples of bloggers who have published books based on their blogs, e.g., Salam Pax, Ellen Simonetti, Jessica Cutler, ScrappleFace.
The Australian Netguide magazine maintained the Daily Net News on their web site from 1996.
However, Blogger does not offer public statistics.
Sierra and supporters initiated an online discussion aimed at countering abusive online behavior and developed a Blogger's Code of Conduct, which set out a rules for behaviour in the online space.
Meanwhile, an increasing number of experts blogged, making blogs a source of in-depth analysis.
Some institutions and organizations see blogging as a means of "getting around the filter" of media "gatekeepers" and pushing their messages directly to the public.
Sanderson later won a compensation claim case against the British firm, however.
, there were over 156&nbsp;million public blogs in existence.
A blog featuring discussions especially about home and family is not uncommonly called a mom blog and one made popular is by Erica Diamond who created Womenonthefence.com which is syndicated to over two million readers monthly.
While not a legitimate type of blog, one used for the sole purpose of spamming is known as a splog.
Blogs that are written on typewriters and then scanned are called typecast or typecast blogs.
The questions and answers were later posted on IsraelPolitik, the country's official political blog.
In August 2006, Technorati found that the most linked-to blog on the internet was that of Chinese actress Xu Jinglei.
Blogs used internally, and only available to employees via an Intranet are called corporate blogs.
In Myanmar, Nay Phone Latt, a blogger, was sentenced to 20 years in jail for posting a cartoon critical of head of state Than Shwe.
Other bloggers are media professionals who are publishing online, rather than via a TV station or newspaper, either as an add-on to a traditional media presence (e.g., hosting a radio show or writing a column in a paper newspaper), or as their sole journalistic output.
The Foreign Ministry also held a microblogging press conference via Twitter about its war with Hamas, with Saranga answering questions from the public in common text-messaging abbreviations during a live worldwide press conference.
One consequence of blogging is the possibility of online or in-person attacks or threats against the blogger, sometimes without apparent reason.
In India, blogger Gaurav Sabnis resigned from IBM after his posts questioned the claims made by a management school.
From 14 June 1993, Mosaic Communications Corporation maintained their "What’s New" list of new websites, updated daily and archived monthly.
An early milestone in the rise in importance of blogs came in 2002, when many bloggers focused on comments by U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott.
After the blog was discovered and she was fired, she wrote a novel based on her experiences and blog: ''The Washingtonienne: A Novel''.
She was one of the first journalists to point out that a large portion of bloggers are professionals and that a well-written blog can help attract employers.
The Sudanese army had demanded his deportation.
Cutler is presently being sued by one of her former lovers in a case that could establish the extent to which bloggers are obligated to protect the privacy of their real life associates.
Blogs have also had an influence on minority languages, bringing together scattered speakers and learners; this is particularly so with blogs in Gaelic languages.
Some bloggers have moved over to other media.
In 2009, a controversial and landmark decision by The Hon.
The blogdex project was launched by researchers in the MIT Media Lab to crawl the Web and gather data from thousands of blogs in order to investigate their social properties.
This system has the characteristics of a blog, and the writing of several authors.
Blogs are much harder to control than broadcast or print media, because a person with sophisticated computer skills can create a blog whose authorship is hard to trace, by using proxy server and website address spoofing.
Threads are topical connections between messages on a virtual "corkboard".
As a result, totalitarian and authoritarian regimes often seek to suppress blogs and/or to punish those who maintain them.
Examples of these include Twitter, Facebook, Tumblr and, by far the largest, WeiBo.
A tiny number of personal bloggers have become famous, both in the online community and in the real world.
The Cahills amended their original complaint, and the mayor settled the case rather than going to trial.
According to critics and other bloggers, Blogger is the most popular blogging service used today.
#Don't say anything online that you wouldn't say in person.
The blogger unconditionally withdrew his post, which resulted in several Indian bloggers criticizing NDTV for trying to silence critics.
This led to the Wall Street Journal calling Navalny "the man Vladimir Putin fears most" in March 2012.
Most blogs are primarily textual, although some focus on art (art blogs), photographs (photoblogs), videos (video blogs or "vlogs"), music (MP3 blogs), and audio (podcasts).
Consequently, CBS apologized for what it said were inadequate reporting techniques (see Little Green Footballs).
In that sense, blogging can be seen as a form of social networking service.
Some of these communities include  Indiblogger,  Blogadda,  Blog Chatter, BlogCatalog and MyBlogLog.
In general, attempts by employee bloggers to protect themselves by maintaining anonymity have proved ineffective.
Minority language publishing (which may lack economic feasibility) can find its audience through inexpensive blogging.
Researchers have actively analyzed the dynamics of how blogs become popular.
Blogs have led to some disintermediation and a breakdown of the traditional advertising model, where companies can skip over the advertising agencies (previously the only interface with the customer) and contact the customers directly via social media websites.
Mark Jen was terminated in 2005 after 10 days of employment as an assistant product manager at Google for discussing corporate secrets on his personal blog, then called 99zeros and hosted on the Google-owned Blogger service.
The ability of readers to leave comments in an interactive format is an important contribution to the popularity of many blogs.
The research community is working on going beyond simple keyword search, by inventing new ways to navigate through huge amounts of information present in the blogosphere, as demonstrated by projects like BlogScope, which was shut down in 2012.
Microblogging is another type of blogging, featuring very short posts.
The short form, "blog", was coined by Peter Merholz, who jokingly broke the word ''weblog'' into the phrase ''we blog'' in the sidebar of his blog Peterme.com in April or May 1999.
Many mainstream journalists, meanwhile, write their own blogs—well over 300, according to CyberJournalist.net's J-blog list.
Technorati has 1.3 million blogs as of February 22, 2014.
and usually contain a link back to the desired site using a keyword or several keywords.
As of 2008, blogging had become such a mania that a new blog was created every second of every minute of every hour of every day.
He blogged about unreleased products and company finances a week before the company's earnings announcement.
In 2009, NDTV issued a legal notice to Indian blogger Kunte for a blog post criticizing their coverage of the Mumbai attacks.
These blogs are referred to as edublogs.
After a brief trial session that took place in Alexandria, the blogger was found guilty and sentenced to prison terms of three years for insulting Islam and inciting sedition, and one year for insulting Mubarak.
Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas Mavericks, was fined during the 2006 NBA playoffs for criticizing NBA officials on the court and in his blog.
A rare type of blog hosted on the Gopher Protocol is known as a phlog.
The project was replaced by tailrank.com which in turn has been replaced by spinn3r.com.
Horton was a police officer in the United Kingdom who blogged about his job under the name "NightJack".
This case highlighted the issue of personal blogging and freedom of expression versus employer rights and responsibilities, and so it received wide media attention.
Blogging helped to create a political crisis that forced Lott to step down as majority leader.
The code was proposed in 2007 due to threats made to blogger Kathy Sierra.
subdomain in domain name (like http://planet.gnome.org/).
Most such writers called themselves diarists, journalists, or journalers.
However, the evolution of electronic and software tools to facilitate the production and maintenance of Web articles posted in reverse chronological order made the publishing process feasible to a much larger, less technical, population.
The emergence and growth of blogs in the late 1990s coincided with the advent of web publishing tools that facilitated the posting of content by non-technical users who did not have much experience with HTML or computer programming.
Such journals have been used as evidence in legal matters.
#Label your tolerance level for abusive comments.
;By genre: Some blogs focus on a particular subject, such as political blogs, journalism blogs, health blogs, travel blogs (also known as ''travelogs''), gardening blogs, house blogs, book blogs, fashion blogs, beauty blogs, lifestyle blogs, party blogs, wedding blogs, photography blogs, project blogs, psychology blogs, sociology blogs, education blogs, niche blogs, classical music blogs, quizzing blogs, legal blogs (often referred to as a blawgs), or dreamlogs.
However, there are high-readership blogs which do not allow comments.
Technorati was one of the more popular blog search engines, but the website stopped indexing blogs and assigning authority scores in May 2014.
Under David Saranga, the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs became active in adopting Web 2.0 initiatives, including an official video blog and a political blog.
Posts are typically displayed in reverse chronological order, so that the most recent post appears first, at the top of the web page.
While the vast majority of personal blogs attract very few readers, other than the blogger's immediate family and friends, a small number of personal blogs have become popular, to the point that they have attracted lucrative advertising sponsorship.
In early 2006, Erik Ringmar, a senior lecturer at the London School of Economics, was ordered by the convenor of his department to "take down and destroy" his blog in which he discussed the quality of education at the school.
Blogs are given rankings by Alexa Internet (web hits of Alexa Toolbar users), and formerly by blog search engine Technorati based on the number of incoming links (Technorati stopped doing this in 2014).
Some believe that any form of commercial activity on blogs will destroy the blogosphere’s credibility.
According to ''Wired'' magazine, Traffic Power had been "banned from Google for allegedly rigging search engine results."
The rise of Twitter and other "microblogging" systems helps integrate MABs and single-author blogs into the news media.
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), in general, are immune from liability for information that originates with third parties (U.S. Communications Decency Act and the EU Directive 2000/31/EC).
The case was dismissed for lack of personal jurisdiction, and Traffic Power failed to appeal within the allowed time.
For instance, Blogster has a sizable community of political bloggers among its members.
#Take the conversation offline, and talk directly, or find an intermediary who can do so.
More often, however, news blogs tend to react to material already published by the mainstream media.
This practice of semi-automated blogging with live video together with text was referred to as sousveillance, and such journals were also used as evidence in legal matters.
There is typically some limit to the number of entries to keep it from operating like a web forum.
In the book ''Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers'', Henry Jenkins stated that "Bloggers take knowledge in their own hands, enabling successful navigation within and between these emerging knowledge cultures.
;Collaborative blogs or group blogs: A type of weblog in which posts are written and published by more than one author.
Blogs can be hosted by dedicated blog hosting services, or they can be run using blog software, or on regular web hosting services.
Though Lott's comments were made at a public event attended by the media, no major media organizations reported on his controversial comments until after blogs broke the story.
Blogging can sometimes have unforeseen consequences in politically sensitive areas.
Following the suit, the Malaysian government proposed to "register" all bloggers in Malaysia in order to better control parties against their interest.
#Consider eliminating anonymous comments.
Global Voices aggregates international bloggers, "with emphasis on voices that are not ordinarily heard in international mainstream media."
Similar blogs for clubs and societies are called club blogs, group blogs, or by similar names; typical use is to inform members and other interested parties of club and member activities.
In ''Doe v. Cahill'', the Delaware Supreme Court held that stringent standards had to be met to unmask the anonymous bloggers, and also took the unusual step of dismissing the libel case itself (as unfounded under American libel law) rather than referring it back to the trial court for reconsideration.
Discussions "in the blogosphere" are occasionally used by the media as a gauge of public opinion on various issues.
''Blog'' can also be used as a verb, meaning ''to maintain or add content to a blog''.
In 2009, the presence of the American journalism industry had declined to the point that several newspaper corporations were filing for bankruptcy, resulting in less direct competition between newspapers within the same circulation area.
By 2004, the role of blogs became increasingly mainstream, as political consultants, news services, and candidates began using them as tools for outreach and opinion forming.
;Blogosphere: The collective community of all blogs and blog authors, particularly notable and widely read blogs, is known as the ''blogosphere''.
#Ignore the trolls.
On the other hand, new companies specialised in blog advertising have been established, to take advantage of this new development as well.
Many blogs provide commentary on a particular subject or topic, ranging from politics to sports.
Since all blogs are on the internet by definition, they may be seen as interconnected and socially networked, through blogrolls, comments, linkbacks (refbacks, trackbacks or pingbacks), and backlinks.
While a blogger's anonymity is often tenuous, Internet trolls who would attack a blogger with threats or insults can be emboldened by the anonymity of the online environment, where some users are known only by a pseudonymous "username" (e.g., "Hacker1984").
Dave Winer's Scripting News is also credited with being one of the older and longer running weblogs.
A typical blog combines text, digital images, and links to other blogs, web pages, and other media related to its topic.
The majority of high-profile collaborative blogs are based around a single uniting theme, such as politics, technology or advocacy.
For instance, the use of some sort of browser-based software is now a typical aspect of "blogging".
Indeed, bloggers do not only produce content to post on their blogs, but also build social relations with their readers and other bloggers.
In counterpoint, Hugh Hewitt exemplifies a mass media personality who has moved in the other direction, adding to his reach in "old media" by being an influential blogger.
U.S. President Barack Obama acknowledged the emerging influence of blogging upon society by saying "if the direction of the news is all blogosphere, all opinions, with no serious fact-checking, no serious attempts to put stories in context, then what you will end up getting is people shouting at each other across the void but not a lot of mutual understanding”.
It has captured the public imagination, in part because the short posts are easy to read on the go or when waiting.
Bloggers declared the documents to be forgeries and presented evidence and arguments in support of that view.
Several cases have been brought before the national courts against bloggers concerning issues of defamation or liability.
Many bloggers view this scandal as the advent of blogs' acceptance by the mass media, both as a news source and opinion and as means of applying political pressure.
In Russia, some political bloggers have started to challenge the dominance of official, overwhelmingly pro-government media.
;Reverse blog: A reverse blog is composed by its users rather than a single blogger.
Similarly, it was ''Emergency Preparedness and Safety Tips On Air and Online'' blog articles that captured Surgeon General of the United States Richard Carmona's attention and earned his kudos for the associated broadcasts by talk show host Lisa Tolliver and Westchester Emergency Volunteer Reserves-Medical Reserve Corps Director Marianne Partridge.
