In 1818 following experiments with animals, he performed the first successful transfusion of human blood to treat postpartum hemorrhage.
One of the earliest blood banks was established by Frederic Durán-Jordà during the Spanish Civil War in 1936.
Since the advent of HIV testing of donor blood in the 1980s, the transmission of HIV during transfusion has dropped dramatically.
For this discovery he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1930, and many other blood groups have been discovered since.
The administration of a single unit of blood is the standard for hospitalized people who are not bleeding, with this treatment then followed with re-assessment and consideration of symptoms and hemoglobin concentration.
Murphy, Jr. introduced the plastic bag for blood collection in 1950.
The resulting dried plasma package came in two tin cans containing 400 cc bottles.
According to the WHO, 25 countries are not able to screen all donated blood for one or more of: HIV; Hepatitis B; Hepatitis C; or syphilis.
Similar systems were established in other cities including Sheffield, Manchester and Norwich, and the service's work began to attract international attention.
The 300–400&nbsp;ml of extracted blood was mixed with 10% citrate solution in a modified Duran Erlenmeyer flask.
Antigen negative units are then tested against the patient plasma using an antiglobulin/indirect crossmatch technique at 37 degrees Celsius to enhance reactivity and make the test easier to read.
For example, Jehovah's Witnesses object to blood transfusions due to their belief that blood is sacred.
cause transfusion reactions, HDN, etc.).
In October 1915, Robertson performed his first wartime transfusion with a syringe to a patient suffering from multiple shrapnel wounds.
An antibody panel consists of commercially prepared group O red cell suspensions from donors that have been phenotyped for antigens that correspond to commonly encountered and clinically significant alloantibodies.
Historically, red blood cell transfusion was considered when the hemoglobin level fell below 10&nbsp;g/dL or hematocrit falls below 30% (the "10/30 rule").
Duran joined the Transfusion Service at the Barcelona Hospital at the start of the conflict, but the hospital was soon overwhelmed by the demand for blood and the paucity of available donors.
Hemopure, a hemoglobin-based therapy, is approved for use in South Africa.
Veterinarians also administer transfusions to other animals.
Replacing breakable glass bottles with durable plastic bags made from PVC allowed for the evolution of a collection system capable of safe and easy preparation of multiple blood components from a single unit of whole blood.
The advisory caution to use blood transfusion only with more severe anemia is in part due to evidence that outcomes are worsened if larger amounts are given.
It takes about 45 minutes to complete (depending on the method used).
* All donated blood should also be tested for the ABO blood group system and Rh blood group system to ensure that the patient is receiving compatible blood.
He followed this up with four subsequent transfusions in the following months and his success was reported to Sir Walter Morley Fletcher, director of the Medical Research Committee.
For example, testing for the post-transfusion RBC survival ''in vivo'' is done on a sample of healthy volunteers, and then compliance is presumed for all RBC units based on universal (GMP) processing standards (of course, RBC survival by itself does not guarantee efficacy, but it is a necessary prerequisite for cell function, and hence serves as a regulatory proxy).
However, all of these criteria are applied in a universal manner that does not account for differences among units of product.
It is preferable for the laboratory to obtain a pre-transfusion sample in these cases so a type and screen can be performed to determine the actual blood group of the patient and to check for alloantibodies.
The first step before a transfusion is given is to type and screen the recipient's blood.
Blood substitutes could make transfusions more readily available in emergency medicine and in pre-hospital EMS care.
Coga received 20 shillings to participate in the experiment.
However, in many species (especially horses and dogs), cross matching is not required before the ''first'' transfusion, as antibodies against non-self cell surface antigens are not expressed constitutively – i.e.
Robertson went on to establish the first blood transfusion apparatus at a Casualty Clearing Station on the Western Front in the spring of 1917.
According to the American Association of Blood Banks, the use of this blood should be restricted to persons with O negative blood, as nothing else is compatible with them, and women who might be pregnant and for whom it would be impossible to do blood group testing before giving them emergency treatment.
Before a recipient receives a transfusion, compatibility testing between donor and recipient blood must be done.
Loutit and Patrick L. Mollison of acid–citrate–dextrose (ACD) solution, which reduced the volume of anticoagulant, permitted transfusions of greater volumes of blood and allowed longer term storage.
Bogdanov was motivated, at least in part, by a search for eternal youth, and remarked with satisfaction on the improvement of his eyesight, suspension of balding, and other positive symptoms after receiving 11 transfusions of whole blood.
Jan Janský also discovered the human blood groups in 1907 which he classified blood into four groups I, II, III, IV.
Certain regulatory measures are in place to minimize RBC storage lesion – including a maximum shelf life (currently 42 days), a maximum auto-hemolysis threshold (currently 1% in the US, 0.8% in Europe), and a minimum level of post-transfusion RBC survival ''in vivo'' (currently 75% after 24 hours).
In 1845 the Edinburgh Journal described the successful transfusion of blood to a woman with severe uterine bleeding.
He made a substantial amount of money from this endeavour, roughly $2 million ($50 million real dollars).
Whenever possible, the AABB recommends that O negative blood be conserved by using blood type testing to identify a less scarce alternative.
Carl Walter and W.P.
In 2012, a national blood policy was in place in 70% of countries and 62% of countries had specific legislation that covers the safety and quality of blood transfusion.
Landsteiner discovered that adverse effects arise from mixing blood from two incompatible individuals.
Job losses will reach as high as 12,000 within the next three to five years, roughly a quarter of the total in the industry, according to the Red Cross.
In 1963, C. Paul Boyan and William S. Howland discovered that the temperature of the blood and the rate of infusion greatly affected survival rates, and introduced blood warming to surgery.
With red cells, this can decrease viability and ability for tissue oxygenation.
A large project, known as 'Blood for Britain' began in August 1940 to collect blood in New York City hospitals for the export of plasma to Britain.
During the years 1825 and 1830, Blundell performed 10 transfusions, five of which were beneficial, and published his results.
While the first transfusions had to be made directly from donor to receiver before coagulation, it was discovered that by adding anticoagulant and refrigerating the blood it was possible to store it for some days, thus opening the way for the development of blood banks.
Denys' third patient to undergo a blood transfusion was Swedish Baron Gustaf Bonde.
He had been called to see his sister after she had given birth.
The blood was stored in a sterile glass enclosed under pressure at 2&nbsp;°C.
Both used sodium citrate as an anticoagulant.
* In addition, in some countries platelet products are also tested for bacterial infections due to its higher inclination for contamination due to storage at room temperature.
Neonatal transfusions typically fall into one of two categories:
However the prevalence of transfusion-transmitted infections is much higher in low income countries compared to middle and high income countries.
He also experimented with preserving separated red blood cells in iced bottles.
In about three minutes, the plasma would be ready to use and could stay fresh for around four hours.
Although some of the biochemical changes are reversible after the blood is transfused, the biomechanical changes are less so, and rejuvenation products are not yet able to adequately reverse this phenomenon.
need for washed, irradiated or CMV negative blood) and the history of the patient to see if they have previously identified antibodies and any other serological anomalies.
The blood bank scientist also checks for special requirements of the patient (e.g.
A direct antiglobulin test (Coombs test) is also performed as part of the antibody investigation.
For red blood cells (RBC), by far the most commonly transfused product, poor transfusion efficacy can result from units damaged by the so-called storage lesion – a range of biochemical and biomechanical changes that occur during storage.
A positive screen warrants an antibody panel/investigation to determine if it is clinically significant.
In developing countries the donor is sometimes specifically recruited by or for the recipient, typically a family member, and the donation occurs immediately before the transfusion.
Oswald Hope Robertson, a medical researcher and U.S.&nbsp;Army officer was attached to the RAMC in 1917, where he was instrumental in establishing the first blood banks, in preparation for the anticipated Third Battle of Ypres.
Other rare transmissible infections include hepatitis B, syphilis, Chagas disease, cytomegalovirus infections (in immunocompromised recipients), HTLV, and Babesia.
By 1925, it was providing services for almost 500 patients and it was incorporated into the structure of the British Red Cross in 1926.
There has been controversy about whether a given product unit's age is a factor in transfusion efficacy, specifically about whether "older" blood directly or indirectly increases risks of complications.
The cardiac arrest rate was high.
The risk of severe bacterial infection is estimated, as of 2002, at about 1 in 50,000 platelet transfusions, and 1 in 500,000 red blood cell transfusions.
Because each unit of blood given carries risks, a trigger level lower than that at 7–8&nbsp;g/dL is now usually used as it has been shown to have better patient outcomes.
Presence of Cytomegalovirus (CMV) may also be tested because of the risk to certain immunocompromised recipients if given, such as those with organ transplant or HIV.
He used sodium citrate as the anticoagulant and the blood was extracted from punctures in the vein and was stored in bottles at British and American Casualty Clearing Stations along the Front.
Of course, restrictive protocol is not an option with some especially vulnerable patients who may require the best possible efforts to rapidly restore tissue oxygenation.
Guidelines recommend blood transfusions should be reserved for patients with or at risk of cardiovascular instability due to the degree of their anaemia.
Typing of recipient's blood determines the ABO and Rh status.
In the winter of 1667, Denys performed several transfusions on Antoine Mauroy with calf's blood.
Most guidelines recommend the provision of CMV-negative blood components and not simply leukoreduced components for newborns or low birthweight infants in whom the immune system is not fully developed.
In general, there are not yet any ''in vitro'' tests to assess quality or predict efficacy for specific units of RBC blood product prior to their transfusion, though there is exploration of potentially relevant tests based on RBC membrane properties such as erythrocyte deformability and erythrocyte fragility (mechanical).
Bogdanov died in 1928 as a result of one of his experiments, when the blood of a student suffering from malaria and tuberculosis was given to him in a transfusion.
After the second transfusion Bonde died.
If successful, such a blood substitute could save many lives, particularly in trauma where massive blood loss results.
In the same way that the safety of pharmaceutical products are overseen by pharmacovigilance, the safety of blood and blood products are overseen by haemovigilance.
Patients with poor oxygen saturation may need more blood.
John Braxton Hicks was the first to experiment with chemical methods to prevent the coagulation of blood at St Mary's Hospital, London in the late 19th century.
Most attempts to find a suitable alternative to blood thus far have concentrated on cell-free hemoglobin solutions.
Sources of contaminants include the donor's blood, donor's skin, phlebotomist's skin, and from containers.
This system evolved into the National Blood Transfusion Service established in 1946, the first national service to be implemented.
This can be due to several reasons, such as patient safety, economic burden or scarcity of blood.
By 2013, the number had declined to about 11 million units, due to the shift towards laparoscopic surgery and other surgical advances and studies that have shown that many transfusions were unnecessary.
Contaminating organisms vary greatly, and include skin flora, gut flora, or environmental organisms.
The evidence for this story, however, is unreliable and may have been motivated by anti-semitism.
Leukoreduced blood products are less likely to cause HLA alloimmunization (development of antibodies against specific blood types), febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction, cytomegalovirus infection, and platelet-transfusion refractoriness.
He found that when incompatible types are mixed, an immune response is triggered and the red blood cells clump.
Packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, and platelets are administered in lieu of crystalloids or whole blood.
Because blood type O negative is compatible with anyone, it is often overused and in short supply.
Donor cells may have heterozygous (e.g.
These are helping doctors and surgeons avoid the risks of disease transmission and immune suppression, address the chronic blood donor shortage, and address the concerns of Jehovah's Witnesses and others who have religious objections to receiving transfused blood.
In 1840, at St George's Hospital Medical School in London, Samuel Armstrong Lane, aided by Dr. Blundell, performed the first successful whole blood transfusion to treat haemophilia.
Physicians have adopted a so-called "restrictive protocol" – whereby transfusion is held to a minimum – due in part to the noted uncertainties surrounding storage lesion, in addition to the very high direct and indirect costs of transfusions.
Early transfusions used whole blood, but modern medical practice commonly uses only components of the blood, such as red blood cells, white blood cells, plasma, clotting factors, and platelets.
The First World War acted as a catalyst for the rapid development of blood banks and transfusion techniques.
In 1937 Bernard Fantus, director of therapeutics at the Cook County Hospital in Chicago, established the first hospital blood bank in the United States.
The Vatican condemned these experiments in 1670.
Volunteers were subjected to a series of physical tests to establish their blood group.
In the UK this data is collected by an independent organisation called SHOT (Serious Hazards Of Transfusion).
The destruction of red blood cells releases free hemoglobin into the bloodstream, which can have fatal consequences.
The transmission of hepatitis C via transfusion currently stands at a rate of about 1 in 2 million units.
By inactivating white blood cells in donated blood products, riboflavin and UV light treatment can also replace gamma-irradiation as a method to prevent graft-versus-host disease (TA-GvHD).
His nomenclature is still used in Russia and states of the former USSR, in which blood types O, A, B, and AB are respectively designated I, II, III, and IV.
Based on the reactions of the patient's serum against the donor cells, a pattern will emerge to confirm the presence of one or more antibodies.
If an antibody is suspected, potential donor units must first be screened for the corresponding antigen by phenotyping them.
Lower had performed the first blood transfusion between animals.
In developed countries, donations are usually anonymous to the recipient, but products in a blood bank are always individually traceable through the whole cycle of donation, testing, separation into components, storage, and administration to the recipient.
Blood is most commonly donated as whole blood intravenously and collecting it with an anticoagulant.
According to Lower's account, "...towards the end of February 1665 I selected one dog of medium size, opened its jugular vein, and drew off blood, until … its strength was nearly gone.
Halsted returned to New York in 1880 and for the next six years led an extraordinarily vigorous and energetic life.
Robertson published his findings in the ''British Medical Journal'' in 1916 and, with the help of a few like minded individuals (including the eminent physician Edward William Archibald who introduced the citrate anticoagulant method), was able to persuade the British authorities of the merits of blood transfusion.
Canadian doctor and Lieutenant Lawrence Bruce Robertson was instrumental in persuading the Royal Army Medical Corps to adopt the use of blood transfusion at the Casualty Clearing Stations for the wounded.
Subsequent transfusions were successful with patients of Professor James Young Simpson after whom the Simpson Memorial Hospital in Edinburgh was named.
Transfusions are used for various medical conditions to replace lost components of the blood.
This allowed them to withstand the allergic reaction.
After providing a donor, Oliver set about organizing a system for the voluntary registration of blood donors at clinics around London, with Sir Geoffrey Keynes appointed as a medical adviser.
Shortly after, Lower moved to London, where his growing practice soon led him to abandon research.
The sample is then screened for any alloantibodies that may react with donor blood.
However, due to latent infection (the "window period" in which an individual is infectious, but has not had time to develop antibodies), many cases of HIV seropositive blood were missed.
In 1882 he performed one of the first gallbladder operations in the United States (a cholecystotomy performed on his mother on the kitchen table at 2&nbsp;am).
Red cells, plasma and platelets can also be donated individually via a more complex process called apheresis.
The London Blood Transfusion Service was free of charge and expanded rapidly in its first few years of operation.
Similar services were established in France, Germany, Austria, Belgium, Australia and Japan.
Denys performed another transfusion into a labourer, who also survived.
He operated at multiple hospitals, including Roosevelt Hospital, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Charity Hospital, Emigrant Hospital, Bellevue Hospital and Chambers Street Hospital.
The use of blood plasma as a substitute for whole blood and for transfusion purposes was proposed as early as 1918, in the correspondence columns of the ''British Medical Journal'', by Gordon R. Ward.
Halsted also performed one of the first blood transfusions in the United States.
He received two transfusions.
The Argentine doctor Luis Agote used a much less diluted solution in November of the same year.
However, early transfusions were risky and many resulted in the death of the patient.
Donated blood is usually subjected to processing after it is collected, to make it suitable for use in specific patient populations.
Stetson discovered the Rhesus blood group system, which was found to be the cause of the majority of transfusion reactions up to that time.
the animal has to be sensitized before it will mount an immune response against the transfused blood.
The latter is much more common than the former.
In cases where patients have low levels of hemoglobin but are cardiovascularly stable, parenteral iron is a preferred option based on both efficacy and safety.
Prior testing of donor blood only included testing for antibodies to HIV.
These specific requirements place additional restrictions on blood donors who can donate for neonatal use.
By the late 19th century, blood transfusion was regarded as a risky and dubious procedure, and was largely shunned by the medical establishment.
It was the most common procedure performed for patients 45 years of age and older in 2011, and among the top five most common for patients between the ages of 1 and 44 years.
For example, cats have 3 known blood types, cattle have 11, dogs have 12, pigs 16 and horses have 34.
The boys subsequently died.
He found her moribund from blood loss, and in a bold move withdrew his own blood, transfused his blood into his sister, and then operated on her to save her life.
One bottle contained enough distilled water to reconstitute the dried plasma contained within the other bottle.
Other blood products are given where appropriate, such as clotting deficiencies.
He also invented a number of instruments for the transfusion of blood.
This enables management and investigation of any suspected transfusion related disease transmission or transfusion reaction.
As transmittance of HIV does not necessarily mean HIV infection, the latter could still occur, at an even lower rate.
K+k−), homozygous (K+k+) expression or no expression of various antigens (K−k−).
William Stewart Halsted, M.D.
Titled in Czech "Hematologická studie u psychotiků".
In these cases parenteral iron is recommended.
There is controversy on potential quality degradation during storage.
British policy through the war was to supply military personnel with blood from centralized depots, in contrast to the approach taken by the Americans and Germans where troops at the front were bled to provide required blood.
Although there are clinical situations where transfusion with red blood cells is the only clinically appropriate option, clinicians look at whether alternatives as feasible.
Yudin performed such a transfusion successfully for the first time on March 23, 1930 and reported his first seven clinical transfusions with cadaveric blood at the Fourth Congress of Ukrainian Surgeons at Kharkiv in September.
However, not all blood is tested for CMV because only a certain amount of CMV-negative blood needs to be available to supply patient needs.
Typically higher ratios of fresh frozen plasma and platelets are given relative to packed red blood cells.
* "Top-up" transfusions, to replace losses due to investigational losses and correction of anemia.
* Exchange (or partial exchange) transfusions are done for removal of bilirubin, removal of antibodies and replacement of red cells (e.g., for anemia secondary to thalassemias and other hemoglobinopathies).
His attempts, using phosphate of soda, however, were unsuccessful.
If there is no antibody present, an immediate spin crossmatch or computer assisted crossmatch is performed where the recipient serum and donor rbc are incubated.
Geoffrey Keynes, a British surgeon, developed a portable machine that could store blood to enable transfusions to be carried out more easily.
One may consider transfusion for people with symptoms of cardiovascular disease such as chest pain or shortness of breath.
In urgent cases where crossmatching cannot be completed, and the risk of dropping hemoglobin outweighs the risk transfusing uncrossmatched blood, O-negative blood is used, followed by crossmatch as soon as possible.
Dr. Charles R. Drew was appointed medical supervisor, and he was able to transform the test tube methods into the first successful technique for mass production.
Within a few years, hospital and community blood banks were established across the United States.
The recipient was Arthur Coga, "the subject of a harmless form of insanity."
As with HIV, this low rate has been attributed to the ability to screen for both antibodies as well as viral RNA nucleic acid testing in donor blood.
Although transfusions of platelets are far less numerous (relative to RBC), platelet storage lesion and resulting efficacy loss is also a concern.
In creating a hospital laboratory that preserved, refrigerated and stored donor blood, Fantus originated the term "blood bank".
Various species require different levels of testing to ensure a compatible match.
This is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a system "...to identify and prevent occurrence or recurrence of transfusion related unwanted events, to increase the safety, efficacy and efficiency of blood transfusion, covering all activities of the transfusion chain from donor to recipient."
Then, to make up for the great loss of this dog by the blood of a second, I introduced blood from the cervical artery of a fairly large mastiff, which had been fastened alongside the first, until this latter animal showed … it was overfilled … by the inflowing blood."
This can result in life-threatening infection, also known as transfusion-transmitted bacterial infection.
The development of a nucleic acid test for the HIV-1 RNA has dramatically lowered the rate of donor blood seropositivity to about 1 in 3 million units.
An academic institution devoted to the science of blood transfusion was founded by Alexander Bogdanov in Moscow in 1925.
Other than positivity for CMV, any products tested positive for infections are not used.
Edinburgh later became the home of the first blood donation and blood transfusion services.
Another important breakthrough came in 1939–40 when Karl Landsteiner, Alex Wiener, Philip Levine, and R.E.
However, this method was never used widely, even in Russia.
A number of blood substitutes have been explored (and still are), but thus far they all suffer from many challenges.
Before a blood transfusion is given, there are many steps taken to ensure quality of the blood products, compatibility, and safety to the recipient.
As of 2006, there were about 15 million units of blood products transfused per year in the United States.
The first non-direct transfusion was performed on March&nbsp;27, 1914 by the Belgian doctor Albert Hustin, though this was a diluted solution of blood.
The British method proved to be more successful at adequately meeting all requirements and over 700,000 donors were bled over the course of the war.
With support from the Department of Health of the Spanish Republican Army, Duran established a blood bank for the use of wounded soldiers and civilians.
The immunological reaction occurs when the receiver of a blood transfusion has antibodies against the donor blood cells.
Not all antibodies are clinically significant (i.e.
A ''massive transfusion protocol'' is used for massive trauma resuscitation, when more than ten units of blood are needed.
O-negative is also used for children and women of childbearing age.
* The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that all donated blood be tested for transfusion transmissible infections.
