Smith would "sing a song in an unusual key, and her artistry in bending and stretching notes with her beautiful, powerful contralto to accommodate her own interpretation was unsurpassed."
Expressive guitar solos were a key feature of this music.
Notable blues rock musicians of this period include Joe Bonamassa,  Gary Clark Jr., Shemekia Copeland, Eric Gales, Beth Hart, Warren Haynes, Jason Ricci, Susan Tedeschi, Derek Trucks, Ben Harper (in collaboration with Charlie Musselwhite) and Orianthi.
While the style is often associated with solo piano, boogie-woogie was also used to accompany singers and, as a solo part, in bands and small combos.
However, beginning in the 1990s, digital multitrack recording and other technological advances and new marketing strategies including video clip production increased costs, challenging the spontaneity and improvisation that are an important component of blues music.
Levine stated that "psychologically, socially, and economically, African-Americans were being acculturated in a way that would have been impossible during slavery, and it is hardly surprising that their secular music reflected this as much as their religious music did."
In 1920 the vaudeville singer Lucille Hegamin became the second black woman to record blues when she recorded "The Jazz Me Blues".
Blue notes (or "worried notes"), usually thirds or fifths flattened in pitch, are also an essential part of the sound.
The blues form is a cyclic musical form in which a repeating progression of chords mirrors the call and response scheme commonly found in African and African-American music.
World War II marked the transition from acoustic to electric blues and the progressive opening of blues music to a wider audience, especially white listeners.
The term ''blues'' may have come from "blue devils", meaning melancholy and sadness; an early use of the term in this sense is in George Colman's one-act farce ''Blue Devils'' (1798).
The lyrics often relate troubles experienced within African American society.
In England, electric blues took root there during a much acclaimed Muddy Waters tour.
A form of this pre-blues was heard in slave ring shouts and field hollers, expanded into "simple solo songs laden with emotional content".
Bebop classics, such as Charlie Parker's "Now's the Time", used the blues form with the pentatonic scale and blue notes.
Black and white musicians shared the same repertoire and thought of themselves as "songsters" rather than blues musicians.
During the early 1950s, the dominating Chicago labels were challenged by Sam Phillips' Sun Records company in Memphis, which recorded B.
Country blues performers often improvised, either without accompaniment or with only a banjo or guitar.
An important label of this era was the Chicago-based Bluebird Records.
After Phillips discovered Elvis Presley in 1954, the Sun label turned to the rapidly expanding white audience and started recording mostly rock 'n' roll.
Jump blues grew up from the boogie woogie wave and was strongly influenced by big band music.
Blues shuffles or walking bass reinforce the trance-like rhythm and call-and-response, and they form a repetitive effect called a groove.
The smooth Louisiana style of Professor Longhair and, more recently, Dr. John blends classic rhythm and blues with blues styles.
Strongly influenced by Jimmy Reed, Swamp blues has a slower pace and a simpler use of the harmonica than the Chicago blues style performers such as Little Walter or Muddy Waters.
In the late 1950s, a new blues style emerged on Chicago's West Side pioneered by Magic Sam, Buddy Guy and Otis Rush on Cobra Records.
The bassist and prolific songwriter and composer Willie Dixon played a major role on the Chicago blues scene.
The blues evolved from informal performances in bars to entertainment in theaters.
Chords for a blues in C:
At the time, there was no clear musical division between "blues" and "country," except for the ethnicity of the performer, and even that was sometimes documented incorrectly by record companies.
The lyrics generally end on the last beat of the tenth bar or the first beat of the 11th bar, and the final two bars are given to the instrumentalist as a break; the harmony of this two-bar break, the turnaround, can be extremely complex, sometimes consisting of single notes that defy analysis in terms of chords.
Spiritual singing developed because African-American communities could gather for mass or worship gatherings, which were called camp meetings.
1998 brought a sequel, ''Blues Brothers 2000'' that, while not holding as great a critical and financial success, featured a much larger number of blues artists, such as B.B.
White audiences' interest in the blues during the 1960s increased due to the Chicago-based Paul Butterfield Blues Band featuring guitarist Michael Bloomfield, and the British blues movement.
At a 7:4 ratio, it is not close to any interval on the conventional Western diatonic scale.
In the UK, bands emulated U.S. blues legends, and UK blues rock-based bands had an influential role throughout the 1960s.
His style of music was not exactly rockabilly but it has been often called real rock and roll (this is a label he shares with several African American rock and roll performers).
The little-recorded Robert Johnson combined elements of urban and rural blues.
Handy, who first heard the blues in Tutwiler, Mississippi, in 1903.
Eric Clapton, known for his performances with the Blues Breakers and Cream, made a comeback in the 1990s with his album ''Unplugged'', in which he played some standard blues numbers on acoustic guitar.
Chicago became a center for electric blues from 1948 on, when Muddy Waters recorded his first success, "I Can't Be Satisfied."
They are labeled by Roman numbers referring to the degrees of the progression.
Although blues (as it is now known) can be seen as a musical style based on both European harmonic structure and the African call-and-response tradition that transformed into an interplay of voice and guitar, the blues form itself bears no resemblance to the melodic styles of the West African griots, and the influences are faint and tenuous.
While popular musicians like Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry, both recording for Chess, were influenced by the Chicago blues, their enthusiastic playing styles departed from the melancholy aspects of blues.
Blues musical styles, forms (12-bar blues), melodies, and the blues scale have influenced many other genres of music, such as rock and roll, jazz, and popular music.
In the 1920s, the blues became a major element of African American and American popular music, reaching white audiences via Handy's arrangements and the classic female blues performers.
You know they killed my sister and my brother,
Perhaps the most visible example of the blues style of music in the late 20th century came in 1980, when Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi released the film ''The Blues Brothers''.
The 12-bar blues structure can be found even in novelty pop songs, such as Bob Dylan's "Obviously Five Believers" and Esther and Abi Ofarim's "Cinderella Rockefella."
Additionally, there are theories that the four-beats-per-measure structure of the blues might have its origins in the Native American tradition of pow wow drumming.
Blues performances were organized by the Theater Owners Bookers Association in nightclubs such as the Cotton Club and juke joints such as the bars along Beale Street in Memphis.
Blues has evolved from the unaccompanied vocal music and oral traditions of slaves imported from West Africa and rural blacks into a wide variety of styles and subgenres, with regional variations across the United States.
Reports of blues music in southern Texas and the Deep South were written at the dawn of the 20th century.
At the end of the 1950s appeared the bluesy Tulsa Sound merging rock'n'roll, jazz and country influences.
This marketing strategy reinforced trends in urban blues music such as the use of electric instruments and amplification and the generalization of the blues beat, the blues shuffle, which became ubiquitous in R&B.
''Blues'' became a code word for a record designed to sell to black listeners.
The blues chords associated to a twelve-bar blues are typically a set of three different chords played over a 12-bar scheme.
From the late 2000s to the present day, blues rock has gained a cultural following, especially after the rise of the Internet, when artists started creating YouTube channels, forums, and Facebook pages.
In 2003, Martin Scorsese made significant efforts to promote the blues to a larger audience.
The blues scale is ubiquitous in modern popular music and informs many modal frames, especially the ladder of thirds used in rock music (for example, in "A Hard Day's Night").
Much of the time, some or all of these chords are played in the harmonic seventh (7th) form.
For instance, for a blues in the key of C, C is the tonic chord (I) and F is the subdominant (IV).
Zydeco musicians used electric solo guitar and cajun arrangements of blues standards.
In the early 1970s, The Texas rock-blues style emerged, which used guitars in both solo and rhythm roles.
The Diddley bow (a homemade one-stringed instrument found in parts of the American South in the early twentieth century) and the banjo are African-derived instruments that may have helped in the transfer of African performance techniques into the early blues instrumental vocabulary.
The repertoires of many seminal blues artists, such as Charley Patton and Skip James, included religious songs or spirituals.
In the early 20th century, the blues was considered disreputable, especially as white audiences began listening to the blues during the 1920s.
However, there are some characteristics that were present long before the creation of the modern blues.
Blues incorporated spirituals, work songs, field hollers, shouts, chants, and rhymed simple narrative ballads.
By the late 1950s, the swamp blues genre developed near Baton Rouge, with performers such as Lightnin' Slim, Slim Harpo, Sam Myers and Jerry McCain around the producer J. D. "Jay" Miller and the Excello label.
Handy was the first to popularize blues-influenced music among non-black Americans.
In the early twentieth century, W.C.
Several record companies, such as the American Record Corporation, Okeh Records, and Paramount Records, began to record African-American music.
Blues songs with sexually explicit lyrics were known as dirty blues.
The transition from country blues to urban blues that began in the 1920s was driven by the successive waves of economic crisis and booms which led many rural blacks to move to urban areas, in a movement known as the Great Migration.
Blues guitarist and vocalist Keb' Mo' performed his blues rendition of "America, the Beautiful" in 2006 to close out the final season of the television series ''The West Wing''.
Many compilations of classic prewar blues were republished by the Yazoo Records.
The banjo seems to be directly imported from West African music.
Musicians were therefore segregated into two categories: gospel singers and blues singers, guitar preachers and songsters.
Often termed "soul blues" or "Southern soul", the music at the heart of this movement was given new life by the unexpected success of two particular recordings on the Jackson-based Malaco label: Z.
The band formed also began a successful tour under the Blues Brothers marquee.
That blue notes predate their use in blues and have an African origin is attested to by "A Negro Love Song", by the English composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, from his ''African Suite for Piano'', written in 1898, which contains blue third and seventh notes.
The film drew many of the biggest living influencers of the Rhythm and blues genre together, such as Ray Charles, James Brown, Cab Calloway, Aretha Franklin, and John Lee Hooker.
Edward P. Comentale has noted how the blues was often used as a medium for art or self-expression, stating: "As heard from Delta shacks to Chicago tenements to Harlem cabarets, the blues proved—despite its pained origins—a remarkably flexible medium and a new arena for the shaping of identity and community."
In the 1930s, Lomax and his son Alan made a large number of non-commercial blues recordings that testify to the huge variety of proto-blues styles, such as field hollers and ring shouts.
John Lee Hooker's popularity was revived with the album ''The Healer'' in 1989.
White performers had brought African-American music to new audiences, both within the U.S. and abroad.
Dick Waterman and the blues festivals he organized in Europe played a major role in propagating blues music abroad.
They argue that the development of the blues is associated with the newly acquired freedom of the enslaved people.
Jump blues tunes by Louis Jordan and Big Joe Turner, based in Kansas City, Missouri, influenced the development of later styles such as rock and roll and rhythm and blues.
No specific African musical form can be identified as the single direct ancestor of the blues.
The musical forms and styles that are now considered the blues as well as modern country music arose in the same regions of the southern United States during the 19th century.
Since the 1980s there has been a resurgence of interest in the blues among a certain part of the African-American population, particularly around Jackson, Mississippi and other deep South regions.
Musically, spirituals were a descendant of New England choral traditions, and in particular of Isaac Watts's hymns, mixed with African rhythms and call-and-response forms.
Prominent jazz, folk or rock performers, such as Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Miles Davis, and Bob Dylan have performed significant blues recordings.
The lines are often sung following a pattern closer to rhythmic talk than to a melody.
Mamie Smith, more a vaudeville performer than a blues artist, was the first African American to record a blues song in 1920; her second record, "Crazy Blues", sold 75,000 copies in its first month.
Boogie-Woogie style was characterized by a regular bass figure, an ostinato or riff and shifts of level in the left hand, elaborating each chord and trills and decorations in the right hand.
Although the blues gained an association with misery and oppression, the lyrics could also be humorous and raunchy:
Chords played over a 12-bar scheme:
African-American singers voiced his or her "personal woes in a world of harsh reality: a lost love, the cruelty of police officers, oppression at the hands of white folk, and hard times."
Most artists of the Chicago blues style recorded for the Chicago-based Chess Records and Checker Records labels.
Before the blues gained its formal definition in terms of chord progressions, it was defined as the secular counterpart of spirituals.
Electric blues used electric guitars, double bass (gradually replaced by bass guitar), drums, and harmonica (or "blues harp") played through a microphone and a PA system or an overdriven guitar amplifier.
During the first decades of the 20th century blues music was not clearly defined in terms of a particular chord progression.
The blue notes allow for key moments of expression during the cadences, melodies, and embellishments of the blues.
It uses saxophone or other brass instruments and the guitar in the rhythm section to create a jazzy, up-tempo sound with declamatory vocals.
Boogie-woogie was another important style of 1930s and early 1940s urban blues.
After WWII, blues had a substantial influence on jazz.
These specialized notes are called the ''blue'' or ''bent notes''.
This melancholy has led to the suggestion of an Igbo origin for blues because of the reputation the Igbo had throughout plantations in the Americas for their melancholic music and outlook on life when they were enslaved.
Several scholars characterize the development of blues music in the early 1900s as a move from group performance to individualized performance.
In 1986 the album ''Strong Persuader'' announced Robert Cray as a major blues artist.
After World War II, new styles of electric blues became popular in cities such as Chicago, Memphis, Detroit and St. Louis.
Another development in this period was big band blues.
Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters were known for their deep, "gravelly" voices.
The origins of the blues are closely related to the religious music of Afro-American community, the spirituals.
It was only in the first decades of the 20th century that the most common current structure became standard: the AAB pattern, consisting of a line sung over the four first bars, its repetition over the next four, and then a longer concluding line over the last bars.
When Jerry Lee Lewis returned to country after the decline of 1950s style rock and roll, he sang his country with a blues feel and often included blues standards on his albums.
Performers such as Frank Stokes, Sleepy John Estes, Robert Wilkins, Joe McCoy, Casey Bill Weldon and Memphis Minnie used a variety of unusual instruments such as washboard, fiddle, kazoo or mandolin.
Yet, if one looks back further, Arnold also started out singing bluesy songs like 'I'll hold you in my heart'.
Dallas-born T-Bone Walker, who is often associated with the California blues style, performed a successful transition from the early urban blues à la Lonnie Johnson and Leroy Carr to the jump blues style and dominated the blues-jazz scene at Los Angeles during the 1940s.
: And I can't get no hearing from that Memphis girl of mine."
B. Lenoir from the Chicago blues movement in the 1950s recorded several LPs using acoustic guitar, sometimes accompanied by Willie Dixon on the acoustic bass or drums.
In the 1990s, the largely ignored hill country blues gained minor recognition in both blues and alternative rock music circles with northern Mississippi artists R. L. Burnside and Junior Kimbrough.
This rapidly evolving market was mirrored by ''Billboard'' magazine's Rhythm and Blues chart.
In lyrics the phrase is often used to describe a depressed mood.
The audience for both blues and jazz split, and the border between blues and jazz became more defined.
The writer Ed Morales claimed that Yoruba mythology played a part in early blues, citing Robert Johnson's "Cross Road Blues" as a "thinly veiled reference to Eleggua, the orisha in charge of the crossroads".
Blues shuffles or walking bass reinforce the trance-like rhythm and form a repetitive effect known as the groove.
Nonetheless, the recordings of some of the classic female blues singers were purchased by white buyers as well.
Through these artists and others, blues music influenced the development of rock music.
During this period, Freddie King and Albert King often played with rock and soul musicians (Eric Clapton and Booker T & the MGs) and had a major influence on those styles of music.
In contrast with the West Side blues, the Texas style is strongly influenced by the British rock-blues movement.
Blues music also adopted elements from the "Ethiopian airs", minstrel shows and Negro spirituals, including instrumental and harmonic accompaniment.
Later, several recordings were made by Robert W. Gordon, who became head of the Archive of American Folk Songs of the Library of Congress.
It was the low-down music played by rural blacks.
Early blues frequently took the form of a loose narrative.
A record of blues music as it existed before 1920 can also be found in the recordings of artists such as Lead Belly and Henry Thomas.
His first hit, "Boogie Chillen," reached number 1 on the R&B charts in 1949.
Although the audience was largely jolted by the performance, the performance influenced local musicians such as Alexis Korner and Cyril Davies to emulate this louder style, inspiring the British invasion of the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds.
Idiosyncratic numbers of bars are occasionally used, such as the 9-bar progression in "Sitting on Top of the World", by Walter Vinson.
Early country music was infused with the blues.
The blues' 12-bar structure and the blues scale was a major influence on rock and roll music.
However the call-and-response format can be traced back to the music of Africa.
Hart Wand's "Dallas Blues" followed in 1912; W. C. Handy's "The Memphis Blues" followed in the same year.
When this riff was played over the bass and the drums, the groove "feel" was created.
Hendrix was a skilled guitarist, and a pioneer in the innovative use of distortion and audio feedback in his music.
For instance Blind Lemon Jefferson's "Rising High Water Blues" (1927) tells of the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927:
There are few characteristics common to all blues music, because the genre took its shape from the idiosyncrasies of individual performers.
: "Backwater rising, Southern peoples can't make no time
: "Rebecca, Rebecca, get your big legs off of me,
Many blues musicians based in Memphis moved to Chicago in the late 1930s or early 1940s and became part of the urban blues movement.
and the whole world let them peoples go down there free
The first publication of blues sheet music was in 1908: Antonio Maggio's "I Got the Blues" is the first published song to use the word blues.
Lyrical themes that frequently appeared in prewar blues, such as economic depression, farming, devils, gambling, magic, floods and drought, were less common in postwar blues.
The term ''race record'', initially used by the music industry for African-American music, was replaced by the term ''rhythm and blues''.
Jimmie Rodgers, Moon Mullican, Bob Wills, Bill Monroe and Hank Williams have all described themselves as blues singers and their music has a blues feel that is different, at first glance at least, from the later country pop of artists like Eddy Arnold.
Characteristic of the blues since its Afro-American origins, the shuffles played a central role in swing music.
The long boom following World War II induced another massive migration of the African-American population, the Second Great Migration, which was accompanied by a significant increase of the real income of the urban blacks.
Almost 30&nbsp;years later, Mahal wrote blues for, and performed a banjo composition, claw-hammer style, in the 2001 movie release ''Songcatcher'', which focused on the story of the preservation of the roots music of Appalachia.
Little Walter, Sonny Boy Williamson (Rice Miller) and Sonny Terry are well known harmonica (called "harp" by blues musicians) players of the early Chicago blues scene.
Early traditional blues verses consisted of a single line repeated four times.
In 1970 the trio Manal established in Argentina the basics of blues sung in Castilian.
John Lee Hooker's blues is more "personal," based on Hooker's deep rough voice accompanied by a single electric guitar.
However, when rural black music began to be recorded in the 1920s, both categories of musicians used similar techniques: call-and-response patterns, blue notes, and slide guitars.
These recordings were typically labeled "race records" to distinguish them from records sold to white audiences.
Contemporary blues music is nurtured by several blues labels such as: Alligator Records, Ruf Records, Severn Records, Chess Records (MCA), Delmark Records, NorthernBlues Music, Fat Possum Records and Vanguard Records (Artemis Records).
Depending on the religious community a musician belonged to, it was more or less considered a sin to play this low-down music: blues was the devil's music.
Major artists of the Texas style are Johnny Winter, Stevie Ray Vaughan, the Fabulous Thunderbirds (led by harmonica player and singer-songwriter Kim Wilson), and ZZ Top.
Contemporary African-American performers who work in this style of the blues include Bobby Rush, Denise LaSalle, Sir Charles Jones, Bettye LaVette, Marvin Sease, Peggy Scott-Adams, Mel Waiters, Clarence Carter, Dr. "Feelgood" Potts, O.B.
Carr accompanied himself on the piano with Scrapper Blackwell on guitar, a format that continued well into the 1950s with artists such as Charles Brown and even Nat "King" Cole.
Early blues frequently took the form of a loose narrative, often relating the troubles experienced in African-American society.
As the recording industry grew, country blues performers like Bo Carter, Jimmie Rodgers (country singer), Blind Lemon Jefferson, Lonnie Johnson, Tampa Red and Blind Blake became more popular in the African American community.
One blues rock performer, Jimi Hendrix, was a rarity in his field at the time: a black man who played psychedelic rock.
This commercial stream had important consequences for blues music, which, together with jazz and gospel music, became a component of R&B.
Smaller blues labels of this era included Vee-Jay Records and J.O.B.
Chroniclers began to report about blues music at the dawn of the 20th century.
In the 1950s, blues had a huge influence on mainstream American popular music.
Gershwin's second "Prelude" for solo piano is an interesting example of a classical blues, maintaining the form with academic strictness.
While the 12-bar harmonic progression had been intermittently used for centuries, the revolutionary aspect of blues was the frequent use of the flattened third, flattened seventh, and even flattened fifth in the melody, together with ''crushing''—playing directly adjacent notes at the same time (i.e., minor second)—and ''sliding'', similar to using grace notes.
Dorsey helped to popularize Gospel music.
The first appearance of the blues is often dated to after the ending of slavery and, later, the development of juke joints.
The first publication of blues sheet music was in 1908.
Blues performers such as John Lee Hooker and Muddy Waters continued to perform to enthusiastic audiences, inspiring new artists steeped in traditional blues, such as New York–born Taj Mahal.
It is associated with the newly acquired freedom of the former slaves.
As time went on, the phrase lost the reference to devils, and "it came to mean a state of agitation or depression."
Recorded blues and country music can be found as far back as the 1920s, when the record industry created the marketing categories "race music" and "hillbilly music" to sell music by blacks for blacks and by whites for whites, respectively.
The lyrical content became slightly simpler in postwar blues, which tended to focus on relationship woes or sexual worries.
: It may be sending you baby, but it's worrying the hell out of me."
Chicago blues is influenced to a large extent by Delta blues, because many performers had migrated from the Mississippi region.
For convenience or by necessity it is often approximated by a minor seventh interval or a dominant seventh chord.
Charles Peabody mentioned the appearance of blues music at Clarksdale, Mississippi, and Gate Thomas reported similar songs in southern Texas around 1901–1902.
These blueswomen's contributions to the genre included "increased improvisation on melodic lines, unusual phrasing which altered the emphasis and impact of the lyrics, and vocal dramatics using shouts, groans, moans, and wails.
It was only in the first decades of the 20th century that the most common current structure became standard: the so-called AAB pattern, consisting of a line sung over the four first bars, its repetition over the next four, and then a longer concluding line over the last bars.
Blues forms are used in the theme to the televised ''Batman'', teen idol Fabian Forte's hit, "Turn Me Loose", country music star Jimmie Rodgers' music, and guitarist/vocalist Tracy Chapman's hit "Give Me One Reason".
A lot of the 1970s-era "outlaw" country music by Willie Nelson and Waylon Jennings also borrowed from the blues.
However, the blues wave that brought artists such as Muddy Waters to the foreground had stopped.
Funk music of the 1970s was influenced by soul; funk can be seen as an antecedent of hip-hop and contemporary R&B.
These scale tones may replace the natural scale tones, or they may be added to the scale, as in the case of the minor blues scale, in which the flattened third replaces the natural third, the flattened seventh replaces the natural seventh and the flattened fifth is added between the natural fourth and natural fifth.
Tennessee-born Bobby "Blue" Bland, like B.
