It was made from the plant Crozophora tinctoria, which grew in the south of France.
Clubs which have won the Copa Libertadores, a tournament for South American clubs, and wear blue include six-time winners Boca Juniors of Buenos Aires, Argentina.
File:Police uniform NY 1854.jpg|In 1853, New York policemen and firemen were officially outfitted in navy blue uniforms.
In the Renaissance, a revolution occurred in painting; artists began to paint the world as it was actually seen, with perspective, depth, shadows, and light from a single source.
A notable exception is four-time FIFA World Cup winners Italy, who wear a blue kit based on the ''Azzuro Savoia'' (Savoy blue) of the royal House of Savoy which unified the Italian states.
However, blue was replaced by black as the power colour in the 14th century, when European princes, and then merchants and bankers, wanted to show their seriousness, dignity and devoutness (see Black).
The nobility wore red or purple, while only the poor wore blue clothing, coloured with poor-quality dyes made from the woad plant.
Today most blue pigments and dyes are made by a chemical process.
In Germany, Wassily Kandinsky and other Russian émigrés formed the art group called Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider), and used blue to symbolise spirituality and eternity.
In France the Gardes Françaises, the elite regiment which protected Louis XVI, wore dark blue uniforms with red trim.
File:Matisse Conversation.jpg|''The Conversation'' (1908–1912) by Henri Matisse  used blue to express the emotions he wanted the viewer to feel.
Human eyes perceive blue when observing light which has a wavelength between 450-495 nanometres.
Ultramarine pigment, for instance, was much darker when used in oil painting than when used in tempera painting, in frescoes.
File:Seth tomb blue.JPG|Figure of a servant from the tomb of King Seth I (1244–1279 BC).
This fashion was adopted by the Prince Regent, then by London society and the upper classes.
The Los Angeles Dodgers use blue prominently on their uniforms and the phrase "Dodger Blue" is may be said to describe Dodger fans' "blood".
This pattern, first produced in 1949, was copied after a design made for Catherine the Great.
The baseball team the Los Angeles Dodgers developed its own blue, called Dodger blue, and several American universities invented new blues for their colours.
The Egyptians had created a synthetic colour, Egyptian blue, three thousand years BC, but the formula had been lost.
Blue gas lasers are also still commonly used for holography, DNA sequencing, optical pumping, and other scientific and medical applications.
Blue was a latecomer among colours used in art and decoration, as well as language and literature.
The colour of the sea is also affected by the colour of the sky, reflected by particles in the water; and by algae and plant life in the water, which can make it look green; or by sediment, which can make it look brown.
The contract for the ''Madone des Harpies'' by Andrea del Sarto (1514) required that the robe of the Virgin Mary be coloured with ultramarine costing "at least five good florins an ounce."
Azurite, a form of copper carbonate, was often used as a substitute for ultramarine.
Henri Matisse used intense blues to express the emotions he wanted viewers to feel.
During the American Revolution, the leader of the Whig Party in England, Charles James Fox, wore a blue coat and buff waistcoat and breeches, the colours of the Whig Party and of the uniform of George Washington, whose principles he supported.
This was the first synthetic blue, first made in about 2500 BC.
To balance their colours, Renaissance artists like Raphael added white to lighten the ultramarine.
File:Egyptian blue.jpg|Egyptian blue, the first artificial pigment, created in the third millennium BC in Ancient Egypt by grinding sand, copper and natron, and then heating them.
File:VanGogh-Irises 1.jpg|In Vincent van Gogh's ''Irises'', the blue irises are placed against their complementary colour, yellow-orange.
It was mined in France, Hungary, Spain and Germany, and it made a pale blue with a hint of green, which was ideal for painting skies.
File:Egyptian - "Malqata Kateriskos" Vessel - Walters 4732 - Profile.jpg|a decorated cobalt glass vessel from Ancient Egypt (1450–1350 BC)
Turner experimented with the new cobalt blue, and of the twenty colours most used by the Impressionists, twelve were new and synthetic colours, including cobalt blue, ultramarine and cerulean blue.
Marine blue became the official colour of the Royal Navy uniform coat in 1748.
The clear sky and the  deep sea appear blue because of an optical effect known as Rayleigh scattering.
It was not one of the four primary colours for Greek painting described by Pliny the Elder (red, yellow, black, and white), but nonetheless it was used as a background colour behind the friezes on Greek temples and to colour the beards of Greek statues.
These minerals were crushed, ground into powder, and then mixed with a quick-drying binding agent, such as egg yolk (tempera painting); or with a slow-drying oil, such as linseed oil, for oil painting.
File:Basilique Saint-Denis chapelle de la Vierge.jpg|Stained glass windows of the Basilica of Saint Denis (1141–1144).
File:4219 Istanbul - Topkapi - Harem - Sala di Murat III - Foto G. Dall'Orto 27-5-2006.jpg|Decoration in the Murat III hall of the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul (16th century).
Regiment Nr.3.jpg|Prussian blue, the colour of the uniforms of the army of Prussia, was invented in about 1706
It was called ''bero-ai'', or Berlin blue, and it became popular because it did not fade like traditional Japanese blue pigment, ''ai-gami'', made from the dayflower.
If the red, blue and green elements all glow at once, the pixel looks white.
Beginning in the 9th century, Chinese artists used cobalt to make fine blue and white porcelain.
Blue continued to be the colour of the field uniform of the US Army until 1902, and is still the colour of the dress uniform.
Beginning in the 1950s, they became an essential part of uniform of young people in the United States, Europe, and around the world.
Closeup of the red, green and blue sub-pixels on left.
File:HeratFridayMosque.jpg| Blue tile on the facade of the Friday Mosque in Herat, Afghanistan (15th century).
In Estonia, 99% of people have blue eyes.
Cobalt has been used for centuries to colour glass and ceramics; it was used to make the deep blue stained glass windows of Gothic cathedrals and Chinese porcelain beginning in the T'ang Dynasty.
Napoleon Bonaparte abandoned many of the doctrines of the French Revolution but he kept blue as the uniform colour for his army, although he had great difficulty obtaining the blue dye, since the British controlled the seas and blocked the importation of indigo to France.
In the 12th century the Roma Catholic Church dictated that painters in Italy (and the rest of Europe consequently) to paint the Virgin Mary with the new most expensive pigment imported from Asia; ultramarine.
It was a favourite background colour of the German painter Albrecht Dürer.
In the mid-20th century, blue passed black as the most common colour of men's business suits, the costume usually worn by political and business leaders.
It was confirmed by Albert Einstein in 1911.
Blue became a colour worn by domestics and artisans, not just nobles.
Good ultramarine was more expensive than gold; in 1508 the German painter Albrecht Dürer reported in a letter that he had paid twelve ducats- the equivalent of forty-one grams of gold - for just thirty grams of ultramarine.
File:Schreber woad mill 1752.JPG|A woad mill in Thuringia, in Germany, in 1752.
Dark blue suits were still rare; this one is blue-green or teal.
Public opinion polls in the United States and Europe showed that blue was the favourite colour of over fifty per cent of respondents.
File:Tripodic goblet Louvre AO4079.jpg|Egyptian blue goblet from Mesopotamia, 1500–1300 BC.
In his ''La Gare Saint-Lazare'', the grey smoke, vapour and dark shadows are actually composed of mixtures of bright pigment, including cobalt blue, cerulean blue, synthetic ultramarine, emerald green, Guillet green, chrome yellow, vermilion and ecarlate red.
Toward the end of the 20th century, dark blue replaced dark grey  as the most common colour for business suits; surveys showed that blue was the colour most associated with the masculine, just ahead of black, and was also the colour most associated with intelligence, knowledge, calm and concentration.
In the Islamic world, blue was of secondary importance to green, believed to be the favourite colour of the Prophet Mohammed.
They used Egyptian blue in the wall paintings of Knossos, in Crete, (2100 BC).
In Russia, the symbolist painter Pavel Kuznetsov and the Blue Rose art group (1906–1908) used blue to create a fantastic and exotic atmosphere.
File:Bunch of blueberries, one unripe.jpg|alt=Group of approximately 20 blue berries|Blueberries
Blue played no part in the rich costumes of the clergy or the architecture or decoration of churches.
In the US, boys are 3-5 per cent more likely to have blue eyes than girls.
The blue is caused by iridescence, the diffraction of light from millions of tiny scales on the wings.
Red and blue mixed together form violet, blue and yellow together form green.
File:Luminol2006.jpg|Vivid blues can be created by chemical reactions, called chemiluminescence.
Blue eyes are also found in parts of Western Asia, most notably in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, and Iran.
In the early 19th century, during the Regency of the future King George IV, the blue suit was revolutionised by a courtier named George Beau Brummel.
In the 20th century, the black suit was largely replaced by the dark blue or grey suit.
Prior to 1748, British naval officers simply wore upper-class civilian clothing and wigs.
Therefore, when looking at the sunset and sunrise, the colour red is more perceptible than any of the other colours.
In painting and traditional colour theory, blue is one of the three primary colours of pigments, along with red and yellow, which can be mixed to form a wide gamut of colours.
File:Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints.jpg|In this painting of ''The Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints'' an early work by Raphael in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the blue cloak of the Virgin Mary has turned a green-black.
File:Cobalt Blue.JPG|Cobalt blue.
When Brandenburg became the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701, the uniform colour was adopted by the Prussian army.
File:Indigo plant extract sample.jpg|Indigo dye is made from the woad, ''Indigofera tinctoria'', a plant common in Asia and Africa but little known in Europe until the 15th century.
Blue was considered a beneficial colour which would protect the dead against evil in the afterlife.
In 1878 a German chemist named a.
It was extremely expensive, and in Italian Renaissance art, it was often reserved the robes of the Virgin Mary.
In 1911, India sold only 660 tons of natural indigo, while BASF sold 22,000 tons of synthetic indigo.
The Romans also imported indigo dye, but blue was the colour of working class clothing; the nobles and rich wore white, black, red or violet.
File:The Hunt of the Unicorn Tapestry 1.jpg|A Dutch tapestry from 1495 to 1505.
File:Giovanni Bellini - Madonna col bambino, 1480.jpg|Ultramarine, slightly violet-blue, in a painting by Giovanni Bellini.
These soldiers are patrolling the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
File:Jeans for men.jpg|Blue jeans, made of denim coloured with indigo dye, patented by Levi Strauss in 1873, became an essential part of the wardrobe of young people beginning in the 1950s.
File:Kuznetsov vstepi.jpg|The Russian avant-garde painter Pavel Kuznetsov and his group, the Blue Rose, used blue to symbolise fantasy and exoticism.
Football clubs which have won the European Cup or Champions League and wear blue include FC Barcelona of Spain (red and blue stripes), FC Internazionale Milano of Italy (blue and black stripes) and FC Porto of Portugal (blue and white stripes).
File:PB35 Bleu Céruléum.JPG| Cerulean was created with copper and cobalt oxide, and used to make a sky blue colour.
The Virgin Mary's azurite blue robe has degraded into a greenish-black.
Both Monet and Renoir liked to use pure colours, without any blending.
The cooler a colour is, the more distant it seems.
The Texas Rangers also use blue prominently on their uniforms and logo.
Blue gradually returned to court fashion in the 17th century, as part of a palette of peacock-bright colours shown off in extremely elaborate costumes.
He also used layers of finely ground or coarsely ground ultramarine, which gave subtle variations to the blue.
In fashion blue, particularly dark blue, was seen as a colour which was serious but not grim.
In 1935, they were raised to the level of high fashion by Vogue magazine.
File:Duccio maesta1021.jpg|The Maesta by Duccio (1308) showed the Virgin Mary in a robe painted with ultramarine.
The French army wore a dark blue uniform coat with red trousers until 1915, when it was found to be a too visible target on the battlefields of World War I.
The 20th century saw the invention of new ways of creating blue, such as chemiluminescence, making blue light through a chemical reaction.
To make blue stained glass, cobalt blue (cobalt(II) aluminate: )pigment was mixed with the glass.
File:Tile panel flowers Louvre OA3919-2-297.jpg|Flower-pattern tile from Iznik, Turkey, from the second half of the 16th century.
It was crushed and powdered and used as a pigment from ancient times,
File:RGB pixels.jpg|Blue and orange pixels on an LCD television screen.
Blue eyes do not actually contain any blue pigment.
File:HoratioNelson1.jpg|Navy blue, here worn by Admiral Horatio Nelson,  is the darkest shade of pure blue.
Several languages, including Japanese, Thai, Korean, and Lakota Sioux, use the same word to describe blue and green.
File:Bleu phtalo.jpg|A new synthetic blue created in the 1930s is phthalocyanine, an intense colour widely used for making blue ink, dye, and pigment.
Two neighbouring countries with two World Cup victories each, Argentina and Uruguay wear a light blue shirt, the former with white stripes.
Van Gogh described to his brother Theo how he composed a sky: "The dark blue sky is spotted with clouds of an even darker blue than the fundamental blue of intense cobalt, and others of a lighter blue, like the bluish white of the Milky Way&nbsp;... the sea was very dark ultramarine, the shore a sort of violet and of light red as I see it, and on the dunes, a few bushes of prussian blue."
File:Natural ultramarine pigment.jpg|Natural ultramarine, made by grinding and purifying lapis lazuli, was the finest available blue pigment in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.
The British called it azure of Amayne, or German azure.
The Sacramento Monarchs of the WNBA wear blue.
The Imperial Porcelain Factory in Saint Petersburg was founded in 1744.
The ancient Greeks classified colours by whether they were light or dark, rather than by their hue.
It was very stable but extremely expensive.
It also became the colour used in blue denim and jeans.
This principle of painting was used by Claude Monet in his ''Impression – Sunrise – Fog'' (1872), where he put a vivid blue next to a bright orange sun, (1872) and in ''Régate à Argenteuil'' (1872), where he painted an orange sun against blue water.
The National Hockey League, the premier Ice hockey league in Canada and the United States, uses blue on its official logo.
It was called ''bleu outremer'' in French and ''blu oltremare'' in Italian, since it came from the other side of the sea.
File:Le_Jardin_de_Nébamoun.jpg|Egyptian blue colour in a tomb painting (Around 1500 BC)
File:Mens fashion plate 1826 2.jpg|Man's suit, 1826.
The earliest known blue dyes were made from plants – woad in Europe, indigo in Asia and Africa, while blue pigments were made from minerals, usually either lapis lazuli or azurite.
In 1748, the British uniform for naval officers was officially established as an embroidered coat of the colour then called marine blue, now known as navy blue.
Blue has been used for art and decoration since ancient times.
Van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo, "'Cobalt blue is a divine colour and there is nothing so beautiful for putting atmosphere around things&nbsp;..."
In 1789, the soldiers gradually changed their allegiance from the king to the people, and they played a leading role in the storming of the Bastille.
The Asian Football Confederation, Oceania Football Confederation and CONCACAF (the governing body of football in North and Central America and the Caribbean) use blue text on their logos.
Blues with a higher frequency and thus a shorter wavelength gradually look more violet, while those with a lower frequency and a longer wavelength gradually appear more green.
Painting by Caillebotte.
In Renaissance paintings, artists tried to create harmonies between blue and red, lightening the blue with lead white paint and adding shadows and highlights.
'''Blue''' is the colour between violet and green on the optical spectrum of visible light.
Another important influence on painting in the 19th century was the theory of complementary colours, developed by the French chemist Michel Eugene Chevreul in 1828 and published in 1839.
It quickly became the colour of the nobles and wealthy.
Beginning in the 1820s, Prussian blue was imported into Japan through the port of Nagasaki.
Often painters or clients saved money by using less expensive blues, such as azurite smalt, or pigments made with indigo, but this sometimes caused problems.
Blue eyes are most common in Ireland, the Baltic Sea area and Northern Europe, and are also found in Eastern, Central, and Southern Europe.
File:Le serment de La Fayette a la fete de la Federation 14 July 1790 French School 18th century.jpg|The Marquis de Lafayette in the uniform of the Garde Nationale during the French Revolution (1790).
Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Vincent van Gogh and other late 19th century painters used ultramarine and cobalt blue not just to depict nature, but to create moods and emotions.
This is the effect of atmospheric perspective; the farther an object is away from the viewer, the less contrast there is between the object and its background colour, which is usually blue.
In Iran and Mesopotamia, it was used to make jewellery and vessels.
The fabric was then soaked for a day in the resulting mixture, then put out in the sun, where as it dried it turned blue.
The French artist Yves Klein, with the help of a French paint dealer, created a specific blue called International Klein blue, which he patented.
In 1778 the Congress asked George Washington to design a new uniform, and in 1779 Washington made the official colour of all uniforms blue and buff.
(See RYB colour system.)
Blue jeans consist of 1-3% by weight of this organic compound.
Image:Alcedo atthis 3 (Marek Szczepanek).jpg|River kingfisher
Monet and the impressionists were among the first to observe that shadows were full of colour.
The semi-precious stone lapis lazuli, coming from mines in Afghanistan, was used in ancient Egypt for jewelry and ornament and later, in The Renaissance, to make the pigment ultramarine, the most expensive of all pigments.
When the Continental Navy of the United States was created in 1775, it largely copied the British uniform and colour.
It was forbidden in England until 1611, when British traders established their own indigo industry in India and began to import it into Europe.
Blue was the colour of liberty and revolution in the 18th century, but in the 19th it increasingly became the colour of government authority, the uniform colour of policemen and other public servants.
Blue was also seen as a colour which was authoritative without being threatening.
File:Indigofera tinctoria1.jpg|''Indigofera tinctoria'', a tropical shrub, is the main source of indigo dye.
Another blue often used in the Middle Ages was called tournesol or folium.
File:Mesolapis.jpg|Lapis lazuli pendant from Mesopotamia (Circa 2900 BC).
File:Lapis-lazuli hg.jpg|Lapis lazuli, mined in Afghanistan for more than three thousand years, was used for jewellery and ornaments, and later was crushed and powdered and used as a pigment.
It became immensely popular for the manufacture of wallpaper, and in the 19th century was widely used by French impressionist painters.
Many sporting teams make blue their official colour, or use it as detail on kit of a different colour.
Prussian blue was used by both Hokusai, in his famous wave paintings, and Hiroshige.
The modern blue business suit has its roots in England in the middle of the 17th century.
File:G20 - Cumbre de Cannes - 20011103.jpg| In the 21st century, the dark blue business suit is the most common style worn by world leaders, seen here at the 2011 G-20 Summit in Cannes, France.
In medieval paintings, blue was used to attract the attention of the viewer to the Virgin Mary, and identify her.
The British industry cut prices and reduced the salaries of its workers, but it was unable to compete; the synthetic indigo was more pure, made a more lasting blue, and was not dependent upon good or bad harvests.
(See underwater and euphotic depth)
A team from Toronto, Ontario, are the Blue Jays.
In the Middle Ages in France and to some extent in Italy, the dyeing of blue cloth was subject to license from the crown or state.
The irises of the eyes of people with blue eyes contain less dark melanin than those of people with brown eyes, which means that they absorb less short-wavelength blue light, which is instead reflected out to the viewer.
Human eyes perceive blue when observing light with a wavelength between 450 and 495 nanometres.
File:Blaues pferd.jpg|Blue neon lighting, first used in commercial advertising, is now used in works of art.
Like azurite, it could fade or turn green.
1881-86.jpg|''The Umbrellas'', by Pierre Auguste-Renoir.
Brummel observed, "If people turn to look at you in the street, you are not well dressed."
File:Coronation of Louis VIII and Blanche of Castile 1223.jpg|The Coronation of King Louis VIII of France in 1223 showed that blue had become the royal colour.
Following the Second World War, blue was adopted as the colour of important international organisations, including the United Nations, the Council of Europe, UNESCO, the European Union, and NATO.
The appearance of blue, green, and hazel eyes results from the Rayleigh scattering of light in the stroma, an optical effect similar to what accounts for the blueness of the sky.
In 1873 a German immigrant in San Francisco, Levi Strauss, invented a sturdy kind of work trousers, made of denim fabric and coloured with indigo dye, called blue jeans.
The reasons were economic; the German states were trying to protect their pastel dye industry against competition from imported indigo dye.
File:Hagiasophia-christ.jpg|Blue mosaic in the cloak of Christ in the Hagia Sophia church in Istanbul (13th century).
Blue was also not used for dyeing fabric until long after red, ochre, pink and purple.
The colours brighten each other.
Uruguay are known as the ''La Celeste'', Spanish for 'the sky blue one', while Argentina are known as ''Los Albicelestes'', Spanish for 'the sky blue and whites'.
By the late 19th century the black suit had become the uniform of businessmen in England and America.
Blue pigments were made from minerals, especially lapis lazuli and azurite (.
Blue was a favourite colour of the impressionist painters, who used it not just to depict nature but to create moods, feelings and atmospheres.
In 1709 a German druggist and pigment maker named Diesbach accidentally discovered a new blue while experimenting with potassium and iron sulphides.
The traditional blue jacket with silver buttons of the London "bobbie" was not abandoned until the mid-1990s, when it was replaced by a light blue shirt and a jumper or sweater of the colour officially known as NATO blue.
File:Pompejanischer Maler um 30 001.jpg|A Roman wall painting of Venus and her son Eros, from Pompeii (about 30 BC)
The prize was won in 1826 by a chemist named Jean Baptiste Guimet, but he refused to reveal the formula of his colour.
The efforts to block indigo were in vain; the quality of indigo blue was too high and the price too low for pastel made from woad to compete.
In the 19th century the Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell found a new way of explaining colours, by the wavelength of their light.
File:Baptism Sainte-Chapelle MNMA Cl23717.jpg|Detail of the windows at Sainte-Chapelle (1250).
It became especially popular in the 17th century, when ultramarine was difficult to obtain.
File:La Gare Saint-Lazare - Claude Monet.jpg|Claude Monet used several recently invented colours in his ''Gare Saint-Lazare'' (1877).
File:Lapis lazuli block.jpg|A block of lapis lazuli, originally used to make ultramarine.
Paintings of the mythical King Arthur began to show him dressed in blue.
