The Bruins made it to the Stanley Cup final, but lost this time to the Philadelphia Flyers.
There was nothing insulting about being rated number two to such a super superstar".
Until that time, players had been forced to accept whatever NHL management paid in salaries.
However, in the summer of 1978, he decided to make a comeback.
He pushed his teammates, because you're playing with the best player in the league and he's giving you the puck and you just can't mess it up.
During his Bruins career, Orr was often the player the press wanted for a post-game interview.
Orr himself said that he knew before the tournament that "I knew I didn't have much longer.
According to team-mate Darryl Sittler, "Bobby Orr was better on one leg, than anybody else was on two."
Although Orr played defence, McDonald encouraged Orr to use his talents as a stickhandler, skater and scorer to make offensive rushes.
The Bruins and Orr reached a verbal agreement with the Jacobs during the summer of 1975, including a controversial agreement for Orr to take an 18.5% share of the Bruins after his playing days were over.
Orr spoke at the unveiling: "This specific moment and time we celebrate with this statue is something we can all now nostalgically remember with fondness, together, each time we enter Boston Garden.
Orr is also active in charitable works and in television commercials.
For the season, the Bruins gave Orr a solid gold puck, one of four they gave out to Bruins players – to each of the four Bruins who scored over 100 points that season – Esposito, Orr, Johnny Bucyk and Ken Hodge.
Until he was ten years old, Orr played on the wing, as a forward.
Doug Orr met Toronto lawyer Alan Eagleson at a juvenile fastball tournament dinner in Parry Sound and asked Eagleson to help out with the situation.
Orr feuded with Toronto rookie defenceman Pat Quinn that season.
The Bruins' Wren Blair described him as "a combination of Doug Harvey and Eddie Shore."
Orr also helped out Bruins trainer John (Frosty) Forristall, his roommate during his first years with the Bruins, who had just been fired from the Tampa Bay Lightning for alcoholism in 1994.
In both victories, Orr scored the clinching goal and was named the playoff MVP.
Orr made his NHL regular-season debut on October 19, 1966, against the Detroit Red Wings, getting one assist.
At the time of his retirement, he was the leading defenceman in league history in goals, assists and points, tenth overall in assists and 19th in points.
The following season, the powerhouse Bruins shattered dozens of league offensive records.
Facing almost certain removal, Eagleson resigned instead.
Orr returned in January in time to play in the NHL All-Star Game, his first of eight appearances overall.
Orr was frequently compared to Brad Park, who played a similar style to Orr and later succeeded Orr as Boston's top defenceman, and the two often fought each other on-ice, fueling the bitter rivalry between the Bruins and New York Rangers.
According to long-time Bruins coach and general manager Harry Sinden, "Bobby became a star in the NHL about the time they played the National Anthem for his first game with us".
Orr had his best season in 1965–66, his fourth season of junior.
Oshawa's hopes in the Cup Final were damaged when Orr suffered a groin injury against Shawinigan, an injury that is painful and weakens a player's skating ability.
It was a slap shot past Gump Worsley and the Boston Garden crowd gave Orr a standing ovation.
Organizers of the series convinced Orr to return to coaching in the series.
He's a great guy and you don't even know it's Bobby Orr, the way he talks to you."
While on vacation, Orr met Margaret Louise "Peggy" Wood, a Trenton, Michigan native and speech therapist who worked in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Orr disassociated himself from Eagleson in 1980.
And isn't it interesting that baseball players who started their pension plan in 1947, as did the NHL, have assets in their plan of some US$500 million while we, as far as we can understand, have US$31.9 million."
Before the season started, however, Orr underwent another surgery on September 20, 1975.
Eagleson had set up a corporation to receive Orr's income and pay Orr a salary, but the arrangement was rejected by US and Canadian tax authorities.
According to team-mate Bobby Clarke, Orr "would hardly be able to walk on the morning of the game.
Orr's rushing enabled him to be where the puck was, allowing him not only to score effectively but also to defend when necessary.
In February, he had to leave a game against Detroit after his left knee went stiff.
In September 1975, the Bruins and Eagleson had reached a deal that would pay Orr US$4 million (US$ in  dollars) for ten years.
Orr made Conway promise to not print a word in the newspaper.
The left knee took all of the punishment and was operated on "13 or 14" times according to Orr.
Boston teammate Johnny McKenzie flattened Conacher from behind and started punching Conacher.
By 1978, Orr had undergone over a dozen knee surgeries, was having trouble walking and barely skated any more.
That was to be a cash payment or involve Orr's receiving 18.6 percent of the Bruins stock."
The statue depicts Orr sprawled in mid-flight after scoring the goal.
Orr returned for the third game against Toronto, getting two assists as the Bruins won their first games in Toronto since 1965.
(US$ in  dollars) The official signing ceremony was done on Emms' boat, the ''Barbara Lynn'', where Eagleson and Emms had conferred during negotiations.
As I skated across, Glenn had to move across the crease and had to open his pads a little.
His impending free agency led to speculation that the Bruins would trade him, but despite his injury, they were negotiating to keep him until the end.
I wouldn't have traded it for anything."
, Orr's teams have won most of the games, winning seven of the eleven times Orr has coached against Cherry.
When Orr was fourteen, Blair convinced the Orr family to allow Bobby to attend the Flyers' tryout camp.
You had to be better than you'd ever been."
At the ceremony, the crowd at Boston Garden would not stop applauding and as a result, most of the evening's program had to be scrapped at the last second due to the constant cheering.
Curran and Orr along with partner Paul Krepelka incorporated the agency as Orr Hockey Group in February 2002.
Orr broke with his agent Alan Eagleson and sued the Black Hawks to settle his contract.
Orr and his family returned to Boston where Orr went into business to rebuild his finances.
Orr's participation in the Canada Cup was considered ill-conceived and Eagleson later thought it may have been the 'last straw' that killed his career.
Orr has been honoured with a star on Canada's Walk of Fame in Toronto.
Bobby Orr displayed his hockey talents from an early age.
Despite the injuries, Orr won the first of a record eight consecutive Norris trophies and was named to the NHL's First All-Star team.
With Orr on defence, the Parry Sound Shamrocks had many successes.
Orr signed with Chicago, but his injuries limited him to only 26 games over the next three seasons.
According to a 2009 ''Sports Illustrated'' article Orr has since had two knee replacement surgeries that have left him pain-free.
The Bruins, happy to make the playoffs, were swept by eventual champion Montreal in the first round.
Orr scored 38 goals to increase his goal-scoring record, and finished with 94 points to average two points per game for the Generals.
Forristall's drinking put him on bad terms with his brother John, so he returned to Boston jobless and soon afterwards was diagnosed with brain cancer.
The game degenerated into a brawl after the score reached 10–0 for the Bruins.
Based on the Orr signing, Eagleson would become the executive director of the new National Hockey League Players' Association (NHLPA) and started on his rise to become one of the most powerful men in the sport and business of ice hockey.
Since 1996, Orr has coached a team of junior hockey players in the annual CHL Top Prospects Game.
His style of play was hard on his left knee, leading to injuries and surgeries that shortened his career.
Orr wanted desperately to play in the NHL, but he went along with Eagleson's strategy and was willing to play for the nationals.
According to the Bruins public relations director Nate Greenberg "one of my toughest jobs in the day was trying to get Orr to come out of the trainer's room to talk to the press.
His left knee was used in a MasterCard commercial in 2008, his scar lines used in an animation connecting his many achievements to the year of the individual scar line.
Orr's Bruins were heavy favourites to repeat as Cup champions, but were upset by the Montreal Canadiens and their rookie goaltender Ken Dryden, at one time Bruins' property, in the first round of the 1971 playoffs.
One goal, a shot from the blue line, broke Rangers' defenceman Rod Seiling's stick.
Orr was one of several players who filed a formal complaint of legal misconduct against Eagleson with the Law Society of Upper Canada over Eagleson's lending of trust monies without the consent or knowledge of his clients.
If he was caught up-ice and the other team had an odd-man rush, that's when you saw his truly great speed.
Orr projected a clean image.
The 1972–73 saw upheaval at the Bruins.
While Eagleson had spoken publicly to reporters of the offer, he had not discussed it with Orr.
In 1967–68, his second season, injuries limited Orr to just 46 games.
So I got a little lucky there, but Derek gave me a great pass and when I got the pass I was moving across.
In 1966, Orr joined Boston, a team that had not won a Stanley Cup since 1941 and had not qualified for the playoffs since 1959.
In accepting the award, Howell said he was glad to win when he did, predicting "Orr will own this trophy from now on."
He scored 21 goals on the season, breaking the goal scoring record for a defenceman, and totalled 64 points to set a new point scoring record for one season for a defenceman.
For a number of years, Orr has coached a team of top Canadian Hockey League junior players against a similar team coached by Don Cherry in the annual CHL Top Prospects Game.
After Tennant, Bucko MacDonald coached Orr, and Orr continued to excel against small town Ontario provincial competition on defence.
According to Cherry, he fought a lot.
Orr was involved in numerous charity fund raisers.
I tried to do things.
The agreement was to be checked out as to whether it would be legal for tax reasons and whether or not the league would approve it.
The Bruins' insurer would not insure a contract with Orr and doctors advised the Bruins that Orr would not be able to play much longer.
But Orr would have to play for Oshawa.
The Bruins were not convinced Orr belonged on defence, trying him out at centre first.
Spreading out the payments in this way was done to minimize taxes.
When camp ended and it came time to sign with the Bruins, a meeting with Bruins' owner Weston Adams went sour and Orr headed back to Parry Sound.
This suited his rushing style very well, as he was able to get from one end of the ice to the other faster than in a standard rink.
Orr, cut and bleeding, got up from the ice, pulled MacKenzie off Conacher and started punching Conacher.
I didn't think it would be wise for him to be a player-owner."
He started a new role as an assistant to Chicago general manager Bob Pulford.
According to a famous 1990 story in the ''Toronto Star'' by Ellie Tesher, Orr stated that Eagleson never told him of the offer, during negotiations or after.
On May 10, 2010, the fortieth anniversary of Orr scoring the game-winning goal against the St. Louis Blues in overtime to clinch the 1970 Stanley Cup, the Bruins commemorated the event with a bronze statue of Orr outside the TD Garden, the Bruins' home rink.
Along with investors, Orr purchased the Woolf Associates agency founded by Boston lawyer Bob Woolf.
I didn't want to sit back.
Former Montreal Canadiens goaltender Ken Dryden described of Orr: "When he began to move&nbsp;... the sensation was unique: All the Canadiens began backpedaling in a small panic, like beachgoers sighting a coming monster wave.
Orr amassed 101 points during the regular season, but had only two points in the playoff loss.
For Eagleson, it was the start of his sports business empire.
It was the start of the player's agent era in professional hockey.
I have so much respect for him.
Doug and Arva had five children together: Patricia, Ronnie, Bobby, Penny and Doug Jr. Bobby was born on March 20, 1948 at St. Joseph's Hospital, where his grandmother Elsie Orr was a nurse.
Also named in his honour is The Bobby Orr Community Centre, a multi-purpose entertainment facility located in his hometown of Parry Sound, Ontario.
Eagleson was involved there too, arranging for the players to give up a seat on the trusteeship of the pension fund in 1969 to gain the acceptance of the NHLPA with the NHL owners.
He won the league scoring title and the Art Ross Trophy for the second time.
The team finished with a 17–43–10 record, leaving the Bruins in last place.
His number 4 jersey was retired by the Bruins on January 9, 1979.
Originally expected to only be out for seven to eight weeks, his knee did not respond to therapy and he returned home to Parry Sound.
Orr's contract was ending after the season, potentially making him a free agent.
Boston Celtics basketball superstar Larry Bird said in his pre-game inspiration that he always looked up at the rafters of the Garden at Orr's retired No.
In the fall of 1961, the Bruins invested C$1,000 (C$ in  dollars) to sponsor his minor hockey team.
Orr was also involved in the 1991 lawsuit of retired NHL players against the NHL over its control of the players' pension fund.
Cherry, briefly his former coach in Boston, considers Orr the greatest hockey player who ever lived, noting that Orr was a complete all-around player who could skate, score, fight, and defend.
Asked why, Orr said to Cherry "He was laughing at us."
"I liked to carry the puck and if you do that, you're going to get hit.
Orr's goal and point totals increased every year during his junior career, and he was named to the OHA First-All Star team every season he was in the OHA.
Orr started in organized hockey at age five.
A museum, called the Bobby Orr Hall of Fame, where his Order of Canada medal is on display along with other exhibits.
Very seldom did he not get back to have a hand in breaking up the play."
The team defeated the Northern Ontario champions North Bay Trappers and the Quebec champions Shawinigan Bruins to win a berth in the Memorial Cup Final for the junior championship of Canada.
His right knee was basically undamaged during his career; his left knee looks like "a road map of downtown Boston" according to sportswriter Bob McKenzie.
Instead, Orr became a free agent, with Boston to receive compensation.
The Bruins' general manager, Harry Sinden complained of tampering by the Black Hawks, and demanded that Chicago owner Bill Wirtz submit to a lie detector test.
Orr returned to the lineup on November 8, 1975, the day after the Bruins traded Esposito to the New York Rangers.
Former Eagle-Tribune writer Russ Conway noted of one occasion when Orr and Conway visited Boston Children's Hospital, with a box of programs, pennants, pucks, pictures and Boston memorabilia: "We went from room to room, Orr popping in, unannounced to visit the kids.
While a few Hall of Fame defencemen, such as Red Kelly, were known for having offensive ability, they were the exception rather than the norm in the NHL before Orr's arrival.
Blair decided to defy the Bruins' ownership and let Orr play.
Orr also supported the law suit that exposed the corruption of the NHL's pension plan.
The Bruins finished second in the NHL's East Division and drew the Maple Leafs in the first round.
Rangers forward Vic Hadfield commented "We played them pretty even, but they had Bobby Orr and we didn't."
Doug Orr instead joined the Royal Canadian Navy, serving during the Second World War.
Blair was able to smooth over the situation and convince Arva Bobby was old enough to leave home.
Orr later played a role in the exposure of Eagleson's misconduct over the years.
And then, at night, he would be the best player on one of the greatest teams ever assembled.
"It was the way I played," Orr has said.
For the season, Orr scored 13 goals and 28 assists, one of the best rookie seasons in NHL history to that point by a defenceman.
In the following 1971–72 season, Orr was second in the scoring race to teammate Phil Esposito, and won the Hart and Norris trophies, helping the Bruins to a first-place finish in the East.
The 1963–64 season brought further changes as the Metro League folded and Oshawa joined the Ontario Hockey Association (OHA).
Son Darren works as a player's agent at Orr Hockey Group.
Orr went on to lead the Bruins in a march through the 1970 playoffs that culminated on May 10, 1970, when he scored one of the most famous goals in hockey history and one that gave Boston its first Stanley Cup since 1941.
4, instead of the retired numbers of Celtics stars such as Bill Russell, Bob Cousy, or John Havlicek.
Orr's contract with Chicago, five years in length, was for US$3 million, (US$ in  dollars), to be paid over 30 years.
In addition, Orr was to receive US$925,000 in cash payable in June 1980.
According to McDonald: "I used to tell Doug the kid was in his natural position when he played defence.
He attended the Massachusetts Senate and House of Representatives and was given a five-minute standing ovation.
He's their Frank Merriwell and Jack Armstrong rolled into one.
This put him into a position where a hit by the opposing defencemen would often hit the left knee.
Through the pre-season, Orr was given jersey number 27.
Orr's departure from the Bruins was acrimonious and he has not held an official role with the Bruins since.
In addition to the Norris and the Art Ross, Orr captured the first of three consecutive Hart Trophies as regular-season MVP and later won the Conn Smythe Trophy for his playoff performance, becoming the only player in history to win four major NHL awards in one season.
The Bruins were sold by Storer Broadcasting in August 1975 and the new Jacobs ownership group had to promise to keep Orr as a condition of the purchase.
Bruins players Gerry Cheevers, Derek Sanderson and Johnny McKenzie joined the upstart World Hockey Association.
To all of you, thank you very much from the bottom of my heart.
In the final achievement of his career, he was the MVP of the 1976 Canada Cup international hockey tournament.
The goal came off a give-and-go pass with teammate Derek Sanderson at the 40-second mark of the first overtime period in the fourth game, helping to complete a sweep of the St. Louis Blues.
Going against the standard practice of the time, Tennant felt Orr's offensive skills were best suited for a rushing defenceman role and he gave Orr the freedom to play that role despite its inherent risks.
Orr's offensive style has influenced countless defencemen who followed him.
On-ice officials broke it up, but the feud continued into the 1969 playoffs.
Doug had asked the Bruins' Blair for more money for Bobby and was turned down.
The 1975–76 season was Orr's final season with the Bruins and it was tumultuous.
Orr split with Eagleson on April 1, 1980.
In 1976, Orr left Boston as a free agent to join the Black Hawks, but repeated injuries had effectively destroyed his left knee, and he retired in 1978 at age 30.
Chicago offered a five-year guaranteed contract with the Black Hawks, and on June 8, 1976, he officially signed with the Black Hawks.
On October 22, he scored his first NHL goal against the Montreal Canadiens.
When Quinn returned, the Boston fans showered garbage onto the ice.
Cherry recalled Orr had refused to speak with the Bruins team president directly, allowing Eagleson to mislead or withhold enough details from Boston's offer.
That series didn't do it.
The Hockey Hall of Fame waived the normal three-year waiting period for induction into the Hall and he was enshrined at age 31 – the youngest player living at the time of his induction in history.
Orr has been known to be fiercely loyal to former Bruin personnel and teammates.
'''Robert Gordon "Bobby" Orr''', OC (born March 20, 1948) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player, widely acknowledged as one of the greatest hockey players of all time.
He was the best player in every game; he was the best player in the tournament.
As part of the legal settlement with Orr, Eagleson agreed to purchase various of Orr's assets for US$620,000 (US$ in  dollars), including his Orr–Walton Hockey Camp, which paid off US$450,000 (US$ in  dollars) of Orr's bank loans.
In 2007, Eagleson sold the puck in an auction of memorabilia for C$16,500.
Orr later gave his puck to Alan Eagleson.
But we've got 17 good hockey players and every one of them put out.
Orr entered the player agent business in 1996 and today is president of the Orr Hockey Group agency.
His assets in July 1980 totalled US$456,604 (US$ in  dollars) and his tax, legal and accounting bills totalled US$469,546 (US$ in  dollars).
A second grandchild, Robert, was born in January 2011.
Orr served briefly as an assistant coach for Chicago, and as a consultant to the NHL and the Hartford Whalers.
Orr did eventually restore his finances, thanks to endorsement contracts and public relations work.
To prevent conflicts of interest, Orr sold an investment in the Lowell Lock Monsters minor pro hockey team and cut his ties with a credit card firm that had a contract with the NHLPA.
At the season's start, the Bruins offered him jersey number 5, that of past Bruins star Dit Clapper, but Orr chose jersey number 4.
Orr debuted in junior in the 1962–63 season for the new Generals in the new Metro Junior A League.
Although he was tiny and somewhat frail, he soon was able to skate faster than anyone his own age, speed he demonstrated in races around the rink and in games.
Orr was a left-hand shot who played the right side.
In contrast to the style of hanging-back defensive play common in the later 1950s and 1960s, Orr was known for his fluid skating and end-to-end rushing.
Eagleson turned down the offer and on June 7, 1976 was quoted in the ''Toronto Star'' as saying "Boston offered a five-year deal at US$925,000 or 18.6 percent ownership of the club in 1980.
However, attendance at Boston Garden increased by forty-one thousand fans.
Teammate Terry O'Reilly described him as a "very private, very shy guy, who just happened to be the best hockey player in the world."
That season, Orr set the record (since surpassed) for the most points in a game by a defenceman, scoring 3 goals and 4 assists in a November 15, 1973 game against the New York Rangers.
