Archaeologists note a dramatic adoption of Tiwanaku ceramics into the cultures which became part of the Tiwanaku empire.
In August 2007, more conflicts arose in Sucre, as the city demanded the discussion of the seat of government inside the assembly, hoping the executive and legislative branches could return to the city, but the assembly and the government said this demand was overwhelmingly impractical and politically undesirable.
12 years of tumultuous rule left the MNR divided.
According to early estimates, the city covered approximately  at its maximum extent and had between 15,000 and 30,000 inhabitants.
Félix Rodríguez was a CIA officer on the team with the Bolivian Army that captured and shot Guevara.
In 2003 the Bolivian gas conflict broke out.
On a synoptic scale, geological units coincide with topographical units.
Argentina, Chile's ally, declared war on the Confederation on 9 May 1837.
During this time, the umbrella labor-organization of Bolivia, the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB), became increasingly unable to effectively challenge government policy.
Bolivia also naturally produces over 4,000 kinds of potatoes.
Its operations are mandated by the Constitution and regulated by the Electoral Regime Law (Law 026, passed 2010).
Tiwanaku continued to absorb cultures rather than eradicate them.
Since 1985, the government of Bolivia has implemented a far-reaching program of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform aimed at maintaining price stability, creating conditions for sustained growth, and alleviating scarcity.
The climate of Bolivia varies drastically from one eco-region to the other, from the tropics in the eastern ''llanos'' to a polar climate in the western Andes.
Bolivia is considered the place of origin for such species as peppers and chili peppers, peanuts, the common beans, yucca, and several species of palm.
Members of the Assembly are elected to five-year terms.
At the end of 2002, the government owed $4.5 billion to its foreign creditors, with $1.6 billion of this amount owed to other governments and most of the balance owed to multilateral development banks.
Bolivia is located in the central zone of South America, between 57°26'–69°38'W and 9°38'–22°53'S.
The region now known as Bolivia had been occupied for over 2,500 years when the Aymara arrived.
The summers are warm, humid in the east and dry in the west, with rains that often modify temperatures, humidity, winds, atmospheric pressure and evaporation, yielding very different climates in different areas.
Subtropical semi-arid climate.
Bolivia has public and private universities.
The Organ's first elections were the country's first judicial election in October 2011, and five municipal special elections held in 2011.
La Plata (now Sucre) was proclaimed provisional capital of the newly independent Alto Perú (later, Bolivia) on 1 July 1826.
Rodriguez said that after he received a Bolivian presidential execution order, he told "the soldier who pulled the trigger to aim carefully, to remain consistent with the Bolivian government's story that Che had been killed in action during a clash with the Bolivian army."
Its regional folk music is distinctive and varied.
On the other hand, sustainable extraction of lithium is attempted by the government.
The capital city became the last place viable for food production due to the resiliency of the raised field method of agriculture.
The territory of Bolivia comprises four types of biomes, 32 ecological regions, and 199 ecosystems.
The government has a long-term sales agreement to sell natural gas to Brazil through 2019.
The geographic center of the country is the so-called ''Puerto Estrella'' ("Star Port") on the Río Grande, in Ñuflo de Chávez Province, Santa Cruz Department.
The largest of these are the Quechuas (2.5&nbsp;million), Aymaras (2&nbsp;million), then Chiquitano (180,000), and Guaraní (125,000).
Whites comprised about 14% of the population in 2006, and are usually concentrated in the largest cities: La Paz, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and Cochabamba, but as well in some minor cities like Tarija.
On 4 April 1884, a truce was signed with Chile, whereby Chile gave facilities of access to Bolivian products through Antofagasta, and freed the payment of export rights in the port of Arica.
Chile organized a second attack on the Confederation and defeated it in the Battle of Yungay.
Winters are very cold in the west, and it snows in the mountain ranges, while in the western regions, windy days are more common.
The Bolivian government annually spends $130&nbsp;million on defense.
*The first is the Amazon Basin, also called the North Basin (/66% of the territory).
According to the government the main problems in the sector are low access to sanitation throughout the country; low access to  water in rural areas; insufficient and ineffective investments; a low visibility of community service providers; a lack of respect of indigenous customs; "technical and institutional difficulties in the design and implementation of projects"; a lack of capacity to operate and maintain infrastructure; an institutional framework that is "not consistent with the political change in the country"; "ambiguities in the social participation schemes"; a reduction in the quantity and
The constitution, drafted in 2006–07 and approved in 2009, provides for balanced executive, legislative, judicial, and electoral powers, as well as several levels of autonomy.
*The '''Llanos region''' in the northeast comprises 59% of the territory, with .
Bolivia has more than 2,900 animal species, including 398 mammals, over 1,400 birds (about 14% of birds known in the world, being the sixth most diverse country in terms of bird species), 204 amphibians, 277 reptiles, and 635 fish, all fresh water fish as Bolivia is a landlocked country.
Two concessions to foreign private companies in two of the three largest cities — Cochabamba and La Paz/El Alto — were prematurely ended in 2000 and 2006 respectively.
The capital city of Tiwanaku dates from as early as 1500 BC when it was a small, agriculturally based village.
The reforms and economic restructuring were strongly opposed by certain segments of society, which instigated frequent and sometimes violent protests, particularly in La Paz and the Chapare coca-growing region, from 1994 through 1996.
The United States' Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had been active in providing finances and training to the Bolivian military dictatorship in the 1960s.
Peasants and the Bolivian army fought briefly but after a few victories, and facing the prospect of a total war against Brazil, it was forced to sign the Treaty of Petrópolis in 1903, in which Bolivia lost this rich territory.
The 2009 Constitution assigns the role of national capital to Sucre, not referring to La Paz in the text.
Though it is landlocked Bolivia keeps a navy.
Peru and Bolivia formed the Peru-Bolivian Confederation, with de Santa Cruz as the ''Supreme Protector''.
Also located in the Cordillera Central is Lake Titicaca, the highest commercially navigable lake in the world and the largest lake in South America; the lake is shared with Peru.
Living conditions of the native people, who constitute most of the population, remained deplorable.
Cuisine in Bolivia stems mainly from the combination of Spanish cuisine with traditional indigenous Aymara/Inca ingredients, with the addition of later influences from German, Italian, Basque, Russian, Polish, and Arab immigrants.
The judiciary consists of the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Tribunal, the Judiciary Council, Agrarian and Environmental Tribunal, and District (departmental) and lower courts.
'''Bolivia''' (; ;  ;  ;  ), officially known as the '''Plurinational State of Bolivia''' (), is a landlocked country located in western-central South America.
In May, there is low precipitation because of dry winds, and most days have clear skies.
In the Andean Altiplano region the departments of La Paz and Oruro hold the largest percentage of population, in the valley region the largest percentage is held by the departments of Cochabamba and Chuquisaca, while in the Llanos region by Santa Cruz and Beni.
As the rainfall decreased, many of the cities further away from Lake Titicaca began to tender less foodstuffs to the elites.
Around AD 400, Tiwanaku went from being a locally dominant force to a predatory state.
Modern Bolivia is constitutionally a democratic republic, divided into nine departments.
In May 2008, Evo Morales was a signatory to the UNASUR Constitutive Treaty of the Union of South American Nations.
The ''Altiplano'' has large numbers of lakes and rivers that do not run into any ocean because they are enclosed by the Andean mountains.
The project is being conducted by Fundación Natura Bolivia and Rare Conservation, with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network.
On 22 March 2005, after weeks of new street protests from organizations accusing Mesa of bowing to U.S. corporate interests, Mesa again offered his resignation to Congress, which was accepted on 10 June.
Alarmed by the rising Popular Assembly and the increase in the popularity of President Juan José Torres, the military, the MNR, and others installed Colonel (later General) Hugo Banzer Suárez as president in 1971.
Under President Víctor Paz Estenssoro, the MNR, having strong popular pressure, introduced universal suffrage into his political platform and carried out a sweeping land-reform promoting rural education and nationalization of the country's largest tin mines.
Bolivia's variable altitudes, ranging from  above sea level, allow for a vast biologic diversity.
The autumn is dry in the non-tropical regions.
Approximately 67 percent of Bolivians live in urban areas, among the lowest proportion in South America.
The government does not want to destroy this unique natural landscape to meet the rising world demand for lithium.
The indigenous population of the Andean region was not able to benefit from government reforms.
The body has its headquarters on the Plaza Murillo in La Paz, but also holds honorary sessions elsewhere in Bolivia.
This privatization of SOEs led neoliberal structuring that acknowledged a diverse population within Bolivia.
In Chile, public outrage over the treaty forced the government to reject it.
The legal age for voluntary admissions is 18; however, when the numbers are small the government recruits anyone as young as 14.
The leader of Venezuela, Antonio José de Sucre, had been given the option by Bolívar to either keep Upper Peru (present-day Bolivia) under the newly formed Republic of Peru, to unite with the United Provinces of Rio de la Plata, or to formally declare its independence from the Viceroyalty of Peru that had dominated most of the region.
William H. Isbell states "Tiahuanaco underwent a dramatic transformation between AD 600 and 700 that established new monumental standards for civic architecture and greatly increased the resident population."
The Bolivian Naval Force (''Fuerza Naval Boliviana'' in Spanish) is a naval force about 5,000 strong in 2008.
Popular myth has it that Bolivian president Mariano Melgarejo (1864–71) traded the land for what he called "a magnificent white horse" and Acre was subsequently flooded by Brazilians, which ultimately led to confrontation and fear of war with Brazil.
The Peruvian-Bolivian forces achieved several major victories during the War of the Confederation: the defeat of the Argentine expedition and the defeat of the first Chilean expedition on the fields of Paucarpata near the city of Arequipa.
Thus, since independence, Bolivia has lost over half of its territory to neighboring countries.
Although a civil transport airline, TAB – Transportes Aéreos Bolivianos, was created as a subsidiary company of the FAB in 1977.
In addition, there are more than 3,000 species of medicinal plants.
In the late 19th century, an increase in the world price of silver brought Bolivia relative prosperity and political stability.
TAB is headquartered adjacent to El Alto International Airport.
The army is organized into ten divisions.
On the same field, the Chilean and Peruvian rebel army surrendered unconditionally and signed the Paucarpata Treaty.
On 12 July 1839, President José Miguel de Velasco proclaimed a law naming the city as the capital of Bolivia, and renaming it in honor of the revolutionary leader Antonio José de Sucre.
Further, this elite's control of llama herds became a powerful control mechanism as llamas were essential for carrying goods between the civic centre and the periphery.
Bolivia was captured and recaptured many times during the war by the royalists and patriots.
Chile took control of today's Chuquicamata area, the adjoining rich ''salitre'' (saltpeter) fields, and the port of Antofagasta among other Bolivian territories.
The MNR platform featured three overarching objectives: economic reactivation (and job creation), anti-corruption, and social inclusion.
A period of political and economic instability in the early-to-mid-19th century weakened Bolivia.
A surplus budget of 1.7% (GDP) was obtained by 2012, the government runs surpluses since Morales administration reflecting a prudent economic management.
Much of the indigenous population adheres to different traditional beliefs marked by inculturation or syncretisim with Christianity.
A humid tropical climate with an average temperature of .
The prisons are managed by the Penitentiary Regime Directorate ().
It is a region of flat land and small plateaus, all covered by extensive rain forests containing enormous biodiversity.
There are also important communities of Japanese(14,000), Chinese(4,600).
External creditors have been willing to do this because the Bolivian government has generally achieved the monetary and fiscal targets set by IMF programs since 1987, though economic crises have undercut Bolivia's normally good record.
It also lost the state of Acre, in the Acre War, important because this region was known for its production of rubber.
In October 1904, the Treaty of Peace and Friendship was signed, and Chile agreed to build a railway between Arica and La Paz, to improve access of Bolivian products to the ports.
The "devil dances" at the annual carnival of Oruro are one of the great folkloric events of South America, as is the lesser known carnival at Tarabuco.
The plan explicitly stated that Bolivian citizens would own a minimum of 51% of enterprises; under the plan, most state-owned enterprises (SOEs), though not mines, were sold.
The Bolivian army has around 31,500 men.
So the full Amerindian population is at 60%; the remaining 30% are mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white), and around 10% are white.
Plautdietsch, a German dialect, is spoken by about 70,000 Mennonites in Santa Cruz.
Following the independence of Peru, Peruvian president General Agustín Gamarra invaded Bolivia.
Bolivia was rated "Repressed" by the Heritage Foundation's 2010 Index of Economic Freedom.
It has been landlocked since the annexation of its Pacific coast territory by Chile following the War of the Pacific (1879–84), but agreements with neighbouring countries have granted it indirect access to the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
The Peruvian army was decisively defeated at the Battle of Ingavi on 20 November 1841 where Gamarra was killed.
According to the 2011 census, 59% of the population is between 15 and 59 years old, 39% is less than 15 years old.
After the first call for independence in 1809, 16 years of war followed before the establishment of the Republic, named for Simón Bolívar, on 6 August 1825.
Slavery was abolished in Bolivia in 1831.
Despite losing its maritime coast, the so-called Litoral Department, after the War of the Pacific, Bolivia has historically maintained, as a state policy, a maritime claim to that part of Chile; the claim asks for sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean and its maritime space.
Bolivia has the second largest natural gas reserves in South America.
Since 1964, Bolivia has had its own port facilities in the ''Bolivian Free Port'' in Rosario, Argentina.
Bolivia is named after Simón Bolívar, a leader in the Spanish American wars of independence.
These areas feature enormous variations in altitude, from an elevation of  above sea level in Nevado Sajama to nearly  along the Paraguay River.
In addition, there are more than 3,000 types of butterfly, and more than 60 domestic animals.
Although a country of great geographic diversity, Bolivia has remained a landlocked country since the War of the Pacific.
The Spanish conquest of the Inca empire began in 1524, and was mostly completed by 1533.
Important archaeological ruins, gold and silver ornaments, stone monuments, ceramics, and weavings remain from several important pre-Columbian cultures.
The wind coming from the Amazon rainforest causes significant rainfall.
After a military rebellion forced out Meza in 1981, three other military governments in 14 months struggled with Bolivia's growing problems.
In addition, during the War of the Pacific (1879–83), Chile  occupied vast territories rich in natural resources south west of Bolivia, including the Bolivian coast.
The treaty stipulated that Chile would withdraw from Peru-Bolivia, Chile would return captured Confederate ships, economic relations would be normalized, and the Confederation would pay Peruvian debt to Chile.
The name was approved by the Republic on 3 October 1825.
Upper Peru was bounded to Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in 1776.
Bolivia can be divided into three physiographic regions:
Afro-Bolivians, descendents of African slaves who arrived in the time of the Spanish Empire, inhabit the department of La Paz, and are located mainly in the provinces of Nor Yungas and Sud Yungas.
Denied its victory in the 1951 presidential elections, the MNR led a successful revolution in 1952.
A major reform of the customs service has significantly improved transparency in this area.
The original name was Republic of Bolívar.
Spanish ''conquistadors'' arriving from Cuzco and Asunción took control of the region in the 16th century.
Economic growth was estimated to be at about 5.2%, and inflation was estimated at about 6.9%.
The ''Cámara de Senadores'' (Chamber of Senators) has 36 members (four per department).
This area is located above  altitude and is located between two big Andean chains, the ''Cordillera Occidental'' ("Western Range") and the ''Cordillera Central'' ("Central Range"), with some of the highest spots in the Americas such as the Nevado Sajama, with an altitude of , and the Illimani, at .
Most of the country's largest cities are located in the highlands of the west and central regions.
One-third of the country is the Andean mountain range, with one of its largest cities and principal economic centers located in the Altiplano.
Once Bolivia's government depended heavily on foreign assistance to finance development projects and to pay the public staff.
It is located to the north of the Cordillera Central and extends from the Andean foothills to the Paraguay River.
At national level, the population density is 8,49, with variations marked between 0,8 (Pando Department) and 26,2 (Cochabamba Department).
Major ruins include Tiwanaku, El Fuerte de Samaipata, Inkallaqta and Iskanawaya.
That revolution, which created a local government junta, was followed by the La Paz revolution, during which Bolivia actually declared independence.
The largest population center is located in the so-called "central axis" and in the Llanos region.
However, by 2013 the foreign assistance is just a fraction of the government budget thanks to tax collection mainly from the profitable exports to Brazil and Argentina of natural gas.
Through revisions to the constitution in 1994, and subsequent laws, the government has initiated potentially far-reaching reforms in the judicial system as well as increasing decentralizing powers to departments, municipalities, and indigenous territories.
At the outset of his government, President Banzer launched a policy of using special police-units to eradicate physically the illegal coca of the Chapare region.
A teachers' strike in 1995 was defeated because the COB could not marshal the support of many of its members, including construction and factory workers.
Both revolutions were short-lived, and defeated by the Spanish authorities, but the following year the Spanish American wars of independence raged across the continent.
Bolivia has a rich folklore.
In October 2011, Bolivia held its first judicial elections to choose members of the national courts by popular vote, a reform brought about by Evo Morales.
Elections in 1979 and 1981 were inconclusive and marked by fraud.
The MIR of Jaime Paz Zamora remained a coalition-partner throughout the Banzer government, supporting this policy (called the Dignity Plan).
Only 27% of the population has access to improved sanitation, 80 to 88% has access to improved water sources.
According to the 2012 census, there are total of 3,158,691 households in Bolivia — an increase of 887,960 from 2001.
In 1993, Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada ran for president in alliance with the Tupac Katari Revolutionary Liberation Movement, which inspired indigenous-sensitive and multicultural-aware policies.
At night, temperatures descend drastically to slightly above 0&nbsp;°C, while during the day, the weather is dry and solar radiation is high.
The best known of the various festivals found in the country is the "Carnaval de Oruro", which was among the first 19 "Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity", as proclaimed by UNESCO in May 2001.
The ''Cámara de Diputados'' (Chamber of Deputies) has 130 members elected to five-year terms, seventy from single-member districts (''circunscripciones''), sixty by proportional representation, and seven by the minority indigenous peoples of seven departments.
In the June 2002 national elections, former President Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada (MNR) placed first with 22.5% of the vote, followed by coca-advocate and native peasant-leader Evo Morales (Movement Toward Socialism, MAS) with 20.9%.
This project is carried out by the public company "Recursos Evaporíticos" subsidiary of COMIBOL.
Bolivia has gained global attention for its 'Law of the Rights of Mother Earth', which accords nature the same rights as humans.
Fulfilling a campaign promise, on 6 August 2006, Morales opened the Bolivian Constituent Assembly to begin writing a new constitution aimed at giving more power to the indigenous majority.
Most elementally, the country is divided into a mountainous western area affected by the subduction processes in the Pacific and an eastern lowlands of stable platforms and shields.
The cultural development is divided into three distinct periods: precolumbian, colonial, and republican.
Bolivia is very wealthy in minerals, especially tin.
When the climatological phenomenon known as ''El Niño'' takes place, it causes great alterations in the weather.
The Bolivian Air Force ('Fuerza Aérea Boliviana' or 'FAB') has nine air bases, located at La Paz, Cochabamba, Santa Cruz, Puerto Suárez, Tarija, Villamontes, Cobija, Riberalta, and Roboré.
Among them: Universidad Mayor, Real y Pontificia de San Francisco Xavier de Chuquisaca USFX – Sucre, founded in 1624; Universidad Mayor de San Andres UMSA – La Paz, founded in 1830; Universidad Mayor de San Simon UMSS – Cochabamba, founded in 1832; Universidad Autónoma Gabriel René Moreno UAGRM – Santa Cruz de la Sierra, founded in 1880; Universidad Tecnica de Oruro UTO – Oruro, founded in 1892; and Universidad Autónoma Tomás Frías UATF – Potosi, founded in 1892.
Bolivia has a high level of biodiversity, considered one of the greatest in the world, as well as several ecoregions with ecological sub-units such as the ''Altiplano'', tropical rainforests (including Amazon rainforest), dry valleys, and the ''Chiquitania'', which is a tropical savanna.
Increasing coverage requires a substantial increase of investment financing.
In 1836, Bolivia, under the rule of Marshal Andrés de Santa Cruz, invaded Peru to reinstall the deposed president, General Luis José de Orbegoso.
Rainy and humid in January and the rest of the year, with warm days and cool nights.
It is a developing country, with a medium ranking in the Human Development Index and a poverty level of 53 percent.
Despite a series of mostly political setbacks, between 2006 and 2009 the Morales administration has spurred growth higher than at any point in the preceding 30 years.
The landholders receive $20 to conserve the trees, avoid polluting livestock practices, and enhance the biodiversity and forest carbon on their land.
Its geography varies from the peaks of the Andes in the West, to the Eastern Lowlands, situated within the Amazon Basin.
Mestizos are distributed throughout the entire country and make up 26% of the Bolivian population.
After his resignation was accepted and his vice president, Carlos Mesa, invested, he left on a commercially scheduled flight for the United States.
After that, regional, global and domestic factors contributed to a decline in economic growth.
The tour of duty is generally 12 months.
In 1980, General Luis García Meza Tejada carried out a ruthless and violent coup d'état that did not have popular support.
Tiwanaku's elites gained their status through the surplus food they controlled, collected from outlying regions and then redistributed to the general populace.
The Rio de la Plata Basin is mainly formed by the Paraguay River, Pilcomayo River, and Bermejo River.
The Incas would not maintain control of the region for long, as the rapidly expanding Inca Empire was internally weak.
In addition to being the constitutional capital, the Supreme Court of Bolivia is located in Sucre, making it the judicial capital.
Bolivia was finally freed of Royalist dominion by Antonio José de Sucre, with a military campaign coming from the North in support of the campaign of Simón Bolívar.
The Plurinational Electoral Organ is an independent branch of government which replaced the National Electoral Court in 2010.
The branch consists of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal, the nine Departmental Electoral Tribunals, Electoral Judges, the anonymously selected Juries at Election Tables, and Electoral Notaries.
Tiwanaku expanded its reaches into the Yungas and brought its culture and way of life to many other cultures in Peru, Bolivia, and Chile.
In 2009, a new constitution changed the country's official name to "Plurinational State of Bolivia" in recognition of the multi-ethnic nature of the country and the enhanced position of Bolivia's indigenous peoples under the new constitution.
In the 1997 elections, General Hugo Banzer, leader of the Nationalist Democratic Action party (ADN) and former dictator (1971–78), won 22% of the vote, while the MNR candidate won 18%.
The Revolutionary Nationalist Movement (MNR), the most historic political party, emerged as a broad-based party.
Wilfredo Ovando presides over the seven-member Supreme Electoral Tribunal.
In the Santa Cruz Department, there are several dozen colonies of German-speaking Mennonites totaling around 40,000 inhabitants ().
The three largest, and main international airports in Bolivia are El Alto International Airport in La Paz, Viru Viru International Airport in Santa Cruz, and Jorge Wilstermann International Airport in Cochabamba.
*The third basin is the '''Central Basin''', which is an endorheic basin (/13% of the territory).
The country's second largest city, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, relatively successfully manages its own water and sanitation system by way of cooperatives.
