This led to a resurgence of Parallel Cinema by the end of the decade.
Exceptions were made for a few films, such as the 2006 colorised re-release of the classic ''Mughal-e-Azam'' or the 2006 film ''Taj Mahal''.
With the strict Muslim culture, Indian movies were said to show "respect" toward women, where Hollywood movies were seen to have "no shame".
The 2002 song "Addictive", sung by Truth Hurts and produced by DJ Quik and Dr. Dre, was lifted from Lata Mangeshkar's "Thoda Resham Lagta Hai" from ''Jyoti'' (1981).
Dialogues are usually written in an unadorned Hindi that would be understood by the largest possible audience.
Organisations like the India EU Film Initiative seek to foster a community between film makers and industry professional between India and the EU.
However, Russian newspapers report that there is a renewed interest in Bollywood among young Russians.
Some movie scripts are first written in Latin script.
Manufacturing of bootleg DVD, VCD, and VHS copies of the latest movie titles is a well established 'small scale industry' in parts of South Asia and South East Asia.
Jyotika Virdi, in her book ''The cinematic imagiNation'' , wrote about the presence of Urdu in Hindi films: "Urdu is often used in film titles, screenplay, lyrics, the language of love, war, and martyrdom."
This created several problems, since the sound in these films usually occurs a frame or two earlier or later than the mouth movements or gestures.
It is more formally referred to as '''Hindi cinema'''.
Over the last years of the 20th century and beyond, Bollywood progressed in its popularity as it entered the consciousness of Western audiences and producers, with Western actors now actively seeking roles in Bollywood movies.
The DFF screens not only Bollywood films, but films from all the other regional movie industries and independent/art films.
Most Bollywood films were unabashedly escapist, but there were also a number of filmmakers who tackled tough social issues, or used the struggle for Indian independence as a backdrop for their plots.
The new policy is opposed by nationalists and representatives of Pakistan's small film industry but is embraced by cinema owners, who are making profits after years of low receipts.
Bollywood films are widely appreciated in East Asian countries such as China, Japan, and South Korea.
The trend was bucked in 2001, after a 30-year hiatus of synchronised sound, with the film ''Lagaan'', in which producer-star Aamir Khan insisted that the sound be done on location.
After the collapse of the Soviet film distribution system, Hollywood occupied the void created in the Russian film market.
Since many Bollywood films are shot abroad, many foreign extras are employed too.
One notable exception was Kishore Kumar, who starred in several major films in the 1950s while also having a stellar career as a playback singer.
Bollywood is also appreciated in France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the Scandinavian countries.
He said, "Financially, I would be more secure knowing that a particular piece of work has already done well at the box office.
Bollywood is popular amongst non-Asians in the country as well.
In the mid-1970s, romantic confections made way for gritty, violent films about gangsters (see Indian mafia) and bandits.
Baz Luhrmann stated that his musical film ''Moulin Rouge!''
This opened up a heated debate on the use and economic feasibility of on-location sound, and several Bollywood films have employed on-location sound since then.
In this case, the event is often two characters falling in love.
In Ethiopia, Bollwood movies are shown alongside Hollywood productions in Piazza theatres, such as the Cinema Ethiopia in Addis Ababa.
Bollywood movies are so much popular in Nepal that, Bollywood movies earn more than Nepali movies.
The 1970s thus saw the rise of commercial cinema in the form of enduring films such as ''Sholay'' (1975), which consolidated Amitabh Bachchan's position as a lead actor.
Despite this, Bollywood continues to play a major role in fashion in India.
Often, bootleg DVD copies of movies are available before the prints are officially released in cinemas.
'''Bollywood''' is the sobriquet for the Hindi language film industry based in Mumbai, the most populous city of the Republic of India.
However, filmmakers may be moving towards accepting some box-office segmentation, between films that appeal to rural Indians, and films that appeal to urban and international audiences.
There have been some notable cases of conflict though.
''Madhumati'' (1958), directed by Bimal Roy and written by Ritwik Ghatak, popularised the theme of reincarnation in Western popular culture.
Some of his films are now included among the greatest films of all time, with ''Pyaasa'' (1957) being featured in Time magazine's "All-TIME" 100 best movies list, and with both ''Pyaasa'' and ''Kaagaz Ke Phool'' (1959) tied at No.
This staging is referred to as a "picturisation".
The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) estimates that the Bollywood industry loses $100&nbsp;million annually in loss of revenue from unlicensed home videos and DVDs.
American Studio Twentieth Century Fox brought the Mumbai-based B.R.
Other similarities include wearing turbans; the presence of animals in markets; porters carrying large bundles, chewing sugar cane; youths riding Bajaj motor scooters; wedding celebrations, and so forth.
Remixing of film songs with modern beats and rhythms is a common occurrence today, and producers may even release remixed versions of some of their films' songs along with the films' regular soundtrack albums.
The composers of film music, known as music directors, are also well-known.
Therefore, the sound was usually created (or re-created) entirely in the studio, with the actors reciting their lines as their images appear on-screen in the studio in the process known as "looping in the sound" or ADR—with the foley and sound effects added later.
A. R. Rahman, an Indian film composer, wrote the music for Andrew Lloyd Webber's ''Bombay Dreams'', and a musical version of ''Hum Aapke Hain Koun'' has played in London's West End.
Mahesh Bhatt has said, "If you hide the source, you're a genius.
''Kisna'', ''Lagaan'', and ''The Rising: Ballad of Mangal Pandey'' also featured foreign actors.
In January 2000, Mumbai mafia hitmen shot Rakesh Roshan, a film director and father of star Hrithik Roshan.
Songs and dances, love triangles, comedy and dare-devil thrills are all mixed up in a three-hour extravaganza with an intermission.
* International Indian Film Academy Awards – (different country each year) – since 2000
Previously song and dance scenes often used to be shot in Kashmir, but due to political unrest in Kashmir since the end of the 1980s, those scenes have since then often been shot in Western Europe, particularly in Switzerland and Austria.
The awareness of Hindi cinema is substantial in the United Kingdom, where they frequently enter the UK top ten.
Bollywood conventions are changing, however.
Bollywood films are particularly popular in the former Soviet Union.
These films often featured actors like Nana Patekar, Manoj Bajpai, Manisha Koirala, Tabu and Urmila Matondkar, whose performances were usually critically acclaimed.
Songs are what make and break the movie; they determine if it is going to be a flop or a hit: "Few films without successful musical tracks, and even fewer without any songs and dances, succeed"  With the increase of globalization, there has also been a change in the type of music that Bollywood films entail; the lyrics of the songs have increasingly been a mix of Hindi and English languages, as opposed to the strict Hindi prior to Globalization.
Most of these award ceremonies are lavishly staged spectacles, featuring singing, dancing, and numerous celebrities.
* Filmfare Awards – since 1954
Bollywood is also one of the biggest film industries in the world in terms of the number of people employed and the number of films produced.
There are channels such as MBC Bollywood and Zee Aflam, which show Hindi movies and serials.
Indian audiences expect full value for their money, with a good entertainer generally referred to as ''paisa'' ''vasool'', (literally, "money's worth").
The Filmfare awards are frequently accused of bias towards commercial success rather than artistic merit.
Kotnis Ki Amar Kahani'' (1946), ''Awaara'' (1951) and ''Do Bigha Zamin'' (1953).
Some Hindi movies had success in the China and South Korea, Japan in the 1940s and 1950s and are popular till today.
Amitabh Bachchan, the star known for his "angry young man" roles, rode the crest of this trend with actors like Mithun Chakraborty, Anil Kapoor and Sunny Deol, which lasted into the early 1990s.
While immersing in Bollywood films, viewers get to see their local experiences duplicated in different locations around the world.
In the early 2010s, established actors like Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar became known for making big-budget ''masala'' entertainers like ''Dabangg'' and ''Rowdy Rathore'' opposite younger actresses like Sonakshi Sinha.
By the 1930s, the industry was producing over 200 films per annum.
These films starred established actors.
(In fact, bootleg copies are the only way people in Pakistan can watch Bollywood movies, since the Government of Pakistan has banned their sale, distribution and telecast).
Historically, Hindi films have been distributed to some parts of Africa, largely by Lebanese businessmen.
Some Hindi filmmakers such as Shyam Benegal continued to produce realistic Parallel Cinema throughout the 1970s, alongside Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani and Vijaya Mehta.
Playback singers are prominently featured in the opening credits and have their own fans who will go to an otherwise lackluster movie just to hear their favourites.
The actors had to act twice: once on-location, once in the studio—and the emotional level on set is often very difficult to re-create.
* Screen Awards – since 1995
* National Film Awards – since 1954
Indian filmmakers have been attracted to Australia's diverse locations and landscapes, and initially used it as the setting for song-and-dance sequences, which demonstrated the contrast between the values.
Other times, a song is an externalisation of a character's thoughts, or presages an event that has not occurred yet in the plot of the movie.
It was this "chance juxtaposition of two pairs of rhyming syllables," Holly and Tolly, that led to the portmanteau name "Tollywood" being coined.
Hindi films can achieve distribution across at least 22 of India's 29 states.
The name "Bollywood" is a portmanteau derived from '''B'''ombay (the former name for Mumbai) and H'''ollywood''', the center of the American film industry.
Bollywood publicists have begun to use the Internet as a venue for advertising.
Some of the most critically acclaimed Hindi films of all time were produced during this period.
The American way of life is creeping into our culture."
Some of the internationally acclaimed Hindi filmmakers involved in the movement included Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani, Shyam Benegal and Vijaya Mehta.
This was because human labour was found to be cheaper than printing and distributing publicity material.
The old hand-painted posters, once regarded as ephemera, are becoming increasingly collectible as folk art.
It was believed that aiming for a broad spectrum would maximise box office receipts.
The ubiquity of ADR in Bollywood cinema became prevalent in the early 1960s with the arrival of the Arriflex 3 camera, which required a blimp (cover) to shield the sound of the camera, for which it was notorious, from on-location filming.
The term "Bollywood" is often loosely used as a synecdoche to refer to the whole of Indian cinema; however, Bollywood proper is only a part of the larger Indian film industry, which includes other production centres producing films in many other Indian languages.
Additionally, classic Bollywood actors like Kishore Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan have historically enjoyed popularity in Egypt and Somalia.
Ever since the social realist film ''Neecha Nagar'' won the Grand Prize at the first Cannes Film Festival, Hindi films were frequently in competition for the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, with some of them winning major prizes at the festival.
Of late, Emma Brown Garett, an Australian born actress, has starred in a few Indian films.
In the last few years some producers have also been releasing music videos, usually featuring a song from the film.
We want their films, their cars, their planes, their Diet Cokes and also their attitude.
Film critic Lata Khubchandani writes, "our earliest films&nbsp;... had liberal doses of sex and kissing scenes in them.
The 1930s and 1940s were tumultuous times: India was buffeted by the Great Depression, World War II, the Indian independence movement, and the violence of the Partition.
In 2011, over 3.5 billion tickets were sold across the globe which in comparison is 900,000 tickets more than Hollywood.
Small convenience stores run by members of the Indian diaspora in the US and the UK regularly stock tapes and DVDs of dubious provenance, while consumer copying adds to the problem.
According to ''Bollywood Audiences Editorial'', "English has begun to challenge the ideological work done by Urdu."
The next year, he made another colour film, a version of ''Mother India''.
renewed interest in the then-moribund Western musical genre, and subsequently films such as ''Chicago, The Producers, Rent'', ''Dreamgirls'', ''Hairspray'', ''Sweeney Todd'', ''Across the Universe'', ''The Phantom of the Opera'', ''Enchanted'' and ''Mamma Mia!''
In that point of time, action and comedy films were also successful, with actors like Govinda and actresses such as Raveena Tandon and Karisma Kapoor appearing in popular comedy films, and stunt actor Akshay Kumar gaining popularity for performing dangerous stunts in action films in his well known Khiladi (film series) and other action films.
In 1955 the Bollywood group Cine Costume Make-Up Artist & Hair Dressers' Association (CCMAA) created a rule that did not allow women to obtain memberships as makeup artists.
There was clearly a huge market for talkies and musicals; Bollywood and all the regional film industries quickly switched to sound filming.
There's no such thing as originality in the creative sphere".
Many Indian artists used to make a living by hand-painting movie billboards and posters (The well-known artist M.F.
Also, with the inspiration of global trends, such as Salsa, Pop and Hip Hop, there has been a modification of the type of music heard in Bollywood films.
Now, a majority of the huge and ubiquitous billboards in India's major cities are created with computer-printed vinyl.
Very few non-Indian actors are able to make a mark in Bollywood, though many have tried from time to time.
Bollywood movies are regularly screened in Dubai cinemas because of the high demand.
Some actors in the last thirty years have sung one or more songs themselves; for a list, see Singing actors and actresses in Indian cinema.
* Stardust Awards – since 2003
The term "Bollywood" itself has origins in the 1970s, when India overtook America as the world's largest film producer.
Commercial Indian filmmakers, known for their speed, never bothered to blimp the camera, and its excessive noise required that everything had to be re-created in the studio.
A greater globalised world worked in tandem with the sexualisation of Indian films so as to become more like American films, thus negating the preferred values of an old Bollywood and diminishing Indian soft power.
Various Bollywood movies are dubbed in German and shown on the German television channel RTL II on a regular basis.
Bollywood films are popular in Southeast Asia (particularly in Maritime Southeast Asia) and Central Asia (particularly in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan).
The critical and financial success of ''Moulin Rouge!''
Besides catering to the homegrown market, demand for these copies is large amongst some sections of the Indian diaspora, too.
Their songs can make or break a film and usually do.
The name "Tollywood" went on to be used as a nickname for the Bengali film industry by the popular Kolkata-based ''Junior Statesman'' youth magazine, establishing a precedent for other film industries to use similar-sounding names, eventually leading to the coining of "Bollywood".
Sets, costumes, special effects, and cinematography were less than world-class up until the mid-to-late 1990s, although with some notable exceptions.
However, due to significant South Asian diasporic communities in Suriname and Guyana, Hindi-language movies are popular.
Bollywood films are mostly musicals and are expected to contain catchy music in the form of song-and-dance numbers woven into the script.
However, colour did not become a popular feature until the late 1950s.
Also in 2005, the Kronos Quartet re-recorded several R. D. Burman compositions, with Asha Bhosle as the singer, into an album ''You've Stolen My Heart: Songs from R.D.
Our TV shows are adaptations of American programmes.
There have always been Indian films with more artistic aims and more sophisticated stories, both inside and outside the Bollywood tradition (see Parallel Cinema).
Another important film from 1975 was ''Deewar'', directed by Yash Chopra and written by Salim-Javed.
Screenwriters generally produce original scripts, but due to financial uncertainty and insecurity over the success of a film many were rejected.
Besides being popular among the India diaspora, such far off locations as Nigeria to Egypt to Senegal and to Russia generations of non-Indian fans have grown up with Bollywood during the years, bearing witness to the cross-cultural appeal of Indian movies.
At this time, lavish romantic musicals and melodramas were the staple fare at the cinema.
There have been some exceptions, of which one recent example is the hit film ''Rang De Basanti'', where the lead actress is Alice Patten, an Englishwoman.
Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Northern Nigeria, while posters of Indian films adorn the walls of tailor shops and mechanics' garages in the country.
Some of the biggest stars, such as Shah Rukh Khan, Madhuri Dixit, Rajesh Khanna, Dharmendra, and Akshay Kumar have succeeded despite a lack of any show business connections.
Product placement, as used in Hollywood, is widely practised in Bollywood.
Bollywood is also one of the largest centers of film production in the world.
Bollywood song lyrics, especially in the old movies, frequently use the poetic vocabulary of court Urdu, with many Persian loanwords.
As more Indians migrate to these countries, they form a growing market for upscale Indian films.
Following the release of ''Salaam Namaste'', on a visit to India the then prime minister John Howard also sought, having seen the film, to have more Indian movies shooting in the country to boost tourism, where the Bollywood and cricket nexus, was further tightened with Steve Waugh's appointment as tourism ambassador to India.
Some deplore the name, arguing that it makes the industry look like a poor cousin to Hollywood.
The latter choice was a failure because "they don't base themselves on the problems of the people," where the former is based socialist values and on the reality of developing countries emerging from years of colonialism.
Ominously, however, the popularity of old Bollywood versus a new, changing Bollywood seems to be diminishing the popularity on the continent.
''Raja Harishchandra'' (1913), by Dadasaheb Phalke, is known as the first silent feature film made in India.
Continued easing followed in 2009 and 2010.
This was followed by ''Heyy Babyy'' (2007) ''Chak De!
of US$1.3&nbsp;billion, whereas Hollywood films sold 2.6&nbsp;billion tickets and generated total revenues (again from all formats) of US$51&nbsp;billion.
However, this ban has now been lifted.
Bollywood films have been dubbed into Russian, and shown in prominent theatres such as Mosfilm and Lenfilm.
In 1937, Ardeshir Irani, of ''Alam Ara'' fame, made the first colour film in Hindi, ''Kisan Kanya''.
There are also increasing returns from theatres in Western countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, where Bollywood is slowly getting noticed.
With the increasing prominence of international setting such as Switzerland, Paris, New York and so on, it does not entail that the people and cultures residing in these exotic settings are represented.
Early in 2008, the Pakistani government eased the ban and allowed the import of even more movies; 16 were screened in 2008.
Bollywood movies and celebrities enjoy wide popularity and appeal in the Arab world.
Many Asian Underground artists, particularly those among the overseas Indian diaspora, have also been inspired by Bollywood music.
Indian movies have also gained ground so as to alter the style of Hausa fashions, songs have also been copied by Hausa singers and stories have influenced the writings of Nigerian novelists.
Prestigious Film Awards ceremonies held within India are:
The emergence of Nollywood, Africa's local movie industry has also contributed to the declining popularity of Bollywood films.
The songs are also often referred to as a "dream sequence", and anything can happen that would not normally happen in the real world.
Music directors often prefer working with certain lyricists, to the point that the lyricist and composer are seen as a team.
The 2000s saw a growth in Bollywood's popularity across the world.
Hindi films shot in Australia usually incorporate aspects of Australian lifestyle.
The hero or heroine will often perform with a troupe of supporting dancers.
The film ''Mera Naam Joker'' (1970), sought to cater to such an appeal and the popularity of Raj Kapoor in Russia, when it recruited Russian actress Kseniya Ryabinkina for the movie.
With Bollywood's popularity among diasporic audiences, "Indianness" poses a problem, but at the same time, it gives back to its homeland audience, a sense of uniqueness from other immigrant groups.
In Indian movies women were modestly dressed, men and women rarely kiss, and there is no nudity, thus Indian movies are said to "have culture" that Hollywood films lack.
Satellite TV, television and imported foreign films are making huge inroads into the domestic Indian entertainment market.
Some movies, however, have used regional dialects to evoke a village setting, or old-fashioned, courtly, Persian-influenced Urdu in Mughal era historical films.
As finances are not regulated, some funding also comes from illegitimate sources, such as the Mumbai underworld.
The Hindi film industry was not widely known to non-Indian audiences (excluding the Soviet states), who would not even be aware that their material was being copied.
Contemporary mainstream movies also make great use of English.
Before the 1990s, this could be done with impunity.
However, Tollywood is now used popularly to refer to the Telugu Film Industry in Telangana & Andhra Pradesh.
Models and beauty contestants, television actors, theatre actors and even common people come to Mumbai with the hope and dream of becoming a star.
Indian films are the most popular foreign films in Tajikistan, and Hindi-Urdu departments are very large in the country.
Nigerian viewers, for example, commented that older films of the 1950s and 1960s had culture to the newer, more westernised picturisations.
Older Bollywood dancers are people such as Helen, known for her cabaret numbers, Cuckoo Moray, Parveen Babi, Waheeda Rahman, Meena Kumari, and Shammi Kapoor.
Indian movies also allowed for a new youth culture to follow without such ideological baggage as "becoming western."
Like ''masalas'', these movies are a mixture of many things such as action, comedy, romance and so on.
This has led to criticism towards the film industry.
Commercial Indian films, not just the Hindi-language variety, are known for their lack of ambient sound, so there is a silence underlying everything instead of the background sound and noises usually employed in films to create aurally perceivable depth and environment.
Song lyrics are often about love.
The makers of ''Partner'' (2007) and ''Zinda'' (2005) have been targeted by the owners and distributors of the original films, ''Hitch'' and ''Oldboy''.
Constrained by rushed production schedules and small budgets, some Bollywood writers and musicians have been known to resort to plagiarism.
Following India's independence, the period from the late 1940s to the 1960s is regarded by film historians as the "Golden Age" of Hindi cinema.
In 2001, the Central Bureau of Investigation seized all prints of the movie ''Chori Chori Chupke Chupke'' after the movie was found to be funded by members of the Mumbai underworld.
Bollywood is one of the largest film producers in India, representing 43% of the net box office revenue, while Telugu and Tamil cinema represent 36%, and the rest of the regional cinema constitutes 21% as of 2014.
A popular tune is believed to help pull audiences into the theatres.
These awards are handed out at an annual ceremony presided over by the President of India.
Since the early 2000s, Bollywood has progressed in Israel.
Releasing the film music, or music videos, before the actual release of the film can also be considered a form of advertising.
However, nowadays, Australian locations are becoming more important to the plot of Bollywood films.
Bollywood employs people from all parts of India.
Australia is one of the countries where there is a large South Asian Diaspora.
However, in 2014 the Supreme Court of India ruled that this rule was in violation of the Indian constitutional guarantees granted under Article 14 (right to equality), 19(1)(g) (freedom to carry out any profession) and Article 21 (right to liberty).
Bollywood has experienced a marked growth in revenue in Canada and the United States, particularly popular amongst the South Asian communities in large cities, such as Toronto, Chicago, and New York City.
Early examples of Hindi films in this movement include Chetan Anand's ''Neecha Nagar'' (1946) and Bimal Roy's ''Do Bigha Zamin'' (1953).
Imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic upon the film's release.
