The producers felt nobody else could continue the role.
The program's Nevada set, the Ponderosa Ranch house, was recreated in Incline Village, Nevada, in 1967, and remained a tourist attraction until its sale thirty-seven years later in September 2004.
The series sought to illustrate the cruelty of bigotry against: Asians ("The Fear Merchants", episode #27, 1960; "The Lonely Man", episode #404, 1971), African-Americans ("Enter Thomas Bowers", episode #164, 1964; "The Wish", episode #326, 1968; "Child", episode #305, 1969), Native Americans ("The Underdog", episode #180, 1964; "Terror at 2:00", episode #384, 1970), Jews, ("Look to the Stars", episode #90, 1962); Mormons ("The Pursued", episodes #239-40, 1966), the disabled ("Tommy", episode #249, 1966) and "little people" ("It's A Small World", episode #347, 1968).
In the ''Bonanza'' flashback, his mother Inger names him Eric after her father.
Three of the cast members bellowed-out the original lyrics, unaccompanied, at the close of the pilot (Pernell Roberts, the sole professional singer of the quartet, abstained and untethered the horse reins).
In the 1963 flashback episode "Marie, My Love", his father was Jean De'Marigny.
The ''Little House on the Prairie'' theme (also by Rose), was heard first in a 1971 episode of ''Bonanza''.
Landon was the only original cast member who was wig-free throughout the series, as even Sen Yung wore an attached queue (Michael Landon, "The Tonight Show", NBC-TV, March 10, 1983).
After graduating from the University of Cincinnati, David Canary was offered a left-end position with the Denver Broncos, but pursued acting and singing.
Ashamed, the school teacher vows to reform.
Clips of his appearance were heavily used in advertisements promoting the "second generation" theme, perhaps misleading audiences to believe that Blocker was playing Hoss' heir.
In 2002, ''Bonanza'' was ranked No.
As producer, Dortort ensured that the episode re-aired during the summer rerun seasons, though two TV stations in the South refused to air it.
David Canary returned to his former role of Candy (to offset Hoss' absence), and a new character named Griff King (played by Tim Matheson) was added to lure younger viewers.
The series stars Lorne Greene, Dan Blocker, Michael Landon, Pernell Roberts (who left after six seasons), and later David Canary and Mitch Vogel.
Michael Richards, as Stanley Spadowski, sang a bit of the theme song while being held hostage by Channel 8's news goons in ''UHF'' (he did not know the words to the song he was originally supposed to sing, "Helter Skelter").
'''''Bonanza''''' was an NBC television western series that ran from 1959 to 1973.
Initially, ''Bonanza'' aired on Saturday evenings opposite ''Perry Mason''.
It was Landon, not Roberts, who objected to the infusion of any new Cartwrights.
In the episode "Enter Thomas Bowers" (Season 5, Episode 30; original air date April 26, 1964), the Cartwright family helps the opera singer Bowers, an African American freedman, after he encounters prejudice while in Virginia City to perform.
The first recorded and released version was an instrumental by Marty Gold, on his 1960 album ''Swingin' West''.
A coda to the episode reveals that Michaelson went on to win the Nobel Prize for Physics.
The prequel series, ''The Ponderosa'', as well as the three sequel movies (see below), are all available on DVD09
Other versions were released by Billy Vaughn, Valjean, Lorne Greene, and Nelson Riddle.
The melodic intro, emulating galloping horses, is one of the most recognized television scores.
Originally, the Cartwrights tended to be depicted as put-off by outsiders.
In the "The Wish" episode, directed by Michael Landon, Hoss protects an African American former slave's family when confronted with racism after the American Civil War.
Teal co-starred in numerous TV westerns throughout his career: he appeared five times on ''Cheyenne'', twice on ''The Lone Ranger'', on the ''The Alaskans'', a short-lived series starring Roger Moore, three times in different roles on another long-running western series, ''Wagon Train'', on NBC's ''Tales of Wells Fargo'' with Dale Robertson, on the ABC western series ''Broken Arrow'', five times on the ABC western comedy ''Maverick'' starring James Garner and Jack Kelly, on the CBS western series ''The Texan'' with Rory Calhoun, the NBC western series ''The Californians'', twice on ''Colt .45'' with Wayde Preston, once on ''Wanted: Dead or Alive'' with Steve McQueen and as "Sheriff Clay" for a single 1960 episode of the NBC western series ''Riverboat'' with Darren McGavin, and four times on a western series about the rodeo entitled ''The Wide Country''.
Attempts to replace Adam with Little Joe's maternal half-brother Clay (Barry Coe) and Cartwright cousin Will (Guy "Zorro" Williams), were unsuccessful.
Many fans felt that the Hoss character was essential, as he was a nurturing, empathetic soul who rounded out the all-male cast.
Notable film roles include playing one of the judges in ''Judgment at Nuremberg'' (1961) with Spencer Tracy, and an indulgent bar owner to Marlon Brando's motorcycle gang in ''The Wild One'' (1953), which was the second of three times that Teal appeared with Brando, having done so already as a drunk in Brando's debut in ''The Men'' (1950) and later in Brando's only directorial effort, ''One-Eyed Jacks'' (1961), as a bartender.
In a 1964 song, the Livingston-Evans lyrics were revised by Lorne Greene with a more familial emphasis, "on this land we put our brand, Cartwright is the name, fortune smiled the day we filed the Ponderosa claim" ("Bonanza", Bear Family Box set, Disc #2).
*Candy Canaday: Crimson shirt, black pants, black leather vest, black hat, grey/ pale purple scarf.
His longest-running role was as Sheriff Roy Coffee.
According to a biography, the show's crew found Blocker to be the "least actor-ish as well as the most likeable" cast member.
Via exposition (S01:E01 &ndash; "Rose for Lotta") and flashback episodes, each wife was accorded a different ancestry: English (S02:E65 &ndash; "Elizabeth My Love"), Swedish (S03:E95 &ndash; "Inger My Love") and French Creole (S04:E120 &ndash; "Marie My Love") respectively.
''Bonanza'' has had a highly profitable merchandising history.
Creator David Dortort introduced a storyline that would keep the character of Adam in the mix, but with a lighter schedule.
NBC kept it because ''Bonanza'' was one of the first series to be filmed and broadcast in color, including scenes of picturesque Lake Tahoe, Nevada.
The nearest town to the Ponderosa was Virginia City, where the Cartwrights would go to converse with Sheriff Roy Coffee (played by veteran actor Ray Teal), or his deputy Clem Foster (Bing Russell).
Griff, in prison for nearly killing his abusive stepfather, was paroled into Ben's custody and got a job as a ranch hand.
In the last of the three Bonanza TV movies, it is revealed that "Little Joe" had died in the Spanish–American War&nbsp;– a member of the "Rough Riders".
After the series was cancelled, the syndicated reruns reverted to the ''Bonanza'' name.
In season 14, he and Greene occasionally wore different shirts and slacks, as the footage of them and the late Dan Blocker together could no longer be reused.
This allowed for a switch to the less expensive Warner studios from September 1970 through January 1973.
Though not familiar stars in 1959, the cast quickly became favorites of the first television generation.
That area (along with the portions ceded to Nevada later on) was still part of Utah Territory at that point.
He portrayed the youngest Cartwright son, whose mother (Felicia in the pilot, and later changed to Marie) was of French Creole descent.
This was followed by the February 1960 single by Buddy Morrow and his Orchestra, which included vocals.
The main cast of actors portraying Cartwrights is listed here in the order of their characters' ages, followed by an array of recurring supporting players:
Landon's development was a bit stormy according to David Dortort, who felt that the actor grew more difficult during the last five seasons the show ran.
Family Channel and the Hallmark Channel were two other channels that have also only aired the ''Bonanza'' Lost Episodes package.
Sheriff Coffee was occasionally the focus of a plot as in the episode "No Less a Man" (broadcast March 15, 1964).
After Ben consoles Marie, the two bond and marry.
Blocker got up and the bone was actually protruding from his skin.
According to producer David Dortort: "Over the years he gave me the least amount of trouble."
Bowers winds up arrested as a fugitive slave.
The series currently airs on Me-TV, TV Land, My Family TV, The Inspiration Network, and Encore Westerns.
The family's cook was the Chinese immigrant Hop Sing (Victor Sen Yung).
Adam built the impressive ranch house.
The series takes place in Nevada Territory in 1849, which is actually an anachronism.
Born in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, to Russian-Jewish parents, Lorne Greene was chosen to play widowed patriarch Ben Cartwright.
Action-shot pictorials of the cast replaced the galloping trio.
Although "big and lovable", Blocker was also tough.
The Inspiration Network first aired only selected first and second season episodes of ''Bonanza'' and began to air the ''Bonanza'' Lost Episodes packages which contains episodes that originally aired from 1965-1973.
TV Land only airs ''Bonanza'' from the first season to the 1969-1970 season.
In May 1972, Blocker died suddenly from a post-operative pulmonary embolism following surgery to remove his gall bladder.
Greene was 44 years old at the beginning of the series while Pernell Roberts and Dan Blocker, who portrayed two of his sons, were both 31, only thirteen years younger.
The initial story was first introduced in 1973, when depiction of fornication courted protests, so CBS insisted their hero Matt have the encounter when he had amnesia.)
The show chronicles the weekly adventures of the Cartwright family, headed by the thrice-widowed patriarch Ben Cartwright (Lorne Greene).
Although there were two official sets of lyrics (some country-western singers, avoiding royalties, substituted the copyright renditions with their own words), the series simply used an instrumental theme.
A new theme song, called "The Big Bonanza" was written in 1970 by episode scorer David Rose, and was used from 1970–1972.
He had three sons, each by a different wife: the eldest was the urbane architect Adam Cartwright (Pernell Roberts) who built the ranch house; the second was the warm and lovable giant Eric "Hoss" Cartwright (Dan Blocker); and the youngest was the hotheaded and impetuous Joseph or "Little Joe" (Michael Landon).
To satisfy young Adam, Inger and Ben agree to try the nickname Hoss and "see which one sticks."
In the second movie, airing on NBC, a one-hour retrospective was done to introduce the drama.
The overture for ''The High Chaparral'' composed by Harry Sukman can be heard briefly at the start of the 1966 episode "Four Sisters from Boston".
Finally, a faster rendition of the original music returned for the 14th and final season, along with action shots of the cast.
Sometime after June 1963, it was released as a track on his sixteenth album: ''Ring of Fire: The Best of Johnny Cash.''
The band often includes the song in their live shows.
That was very difficult to do on television.
''Bonanza'' creator David Dortort approved PAX TV (now Ion TV)'s decision to hire Beth Sullivan, which some believe gave the series more depth as well as a softer edge.
In 1968, Blocker began wearing a toupee on the series, as he was approaching age 40 and losing hair.
A gang of thieves has been terrorizing towns around Virginia City and the town council wants to replace Coffee, whom they consider over-the-hill, with a younger sheriff before the gang hits town, not realizing that they'd been spared earlier because the gang's leader was wary of Coffee's longevity and only acquiesced to rob the Virginia City bank after extreme pressure from other gang members.
Canary joined the cast in Season 9.
In the fall of 1972, off-network episodes were released in broadcast syndication to local stations by NBC under the ''Ponderosa'' name.
The family lived on a 600,000+ acre (937+ square-mile) ranch called the Ponderosa on the eastern shore of Lake Tahoe in Nevada.
The title "Bonanza" is a term used by miners in regard to a large vein or deposit of ore, and commonly refers to the 1859 revelation of the Comstock Lode discovery, not far from the fictional Ponderosa Ranch that the Cartwright family operated.
The script was initially written for the departing David Canary's Candy, but was rewritten for actors Ray Teal (Sheriff Roy Coffee) and Bing Russell (Deputy Clem Foster), who rarely appeared together on the show.
The nickname was used as a nod to the character's ample girth, an endearing term for "big and friendly", used by his Swedish mother (and Uncle Gunnar).
He had also played a sheriff in the Billy Wilder film ''Ace in the Hole'' (1951).
The role of "Little Joe" was given to Michael Landon, who had earlier played the title role in ''I Was a Teenage Werewolf''.
Most shows that tried to do it failed because the sponsors didn't like it, and the networks were nervous about getting letters", explains Stephen Battaglio, a senior editor for ''TV Guide'' magazine.
According to David Dortort, sponsor General Motors was anxious about the episode.
In 2001, there was an attempt to revive the ''Bonanza'' concept with a prequel, ''Ponderosa''&nbsp;&ndash; not to be confused with the 1972 summer reruns under the same title&nbsp;&ndash; with a pilot directed by Simon Wincer and filmed in Australia.
Any time one of the Cartwrights seriously courted a woman, she died from a malady, was abruptly slain, or left with someone else.
The show continues to air in syndication.
This version was later covered by Bad Manners (1989) and the Hurtin' Buckaroos (1997).
In 1967, he joined the cast as "Candy" Canaday, a plucky Army brat turned cowboy, who became the Cartwrights' confidant, ranch foreman, and timber vessel captain.
* Ben Cartwright: Sandy shirt, tawny leather vest, gray pants, cream-colored hat, occasional green scarf.
Roberts disdained the assembly-line mindset of serial television (a rigid 34 episode season), and fought with series writers regarding Adam's lack of independence, noting that his 30-plus year old character was dependent on his "Pa's" approval.
Lorne Greene objected to this, pointing out that as the area's largest timber and livestock producer, the family should be less clannish.
Fourteen-year-old Mitch Vogel was introduced as Jamie Hunter in  "A Matter of Faith" (season 12, episode 363).
Seasons 1-8 (as of 06/2015) are available on DVD, as well as several non-successive public-domain episodes (sans original theme music).
The scheduling change, as well as Dan Blocker's death several months earlier, resulted in plunging ratings for the show.
His German version (lyrics attributed to "Nicolas") was sung in the same style and mood in which Cash had recorded it, and was fairly close in translation.
Episodes ranged from high drama ("Bushwhacked", episode #392, 1971; "Shanklin", episode #409, 1972), to broad comedy ("Hoss and the Leprechauns", episode #146, 1964; "Mrs. Wharton and the Lesser Breeds", episode #318, 1969; "Caution, Bunny Crossing", episode #358, 1969), and addressed issues such as the environment ("Different Pines, Same Wind", episode #304, 1968), substance abuse ("The Hidden Enemy", episode #424, 1972), domestic violence ("First Love", episode #427, 1972), anti-war sentiment ("The Weary Willies", episode #364, 1970), and illegitimate births ("Love Child", episode #370, 1970; "Rock-A-Bye Hoss", episode #393, 1971).
Such a storyline might have been problematic in the original series.
The opening credits would alternate the order among the four stars.
According to the magazine ''TV Guide'', producer Dortort told Blocker he was too old to play the Hoss scion, but gave him the role of an unrelated newspaper reporter.
This version was later covered by Faron Young for his 1963 album ''Aims at the West''.
The biggest hit version is a guitar instrumental by Al Caiola, which reached number 19 on Billboard in 1961.
Inger says of "Hoss", "In the mountain country, that is the name for a big, friendly man."
In 1968, a slightly revamped horn and percussion-heavy arrangement of the original score introduced the series- which was used until 1970.
Michael Feinstein was the last to record the song in 2002 on his ''Songs of Evans and Livingston'' tribute CD.
After 14 years, he was widely known, but making far less than his Ponderosa peers.
Several years after his death, Michael Landon was on "The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson" and related the following anecdote.
The opening scene for the first season was shot at Lake Hemet, a reservoir in the San Jacinto Mountains, Riverside County, California, and later moved to Lake Tahoe.
Another of his roles was as Little John in ''The Bandit of Sherwood Forest'' (1946).
* Hoss Cartwright: White shirt, brown suede vest, brown pants, large beige flat-brimmed, ten-gallon hat.
Teal was a bit-part player in western films for several years before landing a substantial role in ''Northwest Passage'' (1940) starring Spencer Tracy.
43 on TV Guide's 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time, and in 2013 ''TV Guide'' included it in its list of The 60 Greatest Dramas of All Time.
The Hop Sing character was central in only two episodes: "Mark Of Guilt" (#316) and "The Lonely Man" (#404).
It was hosted by both Michael Landon, Jr., and Dirk Blocker, who looks and sounds almost exactly like his father Dan Blocker.
In the episode "First Born" (1962), viewers learn of Little Joe's older, maternal half-brother Clay Stafford.
Roberts decided to stay an additional season, so the scripts were quickly revised by having Adam's fiancee and her daughter depart the series prematurely with Guy Williams' Will, with whom she'd fallen in love.
The first Virginia City set was used on the show until 1970 and was located on a backlot at Paramount and featured in episodes of ''Have Gun – Will Travel'', ''Mannix'', and ''The Brady Bunch''.
Hoss' son Josh was born out of wedlock, as it is explained that Hoss drowned without knowing his fiancėe was pregnant.
Chinese American actor Victor Sen Yung played the Cartwrights' happy-go-lucky cook, whose blood pressure rose when the family came late for dinner.
A bigoted school teacher (oblivious to his prejudice) routinely expels minority students.
The crew wanted to call an ambulance but Blocker refused and stuck the bone back in place himself and resumed filming.
There is also a collection of Bonanza stories: ''The Best of Bonanza World: A Book of Favorite Stories,'' published by CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform (2012).
All aforementioned vocal versions, including the television pilot, used lyrics written by Livingston and Evans contained in the first published sheet music for the song, though not all the lyrics were sung.
After Canary's departure in mid-1970, and aware of the show's aging demographic, the writers sought a fresh outlet for Ben's fatherly advice.
Black leather gloves from 10th season on.
''Bonanza'''s ratings were dismal and the show was soon targeted for cancellation.
At the beginning of the episode, Adam is shown to be outraged at the Supreme Court's ''Dred Scott v. Sandford'' decision (placing the time as 1857), which he discusses with his father.
He returned two seasons later after co-star Dan Blocker's death, reportedly having been approached by Landon.
Veteran character actor Ray Teal essayed the role of '''Sheriff Roy Coffee''' on 98 episodes from 1960 to 1972.
Coffee ends up showing the town that youth and a fast gun don't replace experience.
Morrow's version also appeared on his 1960 album ''Double Impact'' which featured several other then-recent television themes.
Greene appeared in all but twelve ''Bonanza'' episodes.
* Little Joe Cartwright: Beige, light gray shirt, kelly-green corduroy jacket, tan pants, beige hat.
Landon began to develop his skills in writing and directing ''Bonanza'' episodes, starting with "The Gamble."
Though ''Ponderosa'' takes place in what is today the state of Nevada, Nevada Territory did not actually exist in 1849.
He joined the ranks of his fellow co-stars Roberts and Greene, both of whom had begun the series with hairpieces (Greene wore his modest frontal piece in private life too, whereas Roberts preferred not wearing his, even to rehearsals/blocking).
The original series has spawned: several successful novelty western/folk albums from 1962–1965; three dozen Dell and Gold Key comic books from 1962 through 1970; Jim Beam Whiskey Ponderosa Ranch decanters 1964–1966; a series of "Big-Little" books from 1966–1969; Revel Bonanza model character sets from 1966–1968; a chain of Bonanza and Ponderosa steakhouses from 1963–present; the Lake Tahoe-based "Ponderosa" theme park from 1967–2004; a line of American Character action figures in 1966–1967; Aladdin lunch buckets and thermos bottles in 1966–1968; View Master slide sets in 1964, 1971; Ponderosa tin cups from 1967–2004; a series of Hamilton collector plates in 1989–1990; and most recently, Breyer Fiftieth Anniversary Ponderosa Stable sets, with horses and Cartwright figures in 2009–2011.
In mid 1972, the series producers considered inviting Roberts back in the wake of Dan Blocker's death: "One suggestion was to return Pernell Roberts, who had played another Cartwright son when ''Bonanza'' first premiered on NBC fourteen years ago.
(''The Big Valley'', however, had a major character in Heath, who was presented as illegitimate.
Despite the show's success, Roberts departed the series after the 1964–65 season (202 episodes) and returned to stage productions.
Then in 1964, Lorne Greene released the song "Saga of the Ponderosa", wherein Marie's previous husband was "Big Joe" Collins, who dies saving Ben's life.
Country singer Johnny Cash was first to record a full length vocal version of the theme song.
Few media cowboys had on-screen wives.
Fourteen ''Bonanza'' novels have been published: ''Bonanza: A Novel'' by Noel Loomis (1960); ''Bonanza: One Man With Courage'' by Thomas Thompson (1966); ''Bonanza: Killer Lion'' by Steve Frazee (1966); ''Bonanza: Treachery Trail'' by Harry Whittington (1968); ''Winter Grass'' by Dean Owen (1968); ''Ponderosa Kill'' by Dean Owen (1968); ''The Pioneer Spirit'' by Stephen Calder (1988); ''The Ponderosa Empire'' by Stephen Calder (1991); ''Bonanza: The High Steel Hazard'' by Stephen Calder (1993); ''Journey of the Horse'' by Stephen Calder (1993); ''The Money Hole'' by Stephen Calder (1993); ''The Trail to Timberline'' by Stephen Calder (1994); ''Bonanza: Felling of the Sons'' by Monette L. Bebow-Reinhard (2005), and ''Bonanza: Mystic Fire'' by Monette L. Bebow-Reinhard (2009).
The reason for this is twofold: it made duplication of wardrobe easier for stunt doubles (Hal Burton, Bob Miles, Bill Clark, Lyle Heisler, Ray Mazy) and it cut the cost of refilming action shots (such as riding clips in-between scenes), as previously shot stock footage could be reused.
After Roberts did leave the following year, it was eventually mentioned that Adam had gone "to sea", and in the later movies he had emigrated to Australia.
Canary played the character on a total of 91 episodes.
In the 1970 premiere episode of the 12th season entitled "The Night Virginia City Died", Deputy Clem Foster's pyromaniac fiancée levels the town in a series of fires (reflecting a real 1875 fire that destroyed three-quarters of Virginia City).
Currently, Bonanza Ventures, Inc. grants merchandising and licensing rights worldwide.
In October 2015, Me-TV additionally began airing the ''Bonanza'' Lost Episodes package.
Early in the show's history, he recalls each of his late wives in flashback episodes.
* Adam Cartwright: Black shirt, black or midnight blue pants, black hat.
The theme song has been recorded by numerous artists in a diverse variety of styles.
In the episode ''The Lonely Man ''is presented the problem of interracial marriage between a Chinese man (Hop Sing) and a white woman (Missy).
The time period for the television series is roughly between 1861 (Season 1) to 1867 (Season 13) during and shortly after the American Civil War.
The character departed in that same episode, but left an opportunity for a return if needed.
During the first season extra horses were rented from the Idyllwild Stables in Idyllwild, also in the San Jacinto Mountains.
Covering the time when the Cartwrights first arrived at the Ponderosa, when Adam was a teenager and Joe a little boy, the series lasted 20 episodes and featured less gunfire and brawling than the original.
The show is set around the 1860s and it centers on the wealthy Cartwright family, who live in the area of Virginia City, Nevada, bordering Lake Tahoe.
NBC's corporate parent, Radio Corporation of America (RCA), used the show to spur sales of RCA-manufactured color television sets (RCA was also the primary sponsor of the series during its first two seasons).
Greene, Roberts, Blocker, and Landon were billed equally.
Carlos Malcolm & His Afro-Jamaican Rhythms released  a ska version of the song as "Bonanza Ska" on Trojan Records in 1964.
So, whether to Stafford, De'Marigny or Collins, Marie Cartwright was previously married.
Nevada Territory did not split off until 1861, meaning that until at least the 5th season (the episode "Enter Thomas Bowers" establishes that year as 1857), ''Bonanza'' technically should have been set in Utah Territory as well.
A ''Bonanza'' soundtrack album released in late 1961 included a version by David Rose; Rose also had a 1960 single and included the theme on his 1961 album ''Exodus'' in a different mix.
He appeared in more than 250 movies and some 90 television programs during his 37-year career.
The Hop Sing character is depicted not only as a cook but also a family counselor and herbal healer.
Not until the TV movie ''Bonanza: The Next Generation'' was it explained that Hoss had drowned attempting to save a woman's life.
Vogel played the red-haired orphan of a roving rainmaker, whom Ben takes in and adopts later in a 1971 episode, called "A Home For Jamie."
The ranch name refers to the Ponderosa Pine, common in the West.
"You always saw stories about family on comedies or on an anthology, but ''Bonanza'' was the first series that was week-to-week about a family and the troubles it went through.
''Bonanza'' was a period drama that attempted to confront contemporary social issues.
A standard practice with most westerns was to introduce some romance but avoid matrimony.
Several episodes were built around his character, one that Matheson never had a chance to fully develop before the show's abrupt cancellation in November 1972 (with last episode airing January 16, 1973).
The new time slot caused ''Bonanza'' to soar in the ratings, and it eventually reached number one by 1964, an honor it would keep until 1967 when it was seriously challenged by the socially daring variety show, ''The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour'' on CBS.
''Bonanza'' was considered an atypical western for its time, as the core of the storylines dealt less about the range but more with Ben and his three dissimilar sons, how they cared for one another, their neighbors, and just causes.
Lasting 14 seasons and 431 episodes, ''Bonanza'' is NBC's longest-running western, and ranks overall as the second-longest-running western series on U.S. network television (behind CBS's ''Gunsmoke''), and within the top 10 longest-running, live-action American series.
Landon appeared in all but fourteen ''Bonanza'' episodes for its run, a total of 416 episodes.
They choose to honor "Big Joe" by calling their son "Little Joe".
As a semi-regular cast member, Sen Yung was only paid per episode.
On January 29, 2011, Marty Stuart and the Fabulous Superlatives performed the song on episode 56 of The Marty Stuart Show.
In 2007, a ''TV Guide'' survey listed Ben Cartwright as television's #2 favorite dad.
For 14 years, the Cartwrights were the premier western family on American television and have been immensely popular on cable networks such as TV Land, ION (formerly PAX), Family Channel, and the Hallmark Channel.
When he expels the brilliant Jewish student Albert Michelson, a scientific genius whose experiments on the streets of Virginia City often cause commotion, Ben Cartwright steps in and confronts Norton on his bigotry.
It was the first time a TV show's producers chose to kill off a young major male character (though it was done twice previously with young female leads—in 1956 on ''Make Room For Daddy'', and again in 1963 with ''The Real McCoys'').
The producers agreed with this observation and changed the Cartwrights to be more amiable.
At the end of the day he was convinced to go to the hospital where they set the broken bone and gave him strict instructions, no riding for six weeks.
Michael Landon, Jr., played Little Joe's son Benji while Gillian Greene, Lorne Greene's daughter, played a love interest.
Singer Ralf Paulsen recorded a German-language version of the song in 1963, released in mid-June 1963 on Capitol Records in the United States.
He once used martial arts to assail a towering family foe.
Before the pilot aired (on September 12, 1959), the song sequence, deemed too campy, was edited out of the scene and instead the Cartwrights headed back to the ranch whooping and howling.
