This reworking thereby aligned the church's eucharistic theology more closely to that of the Roman Catholic and Orthodox churches.
The work of producing a liturgy in the English language books was largely done by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, starting cautiously in the reign of Henry VIII, and then more radically under his son Edward VI.
To this day, King's Chapel uniquely uses ''The Book of Common Prayer According to the Use in King's Chapel'' in its worship.
Unable to accept the new book, 936 ministers were deprived.
Old Testament and New Testament readings for daily prayer were specified in tabular format as were the Psalms; and canticles, mostly biblical, that were provided to be said or sung between the readings .
It includes passages in the Maori, Fijian, Tongan and English languages.
Particularly unpopular was the banning of processions and the sending out of commissioners to enforce the new requirements.
This allowed substantial leeway for more traditionalist clergy to retain some of the vestments which they felt were appropriate to liturgical celebration (at least until the Queen gave further instructions under the Act of Uniformity of 1559).
The '''Anglican Church of Australia''', known officially, until 1981, as the ''Church of England in Australia and Tasmania'', became self-governing in 1961.
By the 19th century, pressures to revise the 1662 book were increasing.
an objective presence and subjective reception.
For example, the word "God" which used to be "Cheon-joo" was altered to "ha-nu-nim" according to the Public Christian translation.
The 1549 book was, from the outset, intended only as a temporary expedient, as Bucer was assured having met Cranmer for the first time in April 1549: 'concessions...made both as a respect for antiquity and to the infirmity of the present age' as he wrote .
:''Christmas Day 1657.
The Communion service of 1549 maintained the format of distinct rites of consecration and communion, that had been introduced the previous year; but with the Latin rite of the Mass (chiefly following the familiar structure in the Use of Sarum), translated into English.
The Latin Mass was re-established, altars, roods and statues were reinstated; an attempt was made to restore the English Church to its Roman affiliation.
This book (which owes much to Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and other sources) has widely supplanted the 1959 book, though the latter remains authorized.
General Synod gave final authorization to the revision in 1962, to coincide with the 300th anniversary of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer.
I went to London with my wife to celebrate Christmas Day... Sermon ended, as the minister was giving us the holy sacrament, the chapel was surrounded with soldiers, and all the communicants and assembly surprised and kept prisoners by them, some in the house, others carried away...
An Irish translation of the revised prayer book of 1662 was effected by John Richardson (1664–1747) and published in 1712.
Between 1662 and the 19th century, further attempts to revise the ''Book'' in England stalled .
), and Pontifical (services appropriate to a bishop—Confirmation, Ordination) .
John Evelyn records, in ''Diary'', receiving communion according to the 1604 Prayer Book rite:
in the new BCP to simple plainchant inspired by Sarum Use.
Adherents of the Oxford Movement, begun in 1833, raised questions about the relationship of the Church of England to the apostolic church and thus about its forms of worship.
The Elevation of the Host had been forbidden in 1549; all manual acts were now omitted.
Many traditionalists, both Anglo-Catholics and Evangelicals, felt alienated by the theological changes made in the 1979 BCP, and in 1991 The Church of the Good Shepherd in Rosemont, PA published a book entitled, the ''Anglican Service Book'' which is "a traditional language adaptation of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer together with the Psalter or Psalms of David and Additional Devotions."
Instead a different process, that of producing an alternative book, led to the publication of Series 1, 2 and 3 in the 1960s, the 1980 Alternative Service Book and subsequently to the 2000 ''Common Worship'' series of books.
After a period of experimentation with the publication of various supplements, the ''Book of Alternative Services'' was published in 1985.
Following the execution of Charles I in 1649 and the establishment of the Commonwealth under Lord Protector Cromwell, it would not be reinstated until shortly after the restoration of the monarchy to England.
It was only on Henry's death in 1547 and the accession of Edward VI that revision could proceed faster.
Thus, in the Eucharist, gone were the words Mass and altar; the 'Lord have mercy' was interleaved into a recitation of the Ten Commandments and the Gloria was removed to the end of the service.
After the several innovations and reversals, the new forms of worship took time to settle in.
In the Burial service, the possibility that a deceased person who has died in the faith may nevertheless not be counted amongst God's elect, is not entertained.
In accordance with Canon II.3.6(b)(2) of the Episcopal Church (United States), the church relinquishes any copyright for the version of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' currently adopted by the Convention of the church (although the text of proposed revisions remains copyrighted).
The 1789 American BCP reintroduced explicit sacrificial language in the Prayer of Consecration by adding the words "which we now offer unto Thee", after "with these thy holy gifts" from the 1549 BCP.
John Wesley, an Anglican priest whose revivalist preaching led to the creation of Methodism wrote in his preface to ''The Sunday Service of the Methodists in North America'' (1784), "I believe there is no Liturgy in the world, either in ancient or modern language, which breathes more of a solid, scriptural, rational piety than the Common Prayer of the Church of England."
By outwardly maintaining familiar forms, Cranmer hoped to establish the practice of weekly congregational communion, and included exhortations to encourage this; and instructions that communion should never be received by the priest alone.
More controversially, the Psalter included in the book omitted certain sections, including the entirety of Psalm 58.
The General Synod and the College of Bishops of Chung Hwa Sheng Kung Hui planned to publish a unified version for the use of all Anglican churches in China in 1949, which was the 400th anniversary of the first publishing of the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
It is located between John F. Kennedy Drive and Park Presidio Drive, near Cross Over Drive.
Both differ substantially from the ''Book of Common Prayer,'' though the latter includes in the Order Two form of the Holy Communion a very slight revision of the prayer book service, largely along the lines proposed for the 1928 Prayer Book.
In particular, many Christian prayer books have drawn on the Collects for the Sundays of the Church Year—mostly freely translated or even "rethought"  by Cranmer from a wide range of Christian traditions, but including a number of original compositions—which are widely recognized as masterpieces of compressed liturgical construction.
There was no single book; the services that would be provided by the ''Book of Common Prayer'' were to be found in the Missal (the Eucharist), the Breviary (daily offices), Manual (the occasional services of Baptism, Marriage, Burial etc.
It was this edition which was to be the official ''Book of Common Prayer'' during the growth of the British Empire and, as a result, has been a great influence on the prayer books of Anglican churches worldwide, liturgies of other denominations in English, and of the English people and language as a whole.
It therefore grants permission to use the text, and license printing or the importation for sale within the UK, as long as it is assured of acceptable quality and accuracy.
The insertion undid Cranmer's rejection of the Eucharist as a material sacrifice by which the Church offers itself to God in an unbloody liturgical representation in and with the very same sacrifice of Christ who is both priest and victim, both offering and offered.
With these open guidelines, the book was granted approval by the Church of England Convocations and Church Assembly in July 1927.
This represented a radical change from late medieval practice—whereby the primary focus of congregational worship was taken to be attendance at the consecration, and adoration of the elevated consecrated host.
The Latin term '''' (''with privilege'') is printed on the title pages of Cambridge editions of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer (and the King James Version of the Bible) to denote the charter authority or privilege under which they are published.
This simplification was anticipated by the work of Cardinal Francis Quiñones, a Spanish Franciscan, in his abortive revision of the Roman Breviary published in 1537 .
The original book, published in 1549 , in the reign of Edward VI, was a product of the English Reformation following the break with Rome.
His first draft, produced during Henry's reign, retained the traditional seven distinct Canonical hours of Office prayer; but in his second draft, while he retained the Latin, he consolidated these into two .
Then in 1538, as Henry began diplomatic negotiations with Lutheran princes, Cranmer came face to face with a Lutheran embassy .
The Diction of the books have changed from the 1965 version to the 2004 version.
As it has been in regular use for centuries, many phrases from its services have passed into everyday English, either as deliberate quotations or as unconscious borrowings.
Published in 1544, it borrowed greatly from Martin Luther's Litany and Myles Coverdale's New Testament and was the only service that might be considered to be "Protestant" to be finished within the lifetime of King Henry VIII.
James wished to achieve toleration for those of his own Roman Catholic faith, whose practices were still banned.
Before the end of the English Civil War (1642-1651) and the introduction of the 1662 prayer book, something like a half a million prayer books are estimated to have been in circulation .
These wretched miscreants held their muskets against us as we came up to receive the sacred elements, as if they would have shot us at the altar.''
A group of bishops and divines met first at Chertsey and then at Windsor in 1548, drawn from both conservatives and reformers, agreed only "the service of the church ought to be in the mother tongue" .
An Act of Parliament passed in the year 1563, entitled “An Act for the Translating of the Bible and the Divine Service into the Welsh Tongue,” ordered that the Old and New Testament, together with the ''Book of Common Prayer'', were to be translated into Welsh.
Its liturgy, from the first, combined the free use of Cranmer's language with an adherence to the principles of congregational participation and the centrality of the Eucharist, much in line with the Liturgical Movement.
In the baptism service, the signing with the cross was moved until after the baptism and the exorcism, the anointing, the putting on of the chrysom robe and the triple immersion were omitted.
The 1979 book owes a good deal to the Liturgical Movement and to the 19th-century Catholic revival.
The so-called "manual acts", whereby the priest took the bread and the cup during the prayer of consecration, which had been deleted in 1552, were restored; and an "amen" was inserted after the words of institution and before communion, hence separating the connections between consecration and communion which Cranmer had tried to make.
The conservative nature of these changes underlines the fact that reformed principles were by no means universally popular&nbsp;– a fact that the Queen recognised: her revived Act of Supremacy, giving her the ambiguous title of Supreme Governor, passed without difficulty but the Act of Uniformity 1559, giving statutory force to the Prayer Book, passed through the House of Lords by only three votes.
In South Africa a ''Book of Common Prayer''  was "Set Forth by Authority for Use in the Church of the Province of South Africa" in 1954.
After communion, the unused but consecrated bread and wine were to be reverently consumed in church rather than being taken away for the priest's own use.
The chant (plainsong, plainchant) for worship was contained in the Roman Gradual for the Mass and in the Antiphoner for the offices.
The new Anglican churches used and revised the use of the ''Book of Common Prayer'', until they, like the English church, produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries which come under the general heading of the Liturgical Movement.
cited in  Many Methodist churches in England and the United States continued to use a slightly revised version of the book for communion services well into the 20th century.
Their major objections (exceptions) were: firstly, that it was improper for lay people to take any vocal part in prayer (as in the Litany or Lord's Prayer), other than to say "amen"; secondly, that no set prayer should exclude the option of an extempore alternative from the minister; thirdly, that the minister should have the option to omit part of the set liturgy at his discretion; fourthly, that short collects should be replaced by longer prayers and exhortations; and fifthly, that all surviving "Catholic" ceremonial should be removed.
For example, in the Communion service the prayer of consecration follows mainly the Scottish orders derived from 1549  and found in the 1764 Book of Common Prayer.
Numerous objections were made and the notably conservative evangelical Diocese of Sydney drew attention to the loss of ''BCP'' wording and of an explicit "biblical doctrine of substitutionary atonement".
Since the Church of England Assembly (Powers) Act 1919 required measures affecting the ''Book of Common Prayer'' to be approved by Parliament before receiving royal assent, the measure authorising its use, together with an annexed copy (a "Deposited Book"), was submitted to Parliament.
The 1662 Prayer Book was printed only two years after the restoration of the monarchy, following the Savoy Conference between representative Presbyterians and twelve bishops which was convened by Royal Warrant to "advise upon and review the ''Book of Common Prayer''" .
The Prayer Book Cross was erected in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park in 1894 as a gift from the Church of England.
Puritan-inspired petitions for the removal of the prayer book and episcopacy "root and branch" resulted in local disquiet in many places and, eventually, the production of locally organized counter petitions.
Here Confirmation, the cross in baptism, private baptism, the use of the surplice, kneeling for communion, reading the ''Apocrypha''; and subscription to the BCP and Articles were all touched on.
Further revisions occurred in 1892 and 1928, in which  minor changes were made, removing, for instance, some of Cranmer's Exhortations and introducing such innovations as prayers for the dead.
A translation by Richard Davies, bishop of St David's and the scholar William Salesbury was published in 1567 by Humphrey Toy as ''Y Llyfr Gweddi Gyffredin''.
Article X of the Canons of the Episcopal Church provides that "the Book of Common Prayer, as now established or hereafter amended by the authority of this Church, shall be in use in all the Dioceses of this Church," which, of course, is a reference to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer.
Among Cranmer's innovations, retained in the new book was the requirement of weekly Holy Communion services.
An epiclesis was included, as in the Scottish book, though modified to meet reformist objections.
The preface to the 1789 Book of Common Prayer says, "this Church is far from intending to depart from the Church of England in any essential point of doctrine, discipline, or worship...further than local circumstances require."
Its use was destined for the universities.
The effect of the failure of the 1928 book was salutary: no further attempts were made to revise the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
He questioned "the populist and parliamentary basis of the Reformation Church" and unsettled to a great extent "the consensual accommodation of Anglicanism" and this led to the Civil War and republican Commonwealth.
Many phrases are characteristic of the German reformer Martin Bucer, or of the Italian Peter Martyr, (who was staying with Cranmer at the time of the finalising of drafts), or of his chaplain, Thomas Becon.
The '''Anglican Church of Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia''' authorised by General Synod in 1988  ''A New Zealand Prayer Book, He Karakia Mihinare o Aotearoa'' intended to serve the needs of New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, and the Cook Island Anglicans.
Some examples of well-known phrases from the ''Book of Common Prayer'' are:
He borrowed much from German sources, particularly from work commissioned by Hermann von Wied, Archbishop of Cologne; and also from Osiander (to whom he was related by marriage) .
Like the King James Version of the Bible and the works of Shakespeare, many words and phrases from the ''Book of Common Prayer'' have entered common parlance.
Consequently, when the accession of Elizabeth I re-asserted the dominance of the reformed Church of England, there remained a significant body of more Protestant believers who were nevertheless hostile to the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
There was widespread opposition to the introduction of regular congregational Communion, partly because the extra costs of bread and wine that would fall on the parish; but mainly out of an intense resistance to undertaking in regular worship, a religious practice previously associated with marriage or illness.
James herself used phrases from the ''Book of Common Prayer'' and made them into bestselling titles—''Devices and Desires'' and ''The Children of Men,'' while Alfonso Cuarón's 2006 film ''Children of Men'' placed the phrase onto cinema marquees worldwide.
There were some notable differences.
Of the set canticles, only the Te Deum was retained of the non-biblical material.
The continued inconsistency between the Articles of Religion and the Prayer Book remained a point of contention for Puritans; and would in the 19th century come close to tearing the Church of England apart, through the course of the Gorham judgement.
The 1549 book was soon succeeded by a more reformed revision in 1552 under the same editorial hand, that of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury.
The ''Book of Common Prayer'' has had a great influence on a number of other denominations.
Griffith Thomas commented that the retention of the words "militant here in earth" defines the scope of this petition: we pray for ourselves, we thank God for them, and adduces collateral evidence to this end.
The Convocations made some 600 changes, mostly of details, which were "far from partisan or extreme".
The alterations, though minor, were however to cast a long shadow in the development of the Church of England.
The result was conservative revision.
Following the publication of the 1552 Prayer Book, a revised English Primer was published in 1553; adapting the Offices and Morning and Evening Prayer, and other prayers, for lay domestic piety .
They are used in non-liturgical ways.
Noble found a total of 157 allusions to the Psalms in the plays of the First Folio, relating to 62 separate Psalms—all, save one, of which he linked to the version in the Psalter, rather than those in the Geneva Bible or Bishops' Bible.
Instead of the banning of all vestments except the rochet for bishops and the surplice for parish clergy, it permitted "such ornaments...as were in use...in the second year of K. Edward VI".
In addition, there are a small number of direct allusions to liturgical texts in the Prayer Book; e.g.
The '''''Book of Common Prayer''''' is the short title of a number of related prayer books used in the Anglican Communion, as well as by the Continuing Anglican, "Anglican realignment" and other Anglican churches.
Known as Tractarians after their production of ''Tracts for the Times'' on theological issues, they advanced the case for the Church of England being essentially a part of the "Western Church", of which the Roman Catholic Church was the chief representative.
Cranmer was punished for his work in the English Reformation by being burned at the stake on 21 March 1556.
In 2003, a Roman Catholic liturgical book, the ''Book of Divine Worship'', was published in the United States.
The compilers  used materials derived from ancient liturgies especially Eastern Orthodox ones such as the Liturgy of St. James.
The Act had no effect on illegal practices: five clergy were imprisoned for contempt of court and after the trial of the much loved Bishop Edward King of Lincoln, it became clear that some revision of the liturgy had to be embarked upon .
We can see its echo in the works of such very different writers as Daniel Defoe, Thackeray, the Brontës, Coleridge, T. S. Eliot and even Dorothy L.
The Prayer Book certainly was used clandestinely in some places, not least because the Directory made no provision at all for burial services.
This was in effect a series of two conferences: (i) between James and the bishops; (ii) between James and the Puritans on the following day.
These adherents of ritualism, among whom were Percy Dearmer and others, claimed that the Ornaments Rubric prescribed the ritual usages of the Sarum Rite with the exception of a few minor things already abolished by the early reformation.
John Knox took ''The Form of Prayers'' with him to Scotland, where it formed the basis of the Scottish ''Book of Common Order''.
Diarmaid MacCulloch describes the new act of worship as, "a morning marathon of prayer, scripture reading, and praise, consisting of mattins, litany, and ante-communion, preferably as the matrix for a sermon to proclaim the message of scripture anew week by week."
The ''Book of Common Prayer'' is called  in Chinese (pinyin:''Gong Dao Shu'', Jyutping: Gung Tou Sy).
On Elizabeth's death in 1603, the 1559 book, substantially that of 1552 which had been regarded as offensive by some, such as Bishop Stephen Gardiner, as being a break with the tradition of the Western Church, had come to be regarded in some quarters as unduly Catholic.
At the same time, however, Cranmer intended that constituent parts of the rites gathered into the Prayer Book should still, so far as possible, be recognizably derived from traditional forms and elements.
These changes were incorporated into the 1764 book which was to be the liturgy of the Scottish Episcopal Church (until 1911 when it was revised) but it was to influence the liturgy of the Episcopal Church in the United States.
But whatever were the reasons behind the votes of the majority, the rejection of the Measures made it plain that the Church does not possess full spiritual freedom to determine its worship ..." Stephen Neill points out that the Roman Catholic members of parliament abstained from voting.
It also set out in full the "propers" (that is the parts of the service which varied week by week or, at times, daily throughout the Church's Year): the collects and the epistle and gospel readings for the Sunday Communion Service.
The instruction to the congregation to kneel when receiving communion was retained; but the Black Rubric )#29 in the Forty-Two Articles of Faith which were reduced to 39) which denied any "real and essential presence" of Christ's flesh and blood, was removed  to "conciliate traditionalists" and aligned with Queen's sensibilities, .
The Orders of Morning and Evening Prayer were extended by the inclusion of a penitential section at the beginning including a corporate confession of sin and a general absolution, although the text was printed only in Morning Prayer with rubrical directions to use it in the evening as well.
The book concerned was not, however, the 1559 book but very much that of 1549, the first book of Edward VI.
Between then and 1764, when a more formal revised version was published, a number of things happened which were to separate the Scottish Episcopal liturgy more firmly from either the English books of 1549 or 1559.
Joseph Gilfillan was the chief editor of the 1911 Ojibwa edition of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' entitled ''Iu Wejibuewisi Mamawi Anamiawini Mazinaigun'' (''Iw Wejibwewizi Maamawi-anami'aawini Mazina'igan'') .
In England there are only three bodies entitled to print the ''Book of Common Prayer'': the two privileged presses (Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press), and The Queen's Printer.
The doctrines in the Prayer and the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion would set the tone of Anglicanism which would prefer to steer a Middle Way between Roman Catholicism and radical forms of Protestantism, and avoid being identified as a Confessional Church like Calvinists and Lutherans.
In late medieval England, congregations regularly received communion only at Easter; and otherwise individual lay people might expect to receive communion only when gravely ill, or in the form of a Nuptial Mass on being married.
It was to be the basis of claims in the 19th century that vestments such as chasubles, albs and stoles were legal.
Previously it had not been clear when and how bread and wine got onto the altar.
The illegal use of elements of the Roman rite, the use of candles, vestments and incense –&nbsp;practices collectively known as Ritualism&nbsp;– had become widespread and led to the establishment of a new system of discipline, intending to bring the "Romanisers" into conformity, through the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 .
''A Prayer Book for Australia'', produced in 1995, departed from both the structure and wording of the ''Book of Common Prayer'', prompting conservative reaction.
*"Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest" from the collect for the second Sunday of Advent.
He appears nevertheless, to have been resigned to being unable for the present to establish in parishes the weekly practice of receiving Communion; so he restructured the service so as to allow ante-Communion as a distinct rite of worship—following the Communion rite through the readings and offertory, as far as the intercessory "Prayer for the Church Militant".
This was achieved by the insertion of the words "and oblations" into the prayer for the Church and the revision of the rubric so as to require the monetary offerings to be brought to the table (instead of being put in the poor box) and the bread and wine placed upon the table.
That edition has remained the official prayer book of the Church of England, although in the 21st century, alternative provision under the title ''Common Worship'' has largely displaced the ''Book of Common Prayer'' at the main Sunday worship service of most English parish churches.
The present version was published in 1984 and is currently under revision.
The Puritans raised four areas of concern: purity of doctrine; the means of maintaining it; church government; and the ''Book of Common Prayer''.
The Bible that the Anglican Church of Korea uses is the 1994 edition called the "gong-dong beon-yuk-seong-seo" or the Common Translation Bible.
Diarmaid MacCulloch suggests that Cranmer's own Eucharistic theology in these years approximated most closely to that of Heinrich Bullinger; but that he intended the Prayer Book to be acceptable to the widest range of Reformed Eucharistic belief, including the high sacramental theology of Bucer and John Calvin .
Many ordinary churchgoers—that is those who could afford a copy as it was expensive—would own a copy of the prayer book.
One branch of the Ritualism movement argued that both "Romanisers" and their Evangelical opponents, by imitating, respectively, the Church of Rome and Reformed churches, transgressed the Ornaments Rubric of 1559 ("...that such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, at all Times of their Ministration, shall be retained, and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the Authority of Parliament, in the Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth").
); while its final element, the Prayer of Oblation, (with its reference to an offering of a 'Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving'), was transferred, much changed, to a position after the priest and congregation had received Communion, and was made optional to an alternative prayer of thanksgiving.
In 1927, the work on a new version of the prayer book reached its final form.
The parliamentary government had its way but it became clear that the division was not between Catholics and Protestants, but between Puritans and those who valued the Elizabethan settlement.
This, however, drew the Presbyterians closer to the Church of England in their common desire to resist 'popery'; talk of reconciliation and liturgical compromise was thus in the air.
By such subtle means were Cranmer's purposes further confused, leaving it for generations to argue over the precise theology of the rite.
In 1549, there had been provision for a Requiem (not so called) and prayers of commendation and committal, the first addressed to the deceased.
The Diocese of Sydney has developed its own small prayer book, called ''Sunday Services'', to supplement the existing prayer book and preserve the original theology which the Sydney diocese asserts has been changed.
The Church Order of Brandenberg and Nuremberg was partly the work of the latter.
This new Order for the Burial of the Dead was a drastically stripped-down memorial service designed to undermine definitively the whole complex of traditional beliefs about Purgatory and intercessory prayer  .
This version is notable for the inclusion of the ''Misa de Gallo'', a popular Christmastide devotion amongst Filipinos that is of Catholic origin.
For example, the inclusion in the intercessions of the Communion rite of prayer for the dead was proposed and rejected.
Hundreds of Protestants fled into exile—establishing an English church in Frankfurt am Main.
The actual language of the 1662 revision was little changed from that of Cranmer.
However, there was arguably a greater degree of continuity than was the case in England, which may account for the fact that all the books of the series, from 1790 to 1979 retain the same title.
Further developed, and fully translated into English, this Communion service was included, one year later, in 1549, in a full prayer book, set out with daily offices, readings for Sundays and Holy Days, the Communion Service, Public Baptism, of Confirmation, of Matrimony, The Visitation of the Sick, At a Burial and the Ordinal (added in 1550) .
References and allusions to Prayer Book services in the works of Shakespeare were tracked down and identified by Richmond Noble .
The general pattern of Bible reading in 1549 was retained (as it was in 1559) except that distinct Old and New Testament readings were now specified for Morning and Evening Prayer on certain feast days.
In 1979, a more substantial revision was made.
Cambridge University Press has stated that as a university press, a charitable enterprise devoted to the advancement of learning, it has no desire to restrict artificially that advancement, and that commercial restrictiveness through a partial monopoly is not part of its purpose.
After the communists took over mainland China, the '''Diocese of Hong Kong and Macao''' became independent of the Chung Hua Sheng Kung Hui, and continued to use the edition issued in Shanghai in 1938 with a revision in 1959.
Even so, the revision caused some controversy and in 2000, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church issued an apology to those "offended or alienated during the time of liturgical transition to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer."
Cranmer finished his work on an English Communion rite in 1548, obeying an order of Convocation of the previous year that communion was to be given to the people as both bread and wine.
The revision of 1959 was much more substantial, bearing a family relationship to that of the abortive 1928 book in England.
After Mary's death in 1558, it became the primary source for the Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer, with subtle if significant changes only.
*"Till death us do part", from the marriage liturgy.
The language was conservatively modernized, and additional seasonal material was added.
Eventually, in 1555, the civil authorities expelled Knox and his supporters to Geneva, where they adopted a new prayer book, ''The Form of Prayers'', which derived principally from Calvin's French ''La Forme des Prières'' .
It was published in a single volume, primarily for their own use, in 2003.
At Holy Communion, the words from the 1549 book, "the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ" etc.
Books like this are allowed in the Episcopal Church because of a rubric in the 1979 Prayer Book which allows for the translation of the contemporary language into the traditional language of the 1928 Book of Common Prayer.
", a clear reference to the rite of Public Baptism; where the Godparents are asked "Doest thou forsake the vaine pompe and glory of the worlde..?"
However, Edwards states that more of the changes suggested by high Anglicans were implemented (though by no means all ) and Spurr comments that (except in the case of the Ordinal) the suggestions of the "Laudians" (Cosin and Matthew Wren) were not taken up possibly due to the influence of moderates such as Sanderson and Reynolds.
The Psalter, which had not been printed in the 1549, 1552 or 1559 books—was in 1662 provided in Miles Coverdale's translation from the Great Bible of 1538.
The Episcopal Church separated itself from the Church of England in 1789, the first church in the USA having been founded in 1607.
The Prayer Book "...was a masterpiece of theological engineering," (arv..
Following the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (including the English Civil War), the Church of Scotland was re-established on a presbyterian basis but by the Act of Comprehension 1690, the rump of Episcopalians were allowed to hold onto their benefices.
Few parish clergy were initially licensed to preach by the bishops; in the absence of a licensed preacher, Sunday services were required to be accompanied by reading one of the homilies written by Cranmer .
With British colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards, Anglicanism spread across the globe.
Judith Maltby cites a story of parishioners at Flixton in Suffolk who brought their own prayer books to church in order to shame their vicar into conforming with it: they eventually ousted him .
A (re)translation into Latin of the 1559 Book of Common Prayer was made in the form of Walter Haddon's ''Liber Precum Publicarum'' of 1560.
First, informal changes were made to the order of the various parts of the service and inserting words indicating a sacrificial intent to the Eucharist clearly evident in the words,"we thy humble servants do celebrate and make before thy Divine Majesty with these thy holy gifts which we now OFFER unto thee, the memorial thy Son has commandeth us to make;" secondly, as a result of Bishop Rattray's researches into the liturgies of St James and St Clement, published in 1744, the form of the invocation was changed.
Many changes were made in the rubrics and the shapes of the services, which were generally made for both the traditional and contemporary language versions.
A ''Book of Common Prayer'' with local variations is used in churches inside and outside the Anglican Communion in over 50 different countries and in over 150 different languages .
This  sandstone cross commemorates the first use of the ''Book of Common Prayer'' in California by Sir Francis Drake's chaplain on June 24, 1579.
*"From all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil" from the litany.
The book is composed of  material drawn from the proposed 1928 BCP, the 1979 ''Book of Common Prayer'' of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America and the Roman Missal.
Writing in 1947, Cyril Garbett comments:"The House of Commons was within its constitutional rights in rejecting in a few hours the work of many anxious years.
All that remained was a single reference to the deceased, giving thanks for their delivery from 'the myseryes of this sinneful world'.
The business of making the changes was then entrusted to a small committee of bishops and the Privy Council and, apart from tidying up details, this committee introduced into Morning and Evening Prayer a prayer for the Royal Family; added several thanksgivings to the Occasional Prayers at the end of the Litany; altered the rubrics of Private Baptism limiting it to the minister of the parish, or some other lawful minister, but still allowing it in private houses (the Puritans had wanted it only in the church); and added to the Catechism the section on the sacraments.
