Blacks were solidly Republican in this period, having gained emancipation and suffrage with the President Lincoln and his party and later fellow Republican President Ulysses S. Grant defending African American's newly won freedom and civil rights in the South during Reconstruction.
His long-term goal was to end the disenfranchisement of the vast majority of African Americans, who still lived in the South.
Well-educated blacks in the North advocated a different approach, in part due to the differences they perceived in opportunities.
After emancipation, she moved the family to West Virginia to join her husband Washington Ferguson.
In October 1901 President Theodore Roosevelt invited Washington to dine with him and his family at the White House; he was the first African American to be invited there by a president.
He gained access to top national leaders in politics, philanthropy and education.
The Rosenwald Fund helped support the construction and operation of more than 5,000 schools and supporting resources for the betterment of blacks throughout the South in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
State and local governments gave little money to black schools, but white philanthropists proved willing to invest heavily.
Although Washington and the very-private Rogers were seen by the public as friends, the true depth and scope of their relationship was not publicly revealed until after Rogers' sudden death of a stroke in May 1909.
Black leaders emphasized economic self-help and individual advancement into the middle class as a more fruitful strategy than political agitation.
By 1908 Rosenwald, son of an immigrant clothier, had become part-owner and president of Sears, Roebuck and Company in Chicago.
After the reading we were told that we were all free, and could go when and where we pleased.
The effect was that many youths in the South had to accept sacrifices of potential political power, civil rights and higher education.
Washington expressed his vision for his race in his direction of the school.
After Federal troops left, Southern states disfranchised most blacks and many poor whites from 1890–1908 through constitutional amendments and statutes that created barriers to voter registration and voting, such as poll taxes and literacy tests.
The school expanded over the decades, adding programs and departments, to become the present-day Tuskegee University.
Opponents called this network the "Tuskegee Machine."
From his earliest years the slave boy he was known simply as "Booker," with no surname and no middle name.
Henry Rogers was a self-made man, who had risen from a modest working-class family to become a principal officer of Standard Oil, and one of the richest men in the United States.
Northern critics called Washington's widespread organization the "Tuskegee Machine".
Even when such challenges were won at the Supreme Court, southern states quickly responded with new laws to accomplish the same ends, for instance, adding "grandfather clauses" that covered whites and not blacks.
Du Bois supported him, but they grew apart as Du Bois sought more action to remedy disfranchisement and improve educational opportunities for blacks.
In the border states and North, blacks continued to exercise the vote; the well-established Maryland African-American community defeated attempts there to disfranchise them.
To address those needs, in the 20th century Washington enlisted his philanthropic network to create matching funds programs to stimulate construction of numerous rural public schools for black children in the South.
Later in 1912 Rosenwald provided funds for a pilot program to build six new small schools in rural Alabama.
It was bolder, had more ring, and lasted later into the night.
He also gave lectures in support of raising money for the school,  including one on January 23, 1906, at Carnegie Hall in New York called the Tuskegee Institute Silver Anniversary Lecture in which he spoke along with great orators of the day including Mark Twain, Joseph Hodges Choate, and Robert Curtis Ogden that was the kickoff of a campaign to raise $1,800,000.
Washington's health was deteriorating rapidly in 1915; he collapsed in New York City and was brought home to Tuskegee, where he died on November 14, 1915, at the age of 59.
His belief was that African Americans should "concentrate all their energies on industrial education, and accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South."
Washington was held in high regard by business-oriented conservatives, both white and black.
His contacts included such diverse and well-known entrepreneurs and philanthropists as Andrew Carnegie, William Howard Taft, John D. Rockefeller, Henry Huttleston Rogers, George Eastman, Julius Rosenwald, Robert Curtis Ogden, Collis Potter Huntington, and William Henry Baldwin Jr..
He was buried on the campus of Tuskegee University near the University Chapel.
On the plantation in Virginia, and even later, meals were gotten to the children very much as dumb animals get theirs.
He labeled Washington "the Great Accommodator".
In 1907 Philadelphia Quaker Anna T. Jeanes (1822–1907) donated one million dollars to Washington for elementary schools for black children in the South.
At the same time, Washington secretly arranged to fund numerous legal challenges to voting exclusions and segregation.
They were designed, constructed and opened in 1913 and 1914 and overseen by Tuskegee; the model proved successful.
The day, month, and even precise year of Booker's birth were not known even by him.
The main goal was not to produce farmers and tradesmen, but teachers of farming and trades who taught in the new schools and colleges for blacks across the South.
He built a nationwide network of supporters in many black communities, with black ministers, educators and businessmen composing his core supporters.
Fannie died in May 1884.
This work continued for many years after his death.
A major part of Washington's legacy, the model rural schools continued to be constructed into the 1930s, with matching funds from the Rosenwald Fund.
He led the school until his death in 1915.
In March 2006, with the permission of his descendants, examination of medical records indicated that he died of hypertension, with a blood pressure more than twice normal, confirming what had long been suspected.
Austro-Hungarian ambassador to the United States Ladislaus Hengelmüller von Hengervár, who was visiting the White House on the same day, claimed to have found a rabbit's foot in Washington's coat pocket when he mistakenly put on the coat.
Washington argued that the surest way for blacks to gain equal social rights was to demonstrate "industry, thrift, intelligence and property."
He also gained access to top national white leaders in politics, philanthropy and education, raised large sums, was consulted on race issues, and was awarded honorary degrees from leading American universities.
''The Washington Post'' elaborately described it as "the left hind foot of a graveyard rabbit, killed in the dark of the moon".
Washington replied that confrontation would lead to disaster for the outnumbered blacks in society, and that cooperation with supportive whites was the only way to overcome pervasive racism in the long run.
He believed that with self-help, people could go from poverty to success.
The ship was christened by Marian Anderson.
He believed that blacks would eventually gain full participation in society by acting as responsible, reliable American citizens.
The schools which Washington supported were founded primarily to produce teachers, a key need for the race in the 19th century.
Booker T. Washington did not understand that his program was perceived as subversive of a natural order in which black people were to remain forever subordinate or unfree.
After their falling out, Du Bois and his supporters referred to Washington's speech as the "Atlanta Compromise" to express their criticism that Washington was too accommodating to white interests.
The inscription at its base reads:
After emancipation Jane took her family to West Virginia to join her husband Washington Ferguson, who had escaped from slavery to live there during the war.
Du Bois wanted blacks to have the same "classical" liberal arts education as upscale whites did, along with voting rights and civic equality, the latter two elements granted since 1870 by constitutional amendments after the Civil War.
Musical selections were provided by the WVSU "Marching Swarm."
He advised on the use of financial donations from philanthropists, and avoided antagonizing white Southerners with his accommodation to the political realities of the age of Jim Crow segregation.
In addition to his contributions in education, Washington wrote 14 books; his autobiography, ''Up from Slavery'', first published in 1901, is still widely read today.
Washington mobilized a nationwide coalition of middle-class blacks, church leaders, and white philanthropists and politicians, with a long-term goal of building the community's economic strength and pride by a focus on self-help and schooling.
He said, "I have learned that success is to be measured not so much by the position that one has reached in life as by the obstacles which he has had to overcome while trying to succeed."
Late in his career, Washington was criticized by leaders of the NAACP, a civil rights organization formed in 1909.
He called for black progress through education and entrepreneurship, rather than trying to challenge directly the Jim Crow segregation and the disenfranchisement of black voters in the South.
Murray outlived Washington and died in 1925.
She explained to us what it all meant, that this was the day for which she had been so long praying, but fearing that she would never live to see."
Washington was a dominant figure of the African-American community, then largely based in the South, from 1890 to his death in 1915.
The new school opened on July 4, 1881, initially using space in a local church.
* ''The Man Farthest Down'' (1912)
Washington associated with the richest and most powerful businessmen and politicians of the era.
They had no children together, but she helped rear Washington's three children.
The next year, Washington purchased a former plantation, which became the permanent site of the campus.
''The Detroit Journal'' quipped the next day, "The Austrian ambassador may have made off with Booker T. Washington's coat at the White House, but he'd have a bad time trying to fill his shoes."
Historian Clarence E. Walker wrote that, for white Southerners,
In his public role, he believed he could achieve more by skillful accommodation to the social realities of the age of segregation.
Shortly after the Spanish–American War, President William McKinley and most of his cabinet visited Booker Washington.
The next day he contacted Washington and requested a meeting, during which Washington later recounted that he was told that Rogers "was surprised that no one had 'passed the hat' after the speech."
By this time, Mississippi had passed a new constitution, and other southern states were following suit, or using electoral laws to complete disfranchisement of blacks and maintain white political supremacy.
Du Bois, at first supported the Atlanta compromise but after 1909, they set up the NAACP to work for political change.
People called Washington the "Wizard of Tuskegee" because of his highly developed political skills, and his creation of a nationwide political machine based on the black middle class, white philanthropy, and Republican Party support.
Around 1894 Rogers heard Washington speak at Madison Square Garden.
They had two sons, Booker T. Washington Jr. and Ernest Davidson Washington, before she died in 1889.
Both men and women had to learn trades as well as academics.
Washington was on close terms with national Republican Party leaders, and often was asked for political advice by presidents Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft.
Still later he learned from his mother that she had originally given him the name "Booker Taliaferro" at the time of his birth, with the second name instantly falling into disuse.
At the same time, he secretly funded litigation for civil rights cases, such as challenges to southern constitutions and laws that disfranchised blacks.
Washington repudiated the abolitionist emphasis on unceasing agitation for full equality, advising blacks that it was counterproductive to fight segregation at this point.
It was a cup of milk at one time and some potatoes at another."
The Rosenwald Fund made matching grants, requiring community support, cooperation from the white school boards, and fundraising.
She taught in Mississippi and Tennessee before going to Tuskegee to work as a teacher.
She was from Mississippi and had graduated from Fisk University, a historically black college.
He also disclosed that Rogers had encouraged programs with matching funds requirements so the recipients had a stake in the outcome.
During a difficult period of transition, he did much to improve the working relationship between the races.
Washington's work on education problems helped him enlist both the moral and substantial financial support of many major white philanthropists.
His death was believed at the time to have been a result of congestive heart failure, aggravated by overwork.
Upon learning of his original name, Washington immediately readopted it as his own, assuming the name he used for the rest of his life, Booker Taliaferro Washington.
These individuals and many other wealthy men and women funded his causes, including Hampton and Tuskegee institutes.
My mother, who was standing by my side, leaned over and kissed her children, while tears of joy ran down her cheeks.
The monument also honors the families of African ancestry who lived in Old Malden in the early 20th century and who knew and encouraged Booker T. Washington.
Historians since the late 20th century have been divided in their characterization of Washington: some describe him as a visionary capable of "reading minds with the skill of a master psychologist," who expertly played the political game in 19th century Washington by its own rules.
He was seen as a spokesperson for African Americans and became a conduit for funding educational programs.
By then Tuskegee's endowment had grown to over $1.5 million, compared to its initial $2,000 annual appropriation.
Washington played a dominant role in black politics, winning wide support in the black community of the South and among more liberal whites (especially rich Northern whites).
After 1909, Washington was criticized by the leaders of the new NAACP, especially W. E. B.
Washington advocated a "go slow" approach to avoid a harsh white backlash.
In his autobiography ''Up From Slavery'', he gave all three of his wives credit for their contributions at Tuskegee.
In 2000, West Virginia State University (WVSU; then West Va. State College), in cooperation with other organizations including the Booker T. Washington Association, established the  '''Booker T. Washington Institute,''' to honor Washington's boyhood home, the old town of Malden, and the ideals Booker Washington stood for.
The meeting began a close relationship that was to extend over a period of 15 years.
By the late nineteenth century, Southern white Democrats defeated some biracial Populist-Republican coalitions and regained power in the state legislatures of the former Confederacy; they passed laws establishing racial segregation and Jim Crow.
"I cannot recall a single instance during my childhood or early boyhood when our entire family sat down to the table together, and God's blessing was asked, and the family ate a meal in a civilized manner.
* ''Up From Slavery'' (1901)
It was a piece of bread here and a scrap of meat there.
Some man who seemed to be a stranger (a United States officer, I presume) made a little speech and then read a rather long paper—the Emancipation Proclamation, I think.
Foner concludes that Washington's strong support in the black community was rooted in its widespread realization that frontal assaults on white supremacy were impossible, and the best way forward was to concentrate on building up the economic and social structures inside segregated communities.
Washington's 1895 Atlanta Exposition address was viewed as a "revolutionary moment" by both African Americans and whites across the country.
Most of the verses of the plantation songs had some reference to freedom...
Free black people were 'matter out of place'.
As a boy of about nine in Virginia, Booker and his family gained freedom under the Emancipation Proclamation as US troops occupied their region in Virginia.
Washington's response was that confrontation could lead to disaster for the outnumbered blacks.
"As the great day drew nearer, there was more singing in the slave quarters than usual.
These schools became informally known as Rosenwald Schools.
Historian Eric Foner argues that the freedom movement of the late nineteenth century changed directions so as to align with America's new economic and intellectual framework.
Booker T. Washington mastered the nuances of the political arena in the late 19th century, which enabled him to manipulate the media, raise money, strategize, network, pressure, reward friends and distribute funds while punishing those who opposed his plans for uplifting blacks.
Julius Rosenwald (1862–1932) was another self-made wealthy man with whom Washington found common ground.
Special guest speakers at the event included West Virginia Governor Joe Manchin III, Malden attorney Larry L. Rowe, and the president of WVSU.
Washington's greatest life's work, the education of blacks in the South, was well underway and expanding.
On April 5, 1956, the hundredth anniversary of Washington's birth, the house where he was born in Franklin County, Virginia, was designated as the '''Booker T. Washington National Monument'''.
Others say he was a self-serving, crafty narcissist who threatened and punished those in the way of his personal interests, traveled with an entourage and spent much time fundraising, signing autographs, and giving flowery patriotic speeches with lots of flag waving — acts more indicative of an artful political boss than an altruistic civil rights leader.
He also attended Wayland Seminary in Washington, D.C. in 1878 and left after 6 months.
To many he was seen as a popular spokesman for African-American citizens.
In an effort to inspire the "commercial, agricultural, educational, and industrial advancement" of African Americans, Washington founded the National Negro Business League (NNBL) in 1900.
He developed the ability to persuade wealthy whites, many of them self-made men, to donate money to black causes by appealing to values they had exercised in their rise to power.
Washington valued the "industrial" education, as it provided critical skills for the jobs then available to the majority of African Americans at the time, as most lived in the South, which was overwhelmingly rural and agricultural.
He believed these were key to improved conditions for African Americans in the United States.
Booker was thrilled by the day of emancipation in early 1865:
Du Bois, who demanded a stronger tone of protest for advancement of civil rights needs.
Vardaman described the White House as
As Washington rode in the late financier's private railroad car, ''Dixie'', he stopped and made speeches at many locations, where his companions later recounted that he had been warmly welcomed by both black and white citizens at each stop.
His base was the Tuskegee Institute, a historically black college in Alabama.
Washington worked and socialized with many national white politicians and industry leaders.
His Atlanta Address of 1895 received national attention.
Washington maintained control because of his ability to gain support of numerous groups, including influential whites and the black business, educational and religious communities nationwide.
Freedmen strongly supported literacy and education as the keys to their future.
Their emancipation was an affront to southern white freedom.
At the time he started school Booker was faced with the need to rapidly invent a surname, and he claimed for himself the family name Washington, after his stepfather.
The local schools were a source of communal pride and were priceless to African-American families when poverty and segregation severely limited the life chances of the pupils.
Because African Americans had only recently been emancipated and most lived in a hostile environment, Washington believed they could not expect too much at once.
It was there that the wholly illiterate Booker began to painstakingly teach himself to read and attended school for the first time.
Born in Virginia, she had studied at Hampton Institute and the Massachusetts State Normal School at Framingham.
Along with Du Bois, Washington partly organized the "Negro exhibition" at the 1900 Exposition Universelle in Paris, where photos of Hampton Institute's black students were displayed.
The organizers of the new, all-black state school in Alabama called the Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute — the forerunner of Tuskegee University — found the energetic leader they sought in 25-year-old Washington.
Washington was married three times.
Washington worked in salt furnaces and coal mines in West Virginia for several years to earn money.
Using architectural model plans developed by professors at Tuskegee Institute, the Rosenwald Fund spent over $4 million to help build 4,977 schools, 217 teachers' homes, and 163 shop buildings in 883 counties in 15 states, from Maryland to Texas.
At the time W. E. B.
Washington's famous Atlanta speech of 1895 marked this transition, as it called on blacks to develop their farms, their industrial skills and their entrepreneurship as the next stage in emerging from slavery.
As a result, countless small rural schools were established through his efforts, under programs that continued many years after his death.
He believed that an elite, which he called the Talented Tenth, would advance to lead the race to a wider variety of occupations.
Rosenwald endowed Tuskegee so that Washington could spend less time fundraising and more managing the school.
There was emphasis on education and literacy throughout the period after the Civil War.
He made his way east to Hampton Institute, a school established to educate freedmen, where he worked to pay for his studies.
When Washington's second autobiography, ''Up From Slavery'', was published in 1901, it became a bestseller and had a major effect on the African-American community, its friends and allies.
While promoting moderation, Washington contributed secretly and substantially to mounting legal challenges against segregation and disenfranchisement of blacks.
Washington's long-term adviser, Timothy Thomas Fortune (1856–1928), was a respected African-American economist and editor of the ''The New York Age,'' the most widely read newspaper in the black community within the United States.
He thought these skills would lay the foundation for the creation of stability that the African-American community required in order to move forward.
By 1932, the facilities could accommodate one third of all African-American children in Southern U.S. schools.
* ''The Story of My Life and Work'' (1900)
The school building program was one of its largest programs.
The exhibition demonstrated African Americans' positive contributions to United States' society.
Washington revealed that Rogers had been quietly funding operations of 65 small country schools for African Americans, and had given substantial sums of money to support Tuskegee and Hampton institutes.
His approach advocated for an initial step toward equal rights, rather than full equality under the law, gaining economic power to back up black demands for political equality in the future.
Decades after Washington's death in 1915, the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s took a more active and militant approach, which was also based on new grassroots organizations based in the South, such as CORE, SNCC and SCLC.
They included compilations of speeches and essays:
These were taken by his friend Frances Benjamin Johnston.
Numerous high schools, middle schools and elementary schools across the United States have been named after Booker T. Washington.
he believed that such achievements would prove to the deeply-prejudiced white America that African Americans were not "'naturally' stupid and incompetent."
In 1912 Rosenwald was asked to serve on the Board of Directors of Tuskegee Institute, a position he held for the remainder of his life.
The Tuskegee faculty used all the activities to teach the students basic skills to take back to their mostly rural black communities throughout the South.
His work greatly helped blacks to achieve higher education, financial power and understanding of the U.S. legal system.
His family was atomized and he later recalled that
He argued that the surest way for blacks to gain equal social rights was to demonstrate "industry, thrift, intelligence and property."
At the center of the campus at Tuskegee University, the '''Booker T. Washington Monument''', called ''Lifting the Veil'', was dedicated in 1922.
Washington also helped with the Progressive Era by forming the National Negro Business League.
Democratic Party politicians from the South, including future Governor of Mississippi James K. Vardaman and Senator Benjamin Tillman of South Carolina indulged in racist personal attacks when they learned of the invitation.
Many in the North objected to being 'led', and authoritatively spoken for, by a Southern accommodationist strategy which they considered to have been "imposed on them Southern blacks primarily by Southern whites."
Her contributions and those of Henry Rogers and others funded schools in many poor communities.
Washington encouraged them and directed millions of their money to projects all across the South that Washington thought best reflected his self-help philosophy.
A few weeks later Washington went on a previously planned speaking tour along the newly completed Virginian Railway, a $40-million enterprise which had been built almost entirely from  Rogers' personal fortune.
"so saturated with the odor of the nigger that the rats have taken refuge in the stable", and declared "I am just as much opposed to Booker T. Washington as a voter as I am to the cocoanut-headed, chocolate-colored typical little coon who blacks my shoes every morning.
* ''The Story of the Negro: The Rise of the Race from Slavery '' (2 vol 1909)
Washington attained national prominence for his Atlanta Address of 1895, which attracted the attention of politicians and the public, making him a popular spokesperson for African-American citizens.
Tillman said, "The action of President Roosevelt in entertaining that nigger will necessitate our killing a thousand niggers in the South before they will learn their place again."
Washington helped raise funds to establish and operate hundreds of small community schools and institutions of higher educations for blacks.
Black militants in the North, led by W.&nbsp;E.&nbsp;B.
He maintained ties there all his life.
In 1984 Hampton University dedicated a '''Booker T. Washington Memorial''' on campus near the historic Emancipation Oak, establishing, in the words of the University, "a relationship between one of America's great educators and social activists, and the symbol of Black achievement in education."
Under his direction, his students literally built their own school: making bricks, constructing classrooms, barns and outbuildings; and growing their own crops and raising livestock; both for learning and to provide for most of the basic necessities.
Black communities raised more than $4.7 million to aid the construction; essentially they taxed themselves twice to do so.
