After Jean-Marie Le Pen with 10.44%, none of the other candidates exceeded the 5% mark.
Another ring road is under consideration.
In 2008 held municipal elections saw the clash between mayor of Bordeaux, Alain Juppe and the President of the Regional Council of Aquitaine Socialist Alain Rousset.
It is around  southwest of Paris.
MoDem list Robert Rochefort: 8.61%.
Some 20,000 people work for the aeronautic industry in Bordeaux.
It is home to the world's main wine fair, Vinexpo, while the wine economy in the metro area takes in 14.5&nbsp;billion euros each year.
This network is operated from 5&nbsp;am to 1&nbsp;am.
''Rue Sainte-Catherine'' starts at ''Place de la Victoire'' and ends at ''Place de la Comédie'' by the ''Grand Théâtre''.
The first growths are:
Bordeaux wine has been produced in the region since the 8th century.
The city started to play a regional role as a major urban center on the fringes of the newly founded Frankish Duchy of Vasconia.
It is the capital of the Aquitaine-Limousin-Poitou-Charentes region, as well as the prefecture of the Gironde department.
Conventional overhead cables are used outside the city.
* 75 bus routes, all connected to the tramway network (from 1 to 96)
, the GDP of Bordeaux is €32.7 Billion.
Europe Ecology list Bove: 15.83%.
The main railway station, Gare de Bordeaux Saint-Jean, near the center of the city, has 4&nbsp;million passengers a year.
It has a capacity of 42500 people.
Many streets and squares along the tramway route became pedestrian areas, with limited access for cars.
In the second round, the city of Bordeaux place Segolene Royal 52.44% against head with 47.56% for Nicolas Sarkozy, the latter being elected President of the Republic with 53.06% against 46.94% for Ségolène Royal.
At the 2007 presidential election, the Bordelais gave 31.37% of their votes to Ségolène Royal of the Socialist Party against 30.84% to Nicolas Sarkozy, president of the UMP.
The massive, reinforced concrete U-boat pens have proved impractical to demolish and are now partly used as a cultural center for exhibitions.
In the late 6th century, the city re-emerged as the seat of a county and an archdiocese within the Merovingian kingdom of the Franks, but royal Frankish power was never strong.
It was also the capital of an independent state under Edward, the Black Prince (1362–1372), but in the end, after the Battle of Castillon (1453), it was annexed by France which extended its territory.
Europe’s longest-span vertical-lift bridge, the Pont Jacques Chaban-Delmas, was opened in 2013 in Bordeaux, spanning the River Garonne.
Nowadays, this is not the case.
PS list Kader Arif: 17.79%.
In the second round, it was finally Michèle Delaunay who won the election with 50.93% of the votes against 49.07% for Alain Juppé, the advance being only 670 votes.
It should be added that after the partial 2008, the eighth district of Gironde will switch to the left, bringing to nine the account.
The city is home to 362 ''monuments historiques'' (only Paris has more in France) with some buildings dating back to Roman times.
Bordeaux is the world's major wine industry capital.
White Bordeaux is made from Sauvignon blanc, Sémillon, and Muscadelle.
There are no bishops mentioned during the whole 8th century and part of the 9th in Bordeaux.
It was a venue for the FIFA World Cup in 1938 and 1998, as well as the 2007 Rugby World Cup.
Baron Haussmann, a long-time prefect of Bordeaux, used Bordeaux's 18th-century large-scale rebuilding as a model when he was asked by Emperor Napoleon III to transform a then still quasi-medieval Paris into a "modern" capital that would make France proud.
Under the Carolingians, sometimes the Counts of Bordeaux held the title concomitantly with that of Duke of Vasconia.
*Château Haut-Brion
The abstention amounts to Bordeaux in the first round and 14.52% in the second round to 15.90%.
In 1870, at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian war against Prussia, the French government temporary relocated to Bordeaux from Paris.
Then come Monique De Marco, Green candidate which totals 13.40%, followed by the member of Pyrenees-Atlantiques and candidate of the Modem Jean Lassalle who registers a low 6.78% while it is qualified to the second round on the whole Aquitaine.
The PS had put a Socialist heavyweight Gironde and had put great hopes in this election after the victory of Ségolène Royal and Michèle Delaunay in 2007.
The 18th century was the golden age of Bordeaux.
Finally comes the candidate of the Left Front Gérard Boulanger which totals 5.64%, no other candidate from the 5% mark.
The right bank of the Garonne is a low-lying, often marshy plain.
In the parliamentary elections of 2007, the left won eight constituencies against only three right.
* An electric bus shuttle in the city center
Another bridge, the Pont Jean-Jacques Bosc, is to be built in 2018.
Bordeaux now has about  of vineyards, 57 appellations, 10,000 wine-producing châteaux and 13,000 grape growers.
Bordeaux has been inscribed on UNESCO World Heritage List as ''"an outstanding urban and architectural ensemble"''.
The Short Program occurred hours before the bombing.
The 35,000-capacity Stade Chaban-Delmas is the largest stadium in Bordeaux.
The ''École Compleméntaire Japonaise de Bordeaux'' (ボルドー日本語補習授業校 ''Borudō Nihongo Hoshū Jugyō Kō''), a part-time Japanese supplementary school, is held in the ''Salle de L'Athenee Municipal'' in Bordeaux.
There are two major sport teams in Bordeaux, both playing at the Stade Chaban-Delmas.
One section is for Vert tricks, one for street style tricks, and one for little action sports athletes with easier features and softer materials.
From 1940 to 1943, the Italian Royal Navy (''Regia Marina Italiana'') established BETASOM, a submarine base at Bordeaux.
In 814, Seguin was made Duke of Vasconia, but he was deposed in 816 for failing to suppress or sympathise with a Basque rebellion.
The 2009 European elections are like the previous ones in eight constituencies.
Summers are warm and long due to the influence from the Bay of Biscay (surface temperature reaches .
Bordeaux has many shopping options.
It stands out as one of the first French cities, after Nancy, to have entered an era of urbanism and metropolitan big scale projects, with the team Gabriel father and son, architects for King Louis XV, under the supervision of two intendants (Governors), first Nicolas-François Dupré de Saint-Maur then the Marquis de Tourny.
The Laser Mégajoule will be one of the most powerful lasers in the world, allowing fundamental research and the development of the laser and plasma technologies.
Victor Hugo found the town so beautiful he once said: "Take Versailles, add Antwerp, and you have Bordeaux".
Bordeaux is served by an international airport, Aéroport de Bordeaux Mérignac, located  from the city center in the suburban city of Mérignac.
But the Free Skate was cancelled in all of the divisions due to the Paris bombing(s) and aftermath.
From the 12th to the 15th century, Bordeaux regained importance following the marriage of Duchess Eléonore of Aquitaine with the French-speaking Count Henri Plantagenet, born in Le Mans, who became, within months of their wedding, King Henry II of England.
None of the other candidates exceeded the 5% mark.
After duke Eudes's defeat, the Aquitanian duke could still save part of its troops and keep his grip on Aquitaine after the Battle of Poitiers.
The built-up area has grown for more than a century beyond the municipal borders of Bordeaux due to urban sprawl, so that by the January 2011 census there were 1,140,668 people living in the overall metropolitan area of Bordeaux, only a fifth of whom lived in the city proper.
This project, carried by the French Ministry of Defence, involves an investment of 2&nbsp;billion euros.
There is a  ring road called the "Rocade" which is often very busy.
The "Road of the lasers", a major project of regional planning, promotes regional investment in optical and laser related industries leading to the Bordeaux area having the most important concentration of optical and laser expertise in Europe.
Because of a wine glut (wine lake) in the generic production, the price squeeze induced by an increasingly strong international competition, and vine pull schemes, the number of growers has recently dropped from 14,000 and the area under vine has also decreased significantly.
In Bordeaux, the left is for the first time in its history the majority as it holds two three constituencies following the elections.
Tourism, especially wine tourism, is a major industry.
The city's titles are "La perle d'Aquitaine" (The Pearl of Aquitaine), and "La Belle Endormie" (Sleeping Beauty) in reference to the old centre which had black walls due to pollution.
This happened again during the First World War and again very briefly during the Second World War, when it became clear that Paris would soon fall into German hands.
Next to Bordeaux, Charlemagne built the fortress of Fronsac (''Frontiacus'', ''Franciacus'') on a hill across the border with the Basques (''Wascones''), where Basque commanders came over to vow loyalty to him (769).
Bordeaux has five road bridges that cross the Garonne, the Pont de pierre built in the 1820s and three modern bridges built after 1960: the Pont Saint Jean, just south of the Pont de pierre (both located downtown), the Pont d'Aquitaine, a suspended bridge downstream from downtown, and the Pont François Mitterrand, located upstream of downtown.
The decision was taken to save the bridge, but by early 2010 no plans had been announced as to its future use.
Union Bordeaux Bègles is a rugby team in the Top 14 in the Ligue Nationale de Rugby.
In the heart of Bordeaux is ''Rue Sainte-Catherine''.
In the meantime, the global demand for first growths and the most famous labels markedly increased and their prices skyrocketed.
Bordeaux in its hey day had a population of 262,662 in 1968.
There is a  wooden velodrome, Vélodrome du Lac, in Bordeaux which hosts international cycling competition in the form of UCI Track Cycling World Cup events.
The summer of 2003 set a record with an average temperature of .
Duke Eudes mustered a force ready to engage the Umayyads outside Bordeaux, eventually taking on them in the Battle of the River Garonne somewhere near the river Dordogne, described as taking a heavy death toll.
A fifth bridge, the Pont Jacques-Chaban-Delmas, was constructed in 2009–2012 and opened to traffic in March 2013.
Both red and white wines are made in Bordeaux.
In 778, Seguin (or Sihimin) was appointed count of Bordeaux, probably undermining the power of the Duke Lupo, and possibly leading to the Battle of Roncevaux Pass that very year.
Two seats were obtained.
Bordeaux is an important road and motorway junction.
Red wines are generally made from a blend of grapes, and may be made from Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Cabernet Franc, Petit verdot, Malbec, and, less commonly in recent years, Carménère.
The last seat deserves.
With an annual production of approximately 960 million bottles, Bordeaux produces large quantities of everyday wine as well as some of the most expensive wines in the world.
However, on the last of these occasions the French capital was soon moved again to Vichy.
There are many music venues of varying capacity.
In 1814, towards the end of the Peninsula war, the duke of Wellington sent William Beresford with two divisions, who seized Bordeaux without much resistance on 12 March.
In the second round, Alain Rousset is needed largely carried away by the wave as national totals rose 55.83%.
The city also offers several festivals throughout the year.
In the second round, it was Chantal Bourragué who was re-elected with 54.45% against 45.55% for his socialist opponent.
All five road bridges, including the two highway bridges, are open to cyclists and pedestrians as well.
In Bordeaux, the Garonne River is accessible to ocean liners.
The €160 million bridge was inaugurated by President François Hollande and Mayor Alain Juppé on 16 March 2013.
+ 2007 Presidential Election
The city flourished, primarily due to the wine trade, and the cathedral of St. André was built.
In the second round, it's Christmas Mamère is re-elected with 62.82% against 37.18% for his rival right.
There had been several plans for a subway network to be set up, but they stalled for both geological and financial reasons.
The ground was formerly known as the ''Stade du Parc Lescure'' until 2001, when it was renamed in honour of the city's long-time mayor, Jacques Chaban-Delmas.
The term "Bordelais" may also refer to the city and its surrounding region.
These two bridges are part of the ring road around Bordeaux.
Historically the train line used to terminate at a station on the right bank of the river Garonne near the Pont de Pierre, and passengers crossed the bridge to get into the city.
This pedestrian-only shopping street has  of shops, restaurants and cafés; it is also one of the longest shopping streets in Europe.
Bordeaux is located close to the European Atlantic coast, in the southwest of France and in the north of the Aquitaine region.
The two-track Eiffel bridge with a speed limit of  became a bottleneck and a new bridge was built, opening in 2009.
'''Nicolas Sarkozy'''
Then came Francois Bayrou with 22.01%, followed by Jean-Marie Le Pen who recorded 5.42%.
Further ravage was brought by the same Vandals in 409, the Visigoths in 414 and the Franks in 498, beginning a period of obscurity for the city.
In the second district of Gironde confront the UMP mayor and all new Minister of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and the Sea Alain Juppe facing the General Counsel PS Michèle Delaunay.
Access to the port from the Atlantic is via the Gironde estuary.
The Gare Saint-Jean is the major hub for regional trains (TER) operated by the SNCF to Arcachon, Limoges, Agen, Périgueux, Pau, Le Médoc, Angoulême and Bayonne.
In the European elections of 2009, Bordeaux voters largely voted for the UMP list Dominique Baudis, who won 31.54% against 15.00% for only a list PS Kader Arif.
Cycle paths (separate from the roadways) exist on the highway bridges, along the riverfront, on the university campuses, and incidentally elsewhere in the city.
Two seats in the European Parliament.
Together with its suburbs and satellite towns Bordeaux is the centre of the Bordeaux Métropole, which with 749,595 inhabitants () and 1,178,335 in the Metropolitan Area, the sixth largest in France.
At the January 2011 census, there were 239,399 inhabitants in the city proper (commune) of Bordeaux.
The system was controversial for its considerable cost of installation, maintenance and also for the numerous initial technical problems that paralysed the network.
The list of Europe Ecology José Bové has released its game arrived second with 22.34%.
Bordeaux was largely anti-Bonapartist and had a majority that supported the Bourbons, so the British troops were treated as liberators.
Jean Lassalle, who qualified for the second round, passes the 10% mark by totaling 10.77%.
Bordeaux is the city which has the highest number of preserved historical buildings in France, except for Paris.
At regional elections in 2010, the Socialist incumbent president Alain Rousset won the first round by totaling 35.19% in Bordeaux, but this score is lower than the Gironde and Aquitaine plan.
Work on the Tramway de Bordeaux system was started in the autumn of 2000, and services started in December 2003 connecting Bordeaux with its suburban areas.
Hunald was defeated, and his son Waifer replaced him, who in turn confirmed Bordeaux as the capital city (along with Bourges in the north).
The Dassault Falcon private jets are built there as well as the military aircraft Rafale and Mirage 2000, the Airbus A380 cockpit, the boosters of Ariane 5, and the M51 SLBM missile.
* 13 night bus routes (from 1 to 16)
A paid Bicycle sharing system with automated stations has been established in 2010.
Around 585, a certain Gallactorius is cited as count of Bordeaux and fighting the Basques.
Later it became capital of Roman Aquitaine, flourishing especially during the Severan dynasty (3rd century).
+ 2012 Presidential Election
Bordeaux is home to a beautiful quay which runs along the Gironde river.
''Only candidates obtaining more than 5% are listed''
In the 1938 FIFA World Cup, it hosted a violent quarter-final known as the Battle of Bordeaux.
The tram system uses ground-level power supply technology (APS), a new cable-free technology developed by French company Alstom and designed to preserve the aesthetic environment by eliminating overhead cables in the historic city.
Its inhabitants are called "Bordelais" (for men) or "Bordelaises" (women).
In 1462, Bordeaux obtained a parliament, but regained importance only in the 16th century when it became the centre of the distribution of sugar and slaves from the West Indies along with the traditional wine.
The old station was later converted and in 2010 comprised a cinema and restaurants.
Lacking any steep hills, Bordeaux is relatively friendly to cyclists.
The average seasonal winter temperature is , but recent winters have been warmer than this.
The central lift span is  and can be lifted vertically up to  to let tall ships pass underneath.
Globelink.co.uk mentioned Bordeaux as the best tourist destination in Europe in 2015.
"Le Jardin Public" is a park in the heart of the city.
Bordeaux adhered to the Fronde, being effectively annexed to the Kingdom of France only in 1653, when the army of Louis XIV entered the city.
The municipality (commune) of Bordeaux proper has a population of 243,626 (2012).
Bordeaux has an important public transport system called Tram et Bus de la CUB (TBC).
In 1973, it was elevated to First Growth status.
'''François Hollande'''
Frosts in the winter are commonplace, occurring several times during a winter, but snowfall is very rare, occurring only once every three years.
*Château Lafite-Rothschild
UMP list Dominique Baudis: 26.89%.
A new stadium has been open in 2015 to replace the Chaban-Delmas stadium.
Vanessa James/Morgan Cipres (65.75) in 2nd.
The city has some of the biggest companies including Dassault, EADS Sogerma, Snecma, Thales, SNPE, and others.
In 735, the Aquitanian duke Hunald led a rebellion after his father Eudes's death, at which Charles responded by sending an expedition that captured and plundered Bordeaux again, but it was not retained for long.
It is closely followed by Jacques Colombier, candidate of the National Front, which gets 6.48%.
Bordeaux is also the home to one of the strongest cricket teams in France and are the current champions of the South West League.
Winters are cool because of the prevalence of westerly winds from the Atlantic.
Many downtown buildings (about 5,000), including those on the quays, are from this period.
Mae-Berenice-Meite (46.82) in 11th and Laurine Lecavelier (46.53) in 12th.
The bridge remains intact, but unused and without any means of access.
The skate-park is very well maintained by the municipality.
Historically the left bank is more developed because when flowing outside the bend, the water makes a furrow of the required depth to allow the passing of merchant ships, which used to offload on this side of the river.
Red Bordeaux is called claret in the United Kingdom.
The Cité du Vin, a museum as well as a place of exhibitions, shows, movie projections and academic seminars on the theme of wine opened its doors in June 2016.
The 2015 Trophee Eric Bompard was in Bordeaux.
Cycle lanes and bus lanes that explicitly allow cyclists exist on many of the city's boulevards.
During the last stage of the war against Aquitaine (760–768), it was one of Waifer's last important strongholds to fall to King Pepin the Short's troops.
The shops become progressively more upmarket as one moves towards ''Place de la Comédie'' and the nearby ''Cours de l'Intendance'' is where one finds the more exclusive shops and boutiques.
List Left Front of Jean-Luc Mélenchon: 8.16%.
In the first round, Alain Juppe is well ahead with 43.73% against 31.36% for Michèle Delaunay.
The bridge was named after the late Jacques Chaban-Delmas, who was a former Prime Minister and Mayor of Bordeaux.
In fact, a part of the city, Le Port de La Lune, was almost completely renovated.
The following year, the Frankish commander descended again over Aquitaine, but clashed in battle with the Aquitanians and left to take on hostile Burgundian authorities and magnates.
The city fell under Roman rule around 60 BC, its importance lying in the commerce of tin and lead towards Rome.
It is served by the French national (SNCF) railway's high speed train, the TGV, that gets to Paris in three hours, with connections to major European centers such as Lille, Brussels, Amsterdam, Cologne, Geneva and London.
This company is run by the Keolis group.
Included among the latter are the area's five ''premier cru'' (first growth) red wines (four from Médoc and one, Château Haut-Brion, from Graves), established by the Bordeaux Wine Official Classification of 1855:
The ballot is marked by abstention amounted to 55.51% in the first round and 53.59% in the second round.
Sauternes is a sub-region of Graves known for its intensely sweet, white, dessert wines such as Château d'Yquem.
Bordeaux is classified "City of Art and History".
Bordeaux is home to one of Europe's biggest 18th-century architectural urban areas, making it a sought-after destination for tourists and cinema production crews.
The city is connected to Paris by the A10 motorway, with Lyon by the A89, with Toulouse by the A62, and with Spain by the A63.
However, after a rather exciting campaign is Alain Juppé who was widely elected in the first round with 56.62%, far ahead of Alain Rousset who has managed to get 34.14%.
Almost nine million tonnes of goods arrive and leave each year.
In the first division of the Gironde, the outgoing UMP MP Chantal Bourragué well ahead with 44.81% against 25.39% for only the Socialist candidate Beatrice Desaigues.
There are more than 400 taxicabs in Bordeaux.
The defeat of the so-called constituency "Mayor" shows that Bordeaux rocking increasingly left.
During the planning there was much lobbying by the Eiffel family and other supporters to preserve the old bridge as a footbridge across the Garonne, with possibly a museum to document the history of the bridge and Gustave Eiffel's contribution.
: In 1855, Mouton-Rothschild was ranked a Second Growth.
At present, of the eight cantons that has Bordeaux, five and three are at the PS to the UMP, left munching at every election a little bit on the right electorate.
