Pasternak's critics, however, accused him of "pasternakizing" Shakespeare.
Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory.
Pasternak's gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement.
Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union.
Don't forget to open the window tomorrow."
He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, "Who will suffer most because of my death?
Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West.
The madman had his occasional flights of fancy, he had an intuitive feeling for certain things, despite his wild obscurantism.
In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, "Our Shop."
The issue of whether or not the CIA had a hand in creating the international controversy that led to Pasternak's winning the Nobel Prize was definitively settled on 11 April 2014 when the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency released "nearly 100 declassified documents" confirming that it had, in fact, undertaken a massive propaganda campaign to influence the Nobel Prize committee to consider ''Zhivago'' for the award, starting as early as 12 December 1957: "''Dr.
Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, "I haven't read Pasternak, but I condemn him".
According to Max Hayward, "In November 1910, when Tolstoy fled from his home and died in the stationmaster's house at Astapovo, Leonid Pasternak was informed by telegram and he went there immediately, taking his son Boris with him, and made a drawing of Tolstoy on his deathbed."
Pasternak later noted on a photograph of himself, "Petőfi is magnificent with his descriptive lyrics and picture of nature, but you are better still.
Although Pasternak was never arrested by the Soviet secret police, his close friend Titsian Tabidze fell victim to the Great Purge.
He and Zinaida expected to be arrested that evening.
Zhivago'' should be published in a maximum number of foreign editions, for maximum free world discussion and acclaim and consideration for such honor as the Nobel prize" sic In order to turn Pasternak's novel into an international bestseller worthy of consideration for the Nobel Prize, the CIA purchased thousands of copies of the novel as they came off the presses throughout Europe.
During the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing ''The Blind Beauty'', a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II's abolition of serfdom in Russia.
Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.
The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the "progress" of society.
All of Pasternak's letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB.
Evidence of Pasternak's support of still-revolutionary members of the leadership of the Communist Party as late as 1926 is indicated by his worshipful poem "In Memory of Reissner" presumably written upon the shockingly premature death from typhus of legendary Bolshevik leader Larisa Reisner at age 30 in February of that year.
He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably "The Childhood of Luvers" and "Safe Conduct".
The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but – inspired by Scriabin – he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University.
On 9 September 1958, the ''Literary Gazette'' critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing, "the decadent religious poetry of Pasternak, which reeks of mothballs from the Symbolist suitcase of 1908–10 manufacture."
Pasternak's early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin.
According to Ivinskaya, he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it.
But it will go away, won't it?
Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: 'According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity…'"
For this reason, Pasternak regularly avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse.
During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell's ''Animal Farm'' in English.
A 2009 book by Ivan Tolstoi reasserts claims that British and American intelligence officers were involved in ensuring Pasternak's Nobel victory however another Russian researcher disagrees.
Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli's Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia.
In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.
In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to, "break off relations," with both of them.
Pasternak was elated by the outbreak of war between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
During World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodovo-Vilve near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for ''Dr.
When in the summer of 1958 the Dutch publishing house of Mouton brought out an edition of ''Zhivago'', the CIA secretly arranged to "obtain first thousand copies of the book off the press and of these send 500 copies to the Brussels Fair" (i.e.
Pasternak's last words were, "I can't hear very well.
Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief.
She gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below.
They later learned that an NKVD agent was hiding in the bushes outside their window and wrote down every word they said to each other.
At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy.
Subsequently, the CIA funded the publication of a miniature, lightweight paperback edition of Doctor Zhivago that could be easily mailed or concealed in a jacket pocket.
When informed of this, Pasternak responded, "No matter.
He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of ''The Blind Beauty'', he wished to depict "the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic".
Shortly before his death, a priest of the Russian Orthodox Church had given Pasternak the last rites.
In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak's novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people.
I can't stand poetry.'"
Pasternak's translation of the first part of ''Faust'' led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of ''Novy Mir''.
Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of ''Izvestia'' and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam's behalf.
Ivinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988.
Talking with people in the offices of literary periodicals, he often asked: 'When will there be an end to this freedom for lackeys who happily walk over corpses to further their own interests?'
They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to, "his Capitalist paradise."
Pasternak had a younger brother Alex and sisters Lydia and Josephine.
Although Pasternak never left his wife Zinaida, he started an extramarital relationship with Ivinskaya that would last for the remainder of Pasternak's life.
Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad.
He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905.
The worst thing is that she will suffer."
Ivinskaya's daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat.
Pasternak was certain that he would be instantly arrested, but he was not.
In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili as the greatest heartbreaks of his entire life.
Only Oliusha will, and I haven't had time to do anything for her.
Pasternak aspired first to be a musician.
He wrote about his family's strong Tolstoyan convictions, which he still held dear.
With the end of the war in 1945, the Soviet people expected to see the end of the devastation of Nazism, and hoped for the end of Stalin's Purges.
When they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, Sándor Petőfi.
According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over ''Doctor Zhivago''.
Pasternak wrote, "Men who are not free... always idealize their bondage."
Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German-language Romantic poets.
Shortly after his birth, Pasternak's parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement.
In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discreet support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party's literary apparatus.
What was your crime?"
According to Tolstoi, this was done so that Pasternak could win the Nobel prize and harm the international credibility of the Soviet Union.
By 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems, aptly titled ''The Second Birth''.
In a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of ''Doctor Zhivago'' to a Western publishing house.
The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe's "progressive" meanings to support "the reactionary theory of 'pure art'", as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values.
'''Boris Leonidovich Pasternak''' (; ) (30 May 1960) was a Soviet Russian poet, novelist, and literary translator.
In 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, ''Doctor Zhivago'' was serialized in the literary journal ''Novy Mir''.
Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of ''The New York Times''' bestseller list.
According to Olga Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak.
Upon learning of his mistress' arrest, Pasternak telephoned Liuisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard.
Later, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of Vítězslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya:
Meanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.
This is not the site of the Pasternak family dacha, now open to the public, in the writers' colony at Peredelkino, which is about 16 miles south-west of the capital.)
But there's actually nothing there – it would be better to say it in a news bulletin.
Boris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960.
Following ''My Sister, Life'', Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle ''Rupture'' (1921).
During the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes.
The leadership of the Union travelled to Pasternak's dacha at Peredelkino and severely threatened the writer, who refused to sign the statement and returned to his dacha.
It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.
More recently, Anna Sergeyeva-Klyatis wrote that the first Russian edition of ''Doctor Zhivago'', which was a pirated version with numerous typographical errors and omissions, was actually initiated by the Central Association of Postwar Émigrées, in response to a growing demand among Russian émigrés.
Thank God for having expressed it through your pen."
He worked intensively on the second part of ''Doctor Zhivago''."
Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, "Your collected works will consist of twelve volumes of translations, and only one of your own work."
There remains only for the Academy, however, to announce with regret that the presentation of the Prize cannot take place."
She later recalled:
According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal White emigre and a Fascist fifth columnist.
According to Yevgenii Pasternak, "I couldn't recognize my father when I saw him that evening.
According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb.
According to Pasternak, Stalin declared, "Do not touch this cloud dweller" (or, in another version, "Leave that holy fool alone!")
His single-movement Piano Sonata of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice.
In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia.
Soon after, Ivinskaya happened to be ill at Popova's apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.
Pale, lifeless face, tired painful eyes, and only speaking about the same thing: 'Now it all doesn’t matter, I declined the Prize.'"
He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths.
I was scared, and she had refused me.
Pasternak's translations of William Shakespeare (''Romeo and Juliet'', ''Antony and Cleopatra'', ''Othello'', ''King Henry IV'' (Parts I and II), ''Hamlet'', ''Macbeth'', ''King Lear'') remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues.
Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, ''Doctor Zhivago'' was pilloried in the State-owned press.
Pasternak's fortunes were soon to change, however.
Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak's forehead and the coffin was closed and buried.
Although it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, ''Doctor Zhivago'' was not completed until 1956.
Please do not take my voluntary renunciation amiss."
The work of Lozinski, Radlova, Marshak, and Chukovski is alien to me, and seems artificial, soulless, and lacking in depth.
An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title ''A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak''.
"He was totally unprepared for such a conversation.
However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.
His father was the Post-Impressionist painter, Leonid Pasternak, professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture.
In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry.
Pasternak had tutored her in the final class of high school.
In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, "vividly reminded" him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son.
They were further ordered to join a "spontaneous" demonstration demanding Pasternak's exile from the Soviet Union.
Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam.
It was the Russian people and their sufferings who created it.
I was translating both of you."
In a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, "She was put in jail on my account, as the person considered by the secret police to be closest to me, and they hoped that by means of a gruelling interrogation and threats they could extract enough evidence from her to put me on trial.
According to Ivinskaya, "It was this sort of thing that moved him to say: 'Who started the idea that I love poetry?
She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station.
Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1958, an event which both humiliated and enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which forced him to decline the prize, though his descendants were later to accept it in his name in 1988.
Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak's refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist emigres.
Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Raiki, some 27 miles north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students.
Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy's sickbed, that he would end his affair with Ivinskaya.
Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication.
The following year they had a son, Evgenii.
In a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled,
The first screen adaptation of ''Doctor Zhivago'', adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965.
They demanded Pasternak's signature as well, but he refused to give it.
According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life.
In his native Russian, Pasternak's first book of poems, ''My Sister, Life'' (1917), is one of the most influential collections ever published in the Russian language.
Although Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it.
As the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino's Church of the Transfiguration began to toll.
I pity her tears, am more blessed than a saint."
Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia.
Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak's name off an execution list during the Great Purge.
Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, "my father illustrated his books, went to see him, revered him, and ...the whole house was imbued with his spirit."
He bore up well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury), and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places.
Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917.
Ivinskaya wrote, "I believe that between Stalin and Pasternak there was an incredible, silent duel."
But, sealed trains began carrying large numbers of prisoners to the Soviet Gulags.
When it finally was published in 1921, Pasternak's ''My Sister, Life'' revolutionised Russian poetry.
According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk.
Pasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow family of tea merchants, whose company Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world.
And there's a mist in front of my eyes.
In 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front.
Ivinskaya later recalled, "He phoned almost every day and, instinctively fearing to meet or talk with him, yet dying of happiness, I would stammer out that I was "busy today."
According to Pasternak, during the 1937 show trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants.
Weeping, Pasternak told her, "Everything is finished now.
The cartoon depicts Pasternak and another GULAG inmate, splitting trees in the snow.
In memory of it all, B.P., 13 May 1948."
In a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, "I am completely opposed to contemporary ideas about translation.
Soon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin.
he once exclaimed – by 'they' he meant the Russian classics.
After all that had happened, open shadowing, friends turning away, Pasternak's suicidal condition at the time, one can... understand her: the memory of Stalin's camps was too fresh, and she tried to protect him."
He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz Słowacki and Pedro Calderón de la Barca.
In 1932 Pasternak fell in love with Zinaida Neuhaus, the wife of the Russian pianist Heinrich Neuhaus.
So let's make out that I heard nothing."
In an interview with Olga Carlisle from ''The Paris Review'', Pasternak enthusiastically described the play's plot and characters.
In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev,
In the aftermath, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida.
I am above race..." According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence.
On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: "Infinitely grateful, touched, proud, surprised, overwhelmed."
According to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, "Rumors that Pasternak was to receive the Nobel Prize started right after the end of World War II.
Therefore, Pasternak's Christian-themed poems were, "a form of protest."
The Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Alexander Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is considered more faithful to Pasternak's novel than David Lean's 1965 film.
When Yevgeny Borisovich Pasternak was questioned about this, he responded that his father was completely unaware of the actions of Western intelligence services.
According to Solomon Volkov:
In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which ''Novy Mir'' considered, "irrational," had been translated as Goethe had written them.
Some were Nazi collaborators who had fought under General Andrey Vlasov, but most were ordinary Soviet officers and men.
The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.
Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the second part had not been revoked.
That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel.
Despite his decision to decline the award, the Soviet Union of Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State-owned press.
In 1922 Pasternak married Evgeniya Lurye  (Евгения Лурье), a student at the Art Institute.
Ivinskaya would later describe the Petőfi translations as, "a first declaration of love."
Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Alexander Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.
According to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband's infidelity.
By 1927, Pasternak's close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the Arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
the World's Fair held that summer in Brussels, Belgium).
Outside Russia, Pasternak is best known as the author of ''Doctor Zhivago'' (1957), a novel which takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the First World War.
Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told d'Angelo with a laugh, "You are hereby invited to watch me face the firing squad."
In thus daily progressing through the text, the translator finds himself reliving the circumstances of the author.
On 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors.
Pasternak later said, "If, in a bad dream, we had seen all the horrors in store for us after the war, we should not have been sorry to see Stalin fall, together with Hitler.
While they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya, "1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones.
In a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading ''Doctor Zhivago''.
According to journalist Ivan Tolstoi, the British MI6 and the American CIA lent a hand to ensure that ''Doctor Zhivago'' was submitted to the Nobel Committee in the original Russian.
When Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Olga Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow.
Then, an end to the war in favour of our allies, civilized countries with democratic traditions, would have meant a hundred times less suffering for our people than that which Stalin again inflicted on it after his victory."
Soon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak's Moscow apartment.
I flared up, and then was extinguished.
