The rare mineral is called sassolite, which is found at Sasso, Italy.
In his subsequent experiments, he used potassium to reduce boric acid instead of electrolysis.
These compounds do not occur in nature.
BF, isoelectronic with N2, cannot be isolated in condensed form, but B2F4 and B4Cl4 are well characterized.
Whereas α, β and T phases are based on B12 icosahedra, the γ-phase can be described as a rocksalt-type arrangement of the icosahedra and B2 atomic pairs.
The largest known boron deposits are in Turkey, the largest producer of boron minerals.
However, the product is almost always contaminated with borides of those metals.
Boron trifluoride is used in the petrochemical industry as a catalyst.
The U.S. National Institutes of Health states that "Total daily boron intake in normal human diets ranges from 2.1–4.3&nbsp;mg boron/day."
Boric acid is more toxic to insects than to mammals, and is routinely used as an insecticide.
Among light elements that absorb thermal neutrons, 6Li and 10B appear as potential spacecraft structural materials which serve both for mechanical reinforcement and radiation protection.
The next leading use is in polymers and ceramics in high-strength, lightweight structural and refractory materials.
It is thought that boron plays several biochemical roles in animals, including humans.
From the structural perspective, the most distinctive chemical compounds of boron are the hydrides.
The trihalides adopt a planar trigonal structure.
The highest growth in demand is expected to be in Asia where demand could rise by an average 5.7% per year.
11B is also a candidate as a fuel for aneutronic fusion.
These magnets are found in a variety of electromechanical and electronic devices, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) medical imaging systems, in compact and relatively small motors and actuators.
The minimum lethal dose for humans has not been established.
The larger boranes all consist of boron clusters that are polyhedral, some of which exist as isomers.
In nuclear reactors, 10B is used for reactivity control and in emergency shutdown systems.
These are mined industrially as evaporites, such as borax and kernite.
As one example, carboranes form useful molecular moieties that add considerable amounts of boron to other biochemicals in order to synthesize boron-containing compounds for boron neutron capture therapy for cancer.
Although these are not found on Earth naturally, boron forms a variety of stable compounds with formal oxidation state less than three.
Included in this series are the cluster compounds dodecaborate (B12H122−), decaborane (B10H14), and the carboranes such as C2B10H12.
The boranes are toxic as well as highly flammable and require special care when handling.
:2 B + 3 Br2 → 2 BBr3
Roskill Consulting Group forecasts that world demand for boron will grow by 3.4% per year to reach 21 million tonnes by 2010.
When finely divided, it is attacked slowly by hot concentrated hydrogen peroxide, hot concentrated nitric acid, hot sulfuric acid or hot mixture of sulfuric and chromic acids.
Boron is introduced into semiconductors as boron compounds, by ion implantation.
Sodium perborate serves as a source of active oxygen in many detergents, laundry detergents, cleaning products, and laundry bleaches.
The chemical behavior of boron resembles that of silicon more than aluminium.
Global proven boron mineral mining reserves exceed one billion metric tonnes, against a yearly production of about four million tonnes.
Elemental boron is rare and poorly studied because the pure material is extremely difficult to prepare.
Each boron atom has a formal −1 charge and magnesium is assigned a formal charge of +2.
Nearly all plants, even those somewhat tolerant of soil boron, will show at least some symptoms of boron toxicity when soil boron content is greater than 1.8&nbsp;ppm.
Boron fibers and sub-millimeter sized crystalline boron springs are produced by laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition.
Similarly, AlMgB14 + TiB2 composites possess high hardness and wear resistance and are used in either bulk form or as coatings for components exposed to high temperatures and wear loads.
Turkey and the United States are the largest producers of boron products.
As examples, computer HDDs (hard disk drives), CD (compact disk) and DVD (digital versatile disk) players rely on neodymium magnet motors to deliver intense rotary power in a remarkably compact package.
The formal oxidation number in boranes is positive, and is based on the assumption that hydrogen is counted as −1 as in active metal hydrides.
Characteristically such compounds contain boron with coordination numbers greater than four.
Elemental boron is a metalloid that is found in small amounts in meteoroids but chemically uncombined boron is not otherwise found naturally on Earth.
When this content exceeds 2.0&nbsp;ppm, few plants will perform well and some may not survive.
The patient is then treated with a beam of low energy neutrons at a relatively low neutron radiation dose.
Cosmic radiation will produce secondary neutrons if it hits spacecraft structures.
In 1777, boric acid was recognized in the hot springs (soffioni) near Florence, Italy, and became known as ''sal sedativum'', with primarily medical uses.
These minerals resemble silicates in some respect, although boron is often found not only in a tetrahedral coordination with oxygen, but also in a trigonal planar configuration.
Small amounts of boron occur widely in the diet, and the amounts needed in the diet would, by extension from rodent studies, be very small.
Compressing boron above 160&nbsp;GPa produces a boron phase with an as yet unknown structure, and this phase is a superconductor at temperatures 6–12 K. Borospherene (fullerene-like B40) molecules) and borophene (proposed graphene-like structure) have been described in 2014.
Those neutrons will be captured in 10B, if it is present in the spacecraft's semiconductors, producing a gamma ray, an alpha particle, and a lithium ion.
Consumers have moved toward the use of refined borates and boric acid that have a lower pollutant content.
Estimated global consumption of boron (almost entirely as boron compounds) was about 4&nbsp;million tonnes of B2O3 in 2012.
The rate of oxidation of boron depends on the crystallinity, particle size, purity and temperature.
Boron was not recognized as an element until it was isolated by Sir Humphry Davy and by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Louis Jacques Thénard.
The results showed that supplemental boron reduced excretion of calcium by 44%, and activated estrogen and vitamin D, suggesting a possible role in the suppression of osteoporosis.
This is due to its very complex structure.
Similar to carbon, it has both hexagonal (soft graphite-like h-BN) and cubic (hard, diamond-like c-BN) forms.
In 1808 Davy observed that electric current sent through a solution of borates produced a brown precipitate on one of the electrodes.
It forms four major polymorphs: α-rhombohedral and β-rhombohedral (α-R and β-R), γ and β-tetragonal (β-T); α-tetragonal phase also exists (α-T), but is very difficult to produce without significant contamination.
Substances with LD50 above 2&nbsp;g are considered nontoxic.
For example, isomers of B20H26 are based on the fusion of two 10-atom clusters.
However, unlike hexagonal boron nitride, which lacks electrons in the plane of the covalent atoms, the delocalized electrons in magnesium diboride allow it to conduct electricity similar to isoelectronic graphite.
The mass difference results in a wide range of δ11B values, which are defined as a fractional difference between the 11B and 10B and traditionally expressed in parts per thousand, in natural waters ranging from −16 to +59.
Levels as low as 0.8&nbsp;ppm produce these same symptoms in plants that are particularly sensitive to boron in the soil.
A few boron-containing organic pharmaceuticals are used or are in study.
Marco Polo brought some glazes back to Italy in the 13th century.
Unlike silicates, the boron minerals never contain boron with coordination number greater than four.
It is formed in minor amounts in cosmic ray spallation nucleosynthesis and may be found uncombined in cosmic dust and meteoroid materials.
Boron carbide's structure is only approximately B4C, and it shows a clear depletion of carbon from this suggested stoichiometric ratio.
The boron nitrides are notable for the variety of structures that they adopt.
Nuclear applications of boron carbide include shielding, control rods and shut-down pellets.
Increasing demand for boric acid has led a number of producers to invest in additional capacity.
Agriculture consumes 11% of global boron production, and bleaches and detergents about 6%.
Elemental boron, boron oxide, boric acid, borates, and many organoboron compounds are relatively nontoxic to humans and animals (with toxicity similar to that of table salt).
The major global industrial-scale use of boron compounds (about 46% of end-use) is in production of glass fiber for boron-containing insulating and structural fiberglasses, especially in Asia.
Economically important sources of boron are the minerals colemanite, rasorite (kernite), ulexite and tincal.
Schott AG's "Duran" and Owens-Corning's trademarked Pyrex are two major brand names for this glass, used both in laboratory glassware and in consumer cookware and bakeware, chiefly for this resistance.
Boron trichloride gas is also an important chemical in semiconductor industry, however not for doping but rather for plasma etching of metals and their oxides.
Not all fiberglasses contain boron, but on a global scale, most of the fiberglass used does contain it.
Boron occurs in all foods produced from plants.
Boric acid is mildly antimicrobial, and several natural boron-containing organic antibiotics are known.
One of the difficulties in dealing with cosmic rays, which are mostly high energy protons, is that some secondary radiation from interaction of cosmic rays and spacecraft materials is high energy spallation neutrons.
Most studies of "boron" involve samples that contain small amounts of carbon.
The primary use of elemental boron is as boron filaments with applications similar to carbon fibers in some high-strength materials.
It is then slowly filtered out over many months as fissile material is used up and the fuel becomes less reactive.
Dioxaborolane chemistry enables radioactive fluoride (18F) labeling of antibodies, which allows for positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of cancer.
The less-valuable by-product, depleted boron, is nearly pure 11B.
Several allotropes of boron exist: amorphous boron is a brown powder; crystalline boron is silvery to black, extremely hard (about 9.5 on the Mohs scale), and a poor electrical conductor at room temperature.
Boron carbide's ability to absorb neutrons without forming long-lived radionuclides (especially when doped with extra boron-10) makes the material attractive as an absorbent for neutron radiation arising in nuclear power plants.
The 10B isotope is useful for capturing thermal neutrons (see neutron cross section#Typical cross sections).
Boron is involved in the metabolism of calcium in both plants and animals.
The production of boron compounds does not involve the formation of elemental boron, but exploits the convenient availability of borates.
Sasso was the main source of European borax from 1827 to 1872, when American sources replaced it.
A rapid increase in the manufacture of reinforcement-grade boron-containing fiberglass in Asia, has offset the development of boron-free reinforcement-grade fiberglass in Europe and the USA.
Examples are the plasma deposition of boron-containing hard carbon films, silicon nitride-boron nitride films, and for doping of diamond film with boron.
The halides also form derivatives of B(I) and B(II).
The average cost of crystalline boron is $5/g.
its radius is appreciably larger than that predicted by the liquid drop model.
Another 10% of global boron production is for borosilicate glass as used in high strength glassware.
Jöns Jakob Berzelius identified boron as an element in 1824.
Traditional method of introducing boron into semiconductors is via its atomic diffusion at high temperatures.
However, high soil concentrations of greater than 1.0&nbsp;ppm lead to marginal and tip necrosis in leaves as well as poor overall growth performance.
'''Tavaborole''' (marketed as '''Kerydin''') is a Aminoacyl tRNA synthetase inhibitor which is used to treat toenail fungus.
Crystalline boron is a very hard, black material with a melting point of above 2000&nbsp;°C.
The glass fibers used in the material are made of various types of glass depending upon the fiberglass use.
*A number of potential boronated pharmaceuticals using boron-10, have been prepared for use in boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT).
As usual, it is not an element that is intrinsically poisonous, but their toxicity depends on structure.
Illustrative is magnesium diboride (MgB2).
They exhibit structures analogous to various allotropes of carbon, including graphite, diamond, and nanotubes.
The repeating polymer plus semi-crystalline structure of boron carbide gives it great structural strength per weight.
Boron fibers are used in lightweight composite applications, such as high strength tapes.
Together these constitute 90% of mined boron-containing ore.
Boron is added to the glass as borax pentahydrate or boron oxide, to influence the strength or fluxing qualities of the glass fibers.
This use is a very small fraction of total boron use.
Consequently, graphite and h-BN have very different properties, although both are lubricants, as these planes slip past each other easily.
The 10B and 11B nuclei also cause splitting in the resonances of attached nuclei.
The rise in global demand has been driven by high growth rates in glass fiber, fiberglass and borosilicate glassware production.
Boron is converted to boric acid or borates and on reaction with curcumin in acidic solution, a red colored boron-chelate complex, rosocyanine, is formed.
Triethylborane is also injected into vapor deposition reactors as a boron source.
Most other fusion reactions involving hydrogen and helium produce penetrating neutron radiation, which weakens reactor structures and induces long-term radioactivity, thereby endangering operating personnel.
In the latter ("boron neutron capture therapy" or BNCT), a compound containing 10B is incorporated into a pharmaceutical which is selectively taken up by a malignant tumor and tissues near it.
Single medical doses of 20&nbsp;g of boric acid for neutron capture therapy have been used without undue toxicity.
However, the alpha particles from 11B fusion can be turned directly into electric power, and all radiation stops as soon as the reactor is turned off.
Borosilicate glass is desired for its greater strength and thermal shock resistance than ordinary soda lime glass.
The highly boronated glasses used in fiberglass are E-glass (named for "Electrical" use, but now the most common fiberglass for general use).
Presumably boron is necessary to other mammals.
Certain other metal borides find specialized applications as hard materials for cutting tools.
Boron deficiency in rats is not easy to produce, since boron is needed by rats in such small amounts that ultrapurified foods and dust filtration of air are required.
Those resultant decay products may then irradiate nearby semiconductor "chip" structures, causing data loss (bit flipping, or single event upset).
Boron is primarily used in chemical compounds.
Organoboron(III) compounds are usually tetrahedral or trigonal planar, for example, tetraphenylborate, B(C6H5)4− vs. triphenylborane, B(C6H5)3.
In the diamond-like structure, called cubic boron nitride (tradename Borazon), boron atoms exist in the tetrahedral structure of carbons atoms in diamond, but one in every four B-N bonds can be viewed as a coordinate covalent bond, wherein two electrons are donated by the nitrogen atom which acts as the Lewis base to a bond to the Lewis acidic boron(III) centre.
However, h-BN is a relatively poor electrical and thermal conductor in the planar directions.
The earliest routes to elemental boron involved the reduction of boric oxide with metals such as magnesium or aluminium.
In future manned interplanetary spacecraft, 10B has a theoretical role as structural material (as boron fibers or BN nanotube material) which would also serve a special role in the radiation shield.
In 2012, it held a 47% share of production of global borate minerals, ahead of its main competitor, Rio Tinto Group.
These borides are an alternative to diamond coated tools, and their (treated) surfaces have similar properties to those of the bulk boride.
Boranes are chemical compounds of boron and hydrogen, with the generic formula of BxHy.
Pure boron can be prepared by reducing volatile boron halides with hydrogen at high temperatures.
In 2001, this material was found to be a high-temperature superconductor.
The form in which boron is consumed has changed in recent years.
Pure boron was arguably first produced by the American chemist Ezekiel Weintraub in 1909.
It gained FDA approval in July 2014.
Fiberglass is a fiber reinforced polymer made of plastic reinforced by glass fibers, commonly woven into a mat.
Vickers hardness (GPa)
Congenital endothelial dystrophy type 2, a rare form of corneal dystrophy, is linked to mutations in SLC4A11 gene that encodes a transporter reportedly regulating the intracellular concentration of boron.
Turkey's state-owned Eti Mine Works opened a new boric acid plant with the production capacity of 100,000 tonnes per year at Emet in 2003.
It is considered an essential nutrient for humans, and boron deficiency is implicated in osteoporosis.
This is useful because 11B is largely immune to radiation damage.
A typical motif is exemplified by the tetraborate anions of the common mineral borax, shown at left.
Rio Tinto Group increased the capacity of its boron plant from 260,000 tonnes per year in 2003 to 310,000 tonnes per year by May 2005, with plans to grow this to 366,000 tonnes per year in 2006.
The recent rises in energy prices may lead to greater use of insulation-grade fiberglass, with consequent growth in the boron consumption.
The parent member BH3 is called borane, but it is known only in the gaseous state, and dimerises to form diborane, B2H6.
Ultrapure boron for use in the semiconductor industry is produced by the decomposition of diborane at high temperatures and then further purified with the zone melting or Czochralski processes.
When boron levels in plant tissue exceed 200&nbsp;ppm, symptoms of boron toxicity are likely to appear.
It also forms nanotubular structures (BNNTs), which have with high strength, high chemical stability, and high thermal conductivity, among its list of desirable properties.
In these compounds the oxidation state of boron is often not a whole number.
However, multiple boron atoms reacting with each other have a tendency to form novel dodecahedral (12-sided) and icosahedral (20-sided) structures composed completely of boron atoms, or with varying numbers of carbon heteroatoms.
This has led to imports of sodium tetraborate (borax) growing by a hundredfold between 2000 and 2005 and boric acid imports increasing by 28% per year over the same period.
The nuclear spin of 10B is 3 and that of 11B is .
The boron atom in bortezomib binds the catalytic site of the 26S proteasome with high affinity and specificity.
Because of its high neutron cross-section, boron-10 is often used to control fission in nuclear reactors as a neutron-capturing substance.
Small amounts of boron compounds play a strengthening role in the cell walls of all plants, making boron a necessary plant nutrient.
The neutrons, however, trigger energetic and short-range secondary alpha particle and lithium-7 heavy ion radiation that are products of the boron + neutron nuclear reaction, and this ion radiation additionally bombards the tumor, especially from inside the tumor cells.
No deficiency syndrome in humans has been described.
c-BN, also known under commercial name borazon, is a superior abrasive.
It is used in tank armor, bulletproof vests, and numerous other structural applications.
Boron is found in nature on Earth entirely as various oxides of B(III), often associated with other elements.
In this material, the boron centers are trigonal planar with an extra double bond for each boron, forming sheets akin to the carbon in graphite.
Industrially, very pure boron is produced with difficulty because of refractory contamination by carbon or other elements.
Such structures show good mechanical properties (elastic modulus 450&nbsp;GPa, fracture strain 3.7%, fracture stress 17&nbsp;GPa) and can be applied as reinforcement of ceramics or in micromechanical systems.
Many are produced from hydroboration, which employs diborane,  B2H6, a simple borane chemical.
More than one hundred borate minerals contain boron in oxidation state +3.
In pressurized water reactors a variable concentration of boronic acid in the cooling water is used to compensate the variable reactivity of the fuel: when new rods are inserted the concentration of boronic acid is maximal, and then reduced during the lifetime.
Boron carbide and cubic boron nitride powders are widely used as abrasives.
Sodium borohydride presents a fire hazard owing to its reducing nature and the liberation of hydrogen on contact with acid.
The exact physiological role of boron in the animal kingdom is poorly understood.
'''Boron''' is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''B''' and atomic number&nbsp;5.
For example, in diborane B2H6, the boron oxidation state is +3, but in decaborane B10H14, it is 7/5 or +1.4.
Cubic boron nitride, among other applications, is used as an abrasive, as it has a hardness comparable with diamond (the two substances are able to produce scratches on each other).
Boron mining and refining capacities are considered to be adequate to meet expected levels of growth through the next decade.
The United States Department of Agriculture conducted an experiment in which postmenopausal women took 3&nbsp;mg of boron a day.
Several industrial-scale enrichment processes have been developed; however, only the fractionated vacuum distillation of the dimethyl ether adduct of boron trifluoride (DME-BF3) and column chromatography of borates are being used.
A large number of anionic boron hydrides are known, e.g.
Extremely tiny elemental boron was detected in Lunar regolith
As an ultratrace element, boron is necessary for the optimal health of rats.
Within control rods, boron carbide is often powdered, to increase its surface area.
Boron is a useful dopant for such semiconductors as silicon, germanium, and silicon carbide.
Binary metal-boron compounds, the metal borides, contain boron in negative oxidation states.
In the high oxygen environment of Earth, boron is always found fully oxidized to borate.
These isotopes are, therefore, of use in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; and spectrometers specially adapted to detecting the boron-11 nuclei are available commercially.
Boron deficiency manifests in rats as poor coat or hair quality.
Natural boron is composed of two stable isotopes, one of which (boron-10) has a number of uses as a neutron-capturing agent.
Boron is rare in the Universe and solar system due to trace formation in the Big Bang and in stars.
Chinese boron producers have been unable to meet rapidly growing demand for high quality borates.
Often the boron in borides has fractional oxidation states, such as −1/3 in calcium hexaboride (CaB6).
Boron is essential to life.
Agricola, around 1600, reports the use of borax as a flux in metallurgy.
Boron undergoes halogenation to give trihalides; for example,
