It has a coastline about  long surrounding the city of Neum.
Bosnia is home to the composer Dušan Šestić, the creator of the current national anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina and father of singer Marija Šestić, composer Saša Lošić and pianist Saša Toperić.
The House of Peoples has 15 delegates chosen by parliaments of the entities, two-thirds of which come from the Federation (5 Croat and 5 Bosniaks) and one-third from the Republika Srpska (5 Serbs).
The national currency is the (Euro-pegged) Convertible Mark (KM), controlled by the currency board.
* 2006: €556&nbsp;million
The Ottoman Empire had already started its conquest of Europe and posed a major threat to the Balkans throughout the first half of the 15th century.
However, the republic did not escape the increasingly nationalistic climate of the time.
Although Croats were by far the largest ethnic group to constitute the Ustaše, the Vice President of the NDH and leader of the Yugoslav Muslim Organization Džafer Kulenović was a Muslim, and Muslims (Bosniaks) in total comprised nearly 12% of the Ustaše military and civil service authority.
The name ''Herzegovina'' ("herzog's land", from German word for "duke") originates from Bosnian magnate Stephen Vukčić Kosača's title, "Herceg (Herzog) of Hum and the Coast" (1448).
The first bespoke higher-education institution was a school of Sufi philosophy established by Gazi Husrev-beg in 1531.
Major mountains include Kozara, Grmeč, Vlašić, Čvrsnica, Prenj, Romanija, Jahorina, Bjelašnica and Treskavica.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore also a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR).
* 2009: €180&nbsp;million
In the interwar period, Bosnia was part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and after World War II, the country was granted full republic status in the newly formed Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Among those are: Gabrijel Jurkić, Petar Šain, Roman Petrović and Lazar Drljača.
The Ottomans referred to them as ''kristianlar'' while the Orthodox and Catholics were called ''gebir'' or ''kafir'', meaning "unbeliever".
The southern tip of the country has a Mediterranean climate and plain topography.
* 2014: €419&nbsp;million
The best way to experience is the three rivers trip, which purls through the best the Balkans have to offer."
Women's basketball club Jedinstvo Aida from Tuzla won Women's European Club Championship in 1989 and Ronchetti Cup final in 1990, led by Razija Mujanović, three times best female European basketball player, and Mara Lakić.
Sarajevo is the capital and largest city.
Coffee drinking is a favorite Bosnian pastime and part of the culture.
According to the 1991 census, Bosnia and Herzegovina had a population of 4,377,000, while the 1996 UNHCR unofficial census showed a decrease to 3,920,000.
The four centuries of Ottoman rule also had a drastic impact on Bosnia's population make-up, which changed several times as a result of the empire's conquests, frequent wars with European powers, forced and economic migrations, and epidemics.
The country is a potential candidate for membership to the European Union and has been a candidate for North Atlantic Treaty Organisation membership since April 2010, when it received a Membership Action Plan at a summit in Tallinn.
'''Railway operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina''' are successors of the Yugoslav Railways within the country boundaries following independence from the Former Yugoslavia in 1992.
This was followed by annexation into the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, which lasted up until World War I.
Besides entities, cantons, and municipalities, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has four "official" cities.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina covers 51% of Bosnia and Herzegovina's total area, while Republika Srpska covers 49%.
Croatia and Slovenia's subsequent declarations of independence and the warfare that ensued placed Bosnia and Herzegovina and its three constituent peoples in an awkward position.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a region that traces permanent human settlement back to the Neolithic age, during and after which it was populated by several Illyrian and Celtic civilizations.
According to English medievalist William Miller the Slavic settlers in Bosnia "adapted the Latin designation ... Basante, to their own idiom by calling the stream Bosna and themselves ''Bosniaks'' ...".
However the rising threat of Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany forced Yugoslav politicians to shift their attention.
The Parliamentary Assembly is the lawmaking body in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pop and Rock music has a tradition here as well, with the more famous musicians including Dino Zonić, Goran Bregović, Davorin Popović, Kemal Monteno, Zdravko Čolić, Elvir Laković, Edo Maajka, Hari Mata Hari and Dino Merlin.
The art of Bosnia and Herzegovina was always evolving and ranged from the original medieval tombstones called Stećci to paintings in Kotromanić court.
This mandate was formally ratified by the Dreikaiserbund (Three Emperor's Treaty) on 18 June of that year.
In the 12th century the Banate of Bosnia was established, which evolved into the Kingdom of Bosnia in the 14th century, after which it was annexed into the Ottoman Empire, under whose rule it would remain from the mid-15th to the late 19th centuries.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has displayed positive progress in the previous years, which decisively moved its place from the lowest income equality rank of income equality rankings fourteen out of 193 nations.
However, academics Hilary Footitt and Michael Kelly note that the Dayton Agreement states that it is "done in Bosnian, Croatian, English and Serbian", and they describe this as the "de facto recognition of three official languages" at the state level.
The Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence Brigade of Bosnia and Herzegovina was formed when elements of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska Air Force were merged in 2006.
It stretches through central Bosnia, from its source near Sarajevo to Sava in the north.
The entities, based largely on the territories held by the two warring sides at the time, were formally established by the Dayton peace agreement in 1995 because of the tremendous changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina's ethnic structure.
This, combined with frustrations over territorial, political concessions in the north-east, and the plight of Slavic Muslim refugees arriving from the Sanjak of Smederevo into Bosnia Eyalet, culminated in a partially unsuccessful revolt by Husein Gradaščević, who endorsed a multicultural Bosnia Eyalet autonomous from the authoritarian rule of the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II, who persecuted, executed and abolished the Janissaries and reduced the role of autonomous Pasha's in Rumelia.
These are: Banja Luka, Mostar, Sarajevo, and East Sarajevo.
However, the highest political authority in the country is the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the chief executive officer for the international civilian presence in the country.
''Oslobođenje'' (Liberation), founded in 1943, is one of the country's longest running continuously circulating newspapers.
On 12 October 1941, a group of 108 notable Muslim citizens of Sarajevo signed the Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims by which they condemned the persecution of Serbs organized by Ustaše, made distinction between Muslims who participated in such persecutions and whole Muslim population, presented information about the persecutions of Muslims by Serbs and requested security for all citizens of the country, regardless of their identity.
An estimated 209,000 Serbs and Montenegrins were killed on the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina during the war.
Moreover, the country was simply called "Bosnia" until the Austro-Hungarian occupation at the end of the 19th century.
In the south, distilleries used to produce vast quantities of brandy and supply all of ex-Yugoslav alcohol factories (brandy is the base of most alcoholic drinks).
Following the reforms Bosnian Muslims had a total of 1,175,305 hectares of agricultural and forest land taken away from them.
Middle-weight boxer Marijan Beneš has won several Championships of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslav Championships and the European Championship.
Bosnia, along with other territories, became part of Duklja in the 11th century, although it retained its own nobility and institutions.
* 32% manufacturing
Gornji Vakuf was initially attacked by Croats on 20 June 1992, but the attack failed.
It is composed of nine members: four members are selected by the House of Representatives of the Federation, two by the Assembly of the Republika Srpska, and three by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after consultation with the Presidency, but cannot be Bosnian citizens.
In 2007, Ars Aevi, a museum of contemporary art that includes works by renowned world artists was founded in Sarajevo.
The Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina rotates among three members (Bosniak, Serb, Croat), each elected as the Chair for an eight-month term within their four-year term as a member.
Bosniaks regard the attack on the peace rally that was organized in Sarajevo on 5 April 1992, as marking the start of warfare between the three major communities.
Coffeehouses, where Bosnian coffee is served in džezva with rahat lokum and sugar cubes, proliferate Sarajevo and every city in the country.
The proceedings of the Austro-Hungarian authorities led to around 5,500 citizens of Serb ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina being arrested, and between 700 and 2,200 died in prison while 460 were executed.
This was the Roman campaign against Illyricum, known as ''Bellum Batonianum''.
As a result, the wording of the entity constitutions was changed and all three languages were made official in both entities.
Since 1996, the power of the entities relative to the State government has decreased significantly.
;Overall value of foreign direct investment (1999–2014)
It is disputed between Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs who the first casualties of the war were.
A native of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of ethnicity, is identified in English as a Bosnian.
The international news station Al Jazeera maintains a sister channel that caters to the Balkan region, Al Jazeera Balkans, broadcasting out of and based in Sarajevo.
By 1993, when an armed conflict erupted between the predominantly Bosniak government in Sarajevo and the Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia, about 70% of the country was controlled by Republika Srpska.
Notable players on the team included Edin Džeko, Asmir Begović, Emir Spahić, Miralem Pjanić, Muhamed Bešić, and Vedad Ibišević.
With much of the production capacity unrestored, the Bosnian economy still faces considerable difficulties.
The Chetniks were responsible for widespread persecution and murder of non-Serbs and communist sympathizers, with the Muslim population of Bosnia, Herzegovina and Sandžak being a primary target.
It lies between latitudes 42° and 46° N, and longitudes 15° and 20° E.
All three deployed groups have been commended by their respective international forces as well as the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He or she is then responsible for appointing a Foreign Minister, Minister of Foreign Trade, and others as appropriate.
The High Representative has many governmental and legislative powers, including the dismissal of elected and non-elected officials.
A bloody coup occurred in Serbia, on 10 June 1903, which brought a radical anti-Austrian government into power in Belgrade.
The 2013 census found a total population of 3,791,622 people in 1.16 million households; 585,411 fewer people than the 1991 census.
Probably the most distinctive and identifiably "Bosnian" of music, Sevdalinka is a kind of emotional, melancholic folk song that often describes sad subjects such as love and loss, the death of a dear person or heartbreak.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire built the three Roman Catholic churches in Sarajevo and these three churches are among only 20 Catholic churches in the state of Bosnia.
Ćevapi is a grilled dish of minced meat, a type of kebab, popular in former Yugoslavia and considered a national dish in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia.
Meho Kodro spent most of his career playing in Spain most notably with Real Sociedad and FC Barcelona.
In time, Bosnia would come to form a unit under its own ruler calling himself Bosnian.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team played at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, its first major tournament.
Armed and equipped from JNA stockpiles in Bosnia, supported by volunteers and various paramilitary forces from Serbia, and receiving extensive humanitarian, logistical and financial support from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Republika Srpska's offensives in 1992 managed to place much of the country under its control.
The architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina is largely influenced by four major periods where political and social changes influenced the creation of distinct cultural and architectural habits of the population.
The Dinaric Alps generally run in an east-west direction, and get higher towards the south.
Bosnia is located in the western Balkans, bordering Croatia () to the north and south-west, Serbia () to the east, and Montenegro () to the southeast.
In the central and eastern interior of the country the geography is mountainous, in the northwest it is moderately hilly, and the northeast is predominantly flatland.
32) entitled "Of the Serbs and the country in which they now dwell".
Following another shift of power between the two in the early 12th century, Bosnia found itself outside the control of both and emerged as the Banate of Bosnia (under the rule of local ''bans'').
The Bosna basketball club from Sarajevo were European Champions in 1979.
DNA teams have been used to collect evidence of the atrocities committed by Serbian forces during these campaigns.
Finally, after decades of political and social instability, the Kingdom of Bosnia ceased to exist in 1463 after its conquest by the Ottoman Empire.
There are various other institutions of higher education, including: University "Džemal Bijedić" of Mostar, University of Banja Luka, University of Mostar, University of East Sarajevo, University of Tuzla, American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is held in high regard as one of the most prestigious creative arts academies in the region.
Most recently, The Huffington Post named Bosnia and Herzegovina the "9th Greatest Adventure in the World for 2013", adding that the country boasts "the cleanest water and air in Europe; the greatest untouched forests; and the most wildlife.
By the time of his death in 1353, he was successful in annexing territories to the north and west, as well as Zahumlje and parts of Dalmatia.
The Ministry of Defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently pursuing the acquisition of new aircraft including helicopters and perhaps even fighter jets.
The number of identified victims is currently at 97,207 (civilian and military casualties).
In fact, the very translation of the critical sentence in which the word ''Bosona'' (Bosnia) appears is subject to varying interpretation.
The territory and government of the cities of Banja Luka and Mostar corresponds to the municipalities of the same name, while the cities of Sarajevo and East Sarajevo officially consist of several municipalities.
Bosnian Muslims were an easy target, because the Bosnian government forces were poorly equipped and unprepared for the war.
With the Russians being, at least, provisionally willing to keep their word over Bosnia Herzegovina for the first time in 11 years, Austria-Hungary waited and then published the annexation proclamation on 6 October 1908.
There are three landline telephone providers, although each one predominantly serves a partile services are provided by three operators, with nationwide services.
These include 64,341 Bosniaks, 24,726 Serbs, and 7,602 Croats.
In June 1992, the focus switched to Novi Travnik and Gornji Vakuf where the Croat Defence Council (HVO) efforts to gain control were resisted.
;The top investor countries (May 1994&nbsp;– December 2013)
Although the initial split of the country into 33 oblasts erased the presence of traditional geographic entities from the map, the efforts of Bosnian politicians such as Mehmed Spaho ensured that the six oblasts carved up from Bosnia and Herzegovina corresponded to the six sanjaks from Ottoman times and, thus, matched the country's traditional boundary as a whole.
* The Bosna river gave its name to the country, and is the longest river fully contained within it.
The fourth level of political division in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the municipalities.
Schutzkorps, predominantly recruited among the Muslim (Bosniak) population, were tasked with hunting down rebel Serbs (the ''Chetniks'' and ''Komiti'') and became known for their persecution of Serbs particularly in Serb populated areas of eastern Bosnia, where they partly retaliated against Serbian Chetniks who in fall 1914 had carried out attacks against the Muslim population in the area.
These factors caused the Austrian-Hungarian government to seek a permanent resolution of the Bosnian question sooner, rather than later.
Due to expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World Wars, the number of ethnic Germans in Bosnia and Herzegovina was drastically diminshed.
Typical meat dishes include primarily beef and lamb.
A NATO-led peacekeeping force was immediately dispatched to Bosnia to enforce the agreement.
Between 64,000 and 79,000 Bosnian Croats also perished from April 1941 to May 1945.
In December 1995, the signing of the Dayton Agreement in Dayton, Ohio, by the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Alija Izetbegović), Croatia (Franjo Tuđman) and Serbia (Slobodan Milošević) brought a halt to the fighting, roughly establishing the basic structure of the present-day state.
Several international corporations operated in Bosnia— Volkswagen (car factory in Sarajevo, from 1972), Coca Cola (from 1975), SKF Sweden (from 1967), Marlboro, (a tobacco factory in Sarajevo), and Holiday Inn hotels.
The terms Herzegovinian and Bosnian are maintained as a regional rather than ethnic distinction, and the region of Herzegovina has no precisely defined borders of its own.
More than 300,000 people died in Bosnia and Herzegovina in World War II.
The Bosnian news media reported that hundreds of people had been injured during the protests, including dozens of police officers, with bursts of violence in Sarajevo, in the northern city of Tuzla, in Mostar in the south, and in Zenica in central Bosnia.
As a result of the Dayton Accords, the civilian peace implementation is supervised by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina selected by the Peace Implementation Council.
'''Bosnia and Herzegovina''' ( or ; Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian Latin script: ''Bosna i Hercegovina'', Bosnian and Serbian Cyrillic script: Боснa и Херцеговина; ), sometimes called '''Bosnia-Herzegovina''' or '''Bosnia & Herzegovina''', abbreviated '''BiH''', '''BIH''', or '''B&H''', and, in short, often known informally as '''Bosnia''', is a country in Southeastern Europe located on the Balkan Peninsula.
On 18 November 1991, the party branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the ruling party in the Republic of Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), proclaimed the existence of the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia, as a separate "political, cultural, economic, and territorial whole", on the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with Croat Defence Council (HVO) as its military part.
Ethnic cleansing and civil rights violations against non-Serbs were rampant in these areas.
Bodies of victims are still being unearthed two decades later.
The second was Ban Kulin whose rule marked the start of a controversy involving the Bosnian Church – considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church.
In 1978, he won the World Title against Elisha Obed from the Bahamas.
Timothy Gregory explains:
Since 1995, the High Representative has been able to bypass the elected parliamentary assembly, and since 1997 has been able to remove elected officials.
Large population migrations during the Yugoslav wars in the 1990s have caused demographic shifts in the country.
The ICJ concluded, however, that Serbia failed to prevent genocide committed by Serb forces and failed to punish those who carried out the genocide&nbsp;–&nbsp;in particular, General Ratko Mladić&nbsp;– and bring them to justice.
Municipalities also have their own local government, and are typically based on the most significant city or place in their territory.
High-ranking Croat and Bosniak officials have been convicted or indicted for war crimes as well on charges related to the murder, rape, torture, and imprisonment of civilians.
The Porte's efforts at modernizing the Ottoman state were met with distrust growing to hostility in Bosnia, where local aristocrats stood to lose much through the proposed r.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to three ethnic "constituent peoples", who are Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, plus a number of smaller groups including Jews and Roma.
This contributed to a large concentration of arms and military personnel in Bosnia; a significant factor in the war that followed the break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
Northern Bosnia (Posavina) contains very fertile agricultural land along the river Sava and the corresponding area is heavily farmed.
This has been scholarly interpreted in several ways and used especially by the Serb national ideologists to prove Bosnia as originally a "Serb" land.
* The Sava is the largest river of the country, but it only forms its northern natural border with Croatia.
The first preserved widely acknowledged mention of Bosnia is in ''De Administrando Imperio'', a politico-geographical handbook written by the Byzantine emperor Constantine VII in the mid-10th century (between 948 and 952) describing the "small land" (χωρίον in Greek) of "Bosona" (Βοσώνα).
After World War II artists like Mersad Berber and Safet Zec rose in popularity.
Bosnian history from then until the early 14th century was marked by a power struggle between the Šubić and Kotromanić families.
The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is itself complex and consists of 10 federal units&nbsp;– cantons.
Following his death in 1391 however, Bosnia fell into a long period of decline.
The three members of the Presidency are elected directly by the people with Federation voters voting for the Bosniak and the Croat, and the Republika Srpska voters for the Serb.
All the major military offensives by the antifascist movement of Yugoslavia against Nazis and their local supporters were conducted in Bosnia-Herzegovina and its peoples bore the brunt of fighting.
Bosnia faces the dual-problem of rebuilding a war-torn country and introducing transitional liberal market reforms to its formerly mixed economy.
* Russia (€343&nbsp;million)
Hum, formerly Zahumlje, was an early medieval principality that was conquered by the Bosnian Banate in the first half of the 14th century.
Political tensions culminated on 28 June 1914, when a Bosnian Serb nationalist youth named Gavrilo Princip, a member of the secret Serbian-supported movement, Young Bosnia, assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, in Sarajevo—an event that proved to be the spark that set off World War I.
With the aim of establishing the province as a stable political model that would help dissipate rising South Slav nationalism, Habsburg rule did much to codify laws, to introduce new political practices, and to provide for modernisation.
* 1999: €166&nbsp;million
* 2003: €338&nbsp;million
This conference never materialized and without British or French support, the Russians and their client state, Serbia, were compelled to accept the Austrian-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia Herzegovina in March 1909.
Illyrian cultural traits were adopted by the South Slavs, as evidenced in certain customs and traditions, placenames, etc.
Between 1991 and 2013, political disagreements made it impossible to organize a census.
* 2013: €214&nbsp;million
Able-bodied men were separated from their families and interned in camps under a brutal regimen of abuse, murder, and sporadic group executions, whereas women and children were kept in unsanitary detention centers, deprived of food and water.
It consists of two houses: the House of Peoples and the House of Representatives.
The most important of these levels is the division of the country into two entities: Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Today, the country maintains high literacy, life expectancy and education levels and is one of the most frequently visited countries in the region, projected to have the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.
It has been estimated that 30 million pilgrims have come to Međugorje since the reputed apparitions began in 1981.
Bosnia and Herzegovina national u-16 team won two gold medals in 2015, winning both 2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival as well as 2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship.
In the meantime, following a period of escalating tensions, the opening shots in the incipient Bosnian conflict were fired when Serb paramilitary forces attacked Bosnian Croat villages around Capljina on 7 March 1992, and Bosanski Brod and the Bosniak-majority town, Gorazde, on 15 March.
Following the Srebrenica genocide, a NATO bombing campaign began in August 1995, against the Army of Republika Srpska.
A 2012 survey found that 54% of Bosnia's Muslims are non-denominational Muslims, while 38% follow Sunnism.
They are located in the northwestern region of Bosanska Krajina.
Additionally, the country has been a member of the Council of Europe since April 2002 and a founding member of the Mediterranean Union upon its establishment in July 2008.
Serbs have accused Sarajevo authorities of practicing selective justice by actively prosecuting Serbs while ignoring or downplaying Bosniak war crimes.
As a result of the Ottoman administration for almost 500 years, Bosnian food is closely related to Turkish, Greek, and other former Ottoman and Mediterranean cuisines.
During this time the population was called ''Dobri Bošnjani'' ("Good Bosnians").
Bosnian cuisine uses many spices, in moderate quantities.
85 Bosnian soldiers served as base security in IRQ, occasionally conducting infantry patrols there as well.
Former Bosnian footballers include Hasan Salihamidžić, who became only the second Bosnian to ever win a UEFA Champions League trophy, after Elvir Baljić.
In March 1994, the signing of the Washington Accords between the leaders of the republican government and Herzeg-Bosnia led to the creation of a joint Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which absorbed the territory of the Croatian Republic of Herzeg-Bosnia and that held by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Annual inflation is the lowest relative to other countries in the region at 1.9% in 2004.
However, Bosnia's existence within Yugoslavia, for the large part, was a peaceful and very prosperous country, with high employment, a strong industrial and export oriented economy, good education system and social and medical security for every citizen of S. R. Bosnia and Herzegovina.
National Geographic magazine named Bosnia and Herzegovina as the best mountain biking adventure destination for 2012.
The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the supreme, final arbiter of legal matters.
Following the declaration of independence of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Serbs attacked different parts of the country.
The German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina are mostly remnants of Donauschwaben (Danube Swabians), who settled in the area after the Habsburg monarchy claimed the Balkans from the Ottoman Empire.
The name is believed to have been derived from the hydronym of the river  ''Bosna'' coursing through the Bosnian heartland.
On 2 July 1908, in response to the pressing of the Austrian-Hungarian claim, the Russian Imperial Foreign Minister Alexander Izvolsky offered to support the Bosnian annexation in return for Vienna's support for Russia's bid for naval access through the Dardanelles Straits into the Mediterranean.
By the year 1377, Bosnia was elevated into a kingdom with the coronation of Tvrtko as the first Bosnian King in Mile near Visoko in the Bosnian heartland.
Each canton in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of several municipalities, which are divided into local communities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina had a very strong industrial export oriented economy in the 1970s and 1980s, with large scale exports worth millions of US$.
* 2010: €307&nbsp;million
Recent research estimates the total number to be no more than 110,000 killed (civilians and military), and 1.8&nbsp;million displaced.
The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina declared Herzeg-Bosnia illegal, first on 14 September 1992 and again on 20 January 1994.
Other major cities are Banja Luka in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Bijeljina and Tuzla in the northeast, Zenica and Doboj in the central part of Bosnia and Mostar, the largest city in Herzegovina.
An estimated 8,372 Bosnians were killed by the Serbian political authorities.
The Graz agreement caused deep division inside the Croat community and strengthened the separation group, which led to the conflict with Bosniaks.
Following World War I, Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the South Slav Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (soon renamed Yugoslavia).
This farmland is a part of the Parapannonian Plain stretching into neighboring Croatia and Serbia.
Milena Nikolić, member of women's national team, was 2013–14 UEFA Women's Champions League top scorer.
There are many national publications, only some of which include the ''Dnevni Avaz'' (Daily Voice), founded in 1995, and ''Jutarnje Novine'' (Morning News) in circulation in Sarajevo.
Most forest areas are in Central, Eastern and Western parts of Bosnia.
Bordered by Croatia to the north, west, and south; Serbia to the east; Montenegro to the southeast; and the Adriatic Sea to the south, with a coastline about  long surrounding the city of Neum.
