File:Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston.jpg|Institute of Contemporary Art in the revitalized Seaport District of South Boston.
The UCC is the successor of the city's Puritan religious traditions.
Groundwater levels have been dropping, to varying degrees, in many areas of the city, due in part to an increase in the amount of rainwater discharged directly into sewers rather than absorbed by the ground.
Built in 1912, it is the oldest sports arena or stadium in active use in the United States among the four major professional American sports leagues, Major League Baseball, the National Football League, National Basketball Association, and the National Hockey League.
Nevertheless, the city experienced conflict starting in 1974 over desegregation busing, which resulted in unrest and violence around public schools throughout the mid-1970s.
Some of the most renowned and highly ranked universities in the world are located in the Boston area.
Since 1966 they have played in Atlanta as the Atlanta Braves.
The area's many colleges and universities make Boston an international center of higher education, including law, medicine, engineering, and business, and the city is considered to be a world leader in innovation and entrepreneurship.
Harvard participates in the second-highest level, the Football Championship Subdivision.
Many of the crucial events of the American Revolution—the Boston Massacre, the Boston Tea Party, Paul Revere's midnight ride, the battles of Lexington and Concord and Bunker Hill, the Siege of Boston, and many others—occurred in or near Boston.
Fast Northeast Corridor trains, which serve New York City, Washington, D.C., and points in between, also stop at Route 128 Station in the southwestern suburbs of Boston.
The city has Veterans Affairs medical centers in the Jamaica Plain and West Roxbury neighborhoods.
The city proper covers  with an estimated population of 667,137 in 2015, making it the largest city in New England and the 23rd largest city in the United States.
There are private, parochial, and charter schools as well, and approximately 3,300 minority students attend participating suburban schools through the Metropolitan Educational Opportunity Council.
By the 1970s, the city's economy had recovered after 30 years of economic downturn.
The elevated portion of the Central Artery, which carried most of the through traffic in downtown Boston, was replaced with the O'Neill Tunnel during the Big Dig, substantially completed in early 2006.
Boston's economic base also includes finance, professional and business services, biotechnology, information technology, and government activities.
Boston receives the highest absolute amount of annual funding from the National Institutes of Health of all cities in the United States.
Its rich history attracts many tourists, with Faneuil Hall alone drawing over 20&nbsp;million visitors per year.
The Boston Symphony Orchestra is one of the "Big Five," a group of the greatest American orchestras, and the classical music magazine Gramophone called it one of the "world's best" orchestras.
Greater Boston has more than 100 colleges and universities, with 250,000 students enrolled in Boston and Cambridge alone.
Boston is also breaking ground on multiple green affordable housing facilities to help reduce the carbon footprint of the city while simultaneously making these initiatives financially available to a greater population.
Other proposals, for the annexation of Brookline, Cambridge, and Chelsea, were unsuccessful.
In 2016, it was announced that General Electric would be moving its corporate headquarters from Connecticut to the Innovation District in South Boston, joining many other companies in this rapidly developing neighborhood.
WBZ (AM) broadcasts a news radio format.
Greater Boston as a commuting region is home to 8.1&nbsp;million people, making it the sixth-largest combined statistical area in the United States.
Boston was the site of the first game of the first modern World Series, in 1903.
In 2016, Boston was estimated to have 667,137 residents (a density of 13,841 persons/sq mile, or 5,344/km2) living in 272,481 housing units— an 8% population increase over 2010.
Boston-based Fidelity Investments helped popularize the mutual fund in the 1980s and has made Boston one of the top financial cities in the United States.
The state's junior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Ed Markey, who was elected in 2013 to succeed John Kerry after Kerry's appointment and confirmation as the United States Secretary of State.
Boston has been called the "Athens of America" for its literary culture, earning a reputation as "the intellectual capital of the United States."
The neighboring municipalities of Cambridge, Somerville, and Brookline joined the Hubway program in the summer of 2012.
There were 252,699 households, of which 20.4% had children under the age of 18 living in them, 25.5% were married couples living together, 16.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 54.0% were non-families.
Massport also operates several major facilities within the Port of Boston, including a cruise ship terminal and facilities to handle bulk and container cargo in South Boston, and other facilities in Charlestown and East Boston.
The coldest month is January, with a mean of .
According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 57% of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians, with 25% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant, and 29% professing Roman Catholic beliefs.
After The Great Boston Fire of 1872, workers used building rubble as landfill along the downtown waterfront.
The Boston Storm of the United Women's Lacrosse League was formed in 2015.
The area's schools are major employers and attract industries to the city and surrounding region.
'''Boston''' (pronounced  ) is the capital and largest city of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the United States.
College and university radio stations include WERS (Emerson), WHRB (Harvard), WUMB (UMass Boston), WMBR (MIT), WZBC (Boston College), WMFO (Tufts University), WBRS (Brandeis University), WTBU (Boston University, campus and web only), WRBB (Northeastern University) and WMLN-FM (Curry College).
Owing to factors such as the compactness of the city and large student population, 13 percent of the population commutes by foot, making it the highest percentage of pedestrian commuters in the country out of the major American cities.
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston serves nearly 300 parishes and is based in the Cathedral of the Holy Cross (1875) in the South End, while the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts, with the Cathedral Church of St. Paul (1819) as its episcopal seat, serves just under 200 congregations.
People of West Indian and Caribbean ancestry are another sizable group, at 6.0%, about half of whom are of Haitian ancestry.
By the early and mid-20th century, the city was in decline as factories became old and obsolete, and businesses moved out of the region for cheaper labor elsewhere.
Boston is a printing and publishing center — Houghton Mifflin Harcourt is headquartered within the city, along with Bedford-St. Martin's Press and Beacon Press.
The northern three-fourths of the city is in the 7th district, represented by Mike Capuano since 1998.
37.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
The city has a sizable Jewish population with an estimated 25,000 Jews within the city and 227,000 within the Boston metro area; the number of congregations in Boston is estimated at 22.
The Christian Scientists are headquartered in Back Bay at the Mother Church (1894).
But , in part due to the housing crash, as well as increased efforts to make more affordable housing more available, the non-white population has rebounded.
Many are found along the Freedom Trail, which is marked by a red line of bricks embedded in the ground.
is the location of the University of Massachusetts Boston, the Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate, the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, and the Massachusetts Archives and Commonwealth Museum.
Puritan ethics and their focus on education influenced its early history; America's first public school was founded in Boston in 1635.
Boston has an area of — (54.0%) of land and  (46.0%) of water.
The city is also home to PBS station WGBH-TV 2, a major producer of PBS programs, which also operates WGBX 44.
Another major annual event is the Head of the Charles Regatta, held in October.
In 1822, the citizens of Boston voted to change the official name from the "Town of Boston" to the "City of Boston", and on March 4, 1822, the people of Boston accepted the charter incorporating the City.
The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 3.08.
Hospitals such as Massachusetts General Hospital, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Brigham and Women's Hospital lead the nation in medical innovation and patient care.
Despite cost of living issues, Boston ranks high on livability ratings, ranking 36th worldwide in quality of living in 2011 in a survey of 221 major cities.
Non-Hispanic Whites
On April 15, 2013, two explosions killed three people and injured hundreds at the marathon.
Boston Medical Center, located in the South End neighborhood, is the primary teaching facility for the Boston University School of Medicine as well as the largest trauma center in the Boston area; it was formed by the merger of Boston University Hospital and Boston City Hospital, which was the first municipal hospital in the United States.
Six Boston television stations are carried by Canadian satellite television provider Bell TV and by cable television providers in Canada.
The arena seats 18,624 for basketball games and 17,565 for ice hockey games.
Due to its situation along the North Atlantic, the city often receives sea breezes, especially in the late spring, when water temperatures are still quite cold and temperatures at the coast can be more than  colder than a few miles inland, sometimes dropping by that amount near midday.
Although downtown Boston has never been struck by a violent tornado, the city itself has experienced many tornado warnings.
The Boston Ballet performs at the Boston Opera House.
St. Elizabeth's Medical Center is in Brighton Center of the city's Brighton neighborhood.
At the time Boston was chartered as a city, the population was about 46,226, while the area of the city was only .
This helped lead in part to what has been touted as the "Boston Miracle".
Some 1.2&nbsp;million persons may be within Boston's boundaries during work hours, and as many as 2&nbsp;million during special events.
The adjacent communities of Brookline and Newton are both approximately one-third Jewish.
Boston's first professional baseball team was the Red Stockings, one of the charter members of the National Association in 1871, and of the National League in 1876.
To the east lie Boston Harbor and the Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area (which includes part of the city's territory, specifically Calf Island, Gallops Island, Great Brewster Island, Green Island, Little Brewster Island, Little Calf Island, Long Island, Lovells Island, Middle Brewster Island, Nixes Mate, Outer Brewster Island, Rainsford Island, Shag Rocks, Spectacle Island, The Graves, and Thompson Island).
Voter registration and party enrollment
The city is a center for contemporary classical music with a number of performing groups, several of which are associated with the city's conservatories and universities.
Hispanic or Latino (of any race)
The Boston television DMA, which also includes Manchester, New Hampshire, is the 8th largest in the United States.
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which originated in Boston and was long known as "Boston Tech", moved across the river to Cambridge in 1916.
New England Baptist Hospital is in Mission Hill.
Boston is the largest broadcasting market in New England, with the radio market being the 11th largest in the United States.
In 2010, Hispanics in Boston were mostly of Puerto Rican (30,506 or 4.9% of total city population), Dominican (25,648 or 4.2% of total city population), Salvadoran (10,850 or 1.8% of city population), Colombian (6,649 or 1.1% of total city population), Mexican (5,961 or 1.0% of total city population), and Guatemalan (4,451 or 0.7% of total city population) ethnic origin.
The median household income in Boston was $51,739, while the median income for a family was $61,035.
Later, a dense network of railroads furthered the region's industry and commerce.
A large number of high rises were constructed in the Financial District and in Boston's Back Bay during this time period.
The Bruins were the first American member of the National Hockey League and an Original Six franchise.
Damaging storms are more common to areas north, west, and northwest of the city.
The city has one of the highest costs of living in the United States, though it remains high on world livability rankings.
It was the scene of several key events of the American Revolution, such as the Boston Massacre, the Boston Tea Party, the Battle of Bunker Hill, and the Siege of Boston.
Another major park is the Esplanade, located along the banks of the Charles River.
The highest point in Boston is Bellevue Hill at  above sea level, and the lowest point is at sea level.
In 2006, the US Census Bureau estimated that non-Hispanic whites again formed a slight majority.
Other performing-arts organizations located in the city include the Boston Lyric Opera Company, Opera Boston, Boston Baroque (the first permanent Baroque orchestra in the US), and the Handel and Haydn Society (one of the oldest choral companies in the United States).
The city is home to the headquarters of Santander Bank, and Boston is a center for venture capital firms.
Some of the cleaner energy facilities in Boston include the Allston green district, with three ecologically compatible housing facilities.
Boston has a relatively sunny climate for a coastal city at its latitude, averaging over 2,600 hours of sunshine per annum.
In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that Boston was tied with Sacramento and San Francisco for having the third-best park system among the 50 most populous US cities.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Boston has a humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dfa'') with some maritime influence.
Another initiative, presented by the late Mayor Thomas Menino, is the Renew Boston Whole Building Incentive, which reduces the cost of living in buildings that are deemed energy efficient.
Boston has been a noted religious center from its earliest days.
The team won the Super Bowl after the 2001, 2003, 2004, and 2014 seasons.
Four members of the Association of American Universities are in Greater Boston (more than any other metropolitan area): Harvard University,  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston University, and Brandeis University.
Unitarian Universalism has its headquarters on Beacon Hill.
The General Electric Corporation announced in January 2016 its decision to move the company's global headquarters to the Seaport District in Boston, from Fairfield, Connecticut, citing factors including Boston's preeminence in the realm of higher education.
In Greater Boston, these numbers grew significantly, with Puerto Ricans numbering 175,000+, Dominicans 95,000+, Salvadorans 40,000+, Guatemalans 31,000+, Mexicans 25,000+, and Colombians numbering 22,000+.
The city is considered highly innovative for a variety of reasons, including the presence of academia, access to venture capital, and the presence of many high-tech companies.
Over the next 130 years, the city participated in four French and Indian Wars, until the British defeated the French and their native allies in North America.
They include the week-long Harborfest festivities and a Boston Pops concert accompanied by fireworks on the banks of the Charles River.
Smaller private schools include Babson College, Bentley University, Boston Architectural College, Emmanuel College, Fisher College, MGH Institute of Health Professions, Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Simmons College, Wellesley College, Wheelock College, Wentworth Institute of Technology, New England School of Law (originally established as America's first all female law school), and Emerson College.
The BRA subsequently reevaluated its approach to urban renewal in its future projects, including the construction of Government Center.
The ultimate goal of this initiative is to enlist 500 Bostonians to participate in a free, in-home energy assessment.
Murders in the city dropped from 152 in 1990 (for a murder rate of 26.5 per 100,000 people) to just 31—not one of them a juvenile—in 1999 (for a murder rate of 5.26 per 100,000).
The median age was 30.8&nbsp;years.
Boston's low crime rate since the 1990s has been credited to the Boston Police Department's collaboration with neighborhood groups and church parishes to prevent youths from joining gangs, as well as involvement from the United States Attorney and District Attorney's offices.
Nearby general aviation airports are Beverly Municipal Airport to the north, Hanscom Field to the west, and Norwood Memorial Airport to the south.
PBSC Urban Solutions provides bicycles and technology for this bike-sharing system.
In 1950, Whites represented 94.7% of Boston's population.
Neighborhoods such as Jamaica Plain and Roslindale have experienced a growing number of Dominican Americans.
Other concerts are held at the New England Conservatory's Jordan Hall.
ParkScore ranks city park systems by a formula that analyzes the city's median park size, park acres as percent of city area, the percent of residents within a half-mile of a park, spending of park services per resident, and the number of playgrounds per 10,000 residents.
Boston responded by initiating various urban renewal projects under the direction of the Boston Redevelopment Authority (BRA), which was established in 1957.
The hottest month is July, with a mean temperature of .
One of the oldest cities in the United States, Boston was founded on the Shawmut Peninsula in 1630 by Puritan settlers from England.
This, much like the green housing developments, gives people of low socioeconomic status an opportunity to find housing in communities that support the environment.
The Route 128 corridor and Greater Boston continue to be a major center for venture capital investment, and high technology remains an important sector.
Altogether, Boston's colleges and universities employ over 42,600 people, accounting for nearly 7 percent of the city's workforce.
They share Gillette Stadium with the New England Revolution of Major League Soccer.
Between 1999 and 2006, ''Bicycling'' magazine named Boston three times as one of the worst cities in the US for cycling; regardless, it has one of the highest rates of bicycle commuting.
A city agency, the Boston Groundwater Trust, coordinates monitoring of groundwater levels throughout the city via a network of public and private monitoring wells.
Downtown Boston's streets grew organically, so they do not form a planned grid, unlike those in later-developed Back Bay, East Boston, the South End, and South Boston.
Along with the adjacent Boston Public Garden, it is part of the Emerald Necklace, a string of parks designed by Frederick Law Olmsted to encircle the city.
Smaller commercial areas are interspersed among areas of single-family homes and wooden/brick multi-family row houses.
It was organized in 1669 by dissenters from the First Church in Boston (1630).
The city averages  of precipitation a year, with  of snowfall per season.
White (includes White Hispanics)
Pearson PLC publishing units also employ several hundred people in Boston.
The Charles River separates Boston from Watertown and the majority of Cambridge, and the mass of Boston from its own Charlestown neighborhood.
Prevailing wind patterns that blow offshore minimize the influence of the Atlantic Ocean.
Boston Common, located near the Financial District and Beacon Hill, is the oldest public park in the United States.
In the 1820s, Boston's population grew rapidly, and the city's ethnic composition changed dramatically with the first wave of European immigrants.
Boston-based department stores Jordan Marsh and Filene's have both been merged into the Cincinnati–based Macy's.
Some neighborhoods, such as Dorchester, have received an influx of people of Vietnamese ancestry in recent decades.
Boston's status as a state capital as well as the regional home of federal agencies has rendered law and government to be another major component of the city's economy.
It has been suggested that Boston is the new "TitleTown, USA", as the city's professional sports teams have won nine championships since 2001: Patriots (2001, 2003, 2004, and 2014), Red Sox (2004, 2007, and 2013), Celtics (2008), and Bruins (2011).
Spanish-language television networks, including MundoFox (WFXZ-CD 24), Univision (WUNI 27), Telemundo (WNEU 60), and UniMás (WUTF-DT 66), have a presence in the region, with WNEU and WUTF serving as network owned-and-operated stations.
Boston's coastal location on the North Atlantic moderates its temperature, but makes the city very prone to Nor'easter weather systems that can produce much snow and rain.
Its business, medical, dental, and public health schools are located in Boston's Allston and Longwood neighborhoods.
Many of Boston's medical facilities are associated with universities.
The series was played between the AL Champion Boston Americans and the NL champion Pittsburgh Pirates.
In 2011, Walk Score ranked Boston the third most walkable city in the United States.
One of the best known sporting events in the city is the Boston Marathon, the  race which is the world's oldest annual marathon, run on Patriots' Day in April.
There are several major annual events such as First Night, which occurs on New Year's Eve, the Boston Early Music Festival, the annual Boston Arts Festival at Christopher Columbus Waterfront Park, and Italian summer feasts in the North End honoring Catholic saints.
21.4% of the population and 16.0% of families are below the poverty line.
The city's official elevation, as measured at Logan International Airport, is 19&nbsp;ft (5.8&nbsp;m) above sea level.
Periods exceeding  in summer and below freezing in winter are not uncommon but rarely extended, with about 13 and 25&nbsp;days per year seeing each, respectively.
The Embargo Act of 1807, adopted during the Napoleonic Wars, and the War of 1812 significantly curtailed Boston's harbor activity.
Logan Airport, located in East Boston and operated by the Massachusetts Port Authority (Massport), is Boston's principal airport.
The city, especially the East Boston neighborhood, has a significant Hispanic community.
Boston's colleges and universities exert a significant impact on the regional economy.
The city is served by stations representing every major American network, including WBZ-TV 4 and its sister station WSBK-TV 38 (the former a CBS O&O, the latter an MyNetwork TV affiliate), WCVB-TV 5 and its sister station WMUR-TV 9 (both ABC), WHDH 7 (NBC), WFXT 25 (Fox), and WLVI 56 (The CW).
Roxbury Community College and Bunker Hill Community College are the city's two public community colleges.
After the Revolution, Boston's long seafaring tradition helped make it one of the world's wealthiest international ports, with the slave trade, rum, fish, salt, and tobacco being particularly important.
This love of sports has made Boston the United States Olympic Committee's choice to bid to hold the 2024 Summer Olympic Games, but the city cited financial concerns when it withdrew its bid on July 27, 2015.
Federally, Boston is split between two congressional districts.
This boom continued into the mid-1980s and resumed after a few pauses.
The Boston Celtics were founding members of the Basketball Association of America, one of the two leagues that merged to form the NBA.
Boston's many firsts include the United States' first public school, Boston Latin School (1635), first subway system (1897), and first public park (1634).
the Catholic Church had the highest number of adherents as a single denomination in the Boston-Cambridge-Newton Metro area, with more than two million members and 339 churches, followed by the Episcopal Church with 58,000 adherents in 160 churches.
These include ''El Planeta'' (owned by the former publisher of ''The Boston Phoenix''), ''El Mundo'', and ''La Semana''.
The Mystic River separates Charlestown from Chelsea and Everett, and Chelsea Creek and Boston Harbor separate East Boston from Boston proper.
The city is also served by other publications such as ''Boston magazine'', ''The Improper Bostonian'', ''DigBoston'', and the Boston edition of ''Metro''.
Irish and Italian immigrants brought with them Roman Catholicism.
Eventually Boston became a center of the abolitionist movement.
Old South Church in Boston is one of the oldest congregations in the United States.
On April 15, 2013, two Chechen Islamist brothers detonated a pair of bombs near the finish line of the Boston Marathon, killing three people and injuring roughly 264.
A variety of commercial FM radio formats serve the area, as do NPR stations WBUR and WGBH.
Boston's South End Art and Design District, SoWa, and Newbury St. are both art gallery destinations.
The United Church of Christ had 55,000 members and 213 churches.
''The Boston Globe'' and the ''Boston Herald'' are two of the city's major daily newspapers.
Boston is the eastern terminus of I-90, which in Massachusetts runs along the Massachusetts Turnpike.
Some consider the Old Corner Bookstore, where these writers met and where The Atlantic Monthly was first published, to be "cradle of American literature.
Other conservatories include the Boston Conservatory and Berklee College of Music, which has made Boston an important city for jazz music.
The Boston Breakers of Women's Professional Soccer, which formed in 2009, play their home games at Dilboy Stadium in Somerville.
Boston is surrounded by the "Greater Boston" region and is contiguously bordered by the cities and towns of Winthrop, Revere, Chelsea, Everett, Somerville, Cambridge, Newton, Brookline, Needham, Dedham, Canton, Milton, and Quincy.
This legislature includes the Building Energy Reporting and Disclosure Ordinance, which requires the city's larger buildings to disclose their yearly energy and water use statistics and partake in an energy assessment every five years.
Extensive demolition was met with strong public opposition.
The renaming, on September 7, 1630 (Old Style), was by Puritan colonists from England, who had moved over from Charlestown earlier that year in quest of fresh water.
Reclamation projects in the middle of the century created significant parts of the South End, the West End, the Financial District, and Chinatown.
In 1629, the Massachusetts Bay Colony's first governor, John Winthrop, led the signing of the Cambridge Agreement, a key founding document of the city.
In 1773, Adams gave the signals from the Old South Meeting House that started the Boston Tea Party.
The Institute of Contemporary Art is housed in a contemporary building designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro in the Seaport District.
Boston's subway system, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA—known as the "T") operates the oldest underground rapid transit system in the Americas, and is the fourth-busiest rapid transit system in the country, with  of track on four lines.
From the 1950s to the end of the 20th century, the proportion of non-Hispanic whites in the city declined; in 2000, non-Hispanic whites made up 49.5% of the city's population, making the city majority-minority for the first time.
Other parks are scattered throughout the city, with the major parks and beaches located near Castle Island; in Charlestown; and along the Dorchester, South Boston, and East Boston shorelines.
The peninsula is known to have been inhabited as early as 5000 BC.
The city is home to a number of technology companies and is a hub for biotechnology, with the Milken Institute rating Boston as the top life sciences cluster in the country.
The city's average window for freezing temperatures is November 9 through April 5.
The city uses an algorithm created by the Walsh administration, called CityScore, to measure the effectiveness of various city services.
