Darwin experimented on the movements of plant shoots and roots towards light and gravity, and concluded "It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the tip of the radicle .
The earliest known seed plants date from the latest Devonian Famennian stage.
The work of Katherine Esau (1898–1997) on plant anatomy is still a major foundation of modern botany.
Cellulose, the world's most abundant organic polymer, can be converted into energy, fuels, materials and chemical feedstock.
The shoots consist of stems bearing green photosynthesising leaves and reproductive structures.
Today, genetic modification of the Ti plasmid is one of the main techniques for introduction of transgenes to plants and the creation of genetically modified crops.
This is one of several methods used by plants to promote outcrossing.
The bodies of vascular plants including clubmosses, ferns and  seed plants (gymnosperms and angiosperms) generally have aerial and subterranean subsystems.
The dominant classification system is called Linnaean taxonomy.
Innovations in statistical analysis by Ronald Fisher, Frank Yates and others at Rothamsted Experimental Station facilitated rational experimental design and data analysis in botanical research.
Modern taxonomy is rooted in the work of Carl Linnaeus, who grouped species according to shared physical characteristics.
Plants can synthesise useful coloured dyes and pigments such as the anthocyanins responsible for the red colour of red wine, yellow weld and blue woad used together to produce Lincoln green, indoxyl, source of the blue dye indigo traditionally used to dye denim and the artist's pigments gamboge and rose madder.
This can occur early in development to produce an autopolyploid or partly autopolyploid organism, or during normal processes of cellular differentiation to produce some cell types that are polyploid (endopolyploidy), or during gamete formation.
Furthermore, it emphasises structural dynamics.
This can result in adaptive changes in a process known as photomorphogenesis.
In 1753 Carl von Linné (Carl Linnaeus) published his Species Plantarum, a hierarchical classification of plant species that remains the reference point for modern botanical nomenclature.
Angiosperms with monoecious flowers often have self-incompatibility mechanisms that operate between the pollen and stigma so that the pollen either fails to reach the stigma or fails to germinate and produce male gametes.
The results of cladistic analyses are expressed as cladograms: tree-like diagrams showing the pattern of evolutionary branching and descent.
The energy of sunlight, captured by oxygenic photosynthesis and released by cellular respiration, is the basis of almost all life.
Chloroplasts are inherited through the male parent in gymnosperms but often through the female parent in flowering plants.
Stolons and tubers are examples of shoots that can grow roots.
Chemicals obtained from the air, soil and water form the basis of all plant metabolism.
The early recorded history of botany includes many ancient writings and plant classifications.
Sucrose produced by photosynthesis is transported from the leaves to other parts of the plant in the phloem and plant hormones are transported by a variety of processes.
Nowadays, botanists study approximately 400,000 species of living organisms of which some 260,000 species are vascular plants and about 248,000 are flowering plants.
Epigenetic changes in eukaryotic biology serve to regulate the process of cellular differentiation.
Some plants reproduce sexually, some asexually, and some via both means.
The basic approach is to use similarities based on shared inheritance to determine relationships.
Some otherwise sterile plant polyploids can still reproduce vegetatively or by seed apomixis, forming clonal populations of identical individuals.
Schell and Van Montagu (1977) hypothesised that the Ti plasmid could be a natural vector for introducing the Nif gene responsible for nitrogen fixation in the root nodules of legumes and other plant species.
Other plastids contain storage products such as starch (amyloplasts) or lipids (elaioplasts).
Many medicinal and recreational drugs, such as tetrahydrocannabinol (active ingredient in cannabis), caffeine, morphine and nicotine come directly from plants.
Fuchs and Brunfels broke away from the tradition of copying earlier works to make original observations of their own.
Important contributions from the medieval Muslim world include Ibn Wahshiyya's ''Nabatean Agriculture'', Abū Ḥanīfa Dīnawarī's (828–896) the ''Book of Plants'', and Ibn Bassal's ''The Classification of Soils''.
Cyanobacteria, the first oxygen-releasing photosynthetic organisms on Earth, are thought to have given rise to the ancestor of plants by entering into an endosymbiotic relationship with an early eukaryote, ultimately becoming the chloroplasts in plant cells.
The root system and the shoot system are interdependent – the usually nonphotosynthetic root system depends on the shoot system for food, and the usually photosynthetic shoot system depends on water and minerals from the root system.
The synthetic auxin 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid or 2,4-D was one of the first commercial synthetic herbicides.
The characteristic features of plant cells that distinguish them from those of animals and fungi include a primary cell wall composed of the polysaccharides cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin,  larger vacuoles than in animal cells and the presence of plastids with unique photosynthetic and biosynthetic functions as in the chloroplasts.
Chloroplasts and cyanobacteria contain the blue-green pigment chlorophyll ''a''.
These species are said to be dioecious when referring to vascular plant sporophytes and dioicous when referring to bryophyte gametophytes.
Virtually all staple foods come either directly from primary production by plants, or indirectly from animals that eat them.
Lectures were given about the plants grown in the gardens and their medical uses demonstrated.
The difference is that the genetic code itself is used to decide evolutionary relationships, instead of being used indirectly via the characters it gives rise to.
The first known auxin, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), which promotes cell growth, was only isolated from plants about 50 years later.
The goals of plant ecology are to understand the causes of their distribution patterns, productivity, environmental impact, evolution, and responses to environmental change.
1611) published herbals covering the medicinal uses of plants.
Popular stimulants come from plants, such as caffeine from coffee, tea and chocolate, and nicotine from tobacco.
''De Materia Medica'' was widely read for more than 1,500 years.
The many cultivated varieties of wheat are the result of multiple inter- and intra-specific crosses between wild species and their hybrids.
Gymnosperms produce "naked seeds" not fully enclosed in an ovary; modern representatives include conifers, cycads, ''Ginkgo'', and Gnetales.
While scientists do not always agree on how to classify organisms, molecular phylogenetics, which uses DNA sequences as data, has driven many recent revisions along evolutionary lines and is likely to continue to do so.
Minerals and water are transported from roots to other parts of the plant in the transpiration stream.
Vascular land plants make lignin, a polymer used to strengthen the secondary cell walls of xylem tracheids and vessels to keep them from collapsing when a plant sucks water through them under water stress.
Most alcoholic beverages come from fermentation of carbohydrate-rich plant products such as barley (beer), rice (sake) and grapes (wine).
Plants synthesise a number of unique polymers like the polysaccharide molecules cellulose, pectin and xyloglucan from which the land plant cell wall is constructed.
In vascular plants, these elements are extracted from the soil as soluble ions by the roots and transported throughout the plant in the xylem.
Apomixis can also happen in a seed, producing a seed that contains an embryo genetically identical to the parent.
Products made from cellulose include rayon and cellophane, wallpaper paste, biobutanol and gun cotton.
When applied to the investigation of historical plant–people relationships ethnobotany may be referred to as archaeobotany or palaeoethnobotany.
20th century developments in plant biochemistry have been driven by modern techniques of organic chemical analysis, such as spectroscopy, chromatography and electrophoresis.
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is the first product of photosynthesis and the raw material from which glucose and almost all other organic molecules of biological origin are synthesised.
Gene expression can also be controlled by repressor proteins that attach to silencer regions of the DNA and prevent that region of the DNA code from being expressed.
Her books ''Plant Anatomy'' and ''Anatomy of Seed Plants'' have been key plant structural biology texts for more than half a century.
Historically, all living things were classified as either animals or plants and botany covered the study of all organisms not considered animals.
Examples of elements that plants need to transport are nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulphur.
The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere today is much lower than it was when plants emerged onto land during the Ordovician and Silurian periods.
Some of the glucose is converted to starch which is stored in the chloroplast.
In 1998 the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group published a phylogeny for flowering plants based on an analysis of DNA sequences from most families of flowering plants.
The algal division Charophyta, sister to the green algal division Chlorophyta, is considered to contain the ancestor of true plants.
For example, the pain killer aspirin is the acetyl ester of salicylic acid, originally isolated from the bark of willow trees, and a wide range of opiate painkillers like heroin are obtained by chemical modification of morphine obtained from the opium poppy.
Diffusion, osmosis, and active transport and mass flow are all different ways transport can occur.
These gardens facilitated the academic study of plants.
Building upon the gene-chromosome theory of heredity that originated with Gregor Mendel (1822–1884), August Weismann (1834–1914) proved that inheritance only takes place through gametes.
Plants depend on certain edaphic (soil) and climatic factors in their environment but can modify these factors too.
Unlike in animals (which lack chloroplasts), plants and their eukaryote relatives have delegated many biochemical roles to their chloroplasts, including synthesising all their fatty acids, and most amino acids.
These gardens continued the practical value of earlier "physic gardens", often associated with monasteries, in which plants were cultivated for medical use.
Technological developments such as computers and electron microscopes have greatly increased the level of detail studied and speed at which data can be analysed.
Leaves gather sunlight and carry out photosynthesis.
These technologies enable the biotechnological use of whole plants or plant cell cultures grown in bioreactors to synthesise pesticides, antibiotics or other pharmaceuticals, as well as the practical application of genetically modified crops designed for traits such as improved yield.
Exceptions include highly lignified cells, the sclerenchyma and xylem which are dead at maturity, and the phloem sieve tubes which lack nuclei.
However, both ''Pereskia'' and ''Echinocactus'' have spines produced from areoles (highly specialised pad-like structures) suggesting that the two genera are indeed related.
In vascular plants, the xylem and phloem are the conductive tissues that transport resources between shoots and roots.
Sugarcane, rapeseed and soy are some of the plants with a highly fermentable sugar or oil content that are used as sources of biofuels, important alternatives to fossil fuels, such as biodiesel.
Most sexually reproducing organisms are diploid, with paired chromosomes, but doubling of their chromosome number may occur due to errors in cytokinesis.
As a by-product of photosynthesis, plants release oxygen into the atmosphere, a gas that is required by nearly all living things to carry out cellular respiration.
The concept originally stated by Gottlieb Haberlandt in 1902 that all plant cells are totipotent and can be grown ''in vitro'' ultimately enabled the use of genetic engineering experimentally to knock out a gene or genes responsible for a specific trait, or to add genes such as GFP that report when a gene of interest is being expressed.
The term "botany" comes from the Ancient Greek word  (''botanē'') meaning "pasture", "grass", or "fodder";  is in turn derived from  (''boskein''), "to feed" or "to graze".
The finding in 1939 that plant callus could be maintained in culture containing IAA, followed by the observation in 1947 that it could be induced to form roots and shoots by controlling the concentration of growth hormones were key steps in the development of plant biotechnology and genetic modification.
The discovery and identification of the auxin plant hormones by Kenneth V. Thimann in 1948 enabled regulation of plant growth by externally applied chemicals.
Botanical gardens came much later to northern Europe; the first in England was the University of Oxford Botanic Garden in 1621.
By the 18th century, new plants for study were arriving in Europe in increasing numbers from newly discovered countries and the European colonies worldwide.
Model plants such as ''Arabidopsis thaliana'' are used for studying the molecular biology of plant cells and the chloroplast.
These developments, coupled with new methods for measuring the size of stomatal apertures, and the rate of photosynthesis have enabled precise description of the rates of gas exchange between plants and the atmosphere.
As in other eukaryotes, the inheritance of endosymbiotic organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts in plants is non-Mendelian.
In 1665, using an early microscope, Polymath Robert Hooke discovered cells, a term he coined, in cork, and a short time later in living plant tissue.
The cladistic method takes a systematic approach to characters, distinguishing between those that carry no information about shared evolutionary history – such as those evolved separately in different groups (homoplasies) or those left over from ancestors (plesiomorphies) – and derived characters, which have been passed down from innovations in a shared ancestor (apomorphies).
Some of the earliest plant-people relationships arose between the indigenous people of Canada in identifying edible plants from inedible plants.
Botany originated in prehistory as herbalism with the efforts of early humans to identify – and later cultivate – edible, medicinal and poisonous plants, making it one of the oldest branches of science.
Roots are often adapted to store food such as sugars or starch, as in sugar beets and carrots.
This is one of several types of apomixis that occur in plants.
For example, the tiger lily is ''Lilium columbianum''.
Biological classification is the method by which botanists group organisms into categories such as genera or species.
The concept that the composition of plant communities such as temperate broadleaf forest changes by a process of ecological succession was developed by Henry Chandler Cowles, Arthur Tansley and Frederic Clements.
Naturalist Conrad von Gesner (1516–1565) and herbalist John Gerard (1545–c.
These groupings have since been revised to align better with the Darwinian principle of common descent – grouping organisms by ancestry rather than superficial characteristics.
During the 18th century, systems of plant identification were developed comparable to dichotomous keys, where unidentified plants are placed into taxonomic groups (e.g.
The light energy captured by chlorophyll ''a'' is initially in the form of electrons (and later a proton gradient) that's used to make molecules of ATP and NADPH which temporarily store and transport energy.
They include mosses, liverworts and hornworts.
In the last two decades of the 20th century, botanists exploited the techniques of molecular genetic analysis, including genomics and proteomics and DNA sequences to classify plants more accurately.
Only derived characters, such as the spine-producing areoles of cacti, provide evidence for descent from a common ancestor.
These plants that are reproductively isolated from the parent species but live within the same geographical area, may be sufficiently successful to form a new species.
Non-vascular plants, the liverworts, hornworts and mosses do not produce ground-penetrating vascular roots and most of the plant participates in photosynthesis.
The choice and sequence of the characters may be artificial in keys designed purely for identification (diagnostic keys) or more closely related to the natural or phyletic order of the taxa in synoptic keys.
Modern botany traces its roots back to Ancient Greece specifically to Theophrastus (c. 371–287 BC), a student of Aristotle who invented and described many of its principles and is widely regarded in the scientific community as the "Father of Botany".
Increasing knowledge of plant anatomy, morphology and life cycles led to the realisation that there were more natural affinities between plants than the artificial sexual system of Linnaeus had indicated.
Plant responses to climate and other environmental changes can inform our understanding of how these changes affect ecosystem function and productivity.
In many land plants the male and female gametes are produced by separate individuals.
Most of the elements required for plant nutrition come from the chemical breakdown of soil minerals.
One example of epigenetic change is the marking of the genes by DNA methylation which determines whether they will be expressed or not.
Nonvascular land plants are embryophytes that lack the vascular tissues xylem and phloem.
Unlike in higher animals, where parthenogenesis is rare, asexual reproduction may occur in plants by several different mechanisms.
Some ecologists even rely on empirical data from indigenous people that is gathered by ethnobotanists.
Others, such as the essential oils peppermint oil and lemon oil are useful for their aroma, as flavourings and spices (e.g., capsaicin), and in medicine as pharmaceuticals as in opium from opium poppies.
For the purposes of identification, Linnaeus's ''Systema Sexuale'' classified plants into 24 groups according to the number of their male sexual organs.
Throughout this period, botany remained firmly subordinate to medicine.
Traditionally, botany has also included the study of fungi and algae by mycologists and phycologists respectively, with the study of these three groups of organisms remaining within the sphere of interest of the International Botanical Congress.
Modern morphology recognises a continuum between the major morphological categories of root, stem (caulome), leaf (phyllome) and trichome.
These biochemical strategies are unique to land plants.
All gymnosperms and many angiosperms are woody plants.
Phytochromes are the photoreceptors in a plant that are sensitive to light.
The discipline of plant ecology was pioneered in the late 19th century by botanists such as Eugenius Warming, who produced the hypothesis that plants form communities, and his mentor and successor Christen C. Raunkiær whose system for describing plant life forms is still in use today.
Nevertheless, there are some distinctive genetic differences between plants and other organisms.
''Arabidopsis'' was the first plant to have its genome sequenced, in 2000.
The algae are a polyphyletic group and are placed in various divisions, some more closely related to plants than others.
Durum wheat is a fertile tetraploid allopolyploid, while bread wheat is a fertile hexaploid.
The order is: Kingdom; Phylum (or Division); Class; Order; Family; Genus (plural ''genera''); Species.
family, genus and species) by making a series of choices between pairs of characters.
Stems mainly provide support to the leaves and reproductive structures, but can store water in succulent plants such as cacti, food as in potato tubers, or reproduce vegetatively as in the stolons of strawberry plants or in the process of layering.
This knowledge Native Americans have on plants has been recorded by enthnobotanists and then in turn has been used by pharmaceutical companies as a way of drug discovery.
Representatives of the lycopods have survived to the present day.
Phylogenetic studies attempt to discover phylogenies.
'''Botany''', also called '''plant science'''('''s'''), '''plant biology''' or '''phytology''', is the science of plant life and a branch of biology.
They have life cycles with alternating haploid and diploid phases.
The sporophyte generation is nonphotosynthetic in liverworts but may be able to contribute part of its energy needs by photosynthesis in mosses and hornworts.
Investigating how plant species are related to each other allows botanists to better understand the process of evolution in plants.
Heterotrophs including all animals, all fungi, all completely parasitic plants, and non-photosynthetic bacteria take in organic molecules produced by photoautotrophs and respire them or use them in the construction of cells and tissues.
While plants use many of the same epigenetic mechanisms as animals, such as chromatin remodelling, an alternative hypothesis is that plants set their gene expression patterns using positional information from the environment and surrounding cells to determine their developmental fate.
However, attention is still given to these groups by botanists, and fungi (including lichens) and photosynthetic protists are usually covered in introductory botany courses.
'''Chlorophyll ''a'''''
This information can relay a great deal of information on how the land once was thousands of years ago and how it has changed over that time.
Modern Molecular phylogenetics largely ignores morphological characters, relying on DNA sequences as data.
By the end of the Devonian period, several groups, including the lycopods, sphenophylls and progymnosperms, had independently evolved "megaspory" – their spores were of two distinct sizes, larger megaspores and smaller microspores.
In the early 13th century, Abu al-Abbas al-Nabati, and Ibn al-Baitar (d. 1248) wrote on botany in a systematic and scientific manner.
The strictest definition of "plant" includes only the "land plants" or embryophytes, which include seed plants (gymnosperms, including the pines, and flowering plants) and the free-sporing cryptogams including ferns, clubmosses, liverworts, hornworts and mosses.
Respiration is the oxidation of carbon compounds by breaking them down into simpler structures to release the energy they contain, essentially the opposite of photosynthesis.
Botany was greatly stimulated by the appearance of the first "modern" textbook, Matthias Schleiden's '''', published in English in 1849 as ''Principles of Scientific Botany''.
Frederick Campion Steward pioneered techniques of micropropagation and plant tissue culture controlled by plant hormones.
Corn has been used to study mechanisms of photosynthesis and phloem loading of sugar in  plants.
The new photosynthetic plants (along with their algal relatives) accelerated the rise in atmospheric oxygen started by the cyanobacteria, changing the ancient oxygen-free, reducing, atmosphere to one in which free oxygen has been abundant for more than 2 billion years.
Building on the extensive earlier work of Alphonse de Candolle, Nikolai Vavilov (1887–1943) produced accounts of the biogeography, centres of origin, and evolutionary history of economic plants.
Pteridophytic vascular plants with true xylem and phloem that reproduced by spores germinating into free-living gametophytes evolved during the Silurian period and diversified into several lineages during the late Silurian and early Devonian.
Despite the study of model plants and increasing use of DNA evidence, there is ongoing work and discussion among taxonomists about how best to classify plants into various taxa.
German physician Leonhart Fuchs (1501–1566) was one of "the three German fathers of botany", along with theologian Otto Brunfels (1489–1534) and physician Hieronymus Bock (1498–1554) (also called Hieronymus Tragus).
The formation of stem tubers in potato is one example.
This relationship the indigenous people had with plants was recorded by ethnobotanists.
Plant physiology encompasses all the internal chemical and physical activities of plants associated with life.
These bug repelling properties of sweetgrass were later found by the American Chemical Society in the molecules phytol and coumarin.
Other groups of organisms that were previously studied by botanists include bacteria (now studied in bacteriology), fungi (mycology) – including lichen-forming fungi (lichenology), non-chlorophyte algae (phycology), and viruses (virology).
They do not obviously resemble a typical leafless cactus such as an ''Echinocactus''.
Modern systematics aims to reflect and discover phylogenetic relationships between plants.
Moreover, information from studies of community ecology, plant systematics, and taxonomy is essential to understanding vegetation change, habitat destruction and species extinction.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, new techniques were developed for the study of plants, including methods of optical microscopy and live cell imaging, electron microscopy, analysis of chromosome number, plant chemistry and the structure and function of enzymes and other proteins.
In fact it is possible to grow an entire plant from a single leaf, as is the case with ''Saintpaulia'', or even a single cell – which can dedifferentiate into a callus (a mass of unspecialised cells) that can grow into a new plant.
For example, mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobia provide plants with nutrients in exchange for food, ants are recruited by ant plants to provide protection, honey bees, bats and other animals pollinate flowers and humans and other animals act as dispersal vectors to spread spores and seeds.
Although reference to major morphological categories such as root, stem, leaf, and trichome are useful, one has to keep in mind that these categories are linked through intermediate forms so that a continuum between the categories results.
The theoretical possibility of a practical method for identification of plant species and commercial varieties by DNA barcoding is the subject of active current research.
Research topics include the study of plant structure, growth and differentiation, reproduction, biochemistry and primary metabolism, chemical products, development, diseases, evolutionary relationships, systematics, and plant taxonomy.
Genetic evidence suggests that the true evolutionary relationship of multicelled organisms is as shown in the cladogram below – fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants.
From the 1990s onwards, the predominant approach to constructing phylogenies for living plants has been molecular phylogenetics, which uses molecular characters, particularly DNA sequences, rather than morphological characters like the presence or absence of spines and areoles.
Plant ecologists study the composition of local and regional floras, their biodiversity, genetic diversity and fitness, the adaptation of plants to their environment, and their competitive or mutualistic interactions with other species.
A familiar example is peppermint, ''Mentha'' × ''piperita'', a sterile hybrid between ''Mentha aquatica'' and spearmint, ''Mentha spicata''.
In the event that one of the systems is lost, the other can often regrow it.
It is widely regarded as a marker for the start of land plant evolution during the Ordovician period.
This is what ecologists call the first trophic level.
During morphogenesis, totipotent stem cells become the various pluripotent cell lines of the embryo, which in turn become fully differentiated cells.
Some euphorbias have leafless, rounded bodies adapted to water conservation similar to those of globular cacti, but characters such as the structure of their flowers make it clear that the two groups are not closely related.
Regions with characteristic vegetation types and dominant plants as well as similar abiotic and biotic factors, climate, and geography make up biomes like tundra or tropical rainforest.
The 24th group, ''Cryptogamia'', included all plants with concealed reproductive parts, mosses, liverworts, ferns, algae and fungi.
Similarly, "jumping genes" were discovered by Barbara McClintock while she was studying maize.
About the same time, the role of auxins (from the Greek auxein, to grow) in control of plant growth was first outlined by the Dutch scientist Frits Went.
Modern botany is a broad, multidisciplinary subject with inputs from most other areas of science and technology.
Other organisms form mutually beneficial relationships with plants.
The Candollean system reflected his ideas of the progression of morphological complexity and the later classification by Bentham and Hooker, which was influential until the mid-19th century, was influenced by Candolle's approach.
It includes ranks and binomial nomenclature.
As a simple example, prior to the use of genetic evidence, fungi were thought either to be plants or to be more closely related to plants than animals.
The process results from the epigenetic activation of some genes and inhibition of others.
The young sporophyte develops within the seed, which on germination splits to release it.
Sporopollenin is a chemically resistant polymer found in the outer cell walls of spores and pollen of land plants responsible for the survival of early land plant spores and the pollen of seed plants in the fossil record.
Estimates of atmospheric  concentrations since the Palaeozoic have been obtained from stomatal densities and the leaf shapes and sizes of ancient land plants.
Furthermore, structures can be seen as processes, that is, process combinations.
