The white population speaks English and Afrikaans and makes up roughly 3% of the population.
The presidency passed to the sitting Vice-President, Quett Masire, who was elected in his own right in 1984 and re-elected in 1989 and 1994.
The Scottish writer Alexander McCall Smith has written several mystery novels (No.
The United Nations Development Programme claims that poverty is a major problem behind the overexploitation of resources, including land, in Botswana.
It is bordered by South Africa to the south and southeast, Namibia to the west and north, and Zimbabwe to the northeast.
Since independence was declared, the party system has been dominated by the Botswana Democratic Party.
* Phuthadikobo Museum in Mochudi
Around 10 percent of the population lives in the capital and largest city, Gaborone.
*1968–1971 John Richard Dendy-Young
To help change this the UNDP joined in with a project started in the southern community of Struizendam in Botswana.
The cuisine of Botswana is unique but also shares some characteristics with other cuisine of Southern Africa.
A further measure of the success, or reason for hope, in dealing with HIV in Botswana, is that less than 10% of pregnant HIV-infected women were not receiving antiretroviral medications in 2013, with a corresponding large decrease (over 50%) in the number of new HIV infections in children under 5.
As groups broke off and moved to new land, new tribes were created.
According to the 2001 census, the country has around 5,000 Muslims, mainly from South Asia, 3,000 Hindus and 700 Baha'is.
The politics of Botswana take place in a framework of a representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Botswana is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system.
The  Botswana Tourism Organisation is the country's official tourism group.
A vast majority of these students are government sponsored.
However, their inhabitants began to be consulted by the UK, and although successive South African governments sought to have the territories transferred, the UK kept delaying; consequently, it never occurred.
Botswana invests 21% of its government spending in education.
Mashatu Game Reserve is privately owned: located where the Shashe River and Limpopo River meet in eastern Botswana.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Botswana.
Botswana increased its adult literacy rate from 69% in 1991 to 83% in 2008.
The official language of Botswana is English although Setswana is widely spoken across the country.
Botswana folk music has instruments such as Setinkane (a Botswana version of miniature piano), Segankure/Segaba (a Botswana version of the Chinese instrument Erhu), Moropa (Meropa -plural) (a Botswana version of the many varieties of drums), phala (a Botswana version of a whistle used mostly during celebrations, which comes in a variety of forms).
A mid-sized country of just over 2 million people, Botswana is one of the most sparsely populated nations in the world.
Debswana, the largest diamond mining company operating in Botswana, is 50% owned by the government.
In addition, there are small numbers of whites and Indians, both groups being roughly equally small in number.
Botswana is a member of the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the United Nations.
James Anaya, as the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people for the United Nations in 2010, described loss of land as a major contributor to many of the problems facing Botswana's indigenous people, citing the San's eviction from the Central Kalahari Game Reserve (CKGR) as an especial example.
On the reservations, they struggle to find employment and alcoholism is rampant.
Botswana imports refined petroleum products and electricity from South Africa.
Estimated to produce over 11 million carats in 2013, with an average price of $145/carat, the Orapa mine is estimated to produce over $1.6 billion worth of diamonds in 2013.
Other reserves include the Central Kalahari Game Reserve located in the Kalahari desert in Ghanzi District; Makgadikgadi Pans National Park and Nxai Pan National Park are in Central District in the Makgadikgadi Pan.
Many British expatriate school teachers informally taught the game in Botswana's secondary schools.
Prior to European contact, the Batswana lived as herders and farmers under tribal rule.
Botswana music is mostly vocal and performed, sometimes without drums depending on the occasion; it also makes heavy use of string instruments.
The country has been among the hardest hit by the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Tensions also escalated with the Dutch Boer settlers from the Transvaal to the east.
Christian missionaries sent from Europe also spread to the interior, often at the invitation of tribal chiefs who wanted guns and knew that the presence of missionaries encouraged traders.
The Batswana (plural of "Motswana"), a term used also to denote all citizens of Botswana, remain the country's major ethnic group today.
By 1880 every major village had a resident missionary, and their influence became permanent.
Following political changes in South Africa and the region, the BDF's missions have increasingly focused on prevention of poaching, preparing for disasters, and foreign peacekeeping.
According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, universal access to treatment – defined as 80% coverage or greater – has been achieved in Botswana.
The association is a member of the Union for International Cancer Control.
Fewer than 10,000 San people are still living their traditional hunter-gatherer style of life.
The Association supplements existing services through provision of cancer prevention and health awareness programmes, facilitating access to health services for cancer patients and offering support and counseling to those affected.
Botswana won the country's first Olympic medal in 2012 when Nijel Amos won silver in the 800 metres.
Many of the indigenous San people have been forcibly relocated from their land onto reservations.
*1975–1977 George O.L.
Several international mining corporations have established regional headquarters in Botswana, and prospected for diamonds, gold, uranium, copper, and even oil, many coming back with positive results.
Potential reasons for Botswana's high HIV prevalence include concurrent sexual partnerships, transactional sex, cross-generational sex, and a significant number of people who travel outside of their local communities in pursuit of work.
The other privately owned reserve is Mokolodi Nature Reserve near Gaborone.
In the northern part of Botswana, women in the villages of Etsha and Gumare are noted for their skill at crafting baskets from Botswana from Mokola Palm and local dyes.
Botswana became a member of The International Badminton Federation and Africa Badminton Federation in 1991.
The Phakalane Golf Estate is a multimillion-dollar clubhouse that offers both hotel accommodations and access to golf courses.
The country's currency is the Botswana pula.
There were eight principal tribes (or chiefdoms); the dominant was the Bangwaketse.
Banks remain profitable, well-capitalised, and liquid, as a result of growing national resources and high interest rates.
Investment regulations are transparent, and bureaucratic procedures are streamlined and open, although somewhat slow.
The baskets are generally woven into three types: large, lidded baskets used for storage, large, open baskets for carrying objects on the head or for winnowing threshed grain, and smaller plates for winnowing pounded grain.
It consists of a typical court system of local Magistrates Courts, a High Court and a Court of Appeal.
Other popular sports are cricket, tennis, rugby, badminton, softball, handball, golf, and track and field.
The presidency passed in 2008 to Ian Khama (son of the first President), who had been serving as Mogae's Vice-President since resigning his position in 1998 as Commander of the Botswana Defence Force to take up this civilian role.
It is the outsider that found a home within the culture.
In 2011, Amantle Montsho became world champion in the 400 metres and won Botswana's first athletics medal on the world level.
The Department of Forestry and Range Resources has already begun to implement a project to reintroduce indigenous vegetation into communities in Kgalagadi South, Kweneng North and Boteti.
About a thousand years ago, large chiefdoms emerged that were later eclipsed by the Great Zimbabwe empire, which spread into eastern Botswana.
The government has abolished exchange controls, and with the resulting creation of new portfolio investment options, the Botswana Stock Exchange is growing.
From 1966 to 1991 the livestock population has increased from 1.7 million to 5.5 million.
Executive power is exercised by the government.
Under the leadership of Festus Mogae, the Government of Botswana solicited outside help in fighting HIV/AIDS and received early support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Merck Foundation, and together formed the African Comprehensive HIV AIDS Partnership (ACHAP).
Bridge has remained popular and the BBF has over 800 members.
Among Anaya's recommendations in a report to the United Nations Human Rights Council was that development programs should promote, in consultation with indigenous communities such as the San and Bakgalagadi people, activities in harmony with the culture of those communities such as traditional hunting and gathering activities.
Botswana's competitive banking system is one of Africa's most advanced.
1 Ladies' Detective Agency series) set in Botswana.
Notable amongst these is  Botho University, the country's first private university which offers undergraduate programmes in Accounting, Business and Computing.
Approximately 71% of the country's land is used for communal grazing, which has been a major cause of the desertification and the accelerating soil erosion of the country.
Masire retired from office in 1998, and was succeeded by Festus Mogae, who was elected in his own right in 1999 and re-elected in 2004.
The park covers about  and supports about 350 species of birds.
The  Ministry of Trade and Industry of Botswana is responsible for promoting business development throughout the country.
The history of Botswana starts more than 100,000 years ago, when the first humans inhabited the region.
Botswana is ranked second only to South Africa among sub-Saharan Africa countries in the 2014 International Property Rights Index.
The legal system is sufficient to conduct secure commercial dealings, although a serious and growing backlog of cases prevents timely trials.
The Capital Bank opened in 2008.
Appeals can be heard by the Court of Appeal.
"Over 50% of all households in Botswana own cattle, which is currently the largest single source of rural income."
The card game bridge has a strong following; it was first played in Botswana over 30 years ago, and it grew in popularity during the 1980s.
* Supa Ngwano Museum Centre in Francistown
Despite these reasons for hope, Botswana has the third highest prevalence rate for HIV AIDS, reported in 2014.
'''Botswana''' , officially the '''Republic of Botswana''' (), is a landlocked country located in Southern Africa.
An estimated 70% of the country's citizens identify as Christians.
The Head of the Court of Appeal is the Judge President.
The best students enter the University of Botswana, Botswana College of Agriculture, Botswana International University of Science and Technology and the Botswana Accountancy College in Gaborone.
The Makgadikgadi Pan, a large salt pan, lies in the north.
The Okavango Delta is one of the major semi-forested wetlands in Botswana and one of the largest inland deltas in the world; it is a crucial ecosystem to the survival of many animals.
The country is predominantly flat, tending toward gently rolling tableland.
*1997–2010 Julian Mukwesu Nganunu
According to the International Monetary Fund, economic growth averaged over 9% per year from 1966 to 1999.
The government has maintained a sound fiscal policy, despite consecutive budget deficits in 2002 and 2003, and a negligible level of foreign debt.
Botswana has transformed itself from one of the poorest countries in the world to a middle-income country.
High jumper Kabelo Kgosiemang is a three time African champion.
As of August 2015, there are a dozen licensed banks in the country.
Investment returns such as profits and dividends, debt service, capital gains, returns on intellectual property, royalties, franchise's fees, and service fees can be repatriated without limits.
Those objectives are in part pursued through policies in favour of vocational education, gathered within the NPVET (National Policy on Vocational Education and Training), aiming to "integrate the different types of vocational education and training into one comprehensive system".
The mineral industry provides about 40% of all government revenues.
The Bank of Botswana serves as a central bank.
Botswana has made great strides in educational development since independence in 1966.
Other notable artistic communities include Thamaga Pottery and Oodi Weavers, both located in the south-eastern part of Botswana.
During the 1700s, the slave and ivory trades were expanding.
* Kgosi Bathoen II (Segopotso) Museum in Kanye
*1972–1975 Akinola Aguda
*1987–1992 Livesey Luke
The highlight of any celebration or event that shows especially happiness is the dancing.
This places Botswana at the third highest prevalence in the world, in 2013, while "leading the way in prevention and treatment programmes".
The desertification problems predominantly stem from the severe times of drought in the country.
Other languages spoken in Botswana include Kalanga (sekalanga), Sarwa (sesarwa), Ndebele, !Xóõ and, in some parts, Afrikaans.
Hotels include the  Lonrho Lansmore Masa Square, a 5-Star hotel, and the  Avani Gaborone, a luxury hotel that also features a casino.
The oldest paintings from both Botswana and South Africa depict hunting, animal and human figures, and were made by the Khoisan (!Kung San/Bushmen) over twenty thousand years ago within the Kalahari desert.
The Chobe River lies to the north, providing a boundary between Botswana and Namibia's Zambezi Region.
Reform of non-bank financial institutions has continued in recent years, notably through the establishment of a single financial regulatory agency that provides more effective supervision.
Other tribes are Bayei, Bambukushu, Basubia, Baherero and Bakgalagadi.
There are also specialised sanctuaries like the  Khama Rhino Sanctuary (for rhinoceros) and Makgadikgadi Sanctuary (for flamingos).
In Gaborone, a Lutheran History Centre is open to the public.
A long-running dispute over the northern border with Namibia's Caprivi Strip was the subject of a ruling by the International Court of Justice in December 1999, which ruled that Kasikili Island belongs to Botswana.
It earned the highest sovereign credit rating in Africa and has stockpiled foreign exchange reserves (over $7 billion in 2005/2006) amounting to almost two and a half years of current imports.
Officially, the government denies that there is any link to mining and claims the relocation is to preserve the wildlife and ecosystem, even though the San people have lived sustainably on the land for millennia.
The United States Government has also entered into an agreement with Botswana, giving them $7 million US dollars to reduce Botswana's debt by $8.3 million US dollars.
Religious services are well attended in both rural and urban areas.
Proclamations in 1934 regulated tribal rule and powers.
The constitution of Botswana is the rule of law which protects the citizens of Botswana and represents their rights.
The United States has been the largest single foreign contributor to the development of the BDF, and a large segment of its officer corps have received U.S. training.
An expansion of British central authority and the evolution of tribal government resulted in the 1920 establishment of two advisory councils to represent both Africans and Europeans.
According to Transparency International, Botswana is the least corrupt country in Africa and ranks close to Portugal and South Korea.
Botswana cultural musical instruments are not confined only to the strings or drums.
From 2009 to 2013, the country saw a decrease over 50% in new HIV infections in children.
Like elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa, the economic impact of AIDS is considerable.
Botswana has a high level of economic freedom compared to other African countries.
Conquered tribes began to move northwest into Botswana, destroying everything in their path.
Since then, it has maintained a strong tradition of stable representative democracy, with a consistent record of uninterrupted democratic elections.
With a nationwide Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission program, Botswana has reduced HIV transmission from infected mothers to their children from about 40% to just 4%.
The Limpopo River Basin, the major landform of all of southern Africa, lies partly in Botswana, with the basins of its tributaries, the Notwane, Bonwapitse, Mahalapswe, Lotsane, Motloutse and the Shashe, located in the eastern part of the country.
Another international university is the Limkokwing University of Creative Technology which offers various associate degrees in Creative Arts.
When the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910 out of the main British colonies in the region, the Bechuanaland Protectorate, Basutoland (now Lesotho) and Swaziland (the High Commission Territories) were not included, but provision was made for their later incorporation.
Other tertiary institutions include  Ba Isago, ABM University College,  New Era,  Gaborone Institute of Professional Studies etc.
Around 1300 CE, peoples in present-day Transvaal began to coalesce into three main linguistic and political groups, including the Batswana.
In Setswana, prefixes are more important than they are in many other languages.
Similarly, the human population has increased from 574,000 in 1971 to 1.5 million in 1995, nearly a 200% increase.
Many other students end up in the numerous private tertiary education colleges around the country.
Botswana's Indian population is made up of many Indian-Africans of several generations, with some having migrated from Mozambique, Kenya, Tanzania, Mauritius, South Africa, and so on, as well as first generation Indian immigrants.
The seat of government was moved in 1965 from Mafikeng in South Africa, to the newly established Gaborone, which sits near Botswana's border with South Africa.
Approximately 20% of citizens espouse no religion.
After Botswana's 2011 census, current life expectancy is estimated at 54.06 years.
The election of the Nationalist government in 1948, which instituted apartheid, and South Africa's withdrawal from the Commonwealth in 1961, ended any prospect of incorporation of the territories into South Africa.
Three quarters of the country's human and animal populations depend on groundwater due to drought.
Reintroduction of indigenous vegetation will help with the degradation of the land.
Their lands lie in the middle of the world’s richest diamond field.
The citizens refer to themselves as ''Batswana'' (singular: ''Motswana'').
Other destinations in Botswana include the Gaborone Yacht Club and the Kalahari Fishing Club and natural attractions such as the Gaborone Dam and Mokolodi Nature Reserve.
By one estimate, it has the fourth highest gross national income at purchasing power parity in Africa, giving it a standard of living around that of Mexico.
Chobe National Park, found in the Chobe District, has the world's largest concentration of African elephants.
Since raising livestock has proven to be profitable for the people of Botswana, the land continues to be exploited.
The African Council consisted of the eight heads of the Tswana tribes and some elected members.
Botswana is dominated by the Kalahari Desert, which covers up to 70% of its land surface.
The nation's second international university, the Botswana International University of Science and Technology, was  completed in Palapye in 2011.
* Khama III Memorial Museum in Serowe
Botswana faces two major environmental problems: drought and desertification.
Degradation is exacerbated by the effects of drought and climate change."
After appeals by the Batswana leaders Khama III, Bathoen and Sebele for assistance, the British Government put Bechuanaland under its protection on 31 March 1885.
The original inhabitants of southern Africa were the Bushmen (San) and Khoi peoples.
The stipulation of the US reducing Botswana's debt is that Botswana will focus on more extensive conservation of the land.
At the time of independence, Botswana had no armed forces.
For example, the main ethnic group of Botswana is the Tswana people, hence the name Botswana for its country.
Its high gross national income (by some estimates the fourth-largest in Africa) gives the country a modest standard of living and the highest Human Development Index of continental Sub-Saharan Africa.
The Botswana Bridge Federation (BBF) was founded in 1988 and continues to organise tournaments.
The people as a whole are Batswana, one person is a Motswana, and the language they speak is Setswana.
*1977–1981 Hayfron Benjamin
The Botswana government gave the United States permission to explore the possibility of establishing an Africa Command (AFRICOM) base in the country.
The artistry of these baskets is being steadily enhanced through colour use and improved designs as they are increasingly produced for commercial use.
In the remaining 95% of the country, raising livestock is the primary source of rural income.
Botswana has diverse areas of wildlife habitat.
*2010– Maruping Dibotelo
There are golf courses which are maintained by the  Botswana Golf Union (BGU).
It was only after the Rhodesian and South African militaries struck respectively against the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army and Umkhonto we Sizwe bases that the Botswana Defence Force (BDF) was formed in 1977.
Environmentalists report that the Okavango Delta is drying up due to the increased grazing of livestock.
Botswana is an associate member of the International Cricket Council.
The  Ministry of Health in Botswana is responsible for overseeing the quality and distribution of healthcare throughout the country.
Foods unique to Botswana include seswaa, heavily salted mashed-up meat.
It lies between latitudes 17° and 27°S, and longitudes 20° and 30°E.
The economy is dominated by mining, cattle, and tourism.
Northern Botswana has one of the few remaining large populations of the endangered African wild dog.
In 2003, the government began a comprehensive program involving free or cheap generic antiretroviral drugs as well as an information campaign designed to stop the spread of the virus; in 2013, over 40% of adults in Botswana had access to antiretroviral therapy.
Economic development spending was cut by 10% in 2002–3 as a result of recurring budget deficits and rising expenditure on healthcare services.
The northern territory remained under direct administration as the Bechuanaland Protectorate and is modern-day Botswana, while the southern territory, British Bechuanaland, became part of the Cape Colony and is now part of the northwest province of South Africa.
Government announced in early 2009 that they would try to shift their economic dependence on diamonds, over serious concern that diamonds are predicted to dry out in Botswana over the next twenty years.
The constitution provides for an independent judiciary, and the government respects this in practice.
Despite the success in programmes to make treatments available to those infected, and to educate the populace in general about how to stop the spread of HIV AIDS, the number of people with AIDS rose from 290,000 in 2005 to 320,000 in 2013.
Life expectancy at birth was 55 in 2009 according to the World Bank, having previously fallen from a peak of 64.1 in 1990 to a low of 49 in 2002.
The quantitative gains have not always been matched by qualitative ones.
Formerly one of the poorest countries in the world—with a GDP per capita of about US$70 per year in the late 1960s—Botswana has since transformed itself into one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.
Written and composed by Kgalemang Tumediso Motsete, it was adopted upon independence in 1966.
