Bottlenose dolphins inhabit warm and temperate seas worldwide.
The IUCN lists both species as data deficient on their Red List of endangered species because of this issue.
She cites studies showing these dolphins as adults are inseparable, and that early bonds aid protection, as well as in locating females.
Bottlenose dolphins were mentioned in various ''Star Trek'' novels and other materials as serving as navigation specialists on board various Federation starships.
These cooperating dolphins are individually recognized by the local fishermen, who name them.
Rescuers, including Department of Conservation officer Malcolm Smith, attempted to refloat them four times.
Dolphins responded more to tourist than fishing vessels.
Some Mauritanian dolphins cooperate with human fishermen.
A 2005 study showed mothers most likely teach the behavior to their offspring, evincing culture (behavior learned from other species members).
The U.S.'s program is the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program, located in San Diego.
It has no olfactory nerves or olfactory lobe in the brain.
(This contrasts with bats and sonar, which reduce sensitivity of the sound receptor.)
Near Adelaide, in South Australia, three bottlenose dolphins 'tail-walk', whereby they elevate the upper part of their bodies vertically out of the water, and propel themselves along the surface with powerful tail movements.
Its cone-like teeth serve to grasp, but do not chew food.
In most parts of the world, the adults are about , and .
The interclick interval also decreases as the animal nears the target.
They can store almost twice as much oxygen in proportion to their body weight as a human can: the dolphin can store 36 milliliters (ml) of oxygen per kg of body weight, compared with 20 ml per kg for humans.
Bottlenose dolphins have been known to hybridize with other dolphin species.
At least some wild bottlenose dolphins use tools.
These behaviors may also be transmitted via teaching.
The species sometimes shows curiosity towards humans in or near water.
Each dolphin has a unique whistle that functions like a name, allowing the marine mammals to keep close social bonds.
Females sexually mature at ages 5–13, males at ages 9–14.
The ability to stow their reproductive organs (especially in males) allows for maximum hydrodynamics.
Twins are possible, but rare.
Such competition can take the form of fighting other males or of herding females to prevent access by other males.
Births can occur at any time of year, although peaks occur in warmer months.
The show's theme song contains the lyric "no one you see / is smarter than he".
Bottlenose dolphins have the second largest encephalization levels of any mammal on Earth (humans have the largest), sharing close ratios with those of humans and other great apes, which more than likely contributes to their incredibly high intelligence and emotional intelligence.
In Shark Bay, male bottlenose dolphins have been observed working in pairs or larger groups to follow and/or restrict the movement of a female for weeks at a time, waiting for her to become sexually receptive.
The pectoral flippers (at the sides of the body) are for steering; they contain bones homologous to the forelimbs of land mammals.
truncatus'') is found in most tropical to temperate oceans, and it has a grey color, with the shade of grey varying among populations, but it can be bluish-grey, brownish-grey, or even nearly black, and is often darker on the back from the rostrum to behind the dorsal fin; the Black Sea bottlenose dolphin (''T.
The active hemisphere handles surfacing and breathing behavior.
The tonal whistle sounds (the most melodious ones) allow dolphins to stay in contact with each other (above all, mothers and offspring), and to coordinate hunting strategies.
However, Herman, Richards, and Wolz demonstrated comprehension of an artificial language by two bottlenose dolphins (named Akeakamai and Phoenix) in the period of skepticism toward animal language following Herbert Terrace's critique.
In some areas, they cooperate with local fishermen by driving fish into their nets and eating the fish that escape.
Other hybrids live in captivity around the world and in the wild, such as a bottlenose dolphin-Atlantic spotted dolphin hybrid.
In November 2004, a dramatic report of dolphin intervention came from New Zealand.
The IUCN acknowledges two species, although a third distinct species was described in 2011: the common bottlenose dolphin (''T.
Males have large testes in relation to their body size.
Animal welfare activists and scientists have claimed that the dolphins do not have adequate space or receive adequate care or stimulation.
Adults range from , and .
They were later found and returned to captivity from the Gulf of Mexico.
The eyes are located at the sides of the head and have a tapetum lucidum, or reflecting membrane, at the back of the retina, which aids vision in dim light.
This includes: Acoustic and behavioral mimicry, Comprehension of novel sequences in an artificial language, Memory, Monitoring of self behavior, Discrimination and matching, Comprehension of symbols for various body parts, Comprehension of pointing gestures and gaze (as made by dolphins or humans), Mirror self-recognition, and Numerical values.
The dolphin's search for food is aided by a form of sonar known as echolocation: it locates objects by producing sounds and listening for the echos.
Bottlenose dolphins also use sound for communication, including squeaks and whistles emitted from the blowhole and sounds emitted through body movements, such as leaping from the water and slapping their tails on the water surface.
Most research in this area has been restricted to the North Atlantic Ocean.
Bottlenose dolphins are primary characters in Anne McCaffrey's ''Dragonriders of Pern'' series, especially ''The Dolphins of Pern''.
Delphineus, a dolphin, is featured in the video game ''EcoQuest: The Search for Cetus'', helping the boy, Adam, to find the sea king Cetus (a sperm whale), as well as assisting in cleaning up the underwater environment where he lives.
This countershading makes them hard to see, both from above and below, when swimming.
However, dolphins in these areas can also coexist with humans.
Occasionally, they rescue injured divers by raising them to the surface.
However, they live in fission-fusion societies of varying group size, within which individuals change associations, often on a daily or hourly basis.
Likewise, an isolated population in Doubtful Sound, New Zealand, is in decline due to calf loss coincident to an increase in warm freshwater discharge into the fjord.
aduncus'', but is not considered a separate species by the IUCN.
Newborn bottlenose dolphins are  long and weigh , with Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphin infants being generally smaller than common bottlenose dolphin infants.
Hybrids with Risso's dolphin occur both in the wild and in captivity.
Bottlenose dolphins are also able to extract shape information, suggesting they are able to form an "echoic image" or sound picture of their targets.
Dolphins can breathe while "half-asleep".
Dolphins search for prey primarily using echolocation, which is similar to sonar.
Males fight for rank and access to females.
When they encounter a shoal of fish, they work as a team to herd them towards the shore to maximize the harvest.
Each animal has a uniquely identifying, frequency-modulated narrow-band signature vocalization (signature whistle).
The man-made chemical perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) may be compromising the immune system of bottlenose dolphins.
The behavior involves creation of a U-shaped plume of mud in the water column and then rushing through the plume to capture fish.
The bottlenose dolphin sometimes hits a fish with its fluke, sometimes knocking it out of the water, using a strategy called "fish whacking".
Typically, 18%–20% of their bodyweight is blubber.
The first was born in 1985 to a female bottlenose.
Georgetown University professor Janet Mann argues the strong personal behavior among male calves is about bond formation and benefits the species in an evolutionary context.
This has only been observed in this bay (first in 1997), and is predominantly practiced by females.
Similar cases have been observed in Laguna, Santa Catarina in Brazil since during 19th century as well.
Their future is stable because of their abundance and adaptability.
Scientists were long aware that ''Tursiops'' dolphins might consist of more than one species.
The flukes (lobes of the tail) and dorsal fin are formed of dense connective tissue and do not contain bone or muscle.
The dolphins follow the fish, stranding themselves briefly, to eat their prey before twisting their bodies back and forth in order to slide back into the water.
Dolphins often work as a team to harvest fish schools, but they also hunt individually.
Eight bottlenose dolphins that lived at the Marine Life Aquarium in Gulfport, Mississippi were swept away from their aquarium pool during Hurricane Katrina.
The female's slit houses her vagina and anus.
Except in the eastern Pacific, dolphins in warmer, shallower waters tend to be smaller than those in cooler, pelagic waters.
However, others, notably SeaWorld, counter that the dolphins are properly cared for and enjoy interacting with humans.
Bottlenose dolphins are not endangered.
The Bottlenose dolphins are the dolphin species that is known as flipper in Flipper (1964 TV series).
Now and then, one or more dolphins appear, driving the fish towards the line of fishermen.
A dolphin's diet consists mainly of small fish, crustaceans, and squid.
Having less sperm for out-of-season social mating means it wastes less.
Adult males live mostly alone or in groups of two to three, and join pods for short periods of time.
As a result of this genetic variation, other distinct species currently considered to be populations of common bottlenose dolphin are possible.
The sequel was released on September 12, 2014.
The male can retract and conceal his penis through his slit.
These coalitions, also known as male reproductive alliances, will fight with other coalitions for control of females.
Bottlenose dolphins live in groups typically of 10–30 members, called pods, but group size varies from single individuals up to more than 1,000.
Bottlenose dolphins are able to detect salty, sweet, bitter (quinine sulphate), and sour (citric acid) tastes, but this has not been well-studied.
Smaller groups can join to form larger groups of 100 or more, and occasionally exceed 1,000.
Old scientific data do not distinguish between the two species, making it useless for determining structural differences between them.
Tião was a well-known solitary female Bottlenose Dolphin that was first spotted in the town of São Sebastião in Brazil around 1994 and frequently allowed humans to interact with her.
Similar cooperative fisheries also exist in Mauritania, Africa.
Mating occurs belly to belly.
Other communication uses about 30 distinguishable sounds, and although famously proposed by John Lilly in the 1950s, no "dolphin language" has been found.
The dolphins then crawl around on their sides, consuming the fish they washed up on shore.
Bottlenose dolphins conflict with small-scale coastal commercial fisheries in some Mediterranean areas.
truncatus'' lives in the Black Sea; The Pacific bottlenose dolphin (''T.
Dolphins are voluntary breathers, who must deliberately surface and open their blowholes to get air.
Anecdotally, some individuals in captivity have been noted to have preferences for food fish types, although it is not clear if taste mediates this preference.
Less local climate change, such as increasing water temperature may also play a role but has never been shown to be the case.
They are not currently described, however, as separate species or subspecies.
Both sexes have genital slits on the underside of their bodies.
truncatus'' and ''T.
A common dolphin-bottlenose dolphin hybrid born in captivity lives at SeaWorld California.
Bottlenose dolphins are incorporated into the science fiction video game series ''Ecco the Dolphin''.
The breeding season produces significant physiological changes in males.
When under water, the eyeball's lens serves to focus light, whereas in the in-air environment, the typically bright light serves to contract the specialized pupil, resulting in sharpness from a smaller aperture (similar to a pinhole camera).
Bottlenose dolphins typically swim at , but are capable of bursts of up to .
''Dolphin Tale 2'', a sequel to the 2011 film, featured another dolphin named Hope and an appearance by Bethany Hamilton.
They also interact with smaller species, such as the Atlantic spotted dolphin and the rough-toothed dolphin.
t. ponticus''), a subspecies of ''T.
The burst-pulsed sounds (which are more complex and varied than the whistles) are used "to avoid physical aggression in situations of high excitement", such as when they are competing for the same piece of food, for example.
'''''Bottlenose dolphins''''', the genus '''''Tursiops''''', are the most common and well-known members of the family Delphinidae, the family of oceanic dolphin.
In the confusion of casting nets, the dolphins catch a large number of fish as well.
Molecular genetics allowed much greater insight into this previously intractable problem.
t. gillii''), another subspecies of ''T.
This is an adaptation to diving.
''Dolphin Tale'', directed by Charles Martin Smith, starring Nathan Gamble, Ashley Judd, Harry Connick Jr., Morgan Freeman, Cozi Zuehlsdorff and Kris Kristofferson, is based on the real-life story of the dolphin Winter, who was rescued from a crab trap in December 2005 and lost her tail, but has learned to swim with a prosthetic one.
australis''), found in the Port Phillip and Gippsland Lakes areas of Victoria, Australia, was described in September 2011 after research showed it was distinct from ''T.
Commercial 'dolphin encounter' enterprises and tours operate in many countries.
During the breeding season, males compete for access to females.
truncatus'', lives in the Pacific, and has a black line from the eye to the forehead; the Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphin (''T.
In captivity, a bottlenose dolphin and a rough-toothed dolphin hybridized.
Group compositions are usually determined by sex, age, reproductive condition, familial relations and affiliation histories.
Mud plume feeding is a feeding technique performed by a small community of bottlenose dolphins over shallow seagrass beds (less than 1 m) in the Florida Keys in the United States.
Bottlenose dolphins perform in many aquaria, generating much controversy.
The fishermen typically stand up to their knees in the shallow waters or sit in canoes, waiting for the dolphins.
During mating season, males compete vigorously with each other through displays of toughness and size, with a series of acts, such as head-butting.
The best known is the wolphin, a false killer whale-bottlenose dolphin hybrid.
In ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy'' and one of its sequels, ''So Long, and Thanks For All the Fish'', the dolphins try to warn humans of Earth's impending destruction, but their behavior was misinterpreted as playful acrobatics.
In the HBO movie ''Zeus and Roxanne'', a female bottlenose dolphin befriends a male dog, and in ''Bermuda Triangle'', a girl named Annie (played by Lisa Jakub) swims with dolphins.
Bottlenose dolphins are still captured or killed in dolphin drive hunts for their meat, to eliminate competition for fish and for capture for marine parks.
They emit clicking sounds and listen for the return echos to determine the location and shape of nearby items, including potential prey.
They also do this to help injured members of their own species.
One dolphin then displays a unique body movement outside the water, which serves as a signal to the fishermen to cast their nets (the entire sequence is shown here, and a detailed description of the signal's characteristics is available here).
High levels of metal contaminants have been measured in tissues in many areas of the globe.
Cognitive abilities that have been investigated include concept formation, sensory skills, and mental representations.
T.D., the Miami Dolphins' mascot, uses the bottlenose dolphin as its mascot and team logo.
The dolphin became infamous for killing a swimmer and injuring many others, which later earned her the nickname killer dolphin.
They also hunt alone, often targeting bottom-dwelling species.
The "least dominant" one soon moves away to avoid confrontation.
Sea otters are the only other known marine mammalian tool users.
Bottlenose dolphins studied by Bottlenose Dolphin Research Institute researchers off the island of Sardinia show random social behavior while feeding, and their social behavior does not depend on feeding activity.
One type of feeding behavior seen in bottlenose dolphins is mud ring feeding.
Along the beaches and tidal marshes of South Carolina and Georgia in the United States, bottlenose dolphins cooperatively herd prey fish onto steep and sandy banks in a practice known as "strand feeding".
A study conducted by the University of Chicago showed that bottlenose dolphins can remember whistles of other dolphins they'd lived with after 20 years of separation.
The new research shows that dolphins have the longest memory yet known in any species other than humans.
Likewise, studies show that fishermen casting their nets following the unique signal catch more fish than when fishing alone, without the help of the dolphins.
Some researchers theorize mammalian intelligence correlates to the number of nerve cells (neurons) in the cortex of the brain.
The calf suckles for 18 months to up to 8 years, and continues to closely associate with its mother for several years after weaning.
Four lifeguards, swimming  off the coast near Whangarei, were approached by a shark (reportedly a great white shark).
Such research has been ongoing since the 1970s.
Females have two mammary slits, each housing one nipple, one on each side of the genital slit.
Other television appearances by bottlenose dolphins include ''Dolphin Cove'', ''seaQuest DSV'', and The Penguins of Madagascar, in which a dolphin, Doctor Blowhole, is a villain.
Dolphins have been observed engaging in intercourse when the females are not in their estrous cycles and cannot produce young, suggesting they may mate for pleasure.
The bottlenose dolphin sometimes forms mixed species groups with other species from the dolphin family, particularly larger species, such as the short-finned pilot whale, the false killer whale and Risso's dolphin.
However, specific populations are threatened due to various environmental changes.
Human and dolphin interaction segments shot on location in the Florida Keys with Dolphin Research Center as seen on a Halloween episode of ''The Simpsons'', Treehouse of Horror XI.
aduncus'') lives in the waters around India, northern Australia, South China, the Red Sea, and the eastern coast of Africa, with the back being dark-grey and the belly being lighter grey or nearly white with grey spots; the Burrunan dolphin (''T.
In Sardinia, the presence of a floating marine fin-fish farm has been linked to a change in bottlenose dolphin distribution as a result of high fish density around the floating cages in the farming area.
Some recent genetic evidence suggests the Indo-Pacific bottlenose belongs in the genus ''Stenella'', since it is more like the Atlantic spotted dolphin (''Stenella frontalis'') than the common bottlenose.
Common bottlenose dolphins are probably attracted to fishing nets because they offer a concentrated food source.
The bottlenose dolphin can behave aggressively.
In US waters, hunting and harassing of marine mammals is forbidden in almost all circumstances, from the passing of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.
Scientists believe a mutation caused the ancient trait to reassert itself as a form of atavism.
The bottlenose dolphin is capable of defending itself by charging the predator; dolphin 'mobbing' behavior of sharks can occasionally prove fatal for the shark.
In Shark Bay, dolphins place a marine sponge on their rostrum, presumably to protect it when searching for food on the sandy sea bottom.
The population in the Moray Firth in Scotland is estimated to consist of around 190 individuals, and are under threat from harassment, traumatic injury, water pollution and reduction in food availability.
The dolphins drive a school of fish towards the shore, where humans await with nets.
Swimming in pods allows dolphins to better defend themselves against predators.
Although this varies by location, many populations share an appetite for fish from the mullet, the tuna and mackerel, and the drum and croaker families.
In the first half of July, 2014, four attacks with three Porpoise fatalities were observed and caught on video by the Cardigan Bay Marine Wildlife Centre in the Cardigan Bay.
The dolphins were not trained for this behavior; the collaboration began before 1847.
Boycotts of tuna products led to the concept of "dolphin-safe" labeling for fishing methods that avoid endangering dolphins.
At that time, the testes enlarge, enabling them to hold more sperm.
Their size varies considerably with habitat.
The popular television show ''Flipper'', created by Ivan Tors, portrayed a bottlenose dolphin in a friendly relationship with two boys, Sandy and Bud.
When a pod finds a school of fish, they will circle the school and trap the fish in a mini whirlpool.
This suggests sperm production is energetically expensive.
PFOS affects the immune system of male mice at a concentration of 91.5 ppb, while PFOS has been reported in bottlenose dolphins in excess of 1 ppm.
Intraspecies cooperative foraging has also been observed.
Controversially, Rendell and Whitehead have proposed a structure for the study of cetacean culture.
Bottlenose dolphins either use complex evasive strategies to outswim their predators, or mobbing techniques to batter the predator to death or force it to flee.
In colder waters, they have more body fat and blood, and are more suited to deeper diving.
Evidently, the dolphin waits for each click's echo before clicking again.
The bottlenose dolphin typically rises to the surface to breathe through its blowhole two to three times per minute, although it can remain submerged for up to 20 minutes.
Bottlenose dolphins can live for more than 40 years.Bottlenose Dolphin can jump at a height of 6 meters (20 feet) up in the air; they use this to communicate with one another.
Large amounts of sperm allow a male to wash away the previous suitor's sperm, while leaving some of his own for fertilization.
During the sleeping cycle, they remain near the surface, swimming slowly or "logging", and occasionally closing one eye.
A recent study found high levels of cadmium and mercury in bottlenose dolphins from South Australia, levels which were later found to be associated with kidney malformations, indicating possible health effects of high heavy metal concentrations in dolphins.
They can use tools (sponging) and transmit cultural knowledge across generations, and their considerable intelligence has driven interaction with humans.
Dolphins can exhibit altruistic behaviour toward other sea creatures.
Their diets consist mainly of forage fish.
Dolphins have sharp eyesight.
"Strand feeding", is an inherited feeding technique used by bottlenose dolphins near and around coastal regions of Georgia and South Carolina.
