Many jurisdictions and sanctioning agencies also have a "three-knockdown rule", in which three knockdowns in a given round result in a TKO.
The chin is tucked into the chest to avoid punches to the jaw which commonly cause knock-outs and is often kept slightly off-center.
While older boxing boots more commonly resembled those of a professional wrestler, modern boxing shoes and boots tend to be quite similar to their amateur wrestling counterparts.
The first documented account of a bare-knuckle fight in England appeared in 1681 in the ''London Protestant Mercury'', and the first English bare-knuckle champion was James Figg in 1719.
Amateur boxing may be found at the collegiate level, at the Olympic Games and Commonwealth Games, and in many other venues sanctioned by amateur boxing associations.
The Gothenburg study analyzed temporary levels of neurofiliment light in cerebral spinal fluid which they conclude is evidence of damage, even though the levels soon subside.
With about a minute left in the round, Chávez hit Taylor squarely with several hard punches and stayed on the attack, continuing to hit Taylor with well-placed shots.
Knocking a person unconscious or even causing concussion may cause permanent brain damage.
Notable out-fighters include Muhammad Ali, Larry Holmes, Joe Calzaghe Wilfredo Gómez,
It should be noted, that this earliest form of modern boxing was very different.
Boxers practice their skills on two basic types of punching bags.
Currently scoring blows in amateur boxing are subjectively counted by ringside judges, but the Australian Institute for Sport has demonstrated a prototype of an Automated Boxing Scoring System, which introduces scoring objectivity, improves safety, and arguably makes the sport more interesting to spectators.
They often have a higher chance than other fighting styles to score a knockout against their opponents because they focus on landing big, powerful hits, instead of smaller, faster attacks.
The out-fighter's main concern is to stay alert, as the brawler only needs to land one good punch to finish the fight.
These rules did allow the fighters an advantage not enjoyed by today's boxers; they permitted the fighter to drop to one knee to end the round and begin the 30-second count at any time.
Chávez was the epitome of the "Mexican" style of boxing.
An intentional foul that causes injury that prevents a fight from continuing usually causes the boxer who committed it to be disqualified.
Often slaves were used against one another in a circle marked on the floor.
A boxer may win the bout before a decision is reached through a knock-out ; such bouts are said to have ended "inside the distance".
The first instance of film censorship in the United States occurred in 1897 when several states banned the showing of prize fighting films from the state of Nevada, where it was legal at the time.
They observe that many skilled professional boxers have had rewarding careers without inflicting injury on opponents by accumulating scoring blows and avoiding punches winning rounds scored 10-9 by the 10-point must system, and they note that there are many other sports where concussions are much more prevalent.
Headgear is not permitted in professional bouts, and boxers are generally allowed to take much more damage before a fight is halted.
A bout in which the predetermined number of rounds passes is decided by the judges, and is said to "go the distance".
In AD 393, during the Roman gladiator period, boxing was abolished due to excessive brutality.
Salvador Sanchez, Cecilia Brækhus, Gene Tunney, Ezzard Charles, Willie Pep, Meldrick Taylor, Ricardo Lopez, Floyd Mayweather, Roy Jones, Jr., Sugar Ray Leonard, Miguel Vazquez, Sergio "Maravilla" Martínez, Vitali Klitschko, Wladimir Klitschko, and Guillermo Rigondeaux.
In 2007, one study of amateur boxers showed that protective headgear did not prevent brain damage, and another found that amateur boxers faced a high risk of brain damage.
It was banned in Albania from 1965 till the fall of Communism in 1991; it is now legal there.
Most trainers do not allow boxers to train and spar without wrist wraps and boxing gloves.
Referees also ensure that the boxers don't use holding tactics to prevent the opponent from swinging.
In addition, the corner is responsible for stopping the fight if they feel their fighter is in grave danger of permanent injury.
Each punch that lands cleanly on the head or torso with sufficient force is awarded a point.
Rearward motion involves lifting the rear leg and pushing with the lead leg.
There were no weight divisions or round limits, and no referee.
Through the early twentieth century, it was common for fights to have unlimited rounds, ending only when one fighter quit, benefiting high-energy fighters like Jack Dempsey.
Bouts consist of three rounds of three minutes in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games, and three rounds of three minutes in a national ABA (Amateur Boxing Association) bout, each with a one-minute interval between rounds.
Rounds were three minutes with one-minute rest intervals between rounds.
These styles may be divided into several special subgroups, such as counter puncher, etc.
On 6 January 1681, the first recorded boxing match took place in Britain when Christopher Monck, 2nd Duke of Albemarle (and later Lieutenant Governor of Jamaica) engineered a bout between his butler and his butcher with the latter winning the prize.
The International Boxing Hall of Fame opened in Canastota in 1989.
Notable counter punchers include Muhammad Ali, Vitali Klitschko, Evander Holyfield, Max Schmeling, Chris Byrd, Jim Corbett, Jack Johnson, Bernard Hopkins, Laszlo Papp, Jerry Quarry, Anselmo Moreno, James Toney, Marvin Hagler, Juan Manuel Márquez, Humberto Soto, Floyd Mayweather, Jr., Roger Mayweather, Pernell Whitaker, Sergio Gabriel Martinez and Guillermo Rigondeaux.
Like the jab, a half-step forward may be added.
A measure of an ideally extended cross is that the shoulder of the striking arm, the knee of the front leg and the ball of the front foot are on the same vertical plane.
Each boxer enters into the ring from their assigned corners at the beginning of each round and must cease fighting and return to their corner at the signaled end of each round.
From the guard position, the elbow is drawn back with a horizontal fist (knuckles pointing forward) and the elbow bent.
For most fighters, an amateur career, especially at the Olympics, serves to develop skills and gain experience in preparation for a professional career.
The torso and hips are rotated clockwise, propelling the fist through a tight, clockwise arc across the front of the body and connecting with the target.
Hand wraps are used to secure the bones in the hand, and the gloves are used to protect the hands from blunt injury, allowing boxers to throw punches with more force than if they did not utilize them.
Because of the open-ended style of boxing judging, many fights have controversial results, in which one or both fighters believe they have been "robbed" or unfairly denied a victory.
Some notable boxers who have been able to develop relative power in their jabs and use it to punish or 'wear down' their opponents to some effect include Larry Holmes and Wladimir Klitschko.
The positioning of the hands may also vary, as some fighters prefer to have both hands raised in front of the face, risking exposure to body shots.
After counting the referee will observe the fighter, and decide if he is fit to continue.
A small, tear-drop-shaped "speed bag" is used to hone reflexes and repetitive punching skills, while a large cylindrical "heavy bag" filled with sand, a synthetic substitute, or water is used to practice power punching and body blows.
The strategic utility of the uppercut depends on its ability to "lift" the opponent's body, setting it off-balance for successive attacks.
Prior to a bout, both boxers agree upon the weight of gloves to be used in the bout, with the understanding that lighter gloves allow heavy punchers to inflict more damage.
The gloves can be used to block an opponent's blows.
Three main styles exist in boxing: '''outside fighter''' ("boxer"), '''brawler''' (or "slugger"), and '''Inside fighter''' ("swarmer").
The lead (left) fist is held vertically about six inches in front of the face at eye level.
This can be seen in the fight between Diego Corrales and Floyd Mayweather.
Body rotation and the sudden weight transfer is what gives the cross its power.
Some boxers fight from a crouch, leaning forward and keeping their feet closer together.
In boxing, each fighter is given a corner of the ring where he rests in between rounds for 1 minute and where his trainers stand.
Brawlers tend to be more predictable and easy to hit but usually fare well enough against other fighting styles because they train to take punches very well.
Failure to abide by the former may result in a foul.
Out-fighters prefer a slower fight, with some distance between themselves and the opponent.
A distinct advantage that in-fighters have is when throwing uppercuts where they can channel their entire bodyweight behind the punch; Mike Tyson was famous for throwing devastating uppercuts.
However, not all brawler/slugger fighters are not mobile; some can move around and switch styles if needed but still have the brawler/slugger style such as Wilfredo Gómez, Prince Naseem Hamed and Danny García.
Their movement and tactics are similar to that of an out-fighter (although they are generally not as mobile as an out-fighter), but instead of winning by decision, they tend to wear their opponents down using combinations and then move in to score the knockout.
The right uppercut followed by a left hook is a deadly combination employing the uppercut to lift the opponent's chin into a vulnerable position, then the hook to knock the opponent out.
The white end just is a way to make it easier for judges to score clean hits.
However, especially in later times, purchased slaves and trained combat performers were valuable commodities, and their lives were not given up without due consideration.
It was banned in Sweden until 2007 when the ban was lifted but strict restrictions, including four three-minute rounds for fights, were imposed.
A fight with a skilled counter-puncher can turn into a war of attrition, where each shot landed is a battle in itself.
The essence of a swarmer is non-stop aggression.
Contests in Mr. Figg's time, in addition to fist fighting, also contained fencing and cudgeling.
An early article on boxing was published in Nottingham, 1713, by Sir Thomas Parkyns, a successful Wrestler from Bunny, Nottinghamshire, who had practised the techniques he described.
Out-fighters need reach, hand speed, reflexes, and footwork.
In that case, the other participant is awarded a technical knockout win.
Amateur boxing has a point scoring system that measures the number of clean blows landed rather than physical damage.
Early fighting had no written rules.
Typically, three men stand in the corner besides the boxer himself; these are the trainer, the assistant trainer and the cutman.
Throughout the early twentieth century, boxers struggled to achieve legitimacy.
Notable in-fighters include Julio César Chávez, Miguel Cotto, Joe Frazier, Danny García, Mike Tyson, Manny Pacquiao, Saúl Álvarez, Rocky Marciano, Jack Dempsey, Wayne McCullough, Gerry Penalosa, Harry Greb, David Tua, Ricky Hatton and Gennady Golovkin.
In modern boxing, there is a three-minute limit to rounds (unlike the downed fighter ends the round rule).
Going into the final round, Taylor held a secure lead on the scorecards of two of the three judges.
The brand of gloves can also affect the impact of punches, so this too is usually stipulated before a bout.
Many brawlers tend to lack mobility, preferring a less mobile, more stable platform and have difficulty pursuing fighters who are fast on their feet.
The boxer's shorts are raised so the opponent is not allowed to hit to the groin area with intent to cause pain or injury.
A famous example of this type of match-up advantage would be George Foreman's knockout victory over Joe Frazier in their original bout "The Sunshine Showdown".
Furthermore, as the contestants did not have heavy leather gloves and wristwraps to protect their hands, they used different punching technique to preserve their hands, because the head was a common target to hit full out.
In-fighters operate best at close range because they are generally shorter and have less reach than their opponents and thus are more effective at a short distance where the longer arms of their opponents make punching awkward.
A hook may also target the lower body and this technique is sometimes called the "rip" to distinguish it from the conventional hook to the head.
The cutman is a cutaneous doctor responsible for keeping the boxer's face and eyes free of cuts and blood.
By using the ring ropes to pull himself up, Taylor managed to return to his feet and was given the mandatory 8-count.
Modern boxers can sometimes be seen tapping their cheeks or foreheads with their fists in order to remind themselves to keep their hands up (which becomes difficult during long bouts).
Most classic boxers, such as Muhammad Ali, enjoyed their best successes against sluggers.
There are also some two- and three-round professional bouts, especially in Australia.
There is no clear division between the force required to knock a person out and the force likely to kill a person.
If he is successful enough, he may even apply extra pressure in the later rounds in an attempt to achieve a knockout.
More comprehensive studies of neurologiocal function on larger samples performed by Johns Hopkins University and accident rates analyzed by National Safety Council show amateur boxing is a comparatively safe sport.
It follows the rock-paper-scissors scenario - boxer beats brawler, brawler beats swarmer, and swarmer beats boxer.
An illegal punch to the back of the head or neck is known as a rabbit punch.
After the cross is thrown, the hand is retracted quickly and the guard position resumed.
An average pair of boxing gloves resembles a bloated pair of mittens and are laced up around the wrists.
A brawler's most important assets are power and chin (the ability to absorb punishment while remaining able to continue boxing).
A brawler is a fighter who generally lacks finesse and footwork in the ring, but makes up for it through sheer punching power.
They are prohibited from holding the ropes for support when punching, holding an opponent while punching, or ducking below the belt of their opponent (dropping below the waist of your opponent, no matter the distance between).
The modern Olympic movement revived interest in amateur sports, and amateur boxing became an Olympic sport in 1908.
There are cases however, where white ended gloves are not required but any solid color may be worn.
Boxing was a popular spectator sport in Ancient Rome.
Since then, the British, Canadian and Australian Medical Associations have called for bans on boxing.
In addition to these distinctive pieces of equipment, boxers also utilize sport-nonspecific training equipment to build strength, speed, agility, and stamina.
Dr. Bill O'Neill, boxing spokesman for the British Medical Association, has supported the BMA's proposed ban on boxing: "It is the only sport where the intention is to inflict serious injury on your opponent, and we feel that we must have a total ban on boxing."
Many short in-fighters utilize their stature to their advantage, employing a bob-and-weave defense by bending at the waist to slip underneath or to the sides of incoming punches.
The first inductees in 1990 included Jack Johnson, Benny Leonard, Jack Dempsey, Henry Armstrong, Sugar Ray Robinson, Archie Moore, and Muhammad Ali.
A classic "boxer" or stylist (also known as an "out-fighter") seeks to maintain distance between himself and his opponent, fighting with faster, longer range punches, most notably the jab, and gradually wearing his opponent down.
Due to its relatively weak power, the jab is often used as a tool to gauge distances, probe an opponent's defenses, harass an opponent, and set up heavier, more powerful punches.
Oftentimes they place focus on training on their upper body instead of their entire body, to increase power and endurance.
Any punch other than a jab is considered a power punch.
A "technical knock-out" (TKO) is possible as well, and is ruled by the referee, fight doctor, or a fighter's corner if a fighter is unable to safely continue to fight, based upon injuries or being judged unable to effectively defend themselves.
North American fighters tend to favor a more balanced stance, facing the opponent almost squarely, while many European fighters stand with their torso turned more to the side.
The term "ring" has come to be used as a metaphor for many aspects of prize fighting in general.
Often, media outlets covering a match will personally score the match, and post their scores as an independent sentence in their report.
The trainer and assistant typically give advice to the boxer on what he is doing wrong as well as encouraging him if he is losing.
A belt worn over the torso represents the lower limit of punches – any boxer repeatedly landing low blows below the belt is disqualified.
Counter punchers usually wear their opponents down by causing them to miss their punches.
The article, a single page in his manual of wrestling and fencing, ''Progymnasmata: The inn-play, or Cornish-hugg wrestler'', described a system of headbutting, punching, eye-gouging, chokes, and hard throws, not recognized in boxing today.
In general, boxers are prohibited from hitting below the belt, holding, tripping, pushing, biting, or spitting.
An example of a style matchup was the historical fight of Julio César Chávez, a swarmer or in-fighter, against Meldrick Taylor, the boxer or out-fighter (see Julio César Chávez vs. Meldrick Taylor).
"Style" is often defined as the strategic approach a fighter takes during a bout.
Norway legalized professional boxing in December 2014.
The hook may also be thrown with the rear hand.
This style can be incredibly difficult, especially against seasoned fighters, but winning a fight without getting hit is often worth the pay-off.
Among the notable names in the WBHF are Ricardo "Finito" Lopez, Gabriel "Flash" Elorde, Michael Carbajal, Khaosai Galaxy, Henry Armstrong, Jack Johnson, Roberto Durán, George Foreman, Ceferino Garcia and Salvador Sanchez.
** At the same time, the knees push upwards quickly and the torso and hips rotate anti-clockwise and the rear heel turns outward, mimicking the body movement of the cross.
Outlawed in England and much of the United States, prizefights were often held at gambling venues and broken up by police.
As the punch reaches full extension, the lead shoulder can be brought up to guard the chin.
The inaugural inductees included Muhammad Ali, Henry Armstrong, Tony Canzoneri, Ezzard Charles, Julio Cesar Chavez Sr., Jack Dempsey, Roberto Duran, Joe Louis, and Sugar Ray Robinson
If a fighter is knocked down during the fight, determined by whether the boxer touches the canvas floor of the ring with any part of their body other than the feet as a result of the opponent's punch and not a slip, as determined by the referee, the referee begins counting until the fighter returns to his or her feet and can continue.
They also are prohibited from kicking, head-butting, or hitting with any part of the arm other than the knuckles of a closed fist (including hitting with the elbow, shoulder or forearm, as well as with open gloves, the wrist, the inside, back or side of the hand).
For a left-handed boxer or southpaw, the hand positions are reversed.
This is of particular importance because many fights are stopped because of cuts that threaten the boxer's eyes.
Boxing is supervised by a referee over a series of one- to three-minute intervals called rounds.
A boxer-puncher is a well-rounded boxer who is able to fight at close range with a combination of technique and power, often with the ability to knock opponents out with a combination and in some instances a single shot.
Relying on body weight and centripetal force within a wide arc, the roundhouse can be a powerful blow, but it is often a wild and uncontrolled punch that leaves the fighter delivering it off balance and with an open guard.
This style was also used by fictional boxer Apollo Creed.
A punch is considered a scoring punch only when the boxers connect with the white portion of the gloves.
They are often regarded as the best boxing strategists due to their ability to control the pace of the fight and lead their opponent, methodically wearing him down and exhibiting more skill and finesse than a brawler.
Left-handed or southpaw fighters use a mirror image of the orthodox stance, which can create problems for orthodox fighters unaccustomed to receiving jabs, hooks, or crosses from the opposite side.
** At the same time, the lead foot pivots clockwise, turning the left heel outwards.
The rear hand remains next to the face to guard the jaw.
In contrast with amateur boxing, professional male boxers have to be bare-chested.
The corner will occasionally throw in a white towel to signify a boxer's surrender (the idiomatic phrase "to throw in the towel", meaning to give up, derives from this practice).
The rear shoulder is thrust forward and finishes just touching the outside of the chin.
File:jab7.jpg|''Jab''
Officially, however, a "no decision" bout resulted in neither boxer winning or losing.
The result is decided when an opponent is deemed incapable to continue by a referee, is disqualified for breaking a rule, resigns by throwing in a towel, or is pronounced the winner or loser based on the judges' scorecards at the end of the contest.
In 1983, editorials in the ''Journal of the American Medical Association'' called for a ban on boxing.
For clarity, the following discussion will assume a right-handed boxer.
Thus, fighting against counter punchers requires constant feinting and the ability to avoid telegraphing one's attacks.
The rear hand is tucked firmly against the jaw to protect the chin.
The first world heavyweight champion under the Queensberry Rules was "Gentleman Jim" Corbett, who defeated John L. Sullivan in 1892 at the Pelican Athletic Club in New Orleans.
Taylor's hand and foot speed and boxing abilities gave him the early advantage, allowing him to begin building a large lead on points.
In a fully upright stance, the boxer stands with the legs shoulder-width apart and the rear foot a half-step in front of the lead man.
The match was nicknamed "Thunder Meets Lightning" as an allusion to punching power of Chávez and blinding speed of Taylor.
For example, the swarming Joe Frazier, though easily dominated by the slugger George Foreman, was able to create many more problems for the boxer Muhammad Ali in their three fights.
Common training equipment includes free weights, rowing machines, jump rope, and medicine balls.
They may also have a tendency to ignore combination punching in favor of continuous beat-downs with one hand and by throwing slower, more powerful single punches (such as hooks and uppercuts).
Eventually harder leather was used and the thong soon became a weapon.
Boxing matches typically take place in a boxing ring, a raised platform surrounded by ropes attached to posts rising in each corner.
Opponents respond that such a position is misguided opinion, stating that amateur boxing is scored solely according to total connecting blows with no award for "injury".
Wrists are slightly bent to avoid damage when punching and the elbows are kept tucked in to protect the ribcage.
In order for the fighters to protect themselves against their opponents they wrapped leather thongs around their fists.
In their current form, Olympic and other amateur bouts are typically limited to three or four rounds, scoring is computed by points based on the number of clean blows landed, regardless of impact, and fighters wear protective headgear, reducing the number of injuries, knockdowns, and knockouts.
Records of Classical boxing activity disappeared after the fall of the Western Roman Empire when the wearing of weapons became common once again and interest in fighting with the fists waned.
But this did not prevent the pool of ringside newspaper reporters from declaring a consensus result among themselves and printing a newspaper decision in their publications.
They were aided by the influence of promoters like Tex Rickard and the popularity of great champions such as John L. Sullivan.
The main philosophy of the styles is, that each style has an advantage over one, but disadvantage over the other one.
For this reason, the haymaker or roundhouse is not a conventional punch, and is regarded by trainers as a mark of poor technique or desperation.
There are four basic punches in boxing: the jab, cross, hook and uppercut.
It is this exclusive fight film library that will separate the Boxing Hall of Fame Las Vegas from the other halls of fame which do not have rights to any video of their sports.
Intentionally going down in modern boxing will cause the recovering fighter to lose points in the scoring system.
The in-fighter tries to close that gap and unleash furious flurries.
Coming into the later rounds, Taylor was bleeding from the mouth, his entire face was swollen, the bones around his eye socket had been broken, he had swallowed a considerable amount of his own blood, and as he grew tired, Taylor was increasingly forced into exchanging blows with Chávez, which only gave Chávez a greater chance to cause damage.
For additional power, the torso and hips are rotated counter-clockwise as the cross is thrown.
For this reason, fighters often employ cutmen, whose job is to treat cuts between rounds so that the boxer is able to continue despite the cut.
However, Taylor did not stay away, but continued to trade blows with Chávez.
Boxing historians sometimes use these unofficial newspaper decisions in compiling fight records for illustrative purposes only.
These different punch types can be thrown in rapid succession to form combinations or "combos."
Almost all period manuals have powerful straight punches with the whole body behind them to the face (including forehead) as the basic blows.
A "standing eight" count rule may also be in effect.
While there was little doubt that Taylor had solidly won the first three quarters of the fight, the question at hand was whether he would survive the final quarter.
The English case of ''R v. Coney'' in 1882 found that a bare-knuckle fight was an assault occasioning actual bodily harm, despite the consent of the participants.
A fighter who suffers an accidental low-blow may be given up to five minutes to recover, after which they may be ruled knocked out if they are unable to continue.
While people have fought in hand-to-hand combat since before the dawn of history, the origin of boxing as an organized sport may be its acceptance by the ancient Greeks as an Olympic game in BC 688.
Wide, looping punches have the further disadvantage of taking more time to deliver, giving the opponent ample warning to react and counter.
As such, knockouts are more common than one would expect from a defensive style.
Since boxing involves forceful, repetitive punching, precautions must be taken to prevent damage to bones in the hand.
For scoring purposes, a standing eight count is treated as a knockdown.
With three judges, unanimous and split decisions are possible, as are draws.
Broughton encouraged the use of 'mufflers', a form of padded bandage or mitten, to be used in 'jousting' or sparring sessions in training, and in exhibition matches.
