Boroughs and districts are subdivisions of the local council and do not have a separate corporate status.
Local councils offer the advanced National Youth Leadership Training and the National Council offers the National Advanced Youth Leadership Experience conducted at Philmont Training Center.
The board is led by the national president, a volunteer elected by the National Council.
The pinewood derby—a wood car racing event for Cub Scouts—has been declared "a celebrated rite of spring" and was named part of "America's 100 Best" by ''Reader's Digest''.
Unlike the BSA's Learning for Life, membership in the traditional BSA programs is more restricted and controversial.
The National Council is the corporate membership of the Boy Scouts of America and consists of volunteer Scouters who meet annually.
The first jamboree was held in 1937 at the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C.
Every adult leader must complete Youth Protection Training, and then is strongly encouraged to complete a general overview training called ''This is Scouting'', and a ''Fast Start'' training specific to his/her program level.
As part of Service to America, the BSA provided service projects in conjunction with the National Park Service (NPS).
* Western Region covers all of Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, New Mexico, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Wyoming, most of Montana, parts of Nebraska, South Dakota, and Texas, territories located in the Pacific Ocean, and members of the BSA Far East Council.
Interested in the Boy Scouts, Boyce met with staff at the Boy Scouts Headquarters and, by some accounts, Baden-Powell.
Position-specific training is then offered for all direct-contact leaders.
Other members include LDS Church President Thomas S. Monson.
On July 27, 2015, the Boy Scouts of America National Executive Board voted to lift the organization's blanket ban on openly gay leaders and employees.
United Methodist Church
The All Markets membership emphasis includes focus groups and special committees working to improve outreach to youth and families in various underserved ethnic populations, with literature and marketing materials targeting Hispanic/Latino families, Asian-American families, and African-American families.
Alvin Townley wrote in ''Legacy of Honor'' about the large positive impact of Eagle Scouts in America.
The BSA does prohibit members who are atheist and agnostic based on its "Duty to God" principle.
Councils are divided into districts with leadership provided by the district executive, district chairman, and the district commissioner.
Gates said, it “cannot be sustained,” any longer.
* Central Region covers all of Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Ohio, Wisconsin, and parts of Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Montana, Nebraska, South Dakota, Virginia, and West Virginia.
President Gerald Ford said, "I can say without hesitation, because of Scouting principles, I know I was a better athlete, I was a better naval officer, I was a better Congressman, and I was a better prepared President."
Other divisions provides support for the world and national jamborees and International Scouting relations.
Present and past members of the National Executive Board include former presidential nominee Mitt Romney, Ernst & Young CEO James Turley and AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson.
Boy Scout and Varsity Scout youth leaders may attend the unit-level Troop Leadership Training.
Each offers a wide range of programs and training— a typical core program may include sailing, wilderness canoeing or wilderness backpacking trips.
The voting members of each district consist of volunteer representatives from each chartered organization having at least one BSA unit, plus annually elected members-at-large who in turn elect the district chairman.
Today, the BSA does not prohibit gay and lesbian adults or youth from participation.
Contributions and bequests
A series of awards provide opportunities for recognition and personal growth.
The highest level of BSA training is Wood Badge, which is focused on helping participants develop leadership skills while participating in an outdoor program over two weekends.
The Scout executive manages council operations—including finance, property management, advancement and awards, registrations, and Scout Shop sales—with a staff of other professionals and para-professionals.
The Greater New York Councils are unique in that they are divided into five boroughs with each led by a borough Scout executive and each borough then divided into districts.
In 1997, the BSA developed Service to America with a commitment to provide 200&nbsp;million hours of service by youth members by the end of the year 2000.
Administrative expenses
The council executive board is headed by the council president and is made up of annually elected local community leaders.
The Aloha Council in Hawaii also serves BSA units in the American territories of American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands and in the sovereign countries of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau.
One exception to this policy is the Walt Disney movie ''Follow Me, Boys!''
The Chief Scout Executive is the board secretary and non-voting member.
Venturers plan and participate in interdependent group experiences dependent on cooperation.
During World War I, ''Every Scout to Save a Soldier'' was a slogan used to motivate children involved in Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts to help sell War savings stamps.
These bases are administered by the High Adventure Division of the National Council.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was the first partner to sponsor Scouting in the United States, adopting the program in 1913 as part of its Mutual Improvement Association program for young men.
In 2000, the Supreme Court ruled in ''Boy Scouts of America v. Dale'' that Boy Scouts, and all similar private voluntary organizations, have the constitutionally protected right under the First Amendment of freedom of association to set membership standards.
(see Scouting in the United States).
Within each chartered organization, there may be one or more "units".
The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve near Beckley, West Virginia is now the permanent site beginning with the 2013 National Scout Jamboree.
Before joining, youth must discuss with their parents a pamphlet on sexual abuse and adults must take youth protection training and, since 2003, new adult members must pass a criminal background check (adults who were already members had to pass a background check by 2008).
Famed American illustrator Norman Rockwell's works were closely associated with the Boy Scouts of America for much of the 20th century.
Scouting's genuinely egalitarian goals and instincts are more important now than they've ever been.
The BSA operates traditional Scouting by chartering local organizations, such as churches, clubs, civic associations, or educational organization, to implement the Scouting program for youth within their communities.
The BSA charters two councils for American Scouts living overseas, largely on military bases in Europe and Asia.
On June 12, 2013, the Southern Baptist Convention passed non-binding resolutions urging the BSA not to change their policy.
In 1909, Chicago publisher W. D. Boyce was visiting London, where he encountered a boy who came to be known as the Unknown Scout.
Volunteer commissioners lead the unit service functions of the council, help maintain the standards of the BSA, and assures a healthy unit program.
Intel, UPS, and Merck cut financial ties with the BSA over the policy decision.
Many famous Americans are Eagle Scouts: astronaut Neil Armstrong, film director Michael Moore, TV host Mike Rowe, Steven Spielberg, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, and President Gerald Ford are just a small sample of Eagle Scouts.
Parent-Teacher Association/Parent Teacher Organization
Tarr, a Chief Scout Executive in the United States, was quoted in the 1980s in an article regarding sexual assault cases against Scout leaders across all 50 states: "That's been an issue since the Boy Scouts began."
There have also been several high-profile court cases that resulted in convictions and settlements involving such incidents.
Additional recognition can be earned through Eagle Palms, awarded for completing additional tenure, leadership, and merit badge requirements.
Upon his return to the US, Boyce incorporated the '''Boy Scouts of America''' on February 8, 1910.
The Venturing change will occur in late 2013 or early 2014; the Cub Scout change will take effect in mid-2015.
"On my honor, I will do my best, to do my duty, to God and my country, and to obey the Scout Law, to help other people at all times, to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight."
It is usually held every four years, with some adjustment for special years such as the 2010 National Scout Jamboree that celebrated the BSA centennial.
Sea Scouting leaders can take the Seabadge advanced leadership and management course.
However, Intel and UPS cut funding to BSA in 2012.
As of January 2007, the American Institute of Philanthropy listed former Chief Scout Executive Roy Williams as having the fifth-highest compensation of any nonprofit chief in the United States, at $916,028.
This includes an extensive service project that the Scout plans, organizes, leads, and manages.
Several Scout programs for boys started independently in the US.
The advancement system uses both age-based ranks and an optional Academics and Sports Program designed for the development of physical, mental and emotional fitness.
Beginning in 1913, Rockwell began illustrating covers of ''Boys' Life'', the magazine for BSA youth.
Magazine publications
Name of Organization
The board establishes the council program and carries out the resolutions, policies, and activities of the council.
For younger members, the Scout method is part of the program to instill typical Scouting values such as trustworthiness, good citizenship, and outdoors skills, through a variety of activities such as camping, aquatics, and hiking.
With the migration of families from farms to cities, there were concerns among some people that young men were no longer learning patriotism and individualism.
Scouts share responsibilities, apply skills learned at meetings and live together in the outdoors.
The special recognition neither implies nor accords Congress any special control over the BSA, which remains free to function independently.
Venturers and Sea Scouts may attend the unit-level Introduction to Leadership Skills for Crews or Introduction to Leadership Skills for Ships.
The regular size patch may be worn on the right breast shirt pocket, in the temporary patch spot.
Learning for Life is a school and work-site based program that is a subsidiary of the BSA.
A Scout who attains this rank is called an Eagle Scout.
On May 23, 2013, 61% of the 1,400-member BSA National Council voted to remove the restriction denying membership to youth on the basis of sexual orientation while emphasizing that any sexual conduct, whether heterosexual or homosexual, is not allowed.
Over two-thirds of all astronauts have had some type of involvement in Scouting, and eleven of the twelve men to walk on the Moon were Scouts, including Eagle Scouts Neil Armstrong and Charlie Duke.
Scouting for Food is an ongoing annual program begun in 1986 that collects food for local food banks.
The Boy Scouts of America also offers the NYLT Leadership Academy which trains youth staff members from across the country for council-level NYLT courses.
The National Supply Group is responsible for developing and selling uniforms, apparel, insignia, literature, and equipment.
In May 2015, Boy Scouts of America President Robert Gates said it was time to end the ban on gay leaders.
Charity Watch rates BSA an "A".
In 2004, the BSA adopted a new policy statement, including a "Youth Leadership" policy that disallowed members to continue in leadership positions in the event they were to hold themselves out as "open and avowed homosexuals."
* Southern Region covers all of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and Tennessee, and parts of Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Mayor of New York City and business tycoon Michael Bloomberg, said that the BSA's Scout Law required of all Boy Scouts—a Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent—are "all the American values&nbsp;...&nbsp;Americans have quaintly simplistic ways and direct ways of phrasing things&nbsp;...&nbsp;I think it's one of the great strengths of this country."
In October 2003, the Department of the Interior expanded the program with the creation of Take Pride in America, opening service to all Americans.
Each unit is sponsored by a community organization as part of their youth program and is involved in the neighborhood and community.
Net investment gain
"Two deep" leadership dictates that no adult member  can be alone with any youth member (other than their own child).
Parent-teacher groups other than PTAs
Within the BSA National Executive Board, members James Turley, CEO of Ernst & Young, and Randall Stephenson, CEO of AT&T and who was then "on track to become president of the Scout's national board in 2014" and later was, publicly opposed the policy and stated their intention "to work from within the BSA Board to actively encourage dialogue and sustainable progress" in changing the policy.
Venturers are expected to know and live by the Venturing Oath and Venturing Code.
In order to further these outdoor activities, the BSA has four high-adventure bases that operate in Florida, Minnesota, New Mexico, West Virginia, Manitoba, and Ontario.
Williams was honored in 2005 and 2006 as one of the top fifty most effective non-profit leaders by ''The NonProfit Times''.
The BSA also participates in the American Indian Scouting Association in partnership with the Girl Scouts of the USA.
The National Executive Board has a number of standing committees that correspond to the professional staff organization of the National Council.
It utilizes programs designed for schools and community-based organizations that are designed to prepare youth for the complexities of contemporary society and to enhance their self-confidence, motivation, and self-esteem.
Anyone certified as disabled "may enroll in Scouting and remain in its program beyond the regulation age limits.
Robert Mazzuca, Chief Scout Executive of Boy Scouts of America, received $1,211,572 in salary and compensation.
The BSA's stated purpose at its incorporation in 1910 was "to teach boys patriotism, courage, self-reliance, and kindred values."
Learning for Life is a non-traditional subsidiary that provides in-school and career education.
Total Units (2012 / 2013)
However, in July 2012, at the culmination of a review started in 2010, an 11-person committee convened by the BSA reached a "unanimous consensus" recommending retaining the current policy.
The BSA council provides the leader training, inter-unit activities, camping programs, volunteer and professional support, and insurance coverage.
A unit is a group of youth and adults which are collectively designated as a Cub Scout pack, Boy Scout troop, Varsity Scout team, or Venturing crew/Sea Scout ship.
The Boy Scouts of America operates a National Camping School program, which trains people how to run various departments or areas at the Boy Scout summer camps.
In 1907, Robert Baden-Powell, founded the Scouting movement in England using elements of Seton's works among other influences.
Crew officers can attend Crew Officer Orientation, and then a council-provided Kodiak leadership training program.
Some councils offer high-adventure training for adults using the Powder Horn program.
Scouts interact with adult leaders who act as role models and mentors, but they are expected to plan their own activities within the troop and to participate in community service.
Some churches and conservative members threatened to quit the Boy Scouts in response.
Governor Rick Perry of Texas is an Eagle Scout who defended BSA policies and restrictions against ACLU criticisms in his book, ''On My Honor: Why the American Values of the Boy Scouts Are Worth Fighting For''.
Boyce was lost on a foggy street when an unknown Scout came to his aid, guiding him to his destination.
They learn and apply the ideals codified in the Cub Scout Promise and the Law of the Pack,  and in the Character Connections program that develops the core values of citizenship, compassion, cooperation, courage, faith, health and fitness, honesty, perseverance, positive attitude, resourcefulness, respect and responsibility.
Board members serve without pay and some are volunteer Scouters working at the unit level.
It was released to theaters in 1966 and re-released in 1976.
At the turn of the 20th century, Halloween had turned into a night of vandalism, with destruction of property and cruelty to animals and people.
Primary trading post sales
The council level organization is similar to that of the National Council.
The Youth Protection Plan from the organization is linked to in a CDC report on such programs.
Each chartered organization may charter as many units as it wishes, but usually only 3 or 4 (one unit for each program level).
The BSA holds a Congressional charter under Title 36 of the United States Code, which means that it is one of the comparatively rare "Title 36" corporations in the United States.
All Learning for Life programs are open to youth and adults without restriction based on gender, residence, sexual orientation, or other considerations other than age requirements.
Current high-adventure bases of the Boy Scouts of America include Philmont Scout Ranch, Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases, Florida National High Adventure Sea Base, and The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve which was the site of the 2013 Jamboree.
In addition to donations from individuals, the BSA receives extensive donations from major corporations.
One of the principal reasons for seeking a Congressional Charter was as a way to deal with competition from other Scout organizations including the United States Boy Scouts and the Lone Scouts of America, The 1916 statute of incorporation established this institution among a small number of other patriotic and national organizations which are similarly chartered, such as the Girl Scouts of the USA, the American Legion, the Red Cross, Little League Baseball, and the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Council is incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization and is funded from private donations, membership dues, corporate sponsors, and special events.
The BSA pursues these aims through an informal education system called the Scout method, with variations that are designed to be appropriate for the age and maturity of each membership division.
The Boy Scouts of America partners with community organizations, such as religious congregations, fraternal groups, service clubs, and other community associations, to provide the Scouting program for the particular neighborhood or community in which the particular organization wishes to outreach to youth and families.
Boy Scouts learn to use the ideals spelled out in the Scout Oath, the Scout Law, the Outdoor Code, the Scout motto ("Be prepared"), and the Scout slogan ("Do a good turn daily").
Cub Scouts wear a uniform that gives each boy a level of identity within the den, the pack and the community.
Learning for Life is not considered a traditional Scouting program; it does not use the Scout Promise, Scout Law, uniforms, or insignia of traditional Scouting.
On January 28, 2013, the BSA announced they were considering rescinding the ban on homosexuals, allowing chartered organizations to determine local policy.
The Administrative Group provides internal administration service and support.
As part of the US Bicentennial celebrations in 1976, Rockwell's Scouting paintings toured the nation and were viewed by 280,000 people.
A permanent location owned by the BSA was sought in 2008 for future jamborees, high adventure programs and training.
On October 19, 2012, the Boy Scouts of America were forced by court order to release over 20,000 pages of documentation on 1200 alleged child sexual abuse cases within the organization from between 1965 and 1985.
Each chartered organization provides the meeting place for BSA youth, oversees the volunteer leaders, and agrees to follow the basic BSA safety policies and values-based program, and the organization is considered the "owner" of its local program, much like a franchise.
The '''Program Impact Division''' is responsible for developing the Scouting program and includes the volunteer committees and staff working on volunteer training, youth development, and other program impact needs.
They associate and work directly with adults as partners, but the crew is led by elected youth officers who are given opportunities to learn and apply leadership skills.
Local chartering organizations are still permitted to set their own standards based on religious principle for selecting the adult volunteers for their unit.
The first national Good Turn was the promotion of a safe and sane Fourth of July in 1912.
The traditional Scouting divisions are ''Cub Scouting'' for boys ages 7 to 10½ years, ''Boy Scouting'' for boys ages 10½ to 18 and ''Venturing'' for young men and women ages 14 (or 13 and having completed the 8th grade) through 21.
Around 1912, the BSA, Boys Clubs and other neighborhood organizations came together to encourage a safe celebration that would end the destruction that had become so common on this night.
Each award requires the Venturer to teach what they have learned to others returning the skill and knowledge back to the community and enabling the Venturer to master those skills.
Requirements include earning at least 21 merit badges and demonstrating Scout Spirit through the Boy Scout Oath and Law, service, and leadership.
He also drew the organization's annual calendar illustrations between 1925 and 1976.
The federal incorporation was originally construed primarily as an honor; however, it does grant the chartered organization some special privileges and rights, including freedom from antitrust and monopoly regulation and complete control over the organization's symbols and insignia.
Most advancement is done in the home and is intended to involve the entire family and many Cub Scout activities include family members.
BSA had two notable predecessors in the United States: the Woodcraft Indians started by Ernest Thompson Seton in 1902 in Cos Cob, Connecticut, and the Sons of Daniel Boone founded by Daniel Carter Beard in 1905 in Cincinnati, Ohio.
He concluded that, although Scouting is viewed by some as old-fashioned, "Scouting's core values&nbsp;...&nbsp;are wonderful building blocks for a movement and a life.
The '''Membership Impact Division''' works to sustain marketing efforts and relationships with the national organizations that make up the predominant number of chartered organizations, such as Lions International, Rotary International, Kiwanis International, American Legion, Elks, VFW, and all religious denominations chartering BSA units.
Advancement is measured by the achievement to the best of the Scout's abilities.
There are about 100,000 physically or mentally disabled Scouts throughout the United States.
Girls may not join Cub Scouting or Boy Scouting, but may join Venturing and Sea Scouting; women can be adult volunteers in all programs.
In 2005, the BSA ranked as the twelfth-largest non-profit organization in the US, with total revenues of $665.9&nbsp;million.
Retirement benefits trust
This is the 4th highest compensation package given by any charity to the head of the charity, according to Charity Watch.
At another table, several Cub Scouts, in full uniform, are seated.
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.)
Eagle Scouts are presented with a medal and a badge that visibly recognizes the accomplishments of the Scout.
On July 10, 2015, the Boy Scouts of America Executive Committee agreed, and referred the matter to the National Executive Board.
The day-to-day operations of the National Council are administered by the Chief Scout Executive and other national professional staff.
It sells equipment and supplies through National Scout Shops, local council trading posts, authorized independent resellers, and online at ScoutStuff.org.
In 2010, their top corporate donors were, in order, Intel, Emerson, Verizon, 3M, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Pfizer, Valero, UPS, U.S. Bank, Eli Lilly, GE, and Monsanto.
It includes the '''Marketing and Communications Division''' responsible for marketing the BSA program, administering the national websites, and publishing ''Scouting'' for adult leaders and ''Boys' Life'' for youth.
National Camping School certification is valid for five years.
Many of these Scout programs in the US merged with the BSA.
Regions and areas are subdivisions of the National Council and do not have a corporate status separate from the BSA.
Units are led entirely by volunteers appointed by the chartering organization, who are supported by local councils using both paid Professional Scouters and volunteers.
Exhibits include Norman Rockwell paintings, high adventure sections, hands-on learning experiences, interactive exhibits, and a historical collection tracing uniforms, themes, and documents from the beginning of the Scouting movement in America.
Prominent Americans in diverse walks of life, from filmmaker Steven Spielberg (who helped launch a merit badge in cinematography) to adventurer Steve Fossett to politicians, were BSA members as youths.
At the Scouts annual meeting in April 2012, a leader from the Northeast presented a resolution that "would allow individual units to accept gays as adult leaders".
In January 1911, Robinson turned the movement over to James E. West who became the first Chief Scout Executive and Scouting began to expand in the US
'''Exploring''' is the worksite-based program of Learning for Life with programs based on five areas of emphasis: career opportunities, life skills, citizenship, character education, and leadership experience.
This provision allows all members to advance in Scouting as far as they wish."
Some online training is offered, but most areas require an in-person week-long training program at one of the National Camping Schools.
with Fred McMurray portraying a Scoutmaster of a rural troop.
Peter Applebome, an editor of ''The New York Times'', wrote in 2003 of his experience as an adult participating with his son in Scouting activities, "I feel lucky to have had this unexpected vehicle to share my son's youth, to shape it, and to be shaped by it as well."
It's one of the only things that kids do that's genuinely cooperative, not competitive."
Another is the final scene of ''The Sopranos'' television show, where Tony Soprano sits down to dinner in a restaurant.
The '''Outdoor Adventure Division''' oversees four "High Adventure" bases Philmont Scout Ranch, Northern Tier National High Adventure Bases, The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve, and Florida National High Adventure Sea Base, as well as other special programs and the Order of the Arrow.
* Northeast Region covers all of Connecticut, District of Columbia, Delaware, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virgin Islands (US), parts of Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia, and members of the BSA Transatlantic Council.
In 2005, Williams' pay was 0.26%&nbsp;of total expenses, whereas the national average among charities was a higher 0.34%.
The National Scouting Museum is located in Irving, Texas.
Total Youth (2012 / 2013)
Since the founding of the BSA in 1910, the President of the United States has served as the organization's honorary president during his term in office.
Mark Mays, CEO of Clear Channel Communications, told a magazine interviewer in May 2008 that, "Particularly in the very impactful ages of youth 11&nbsp;to&nbsp;14 years old, when they can really go astray and you're taking the time to spend with them and focus on cultural core values like reverent, trustworthy, loyal, and helpful&nbsp;—all of those different things&nbsp;...&nbsp;Scouting has a huge positive impact on boys and their lives, and that in turn positively impacts our communities and society as a whole."
The current mission statement of the BSA is "to prepare young people to make ethical and moral choices over their lifetimes by instilling in them the values of the Scout Oath and Law."
The resolution went into effect on January 1, 2014, but Scout leaders who were "open and avowed homosexuals" were still prohibited.
Service to America became Good Turn for America in 2004 and expanded to address the problems of hunger, homelessness, and inadequate housing and poor health in conjunction with the Salvation Army, the American Red Cross, Habitat for Humanity, and other organizations.
After successfully completing a week-long program, a person is entitled to wear the National Camp School patch.
