In addition to the traditional classification of brachiopods into inarticulate and articulate, two approaches appeared in the 1990s: one approach groups the inarticulate Craniida with articulate brachiopods, since both use the same material in the mineral layers of their shell; the other approach makes the Craniida a third group, as their outer organic layer is different from that in either of the other two.
Most species avoid locations with strong currents or waves, and typical sites include rocky overhangs, crevices and caves, steep slopes of continental shelves, and in deep ocean floors.
None, cemented to surface
Articulate brachiopods open the valves by means of abductor muscles, also known as diductors, which lie further to the rear and pull on the part of the brachial valve behind the hinge.
In waters where food is scarce, the snail ''Capulus ungaricus'' steals food from bivalves, snails, tube worms, and brachiopods.
Most species release both ova and sperm into the water, but females of some species keep the embryos in brood chambers until the larvae hatch.
Inarticulate brachiopods have no matching teeth and sockets; their valves are held together only by muscles.
The Lingulida and Discinida are grouped as Linguliformea, and the Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida as Rhynchonelliformea.
Each has two valves (shell sections) which cover the dorsal and ventral surface of the animal, unlike bivalve molluscs whose shells cover the lateral surfaces.
However, in 2008 two analyses found that brachiopods' closest lophotrochozoan relatives were nemertines.
Like bryozoans and phoronids, brachiopods have a lophophore, a crown of tentacles whose cilia (fine hairs) create a water current that enables them to filter food particles out of the water.
Primary (middle) mineralized layer of shell
The Lingulida and Discinida, combined in the Lingulata, have shells made of chitin and calcium phosphate.
Nielsen views the brachiopods and closely related phoronids as affiliated with the deuterostome pterobranchs because their lophophores are driven by one cilium per cell, while those of bryozoans, which he regards as protosomes, have multiple cilia per cell.
One type of analysis of the evolutionary relationships of brachiopods has always placed brachiopods as protostomes while another type has split between placing brachiopods among the protostomes or the deuterostomes.
The function of these diverticula is uncertain and it is suggested that they may be storage chambers for chemicals such as glycogen, may secrete repellents to deter organisms that stick to the shell or may help in respiration.
However, after the Permian–Triassic extinction event, informally known as the "Great Dying", brachiopods recovered only a third of their former diversity.
Lingulids and discinids, which have pedicles, have a matrix of glycosaminoglycans (long, unbranched polysaccharides), in which other materials are embedded: chitin in the periostracum; apatite containing calcium phosphate in the primary biomineralized layer; and a complex mixture in the innermost layer, containing collagen and other proteins, chitinophosphate and apatite.
Other inarticulate brachiopods and all articulate brachiopods have a curved gut that ends blindly, with no anus.
The "brain" of adult articulates consists of two ganglia, one above and the other below the oesophagus.
It is now clear the brachiopods do not belong to the Deuterostomata (such as echinoderms and chordates) as was hypothesized earlier, but should be included in the Protostomia (with mollusks and annelid worms), in a subgroup now called Lophotrochozoa.
Articulate brachiopods have toothed hinges and simple opening and closing muscles, while inarticulate brachiopods have untoothed hinges and a more complex system of muscles used to keep the two halves aligned.
Some brachiopods have statocysts, which detect changes in the animals' position.
Lifespans range from three to over thirty years.
Although not directly connected to sensory neurons, the mantle's chaetae probably send tactile signals to receptors in the epidermis of the mantle.
However, some taxonomists believe it is premature to suggest higher levels of classification such as order and recommend a bottom-up approach that identifies genera and then groups these into intermediate groups.
Shells can grow holoperipherally, where new material is added all around the margin, or mixoperipherally, where new material is added to the posterior region of the shell in an anterior direction, growing towards the other shell.
Entoprocts use a similar-looking crown of tentacles, but it is solid and the flow runs from bases to tips, forming a "downstream collecting" system that catches food particles as they are about to exit.
Brachiopod fossils show great diversity in the morphology of the shells and lophophore, while the modern genera show less diversity but provide soft-bodied characteristics.
Lineages of brachiopods that have both fossil and extant taxa appeared in the early Cambrian, Ordovician, and Carboniferous periods, respectively.
The gonads are masses of developing gametes (ova or sperm), and most species have four gonads, two in each valve.
'''Brachiopods''', phylum '''Brachiopoda''', are marine animals that have hard "valves" (shells) on the upper and lower surfaces, unlike the left and right arrangement in bivalve molluscs.
The main function of the blood may be to deliver nutrients.
Traditionally, brachiopods have been regarded as members of, or as a sister group to, the deuterostomes, a superphylum that includes chordates and echinoderms.
Three unmineralized species have also been found in the Cambrian, and apparently represent two distinct groups that evolved from mineralized ancestors.
Some articulate brachiopods also have a brachidium, a calcareous support for the lophophore attached to the inside of the brachial valve.
The fossil record shows that drilling predators like gastropods attacked molluscs and echinoids 10 to 20 times more often than they did brachiopods, suggesting that such predators attacked brachiopods by mistake or when other prey was scarce.
Adults of most species are of one sex throughout their lives.
Consequently, it has been suggested to included horseshoe worms in the Brachiopoda as a class named Phoronata B.L.Cohen&Weydmann in addition to the Craniata and Lingulata, within the subphylum Linguliformea.
A lingulid moves its body up and down the top two-thirds of the burrow, while the remaining third is occupied only by the pedicle, with a bulb on the end that builds a "concrete" anchor.
Inner mineralized layer of shell
Over 12,000&nbsp;fossil species are recognized,grouped into over 5,000&nbsp;genera.
At their peak in the Paleozoic era, the brachiopods were among the most abundant filter-feeders and reef-builders, and occupied other ecological niches, including swimming in the jet-propulsion style of scallops.
''Paterimitra'', another mostly assembled fossil found in 2008 and described in 2009, had two symmetrical plates at the bottom, like brachiopod valves but not fully enclosing the animal's body.
In a few articulate genera such as ''Neothyris'' and ''Anakinetica'', the pedicles wither as the adults grow and finally lie loosely on the surface.
Muscles at the rear of the body can straighten, bend or even rotate the pedicle.
This has a chitinous cuticle (non-cellular "skin") and protrudes through an opening in the hinge.
In most articulate brachiopod species, both valves are convex, the surfaces often bearing growth lines and/or other ornamentation.
The smallest living brachiopod, ''Gwynia'', is only about  long, and lives in between gravel.
The planktonic larvae of articulate species do not resemble the adults, but rather look like blobs with yolk sacs, and remain among the plankton for only a few days before leaving the water column upon metamorphosing.
Among brachiopods, only the lingulids (''Lingula sp.'')
The inarticulate ''Lingula'' is often called a "living fossil", as very similar genera have been found all the way back to the Ordovician.
However,  in 1980 Gould and Calloway produced a statistical analysis that concluded that: both brachiopods and bivalves increased all the way from the Paleozoic to modern times, but bivalves increased faster; the Permian–Triassic extinction was moderately severe for bivalves but devastating for brachiopods, so that brachiopods for the first time were less diverse than bivalves and their diversity after the Permian increased from a very low base; there is no evidence that bivalves out-competed brachiopods, and short-term increases or decreases for both groups appeared at the same times.
In some species oxygen is partly carried by the respiratory pigment hemerythrin, which is transported in coelomocyte cells.The maximum oxygen consumption of brachiopods is low, and their minimum requirement is not measurable.
The edge of the mantle has probably the greatest concentration of sensors.
Ripe gametes (ova or sperm) float from the gonads into the main coelom and then exit into the mantle cavity.
From about the 1940s to the 1990s, family trees based on embryological and morphological features placed brachiopods among or as a sister group to the deuterostomes.
The tentacles bear cilia (fine mobile hairs) on their edges and along the center.
It was often thought that brachiopods went into decline after the Permian–Triassic extinction, and were out-competed by bivalves, but a study in 1980 found both brachiopod and bivalve species increased from the Paleozoic to modern times, with bivalves increasing faster; after the Permian–Triassic extinction, brachiopods became for the first time less diverse than bivalves.
a super-phylum that includes chordates and echinoderms.
Proteins and calcite
Fish and crustaceans seem to find brachiopod flesh distasteful and seldom attack them.
Articulate ("jointed") brachiopods have a tooth and socket arrangement by which the pedicle and brachial valves hinge, locking the valves against lateral displacement.
Brachiopod fossils have been useful indicators of climate changes during the Paleozoic era.
They are often known as "lamp shells", since the curved shells of the class Terebratulida look rather like pottery oil-lamps.
The brachial valve bears on its inner surface the brachia ("arms") from which the phylum gets its name, and which support the lophophore, used for feeding and respiration.
From 1988 onwards analyses based on molecular phylogeny, which compares biochemical features such as similarities in DNA, have placed brachiopods among the Lophotrochozoa, a protostome super-phylum that includes molluscs, annelids and flatworms but excludes the other protostome super-phylum Ecdysozoa, whose members include arthropods.
When global temperatures were low, as in much of the Ordovician, the large difference in temperatures between equator and poles created different collections of fossils at different latitudes.
*A classification devised in the 1990s, based on the materials of which the shells are based, united the Craniida and the "articulate" brachiopods in the Calciata, which have calcite shells.
The water flow enters the lophophore from the sides of the open valves and exits at the front of the animal.
In most brachiopods, diverticula (hollow extensions) of the mantle penetrate through the mineralized layers of the valves into the periostraca.
However, fossils from 2007 onwards have supported a new interpretation of the Early-Cambrian tommotiids and a new hypothesis that brachiopods evolved from tommotiids.
Brachiopods have metanephridia, used by many phyla to excrete ammonia and other dissolved wastes.
The cell division in the embryo is radial (cells form in stacks of rings directly above each other), holoblastic (cells are separate, although adjoining) and regulative (the type of tissue into which a cell develops is controlled by interactions between adjacent cells, rather than rigidly within each cell).
+ Three high-level classifications of brachiopods
No coelom, muscles where joins body
Ripe gametes float into the main coelom and then exit into the mantle cavity via the metanephridia, which open on either side of the mouth.
The great majority of modern brachiopods are rhynchonelliforms (Articulata, but excluding Craniida).
The valves are termed brachial and pedicle.
Rhynchonelliforms (Articulata excluding Craniida), whose larvae consume only their yolks and settle and develop quickly, specialize in specific areas and form dense populations that can reach thousands per meter.
The rest of the space is lined with the mantle lobes, extensions that enclose a water-filled space in which sits the lophophore.
Hence forming the mouth via a deuterostome-like process does not imply that brachiopods are affiliated with deuterostomes.
The larvae of inarticulate brachiopods are miniature adults, with lophophores that enable the larvae to feed and swim for months until the animals become heavy enough to settle to the seabed.
Members of some genera have survived for a year in aquaria without food.
One brachiopod species (''Coptothyrus adamsi'') may be a measure of environmental conditions around an oil terminal being built in Russia on the shore of the Sea of Japan.
Brachiopods now live mainly in cold water and low light.
The coelom extends into each lobe as a network of canals, which carry nutrients to the edges of the mantle.
About 330&nbsp;living species are recognized, grouped into over 100&nbsp;genera.
If the lophophore is clogged, the adductors snap the valves sharply, which creates a "sneeze" that clears the obstructions.
Coelom fully divided
These cells are gradually displaced to the underside of the mantle by more recent cells in the groove, and switch to secreting the mineralized material of the shell valves.
Nutrients are transported throughout the coelom, including the mantle lobes, by cilia.
Another study in 2008 also concluded that brachiopods are closely related to nemertines, casting doubt on the idea that brachiopods are part of a clade Lophophorata of lophophore-feeding animals within the lophotrochozoans.
However, articulate  brachiopods of genus ''Chlidonophora'' use a branched pedicle to anchor in sediment.
An articulate pedicle has no coelom, is constructed from a different part of the larval body, and has a core composed of connective tissue.
Both classes open the valves to an angle of about 10°.
Experiments show that a brachiopod's oxygen consumption drops if petroleum jelly is smeared on the shell, clogging the diverticula.
Both types of coelom construction appear among brachiopods, and therefore do not imply that brachiopods are deuterostomes.
*In the "traditional" classification, the Articulata have toothed hinges between the valves, while the hinges of the Inarticulata are held together only by muscles.
Young adults often attach to the shells of more mature ones.
The pedicle emerges from the pedicle valve, either through a notch in the hinge or, in species where the pedicle valve is longer than the brachial, from a hole where the pedicle valve doubles back to touch the brachial valve.
"Calciata" approach
Those of articulates lie in the channels of the mantle lobes, while those of inarticulates lie near the gut.
However, brachiopods have no sign of the podocytes, which perform the first phase of excretion in this process, and brachiopod metanephridia appear to be used only to emit sperm and ova.
Both fossils and extant species have limitations that make it difficult to produce a comprehensive classification of brachiopods based on morphology.
Inarticulate brachiopod shells have a similar sequence of layers, but their composition is different from that of articulated brachiopods and also varies among the classes of inarticulate brachiopods.
Hence radial cleavage does not imply that brachiopods are affiliated with deuterostomes.
The larvae of articulate species settle in quickly and form dense populations in well-defined areas while the larvae of inarticulate species swim for up to a month and have wide ranges.
This method is used by the related phoronids and bryozoans, and also by pterobranchs.
While the largest modern brachiopods are  long, a few fossils measure up to  wide.
Brachiopods, as with molluscs, have an epithelial mantle that secretes and lines the shell, and encloses the internal organs.
On metamorphosing into an adult, the pedicle attaches to a surface, the front lobe develops the lophophore and other organs, and the mantle rolls up over the front lobe and starts to secrete the shell.
The "armor mail" of tommotiids was well-known but not in an assembled form, and it was generally assumed that tommotiids were slug-like animals similar to ''Halkieria'', except that tommotiids' armor was made of organophosphatic compounds while that of ''Halkieria'' was made of calcite.
Hence some brachiopod taxonomists believe it is premature to define higher levels of classification such as order, and recommend instead a bottom-up approach that identifies genera and then groups these into intermediate groups.
In lingulids the entrance and exit channels are formed by groups of chaetae that function as funnels.
Genetic analysis performed since the 1990s has extended the understanding of the relationship between different organisms.
Lifespans range from 3 to over 30&nbsp;years.
Some brachiopods do not have a functional pedicle, and thus do not have this pedicle opening.
Modern brachiopods range from  long, and most species are about .
Relatively new cells in a groove on the edges of the mantle secrete material that extends the periostracum.
The lophophore captures food particles, especially phytoplankton (tiny photosynthetic organisms), and deliver them to the mouth via the brachial grooves along the bases of the tentacles.
In other words, on the edge of the valve the periostracum is extended first, and then reinforced by extension of the mineralized layers under the periostracum.
Chaetae around opening of shells
The larvae of inarticulates swim as plankton for months and are like miniature adults, with valves, mantle lobes, a pedicle that coils in the mantle cavity, and a small lophophore, which is used for both feeding and swimming—except that Craniids have no pedicle.
* The traditional view is that the coelom(s) in deuterostomes and protostomes form by different process, called enterocoely and schizocoely respectively.
On front of body, at end of U-shaped gut
These variations in growth often form growth lines in the shells.
Each valve consists of three layers, an outer periostracum made of organic compounds and two biomineralized layers.
The pedicle valve is typically larger than the brachial.
Although their adult morphology seems rather different, the nucleotid sequence of the 18S rRNA indicates that the horseshoe worms are the closest relatives of the inarticulate brachiopods rather than articulate brachiopods.
Brachiopod valves are hinged at the rear end, while the front can be opened for feeding or closed for protection.
However a bryozoan or phoronid lophophore is a ring of tentacles mounted on a single, retracted stalk, while the basic form of the brachiopod lophophore is U-shaped, forming the brachia ("arms") from which the phylum gets its name.
All brachiopods have adductor muscles that are set on the inside of the pedicle valve and which close the valves by pulling on the part of the brachial valve ahead of the hinge.
While some animals develop the mouth and anus by deepening the blastopore, a "dent" in the surface of the early embryo, the blastopore of brachiopods closes up, and their mouth and anus develop from new openings.
(R.&nbsp;C.&nbsp;Moore, 1952)
Some species stand with the front end upwards, while others lie horizontal with the pedicle valve uppermost.
However, other taxonomists believe that some patterns of characteristics are sufficiently stable to make higher-level classifications worthwhile, although there are different views about what the higher-level classifications should be.
Short, attached to hard surfaces
Fish and crustaceans seem to find brachiopod flesh distasteful.
Pedicles of inarticulate species are extensions of the main coelom, which houses the internal organs.
Traditionally they have been regarded as a separate phylum, but increasingly detailed  molecular phylogeny studies between 1997 and 2000 have concluded that phoronids are a sub-group of brachiopods.
However, some genera such as the inarticulate ''Crania'' and the articulate ''Lacazella'' have no pedicle, and cement the rear of the "pedicle" valve to a surface so that the front is slightly inclined up away from the surface.
Food passes through the mouth, muscular pharynx ("throat") and oesophagus ("gullet"), all of which are lined with cilia and cells that secrete mucus and digestive enzymes.
(R.&nbsp;C.&nbsp;Moore, 1952)
The more complex set of muscles employed by inarticulate brachiopods can also operate the valves as scissors, a mechanism that lingulids use to burrow.
However, inarticulate lingulids, which burrow into the seabed, have valves that are smoother, flatter and of similar size and shape.
Oxygen seems to be distributed by the fluid of the coelom, which is circulated through the mantle and driven either by contractions of the lining of the coelom or by beating of its cilia.
Members of the discinoid genus ''Pelagodiscus'' have a cosmopolitan distribution.
In cold seas, brachiopod growth is seasonal and the animals often lose weight in winter.
Two major groups are recognized, articulate and inarticulate.
To provide enough filtering capacity in this restricted space, lophophores of larger brachiopods are folded in moderately to very complex shapes—loops and coils are common, and some species' lophophores resemble a hand with the fingers splayed.
The largest brachiopods known – ''Gigantoproductus'' and ''Titanaria'', reaching  in width – occurred in the upper part of the Lower Carboniferous.
In a typical brachiopod a stalk-like pedicle projects from an opening in one of the valves near the hinges, known as the pedicle valve, keeping the animal anchored to the seabed but clear of silt that would obstruct the opening.
These animals bundle solid waste with mucus and periodically "sneeze" it out, using sharp contractions of the gut muscles.
Glycosaminoglycans and apatite (calcium phosphate)
For now, the weight of evidence is inconclusive as to the exact relations within the inarticulates.
Brachiopods live only in the sea, and most species avoid locations with strong currents or waves.
This conclusion is unanimous among molecular phylogeny studies, which use a wide selection of genes: rDNA, Hox genes, mitochondrial protein genes, single nuclear protein genes and sets of nuclear protein genes.
In some inarticulate brachiopods the digestive tract is U-shaped and ends with an anus that eliminates solids from the front of the body wall.
Brachiopod fossils have been useful indicators of climate changes during the Paleozoic.
*A three-part scheme, also from the 1990s, places the Craniida in a separate group of its own, the Craniformea.
However, research since the early 1990s has found significant exceptions.
As the shell becomes heavier, the juvenile sinks to the bottom and becomes a sessile adult.
Other lineages have arisen and then become extinct, sometimes during severe mass extinctions.
On the other hand, articulate brachiopods have produced major diversifications, and suffered severe mass extinctions—but the articulate Rhynchonellida and Terebratulida, the most diverse present-day groups, appeared at the start of the Ordovician and Carboniferous respectively.
Glycosaminoglycans and chitin
These muscles have both "quick" fibers that close the valves in emergencies and "catch" fibers that are slower but can keep the valves closed for long periods.
However fossils of a new tommotiid, ''Eccentrotheca'', showed an assembled mail coat that formed a tube, which would indicate a sessile animal rather than a creeping slug-like one.
However, some "protostomes" forming the mouth using a process more like that typical of deuterostomes.
In some brachiopods groups of chaetae help to channel the flow of water into and out of the mantle cavity.
The beating of the outer cilia drives a water current from the tips of the tentacles to their bases, where it exits.
Three-part approach
This has its own cilia, which wash the lumps out through the opening  between the valves.
A layer of longitudinal muscles lines the epidermis of the pedicle.
The stomach wall has branched ceca ("pouches") where food is digested, mainly within the cells.
The hypothesis proposes that the first brachiopod converted its shells into a pair of valves by folding the rear part of its body under its front.
This "brachiopod fold" hypothesis suggests that brachiopods evolved from an ancestor similar to ''Halkieria'', a slug-like animal with "chain mail" on its back and a shell at the front and rear end.
The larvae of articulate species live only on yolk, and remain among the plankton for only a few days.
It was often thought that brachiopods were actually decline in diversity, and that in some way bivalves out-competed them.
However, the pedicles of the order Discinida are short and attach to hard surfaces.
Brachiopod shells occasionally show evidence of damage by predators, and sometimes of subsequent repair.
Many brachiopods close their valves if shadows appear above them, but the cells responsible for this are unknown.
The cilia of the lophophore can change direction to eject isolated particles of indigestible matter.
Brachiopods live only in the sea.
The other subphylum Rhynchonelliformea only contains one class, which is subdivided in the orders Rhynchonellida, Terebratulida and Thecideida.
have been fished commercially, on a very small scale.
Members of the order Lingulida have long pedicles, which they use to burrow into soft substrates, to raise the shell to the opening of the burrow to feed, and to retract the shell when disturbed.
The mouth is at the base of the lophophore.
However, after the Permian–Triassic extinction event, brachiopods recovered only a third of their former diversity.
However, pterobranchs are hemichordates and probably closely related to echinoderms, and there is no evidence that the latest common ancestor of pterobranchs and other hemichordates or the latest common ancestor of hemichordates and echinoderms was sessile and fed by means of tentacles.
The wastes produced by metabolism are broken into ammonia, which is eliminated by diffusion through the mantle and lophophore.
In these genera the shells are thickened and shaped so that the opening of the gaping valves is kept free of the sediment.
In most species the edge of the mantle also bears movable bristles, often called chaetae or setae, that may help defend the animals and may act as sensors.
Brachiopods seldom settle on artificial surfaces, probably because they are vulnerable to pollution.
Most modern species attach to hard surfaces by means of a cylindrical pedicle ("stalk"), an extension of the body wall.
The blood passes through vessels that extend to the front and back of the body, and branch to organs including the lophophore at the front and the gut, muscles, gonads and nephridia at the rear.
The blood circulation seems not to be completely closed, and the coelomic fluid and blood must mix to a degree.
Calcite (a form of calcium carbonate)
The method used by brachiopods is known as "upstream collecting", as food particles are captured as they enter the field of cilia that creates the feeding current.
Short, attached to hard surfaces
