Over the years the Trust has subsumed a number of smaller hospitals; these include Woodlands Orthopaedic Hospital, Northern View and Bierley Hall.
Impressions Gallery is an independent contemporary photography gallery with a temporary exhibitions programme showing on average six exhibitions each year.
In the field of science and medicine, Friederich Wilhelm Eurich (1867–1945), professor of forensic medicine and bacteriologist, did much to conquer anthrax in the wool trade.
Its Peace Studies department, founded with Quaker support in 1973, was for a long time the only such institution in the UK.
After a campaign in 2008, Bradford was recognised as a 'City of Sanctuary' on 18 November 2010.
Bradford was one of the first areas of the UK to get a local commercial radio station Pennine Radio in September 1975.
The city is also home to a number of rugby union clubs—Bradford Salem are based in the Heaton area and Wibsey RFC can be found to the south of the city centre.
Supermarket chain Morrisons has its head office in Bradford as does water utility company Yorkshire Water.
Partly supported by European funding, it is the result of close collaboration between the University of Bradford, the NHS and other institutions in West Yorkshire.
Kimberly Walsh achieved major success after winning a place in the girl band Girls Aloud in Popstars: The Rivals later in the same year, and in 2010 Zayn Malik came third in ''The X Factor'' with his boy band One Direction, who in March 2012 became the first British group to go straight to the top of the US music charts with their debut album.
The Bradford Playhouse is a privately run venue with a medium-sized proscenium theatre and a small studio.
Since this time, Bradford has emerged as a tourist destination, becoming the first UNESCO City of Film with attractions such as the National Media Museum, Bradford City Park, the Alhambra theatre and Cartwright Hall.
The Football League subsequently elected Bradford City to the league, with a total of 30 votes to replace Doncaster Rovers, because it saw the invitation as a chance to introduce football to the rugby-dominated county.
It entered a team in the 1960 Provincial League then fell dormant until the 1970s when it re-opened.
They indicate that Christians may have worshipped here since Paulinus of York came to the north of England in AD&nbsp;627 on a mission to convert Northumbria.
The 10th Battalion The Prince of Wales's Own West Yorkshire Regiment was involved in the attack on Fricourt, the 10th West Yorks suffered the highest casualty rate of any battalion on the Somme on 1 July and perhaps the highest battalion casualty list for a single day during the entire war.
Like many cities, Bradford lost a number of notable buildings to developers in the 1960s and 1970s: particularly mourned at the time were the Swan Arcade and the old Kirkgate Market.
Simon Beaufoy from Bradford, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of ''Slumdog Millionaire'', said the city had played a crucial role in the story of cinema and deserved to be recognised.
A memorial college to Margaret McMillan was opened in 1952.
The track staged a Speedway World Final.
In December 2010 the university was named as the greenest in the UK for the second year running.
Bradford had  ample supplies of locally mined coal to provide the power that the industry needed.
These Territorial forces were to remain close to each other throughout the war, serving in the 49th Division.
There were frequent outbreaks of cholera and typhoid, and only 30% of children born to textile workers reached the age of fifteen.
Today this is The Pulse of West Yorkshire and Pulse Classic Gold.
The University of Bradford, which has over 10,000 students, received its Royal Charter in 1966, but traces its history to the 1860s when it was founded as the ''Bradford Schools of Weaving, Design and Building''.
This, "The oldest reform synagogue outside London", was established by German Jews who had moved to Bradford for the wool trade.
Bradford's only television station AAP TV caters for Bradford's large Asian community.
Speedway was staged at Greenfields Stadium in the pioneer days, when it was known as the Autodrome in the early 1960s.
Edward IV granted the right to hold two annual fairs and from this time the town began to prosper.
In April 2012 retail giant Freeman Grattan Holdings secured a deal to open a new head office and house around 300 staff in the centre of Bradford.
Whilst in Bradford after 1892, Margaret McMillan joined the Fabian Society and the Independent Labour Party.
At the site of the original ford, the beck turns north, and flows towards the River Aire at Shipley.
At first the vehicles were horse-drawn but were replaced by steam-driven trams in 1883, and by electric vehicles in 1898.
Many of the Roman Catholic churches that are found within the city are a legacy of the large Irish population that migrated to Bradford in the 19th century.
Bradford's main art gallery is housed in Cartwright Hall in Lister Park.
The Great Northern Railway opened a third terminus at Adolphus Street in 1854, but the station was too far from the centre, and the two companies built a joint station, Bradford Exchange which opened in 1867.
Local sandstone was an excellent resource for building the mills, and with a population of 182,000 by 1850, the town grew rapidly as workers were attracted by jobs in the textile mills.
The absolute maximum temperature recorded was  in August 1990.
Mott The Hoople mention Bradford in their song 'All the way from Memphis': ''Now it's a mighty long way down rock'n'roll, through the Bradford Cities and the Oreoles.''
The Bradford Mela is now part of the bigger Bradford Festival which takes place in June.
The city has a history of welcoming and including newcomers from throughout the world.
The Diocese of Bradford was created from part of the Diocese of Ripon in 1919, and the church became a cathedral at that time.
The architectural historian Jonathan Foyle, actresses Imelda Staunton and Jenny Agutter, and director Michael Winner all lent their support to the campaign.
In 1973, Exchange station was rebuilt on a different site and in 1983 renamed Bradford Interchange and a bus station built alongside.
Bradford has a long sporting tradition, and Bradford Bulls, formerly Bradford Northern, is one of the most successful rugby league clubs in the world, winning the World Club Championship three times since 2002 and seven times winners of the Rugby Football League Championship.
The economy is worth around 8.3&nbsp;billion, making Bradford's economy a major powerhouse in the region and is forecast to grow to more than 9&nbsp;billion by 2016, contributing around 8.4% of the region's output, and making the district the third largest (after Leeds and Sheffield) in Yorkshire & Humber.
Henry Ripley was a younger contemporary of Titus Salt.
Recent Ofsted reports rank many Bradford schools as amongst the UK's finest.
According to historian Sharman Kadish, "The city of Bradford was unique in that it boasted a reform synagogue before it acquired an orthodox one".
It includes Primark, New Look, Bank, W H Smith, Boots, SportsDirect.com, Deichmann and F. Hinds in its 65 shops, as well as an indoor market and 550 car parking spaces.
The district has a tradition of nonconformity which is reflected in the number of chapels erected by Congregationalists, Baptists and Methodists.
Nearly 60% of the battalion's casualties were deaths.
The defunct Bradford Dukes speedway team raced at Odsal.
The Sikh community has six gurudwaras in the city.
In 1825 the wool-combers union called a strike that lasted five-months but workers were forced to return to work through hardship leading to the introduction of machine-combing.
At the 2011 UK census, Bradford had a population of 522,452.
A major employer was Titus Salt who in 1833 took over the running of his father's woollen business specialising in fabrics combining alpaca, mohair, cotton and silk.
On the 1906 Ordnance Survey, it disappears at Tumbling Hill Street, off Thornton Road, and appears north of Cape Street, off Valley Road, though there are culverts as far as Queens Road.
Sunshine, at little in excess of 1250 hours per year is low, as one would expect of an inland location in Northern England located amongst upland areas.
The city also lies within the north western parts of the Yorkshire Coalfield which is mostly composed of carboniferous coal measures.
The Manningham Riot occurred between 10 and 12 June 1995, in Manningham and the 2001 Bradford race riots began on 7 July 2001 as a result of tension between ethnic minority communities and the city's white majority, stoked by the Anti-Nazi League and the National Front.
Around   the middle decades of the 19th century the Irish were concentrated in eight densely settled areas situated near the town centre.
In 1974 Bradford's municipal buses were taken over by the West Yorkshire Metro.
North Parade has also seen several new themed bars open and is at the heart of the Independent Quarter of the city.
Wm Morrison Supermarkets was founded by William Morrison in 1899, initially as an egg and butter merchant in Rawson Market, operating under the name of ''Wm Morrison (Provisions) Limited''.
The Bradford Canal, built in 1774, linking the city to the Leeds and Liverpool Canal took its water from Bradford Beck and its tributaries.
It can be regarded as one of the Yorkshire Dales, though as it passes though the city, it is often not recognised as such.
The parish was in existence by 1283, and there was a stone church on the rock shelf above Bradford Beck by 1327.
Bradford grew slowly over the next two-hundred years as the woollen trade gained in prominence.
The city has a sizeable Indian community and the Lakshmi Narayan mandir which opened in April 2008 is the largest Hindu temple in northern England.
The underlying geology of the city is primarily carboniferous sandstones.
The Jewish community was strong in the middle to late 19th century and built Bradford Reform Synagogue in Manningham.
Bradford has the youngest, fastest growing population outside London.
A culture of innovation had been fundamental to Bradford's dominance, with new textile technologies being invented in the city; a prime example being the work of Samuel Lister.
Black or Black British
University of Bradford School of Management located opposite Lister Park on Emm Lane, in 2011, was rated the 14th best business school in the UK by the ''Financial Times''.
Ten Bradford trolleybuses are preserved at the Sandtoft Trolleybus Museum.
It has become a beacon of regeneration after a £100&nbsp;million conversion to apartment blocks by property developer Urban Splash.
The gallery moved from York to Centenary Square, Bradford, in 2007.
The Leeds and Bradford Railway opened Forster Square railway station on 1 July 1846 with a service via Shipley to Leeds.
There are four theatres in Bradford.
There have been many schemes to link between Bradford's railway terminals.
Bradford held the first mela in Europe in September 1988 and it is presently held in Bradford City Park.
The judges were also particularly impressed by Bradford's International Food Academy and Jamie's Ministry of Food, which teaches the districts residents how to cook quick, simple, healthy and cost-effective meals.
By 1850 he had five mills.
This innovation culture continues today throughout Bradford's economy, from automotive (Kahn Design) to electronics (Pace Micro Technology).
There are also a number of amateur theatre groups.
The university balances academic research and teaching quality with a strong tradition of social inclusion.
In recent years Bradford has developed a relationship with Bollywood, hosting the International Indian Film Festival awards in 2007.
Forster Square and Bradford Interchange stations are part of the West Yorkshire Metro.
The Mekons (who formed in nearby Leeds) mention Bradford in the song "Ghosts of American Astronauts": ''Up in the hills above Bradford / Outside the napalm factory''.
Bradford City Football Club was formed in 1903.
It will track the lives of all the babies born in the city from 2006 to 2008 and aims to provide a wealth of data, allowing health researchers the opportunity to investigate many different aspects of health and wellbeing.
Founded by Alfred Angas Scott in 1908 as the Scott Engineering Company in Bradford, Scott motorcycles were produced until 1978.
The grandest of the mills no longer used for textile production is Lister's Mill, the chimney of which can be seen from most places in Bradford.
In terms of nationally recognised leading areas of research there are various departments such as Institute of Cancer Therapeutics, Bradford School of Pharmacy, Peace Studies, Archaeology, Engineering, Management, Centre for Skin Sciences amongst others.
In 1989, copies of Salman Rushdie's ''The Satanic Verses'' were burnt in the city, and a section of the Muslim community led a campaign against the book.
There is a Hindu temple and community centre on Thornton Lane and smaller house-based mandirs, as shown in the List of Hindu Temples in England.
The city played an important part in the early history of the Labour Party.
Nearly half of all Asians living in Yorkshire and the Humber live in Bradford, with the central wards of Bradford Moor, City, Little Horton, Manningham and Toller having large majority Asian populations, whereas outlying wards of Bradford such as Thornton and Allerton, Idle and Thackley, Eccleshill, Wibsey, Wyke, Clayton, Wrose, Tong and Royds have predominantly white populations.
Of the estimated 1,394 men who left the trenches 1,060 were either killed or injured during the ill fated attack on the village of Serre.
During the 1820s and 1830s, there was immigration from Germany.
In the BBC political satire ''The Amazing Mrs Pritchard,'' the Prime Minister considers a proposal to move Parliament to Bradford, as it is closer to the geographic centre of the country than London.
Bradford is the focus of one of the UK's largest ever birth cohort studies, known as ''Born in Bradford''.
The gallery shows four temporary exhibitions a year.
Access to this material has had a pronounced effect on the architecture of the city.
The full record can be found on the councils website.
The 6th Territorial Battalions of The Prince of Wales's Own West Yorkshire Regiment first saw action in 1915 at Neuve Chapelle before moving north to Yser Canal near Ypres.
Following decades of decay there have been successful conversions to office and residential use.
Lister epitomised Victorian enterprise but it has been suggested that his capitalist attitude made trade unions necessary.
This extreme level of infant and youth mortality contributed to a life expectancy for Bradford residents of just over eighteen years, which was one of the lowest in the country.
It was a boomtown of the Industrial Revolution, and amongst the earliest industrialised settlements, rapidly becoming the "wool capital of the world".
The theatre was refurbished in 1986.
The major redevelopment of the city centre in the 1960s provided an opportunity to connect the termini but was not pursued and large buildings were constructed on the alignment in the 1990s.
The city was a centre of the House Church movement in the 1980s, and the Christian charity Christians Against Poverty was founded in the city.
Many were Jewish merchants and they became active in the life of the town.
It opened in 1774, closed in 1866, reopened in 1871, and finally closed in 1922.
Bradford became a municipal borough in 1847, and received its charter as a city in 1897.
First Bradford and Arriva are the chief operators of buses in Bradford, with some routes using guided buses.
On the 1852 Ordnance Survey map it is visible as far as Sun Bridge, at the end of Tyrrell Street, and then from beside Bradford Forster Square railway station on Kirkgate.
The voting figures for Bradford in the European Parliament election in June 2009 were: Conservative 19.2%, Labour 29.3%, UKIP 31.1%, Lib Dem 6.25%, Green 7.9%.
The original Bradford Coat of Arms had the Latin words 'LABOR OMNIA VINCIT' below it, meaning Work conquers all.
Infant mortality is double the national average, and life expectancy is slightly lower than in other parts of the district.
Bradford is represented by three MPs: for the constituencies of Bradford East (Imran Hussain, Labour Party), Bradford South (Judith Cummins, Labour), and Bradford West (Naz Shah, Labour Party).
As with the rest of the UK, Bradford benefits from a maritime climate, with limited seasonal temperature ranges, and generally moderate rainfall throughout the year.
These are operated by City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council.
In the genre of classical music  Rodney Friend is an English violinist, born (1940), In 1964 he became the youngest ever leader of the London Philharmonic Orchestra.
Like many major cities Bradford has been a destination for immigrants.
Bradford Community Broadcasting based in the city centre has broadcast on full-time Community Radio licence around Bradford and the Aire Valley, whilst the University radio station Ramair broadcasts to the student population.
In recent pop culture the former participant of ''The X Factor'', Zayn Malik, former member of successful boy band One Direction, was born and raised in Bradford.
Bradford and Leeds councils jointly opened the airport in 1931.
The area's access to a supply of coal, iron ore and soft water facilitated the growth of Bradford's manufacturing base, which, as textile manufacture grew, led to an explosion in population and was a stimulus to civic investment; Bradford has a large amount of listed Victorian architecture including the grand Italianate City Hall.
The census showed that of Bradford's total population, 67.44% (352,317) was White, 26.83% (140,149) Asian, 2.48% (12,979) Mixed Race, 1.77% (9,267) Black and 1.48% (7,740) from other races.
Standing in a conservation area adjacent to the listed Alhambra Theatre, it closed in 2000 and was sold to developer Langtree with the intention it would be demolished and replaced with an apartment and office block.
The launch of manufacturing in the early 18th century marked the start of the town's development while new canal and turnpike road links encouraged trade.
Leeds Bradford International Airport is  to the north east of the city.
He was managing partner of Edward Ripley & Son Ltd, which owned the Bowling Dye Works.
Coal output continued to expand, reaching a peak in 1868 when Bradford contributed a quarter of all the coal and iron produced in Yorkshire.
Bridgepoint announced that a further £70&nbsp;million would be invested in airport improvements, to boost passenger figures to over 7&nbsp;million by 2015.
It contains an Imax cinema, the Cubby Broccoli Cinema, and the ''Pictureville'' Cinema&nbsp;— described by David Puttnam as the best cinema in Britain.
Bradford's textile industry has been in decline for many years and the city has suffered from de-industrialisation.
Typically, 41.4 nights of the year will record an air frost.
After an uprising in 1070, during William the Conqueror's Harrying of the North, the manor of Bradford was laid waste and is described as such in the ''Domesday Book'' of 1086.
It includes over 20 large retail and food units including Next, TK Maxx, Harveys, Asda Living, Outfit, Peacocks, Clarks, JD Sports, Currys, DFS, Subway, McDonald's and Costa Coffee.
Today Bradford is accessed by several trunk roads, the A647 between Leeds and Halifax, via Queensbury, the A650 between Wakefield and Keighley, the A658 to Harrogate and the A6036 to Halifax via Shelf.
American film star Aasif Mandvi grew up in Bradford.
The Low Moor Company also made pig iron and the company employed 1,500 men in 1929. when the municipal borough of Bradford was created in 1847 there were 46 coal mines within its boundaries.
The city has a rich heritage in film production and many films and TV productions have been filmed in the city including ''Room at the Top'', ''Billy Liar'' and The ''Red Riding'' Trilogy.
It then became part of the ''Honour of Pontefract'' given to Ilbert de Lacy for service to the Conqueror, in whose family the manor remained until 1311.
The Parliamentarians retreated to Bradford and the Royalists set up headquarters at Bolling Hall from where the town was besieged leading to its surrender.
The Alhambra also has a smaller studio theatre in the same complex.
The film was created by local Andrea Dunbar, and was initially unpopular with local residents due to its negative image of the area, but has since earned itself a good reputation in the local community as Buttershaw's claim to fame.
Bradford is not built on any substantial body of water but is situated at the junction of three valleys, one of them, that of the Bradford Beck which rises in moorland to the west, and is swelled by its tributaries, the Horton Beck, Westbrook, Bowling Beck and Eastbrook.
Bradford was the focus of a 2012 Channel 4 documentary, ''Make Bradford British'', which examined the level of integration between the city's Christian and Muslim communities.
This Industrial Revolution led to rapid growth, with wool imported in vast quantities for the manufacture of worsted cloth in which Bradford specialised, and the town soon became known as the wool capital of the world.
'''Bradford'''  is in the Metropolitan Borough of the City of Bradford in West Yorkshire, England, in the foothills of the Pennines  west of Leeds, and  northwest of Wakefield.
Working with her sister, Rachel, she set about improving the welfare of children living in the slums, and campaigned for free school meals.
The mail order and online retailer will transfer office staff from its Lidget Green base, where Grattan has had a presence since 1934, to a Grade II-listed former wool warehouse on the edge of Little Germany.
The company was established in 1880 by Joshua Kelley Waddilove to provide affordable credit to families in West Yorkshire.
Work started on the £24M project in February 2010 and City Park officially opened in March 2012, with thousands of people turning out for the grand opening event.
Bradford was the location for the films ''Yanks'', starring Richard Gere, ''The Railway Children'' starring Jenny Agutter, a 1970s classic filmed around Haworth including the Bronte Parsonage about Victorian children whose father goes missing and FairyTale: A True Story starring Harvey Keitel based on the story of the Cottingley Fairies.
In the reign of Henry VIII Bradford exceeded Leeds as a manufacturing centre.
The centre has undergone a multimillion-pound refurbishment recently, and plans to upgrade the facade of the 1960s building have been submitted as it anticipates competition from the long-awaited £260&nbsp;million Westfield development which is due to open on 5 November 2015.
"With the UNESCO City of Film designation, Bradford will now go on to achieve inspirational projects in film."
The manor then passed to the Earl of Lincoln, John of Gaunt, The Crown and, ultimately, private ownership in 1620.
Bradford scored highly not just for the quality of food and service offered by each of the restaurants, but also for food hygiene, a deep understanding of the curry restaurant sector and its success in collectively raising funds for food charity The Curry Tree, which seeks to alleviate the plight of the poor in South East Asia.
Joe Johnson is a retired professional snooker player from Bradford who won the 1986 World Snooker Championship.
These vary in quality from rough rock to fine, honey-coloured stone of building quality.
There are plans to rebuild it as a key part of the regeneration of the city centre.
'''Bradford: Religion''': 2011 Census
The 2008 ''Spooks'' spin-off for BBC Three, ''Spooks: Code 9'', was filmed in the city.
The Hallé Orchestra have been regular visitors over the years, as have a wide range of popular musicians, bands, entertainers, comedians and theatrical productions.
In 2013 Bradford was again crowned "Curry Capital of Britain" after seeing off other strong contenders such as Glasgow and Wolverhampton.
The Buttershaw area of the city featured in the 1986 film ''Rita, Sue and Bob Too'', in which two 16-year-old girls were involved in a love triangle with a wealthy married man (played by George Costigan).
The University of Bradford was ranked second in the UK for graduate employment by the Times Higher Education Supplement in 2005.
Nightlife in Bradford has traditionally centred on Manor Row and Manningham Lane.
The main difficulty in connecting the termini is the great difference in elevation: Bradford Interchange is at the end of a long slope, steep by railway standards, but is many feet higher than Forster Square.
The club now plays in the National League North, which means the Bradford derby has not been played in years.
Historically a part of the West Riding of Yorkshire, Bradford rose to prominence during the 19th century as an international centre of textile manufacture, particularly wool.
A desperate shortage of water in Bradford Dale  was a serious limitation on industrial expansion and improvement in urban sanitary conditions.
All averages refer to the 1981–2010 observation period.
"Becoming the world's first City of Film is the ultimate celebration of Bradford's established and dynamic history in film and media," said Colin Philpott, director of Bradford's National Media Museum.
Paper Hall was saved from demolition and renovated in the 1990s and in mid-2005 renovation began on the prominent Eastbrook Hall in Little Germany.
Bradford features in the 1983 film ''Monty Python's The Meaning of Life'' with footage filmed in Lister Park.
James Whyte, a sub-editor of the ''Bradford Observer'' met with Football Association representative, John Brunt, in January to discuss plans, and in May, Manningham RFC, a rugby league team decided to change codes to association football.
This was changed to Bradford Barons—emulating the more successful Halifax Dukes.
They currently compete in Football League One, the third tier of English football.
There has been rapid expansion in recent years, and is the home base of economy Airline Jet2.com.
Bradford College developed from the 19th century technical college whose buildings it inherited.
Eventually the Halifax team was brought to Bradford under the name Bradford Dukes.
The University of Bradford also has a cinema run by the Students' Union, operating from the University's Great Hall.
(Another Odeon, always part of the Odeon Cinemas chain, was built in the city in 1938 and demolished in 1969.)
The Jewish community mostly living in the Manningham area of the town, numbered about 100 families but was influential in the development of Bradford as a major exporter of woollen goods from their textile export houses predominately based in Little Germany and the civic life of Bradford.
The festival culminates in the annual BAF Awards which celebrate new animation from around the world.
In 2002 Gareth Gates came second in the first series of Pop Idol and went on to achieve 4 UK number one singles before enjoying success in Musical theatre.
Bradford City Park has the largest city centre water feature in the UK.
In the field of industry, Sir Jacob Behrens (1806–1889) was an Anglo–German textile merchant who was instrumental in Bradford becoming a major exporter of woollen goods.
Mela festivals include a combination of markets, funfairs, food and drink, arts and workshops, children's activities, strolling entertainment and a variety of music and dance performances on a number of stages.
Behrens was a philanthropist, he also helped to establish the Bradford chamber of commerce in 1851.
