There are, however, a few areas where new neurons continue to be generated throughout life.
Multiple functions involve the pallium, including smell and spatial memory.
* '''Working memory''' is the ability of the brain to maintain a temporary representation of information about the task that an animal is currently engaged in.
In many mammals, the cerebral cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci.
In vertebrates, the part of the brain that plays the greatest role is the hypothalamus, a small region at the base of the forebrain whose size does not reflect its complexity or the importance of its function.
It is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue using a microscope, and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another.
This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements.
* The '''medulla''', along with the spinal cord, contains many small nuclei involved in a wide variety of sensory and involuntary motor functions such as vomiting, heart rate and digestive processes.
Finally, on the basis of the results, it generates motor response patterns that are suited to maximize the welfare of the animal.
The SCN projects to a set of areas in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and midbrain that are involved in implementing sleep-wake cycles.
Supplementary motor area
Except for the muscles that control the eye, which are driven by nuclei in the midbrain, all the voluntary muscles in the body are directly innervated by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain.
The property that makes neurons unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells over long distances.
On one hand, it is possible to write a computer program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that describe their electrochemical activity; such simulations are known as ''biologically realistic neural networks''.
Levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin drop during slow wave sleep, and fall almost to zero during REM sleep; levels of acetylcholine show the reverse pattern.
In many classes of vertebrates, such as fish and amphibians, the three parts remain similar in size in the adult, but in mammals the forebrain becomes much larger than the other parts, and the midbrain becomes very small.
The tip of a growing axon consists of a blob of protoplasm called a growth cone, studded with chemical receptors.
Contains motor neurons that directly activate the eye muscles
In animal studies, most commonly involving rats, it is possible to use electrodes or locally injected chemicals to produce precise patterns of damage and then examine the consequences for behavior.
Recordings of brain activity can be made using electrodes, either glued to the scalp as in EEG studies, or implanted inside the brains of animals for extracellular recordings, which can detect action potentials generated by individual neurons.
The synaptic network that finally emerges is only partly determined by genes, though.
The brain does not simply grow, but rather develops in an intricately orchestrated sequence of stages.
The brain is located in the head, usually close to the primary sensory organs for such senses as vision, hearing, balance, taste, and smell.
Without such a stain, brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers, in which it is impossible to determine any structure.
He believed that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical ''res cogitans'', but that the majority of behaviors of humans, and all behaviors of animals, could be explained mechanistically.
On the other hand, it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating, or mathematically analyzing, the operations of simplified "units" that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out much of their biological complexity.
This sort of dynamic memory is thought to be mediated by the formation of cell assemblies—groups of activated neurons that maintain their activity by constantly stimulating one another.
A search in the genomes of vertebrates revealed a set of analogous genes, which were found to play similar roles in the mouse biological clock—and therefore almost certainly in the human biological clock as well.
The first vertebrates appeared over 500&nbsp;million years ago (Mya), during the Cambrian period, and may have resembled the modern hagfish in form.
Another approach to brain function is to examine the consequences of damage to specific brain areas.
Some types of worms, such as leeches, also have an enlarged ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord, known as a "tail brain".
The brain acts on the rest of the body both by generating patterns of muscle activity and by driving the secretion of chemicals called hormones.
A myelinated axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath of myelin,  which serves to greatly increase the speed of signal propagation.
It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains.
An important component of the system is the reticular formation, a group of neuron-clusters scattered diffusely through the core of the lower brain.
A number of brain areas are involved, including the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and especially the cerebellum, which functions as a large memory bank for microadjustments of the parameters of movement.
The brain typically gets most of its energy from oxygen-dependent metabolism of glucose (i.e., blood sugar), but ketones provide a major alternative source, together with contributions from medium chain fatty acids (caprylic and heptanoic acids), lactate, acetate, and possibly amino acids.
In some primitive fishes, such as lampreys, this region is the largest part of the brain.
Most of the brain's energy consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge (membrane potential) of neurons.
In the hands of Camillo Golgi, and especially of the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the new stain revealed hundreds of distinct types of neurons, each with its own unique dendritic structure and pattern of connectivity.
The prefrontal cortex carries out functions that include planning, working memory, motivation, attention, and executive control.
The pituitary gland secretes hormones into the bloodstream, where they circulate throughout the body and induce changes in cellular activity.
* The '''olfactory bulb''' is a special structure that processes olfactory sensory signals and sends its output to the olfactory part of the pallium.
Reward and punishment exert their most important neural effects by altering connections within the basal ganglia.
Size, however, is not the only difference: there are also substantial differences in shape.
The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the brain until it reaches its destination area, where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses.
The autonomic nervous system affects heart rate, digestion, respiration rate, salivation, perspiration, urination, and sexual arousal, and several other processes.
Although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate brains, some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial distortions of brain geometry, especially in the forebrain area.
The relationship between brain size, body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate species.
The basic principle that underlies homeostasis is negative feedback: any time a parameter diverges from its set-point, sensors generate an error signal that evokes a response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum value.
In many parts of the brain, axons initially "overgrow", and then are "pruned" by mechanisms that depend on neural activity.
The fundamental bilateral body form is a tube with a hollow gut cavity running from the mouth to the anus, and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a ganglion) for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion at the front, called the brain.
Eventually, via a way-station in the thalamus, the signals are sent to the cerebral cortex, where they are processed to extract biologically relevant features, and integrated with signals coming from other sensory systems.
One way or another, all of these sensory modalities are initially detected by specialized sensors that project signals into the brain.
It is a major brain component in many vertebrates, but is greatly reduced in humans and other primates (whose senses are dominated by information acquired by sight rather than smell).
With few exceptions, each neuron in the brain releases the same chemical neurotransmitter, or combination of neurotransmitters, at all the synaptic connections it makes with other neurons; this rule is known as Dale's principle.
All of these brains contain the same set of basic anatomical components, but many are rudimentary in the hagfish, whereas in mammals the foremost part (the telencephalon) is greatly elaborated and expanded.
Because there is no ability to experimentally control the nature of the damage, however, this information is often difficult to interpret.
For vertebrates, the early stages of neural development are similar across all species.
This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids, nicotine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol, fluoxetine, chlorpromazine, and many others.
Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors located in the lining of blood vessels, conveying information about temperature, sodium level, glucose level, blood oxygen level, and other parameters.
In mammals, the pallium evolves into a complex six-layered structure called neocortex or ''isocortex''.
The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity in human patients suffering from intractable epilepsy, in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures.
Only a few invertebrates such as sponges, jellyfish, adult sea squirts and starfish do not have a brain; diffuse or localised nerve nets are present instead.
In vertebrates, the reward-punishment system is implemented by a specific set of brain structures, at the heart of which lie the basal ganglia, a set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain.
Most organisms studied to date utilize a reward–punishment mechanism: for instance, worms and insects can alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers.
* '''Episodic memory''' is the ability to remember the details of specific events.
Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted.
To generate purposeful and unified action, the brain first brings information from sense organs together at a central location.
Moreover, other animals may develop existing sensory systems in new ways, such as the adaptation by bats of the auditory sense into a form of sonar.
At a higher level yet is the primary motor cortex, a strip of tissue located at the posterior edge of the frontal lobe.
The primary motor cortex sends projections to the subcortical motor areas, but also sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the pyramidal tract.
It has been estimated that visual processing areas occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate neocortex.
(This principle is widely used in engineering, for example in the control of temperature using a thermostat.)
Some of the outputs also go to the pituitary gland, a tiny gland attached to the brain directly underneath the hypothalamus.
The '''brain''' is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals.
Theorists have worked to understand these response patterns by constructing mathematical models of neurons and neural networks, which can be simulated using computers.
Neurophysiologists study the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain: their primary tools are drugs and recording devices.
Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate; most tranquilizers exert their sedative effects by enhancing the effects of GABA.
Contains motor neurons that directly activate muscles
Planning and other executive functions
Thus, a neuron can be characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases.
It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain's primary mechanism for learning and memory.
The cerebellum of mammals contains a large portion (the neocerebellum) dedicated to supporting the cerebral cortex, which has no counterpart in other vertebrates.
The brain, estimated to be over 5,000 years old, was found in the skull of a 12 to 14-year-old girl.
It changes in shape from a simple swelling at the front of the nerve cord in the earliest embryonic stages, to a complex array of areas and connections.
It remains to be seen what level of success they can achieve in the time frame of the project and the wisdom of it has been publicly contested, with high-profile scientists on both sides of the argument.
A few years later David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel discovered cells in the primary visual cortex of monkeys that become active when sharp edges move across specific points in the field of view—a discovery for which they won a Nobel Prize.
For any animal, survival requires maintaining a variety of parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation: these include temperature, water content, salt concentration in the bloodstream, blood glucose levels, blood oxygen level, and others.
These signal-processing tasks require intricate interplay between a variety of functional subsystems.
These axons transmit signals in the form of electrochemical pulses called action potentials, which last less than a thousandth of a second and travel along the axon at speeds of 1–100 meters per second.
It also directs reaching movements and other object-directed actions.
Nevertheless, there are a number of principles of brain architecture that apply across a wide range of species.
Some basic types of responsiveness such as reflexes can be mediated by the spinal cord or peripheral ganglia, but sophisticated purposeful control of behavior based on complex sensory input requires the information integrating capabilities of a centralized brain.
Arthropods have a central brain, the supraesophageal ganglion, with three divisions and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing.
The motivational system in the brain monitors the current state of satisfaction of these goals, and activates behaviors to meet any needs that arise.
Dolphins have values higher than those of primates other than humans, but nearly all other mammals have EQ values that are substantially lower.
* '''Instrumental learning''' is the ability for rewards and punishments to modify behavior.
* The '''pons''' lies in the brainstem directly above the medulla.
It is now possible with relative ease to "knock out" or mutate a wide variety of genes, and then examine the effects on brain function.
Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain, nerves, and muscles, demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of nerves.
Brenner's team sliced worms into thousands of ultrathin sections and photographed each one under an electron microscope, then visually matched fibers from section to section, to map out every neuron and synapse in the entire body.
In general, smaller animals tend to have larger brains, measured as a fraction of body size.
* Fruit flies (''Drosophila''), because of the large array of techniques available for studying their genetics, have been a natural subject for studying the role of genes in brain development.
Early philosophers were divided as to whether the seat of the soul lies in the brain or heart.
All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form, which appears most clearly during early stages of embryonic development.
Living brain tissue is pinkish on the outside and mostly white on the inside, with subtle variations in color.
It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain, or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the disappearance of a previously existing brain structure.
Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord, and by inputs that descend from the brain.
* The '''hypothalamus''' is a small region at the base of the forebrain, whose complexity and importance belies its size.
One of the primary functions of a brain is to extract biologically relevant information from sensory inputs.
The functions of these synapses are very diverse: some are excitatory (exciting the target cell); others are inhibitory; others work by activating second messenger systems that change the internal chemistry of their target cells in complex ways.
Brains are most simply compared in terms of their size.
Neuroscientists currently distinguish several types of learning and memory that are implemented by the brain in distinct ways:
The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord.
The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems.
Cognitive science seeks to unify neuroscience and psychology with other fields that concern themselves with the brain, such as computer science (artificial intelligence and similar fields) and philosophy.
* The '''thalamus''' is a collection of nuclei with diverse functions: some are involved in relaying information to and from the cerebral hemispheres, while others are involved in motivation.
When a particular behavior is followed by favorable consequences, the reward mechanism in the brain is activated, which induces structural changes inside the brain that cause the same behavior to be repeated later, whenever a similar situation arises.
The brain is small and simple in some species, such as nematode worms; in other species, including vertebrates, it is the most complex organ in the body.
* The nematode worm ''Caenorhabditis elegans'', like ''Drosophila'', has been studied largely because of its importance in genetics.
This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to changes in the environment.
10% of the brain's total volume consists of the cerebellum and 50% of all neurons are held within its structure.
Until 1970, however, experimental evidence to support the synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking.
Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum.
The human brain has been estimated to contain approximately 100 trillion synapses; even the brain of a fruit fly contains several million.
When large numbers of neurons show synchronized activity, the electric fields that they generate can be large enough to detect outside the skull, using electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first, the use of computers to study the brain; second, the study of how brains perform computation.
At the lowest level are motor areas in the medulla and pons, which control stereotyped movements such as walking, breathing, or swallowing.
Most of its functions are not under direct voluntary control.
Nothing approaching this level of detail is available for any other organism, and the information gained has enabled a multitude of studies that would otherwise have not been possible.
In the first stages of development, each axon from the retina is guided to the right general vicinity in the midbrain by chemical cues, but then branches very profusely and makes initial contact with a wide swath of midbrain neurons.
This sort of memory is probably stored largely in the cerebral cortex, mediated by changes in connections between cells that represent specific types of information.
In humans, the effects of strokes and other types of brain damage have been a key source of information about brain function.
The shape and size of the brain varies greatly in different species, and identifying common features is often difficult.
Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive expansion of the cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex and the parts of the cortex involved in vision.
Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the study and development of dynamic neuronal models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes.
The muscle coordination learned while riding a bicycle is an example of a type of neural plasticity that may take place largely within the cerebellum.
In the United States, the 1990s were officially designated as the "Decade of the Brain" to commemorate advances made in brain research, and to promote funding for such research.
Axons transmit signals to other neurons by means of specialized junctions called synapses.
Neuroanatomists usually divide the vertebrate brain into six main regions: the telencephalon (cerebral hemispheres), diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), mesencephalon (midbrain), cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata.
Norepinephrine, which is involved in arousal, comes exclusively from a nearby small area called the locus coeruleus.
Maintaining homeostasis is a crucial function of the brain.
This sort of memory can last for a lifetime.
Among other things, it contains nuclei that control often voluntary but simple acts such as sleep, respiration, swallowing, bladder function, equilibrium, eye movement, facial expressions, and posture.
Physiologically, the function of the brain is to exert centralized control over the other organs of the body.
Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume, so large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals.
The essential difficulty is that sophisticated computation by neural networks requires distributed processing in which hundreds or thousands of neurons work cooperatively—current methods of brain activity recording are only capable of isolating action potentials from a few dozen neurons at a time.
When an action potential, traveling along an axon, arrives at a synapse, it causes a chemical called a neurotransmitter to be released.
Sharks appeared about 450&nbsp;Mya, amphibians about 400&nbsp;Mya, reptiles about 350&nbsp;Mya, and mammals about 200&nbsp;Mya.
The first real progress toward a modern understanding of nervous function, though, came from the investigations of Luigi Galvani, who discovered that a shock of static electricity applied to an exposed nerve of a dead frog could cause its leg to contract.
* The '''basal ganglia''' are a group of interconnected structures in the forebrain.
Once neurons have positioned themselves, their axons sprout and navigate through the brain, branching and extending as they go, until the tips reach their targets and form synaptic connections.
In a typical human, the cerebral cortex (the largest part) is estimated to contain 15–33 billion neurons, each connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons.
In primates, however, the percentage is much higher—in humans it rises to 20–25%.
The most important is brain disease and the effects of brain damage, covered in the human brain article because the most common diseases of the human brain either do not show up in other species, or else manifest themselves in different ways.
There has long been debate about whether the qualities of mind, personality, and intelligence can be attributed to heredity or to upbringing—this is the nature and nurture controversy.
It then processes this raw data to extract information about the structure of the environment.
Groups elementary movements into coordinated patterns
Aristotle favored the heart, and thought that the function of the brain was merely to cool the blood.
The hindbrain and midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates, but dramatic differences appear in the forebrain, which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure.
The result of this sophisticated process is a gradual tuning and tightening of the map, leaving it finally in its precise adult form.
Among other tools, they employ a plethora of stains that reveal neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity.
Considering the entire brain, thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding.
In a number of parts of the nervous system, neurons and synapses are produced in excessive numbers during the early stages, and then the unneeded ones are pruned away.
The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas.
Glial cells are different: as with most types of cells in the body, they are generated throughout the lifespan.
Neurons are created in special zones that contain stem cells, and then migrate through the tissue to reach their ultimate locations.
+ Major areas involved in controlling movement
In his treatise on epilepsy he wrote:
Next it combines the processed sensory information with information about the current needs of an animal and with memory of past circumstances.
The brain of a shark shows the basic components in a straightforward way, but in teleost fishes (the great majority of existing fish species), the forebrain has become "everted", like a sock turned inside out.
The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time, but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods PET, fMRI, and NIRS.
The folds increase the surface area of the cortex and therefore increase the amount of gray matter and the amount of information that can be stored and processed.
In its earliest form, the brain appears as three swellings at the front end of the neural tube; these swellings eventually become the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain (the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon, respectively).
Each of these areas has a complex internal structure.
Some useful models are abstract, focusing on the conceptual structure of neural algorithms rather than the details of how they are implemented in the brain; other models attempt to incorporate data about the biophysical properties of real neurons.
Conversely, when a behavior is followed by unfavorable consequences, the brain's punishment mechanism is activated, inducing structural changes that cause the behavior to be suppressed when similar situations arise in the future.
The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved.
Humans have an average EQ in the 7-to-8 range, while most other primates have an EQ in the 2-to-3 range.
The brain is also the most important organ studied in psychiatry, the branch of medicine that works to study, prevent, and treat mental disorders.
Thousands of distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity.
This concept formed the basis of the field of cybernetics, and eventually gave rise to the field now known as computational neuroscience.
However, having said this, the Human Brain Project is trying to build a realistic, detailed computational model of the entire human brain.
Even though it is protected by the skull and meninges, surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, the delicate nature of the brain makes it vulnerable to numerous diseases and several types of damage.
The invention of electronic computers in the 1940s, along with the development of mathematical information theory, led to a realization that brains can potentially be understood as information processing systems.
The complete neuronal ''wiring diagram'' of ''C.elegans'' – its connectome was achieved.
The superior colliculus is part of the midbrain.
Action selection on the basis of motivation
Myelin is white, making parts of the brain filled exclusively with nerve fibers appear as light-colored white matter, in contrast to the darker-colored grey matter that marks areas with high densities of neuron cell bodies.
Damage to the reticular formation can produce a permanent state of coma.
The cells in the blood vessel walls are joined tightly to one another, forming the blood–brain barrier, which blocks the passage of many toxins and pathogens (though at the same time blocking antibodies and some drugs, thereby presenting special challenges in treatment of diseases of the brain).
The retina, before birth, contains special mechanisms that cause it to generate waves of activity that originate spontaneously at a random point and then propagate slowly across the retinal layer.
Direct cortical activation of spinal motor circuits
In the early 1970s, Sydney Brenner chose it as a model organism for studying the way that genes control development.
Several areas at the edge of the neocortex, including the hippocampus and amygdala, are also much more extensively developed in mammals than in other vertebrates.
Further information can be gained by staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of molecules are present in high concentrations.
The axons of sensory receptor cells travel into the spinal cord or brain, where they transmit their signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific sensory modality.
The length of an axon can be extraordinary: for example, if a pyramidal cell, (an excitatory neuron) of the cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became the size of a human body, its axon, equally magnified, would become a cable a few centimeters in diameter, extending more than a kilometer.
The essence of the information processing approach is to try to understand brain function in terms of information flow and implementation of algorithms.
