Many global companies, including IBM, Dell, Lenovo, AT&T, SAP, and Accenture, have built outsourcing and service centres here or plan to do so soon.
Large residential areas consisting of high-rise prefabricated panel buildings, such as those in the Petržalka borough, were built.
Hundreds of citizens were expelled during the communist oppression of the 1950s, with the aim of replacing "reactionary" people with the proletarian class.
Other institutions of tertiary education are the public University of Economics and the first private college in Slovakia, City University of Seattle.
Public transport in Bratislava is managed by Dopravný podnik Bratislava, a city-owned company.
Beforehand it was mostly known in English by its German name, ''Pressburg'', as it was long dominated by Austrians and other German-speakers.
Owing to Ottoman advances into Hungarian territory, the city was designated the new capital of Hungary in 1536, becoming part of the Austrian Habsburg monarchy and marking the beginning of a new era.
The average altitude is .
'''Bratislava''' ( or ; ; also known by other names) is the capital of Slovakia, and with a population of about 450,000, the country's largest city.
Bratislava lies in the north temperate zone and has a moderately continental climate (original/US Köppen–Geiger climate classification Cfb/Dfb, Trewartha climate classification DCbo, USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 7b) with mean annual temperature (1990–2009) of around , average temperature of  in the warmest month and  in the coldest month, four distinct seasons and precipitation spread rather evenly throughout the year.
The Slovak Academy of Sciences is also based in Bratislava.
FC Petržalka akadémia is the oldest of Bratislava's football clubs, founded in 1898, and is based at Stadium FC Petržalka 1898 in Petržalka (formerly at Pasienky in Nové Mesto and Štadión Petržalka in Petržalka).
The city's first permanent bridge over the Danube, ''Starý most'', was built in 1891.
The mayor, based at the Primate's Palace, is the city's top executive officer and is elected to a four-year term of office.
Apart from musical festivals, it is possible to hear music ranging from underground to well known pop stars.
Rusovce mansion, with its English park, is in the Rusovce borough.
For self-governance purposes, the city is divided into 17 boroughs, each of which has its own mayor (''starosta'') and council.
It is often windy with a marked variation between hot summers and cold, humid winters.
The city has a balanced budget of 277 million Euros (), with one fifth used for investment.
The Grassalkovich Palace, built around 1760, is now the residence of the Slovak president, and the Slovak government now has its seat in the former Archiepiscopal Palace.
The Church of St. Elizabeth, better known as the Blue Church due to its colour, is built entirely in the Hungarian Secessionist style.
It is one of the most important Slovak archaeological sites and contains a museum dedicated to its history.
It was destroyed by Napoleon's troops in 1809.
It is home to several universities, museums, theatres, galleries and other important cultural and educational institutions.
In the 9th century, the castles at Bratislava ''(Brezalauspurc)'' and Devín ''(Dowina)'' were important centres of the Slavic states: the Principality of Nitra and Great Moravia.
The HC Slovan Bratislava ice hockey team represents Bratislava from 2012/2013 season in Kontinental Hockey League.
The city's system of secondary education (some middle schools and all high schools) consists of 39 gymnasia with 16,048 students, 37 specialized high schools with 10,373 students, and 27 vocational schools with 8,863 students (data ).
Other alternative names of the city in the past include Greek: Ιστρόπολις ''Istropolis'' (meaning "Danube City", also used in Latin), , , , ,  and .
More than 75% of Bratislava's population works in the service sector, mainly composed of trade, banking, IT, telecommunications, and tourism.
The Slovak National Gallery, founded in 1948, offers the most extensive network of galleries in Slovakia.
A new line to Vienna using steam locomotives was opened in 1848, and a line to Pest in 1850.
During the summer, various musical events take place as part of the Bratislava Cultural Summer at Bratislava Castle.
Other large companies and employers with headquarters in Bratislava include Slovak Telekom, Orange Slovensko, Slovenská sporiteľňa, Tatra banka, Doprastav, Hewlett-Packard Slovakia, Slovnaft, Henkel Slovensko, Slovenský plynárenský priemysel, Kraft Foods Slovakia, Whirlpool Slovakia, Železnice Slovenskej republiky, and Tesco Stores Slovak Republic.
It is the seat of the Slovak president, the parliament and the Slovak Executive.
In 1843 Hungarian was proclaimed the official language in legislation, public administration and education by the Diet in the city.
The GDP per capita (PPP), valued at €41,800 (2009), is 184% of the EU average and is the sixth-highest of all regions in the EU member states.
Some areas, particularly Devín and Devínska Nová Ves, are vulnerable to floods from the Danube and Morava rivers.
The average gross monthly salary in the Bratislava region in 2016 was €1427.
The zoo, founded in 1960, currently houses 152 species of animals, including the rare white lion and white tiger.
Joseph Haydn performed in 1784 in the Grassalkovich Palace.
Bratislava's territorial divisions (districts and boroughs)
Smaller theatres include the Bratislava Puppet Theatre, the Astorka Korzo '90 theatre, the Arena Theatre, L+S Studio, and the Naive Theatre of Radošina.
The historic centre is characterised by many baroque palaces.
By the 1930 Czechoslovakian census, the Hungarian population of Bratislava had decreased to 15.8% (see the Demographics of Bratislava article for more details).
The Bratislava City Museum (''Múzeum mesta Bratislavy''), established in 1868, is the oldest museum in continuous operation in Slovakia.
In 2010 Artmedia were relegated from the Corgon Liga under their new name of MFK Petržalka, finishing 12th and bottom.
After the restoration of Czechoslovakia, the Beneš decrees (partly revoked in 1948) collectively punished ethnic German and Hungarian minorities by expropriation and deportation to Germany, Austria, and Hungary for their alleged collaborationism with Nazi Germany and Hungary against Czechoslovakia.
Bratislava is the seat of the Slovak parliament, presidency, ministries, supreme court (), and central bank.
The greater metropolitan area is home to more than 650,000 people.
Football is currently represented by the only club playing in the top Slovak football league, the Fortuna Liga.
Due to Slovakization, the proportion of Slovaks and Czechs increased in the city, while the proportion of Germans and Hungarians fell.
The area fell under Roman influence from the 1st to the 4th century AD and was made part of the Danubian Limes, a border defence system.
The medieval settlement ''Brezalauspurc'' (literally: Braslav's castle) is sometimes attributed to Bratislava, however the actual location of Brezalauspurc is under scholarly debate.
They also established a mint, producing silver coins known as ''biatecs.''
Bratislava is also the centre of rugby union in Slovakia.
Companies with the highest value added according to TREND TOP 200 ranking (2011), operating predominantly in Bratislava, include the Volkswagen Bratislava Plant, Slovnaft refinery (MOL), Eset (software developer), Asseco (software company), PPC Power (producer of heat and steam) and Trenkwalder personnel agency.
National newspapers based in Bratislava include ''SME'', ''Pravda'', ''Nový čas'', ''Hospodárske noviny'' and the English-language ''The Slovak Spectator''.
The city annexed new land, and the population rose significantly, becoming 90% Slovak.
The city became a coronation town and the seat of kings, archbishops (1543), the nobility and all major organisations and offices.
Bratislava is the sixth richest region of the European Union and GDP per capita is about 3 times higher than in other Slovak regions.
The Peace of Pressburg between Austria and France was signed here in 1805.
Among other notable composers who visited or lived in the town were Haydn, Liszt, Bartók and Beethoven.
In 1938, 59% of population were Slovaks or Czechs, while Germans represented 22% and Hungarians 13% of the city's population.
The name Pressburg was also used in English-language publications until 1919, and it is occasionally used today.
Several Davis Cup matches have been played there, including the 2005 Davis Cup final.
A curiosity is the underground (formerly ground-level) restored portion of the Jewish cemetery where 19th-century Rabbi Moses Sofer is buried, located at the base of the castle hill near the entrance to a tram tunnel.
The new building, opened to the public in 2007, is on the riverfront.
One of the most prominent structures in the city is Bratislava Castle, situated on a plateau  above the Danube.
Bratislava is the political, cultural and economic centre of Slovakia.
The city has a number of natural and man-made lakes, most of which are used for recreation.
The first horse-drawn railway in the Kingdom of Hungary, from Pressburg to Szentgyörgy Svätý Jur, was built in 1840.
'''Bratislava IV'''
A stone castle was not constructed until the 10th century, when the area was part of the Kingdom of Hungary.
This science and technology park will combine public and private research and educational institutions.
Many central offices subsequently moved to Buda, followed by a large segment of the nobility.
It developed as a key economic and administrative centre on the kingdom's frontier.
Two news agencies are headquartered there: the News Agency of the Slovak Republic (TASR) and the Slovak News Agency (SITA).
Petržalka and Bratislava hlavná stanica are the main railway stations.
In 1436 he authorized the town to use its own coat of arms.
The creation of the first Slovak Republic in 1939 brought other changes, most notably the expulsion of many Czechs and the deportation or flight of the Jews during the Holocaust.
The city received its contemporary name in 1919.
On March 27, 1919, the name Bratislava was officially adopted for the first time.
Bratislava straddles the Danube River, which it had developed around and for centuries was the chief transportation route to other areas.
The unemployment rate in Bratislava was 1.83% in December 2007.
The city hosts several annual festivals, such as the Bratislava Music Festival and Bratislava Jazz Days.
The city started to lose its importance under the reign of Maria Theresa's son Joseph II, especially after the crown jewels were taken to Vienna in 1783 in an attempt to strengthen the union between Austria and Hungary.
Left without any protection after the retreat of the Hungarian army, many Hungarians were expelled or fled.
The city became the seat of Slovakia's political organs and organizations and became Slovakia's capital on 4 February.
Further unofficial division recognizes additional quarters and localities.
ŠK Slovan is the most successful football club in Slovak history, being the only club from the former Czechoslovakia to win the European football competition the Cup Winners' Cup, in 1969.
Areas attracting developers include the Danube riverfront, where two major projects are already finished: River Park in the Old Town, and Eurovea near the Apollo Bridge.
It is expected that investors will spend €1.2 billion on new projects by 2010.
Bratislava was bombarded by the Allies, occupied by German troops in 1944, and eventually taken by troops of the Soviet 2nd Ukrainian Front on 4 April 1945.
The city also has many foreign embassies and consulates.
The city was the capital of the Kingdom of Hungary, a part of the larger Habsburg Monarchy territories, from 1536 to 1783 and has been home to many Slovak, Hungarian and German historical figures.
'''Bratislava II'''
Bratislava holds shares in 17 companies directly, for example, in the public transport company (Dopravný podnik Bratislava), the waste collection and disposal company, and the water utility.
Bratislava was declared the capital of the first independent Slovak Republic on March 14, 1939, but the new state quickly fell under Nazi influence.
The Slovak National Museum (''Slovenské národné múzeum''), founded in 1961, has its headquarters in Bratislava on the riverfront in the Old Town, along with the Natural History Museum, which is one of its subdivisions.
The dominant Hungarian and German population tried to prevent annexation of the city to Czechoslovakia and declared it a free city.
The largest city park is Horský park (literally, Mountainous Park), in the Old Town.
The exact location of the battle remains unknown, and some interpretations place it west of Lake Balaton.
As a response to onslaughts by Avars, the local Slavic tribes rebelled and established Samo's Empire (623–658), the first known Slavic political entity.
The city board is a 28-member body composed of the mayor and his deputies, the borough mayors, and up to ten city council members.
The city's lowest point is at the Danube's surface at  above mean sea level, and the highest point is Devínska Kobyla at .
Bratislava's zoological park is located in Mlynská dolina, near the headquarters of Slovak Television.
The Carpathian mountain range begins in city territory with the Little Carpathians (''Malé Karpaty'').
The only military cemetery in Bratislava is Slavín, unveiled in 1960 in honour of Soviet Army soldiers who fell during the liberation of Bratislava in April 1945.
The number of councillors in each depends on the size and population of the borough.
Notable TV stations based in the city include Slovak Television (''Slovenská televízia''), Markíza, JOJ and TA3.
Education in Hungarian and German was radically reduced in the city.
The city is in one of the warmest and driest parts of Slovakia.
Owing to its historical multi-cultural character, local culture is influenced by various ethnic and religious groups, including Germans, Slovaks, Hungarians, and Jews.
Volkswagen Group took over and expanded the BAZ communist-built factory in 1991, and has since considerably expanded production beyond original Skoda Auto models.
The Slavs arrived from the East between the 5th and 6th centuries during the Migration Period.
The Middle Danube basin begins at Devín Gate in western Bratislava.
The city has a total area of , making it the second-largest city in Slovakia by area (after the township of Vysoké Tatry).
The current local government (''Mestská samospráva'') structure has been in place since 1990.
As a reaction to the Revolutions of 1848, Ferdinand V signed the so-called April laws, which included the abolition of serfdom, at the Primate's Palace.Kováč et al., "Kronika Slovenska 1", p. 444 The city chose the revolutionary Hungarian side, but was captured by the Austrians in December 1848.
Bratislava is home to both the Slovak Philharmonic Orchestra and the chamber orchestra, Capella Istropolitana.
New flood protection has been built on both banks.
Bratislava enjoys numerous theatres, museums, galleries, concert halls, cinemas, film clubs, and foreign cultural institutions.
The Bratislava Stock Exchange (BSSE), the organiser of the public securities market, was founded on March 15, 1991.
The 17th century was marked by anti-Habsburg uprisings, fighting with the Turks, floods, plagues and other disasters, which diminished the population.
After the formation of the Czechoslovak Republic in 1918, Bratislava remained a multi-ethnic city, but with a different demographic trend.
Since 2012, production has also included Volkswagen up!
The history of the city has been strongly influenced by people of different nations and religions, namely by Austrians, Croats, Czechs, Germans, Hungarians, Jews, Serbs and Slovaks (in alphabetical order).
In total, about 56,000 students attend university in Bratislava.
Main bus station (Autobusová stanica Mlynské Nivy or AS Mlynské Nivy) is located at Mlynské Nivy, east of city centre and offers bus connections to cities in Slovakia and international bus lines.
There are many more clubs with long tradition and successful history despite the lack of success in last years, e.g.
The Franciscan Church, dating to the 13th century, has been a place of knighting ceremonies and is the oldest preserved sacral building in the city.
Bratislava's Town Hall is a complex of three buildings erected in the 14th–15th centuries and now hosts the Bratislava City Museum.
In 1945, most of the Germans were evacuated.
The castle was converted into a Gothic anti-Hussite fortress under Sigismund of Luxemburg in 1430, became a Renaissance castle in 1562, and was rebuilt in 1649 in the baroque style.
Slovak Radio (''Slovenský rozhlas'') has its seat in the centre, and many Slovak commercial radio stations are based in the city.
Bratislava is the seat of the largest university (Comenius University, 27,771 students), the largest technical university (Slovak University of Technology, 18,473 students), and the oldest art schools (the Academy of Performing Arts and the Academy of Fine Arts and Design) in Slovakia.
and badge-engineered SEAT Mii and Skoda Citigo.
The Port of Bratislava provides access to the Black Sea via the Danube and to the North Sea through the Rhine–Main–Danube Canal.
Hungarian speakers still use the Hungarian name, Pozsony.
Many governmental institutions and private companies have their headquarters in Bratislava.
The borough is also known for the ruins of the Roman military camp Gerulata, part of Limes Romanus, a border defence system.
The Bratislava Region is the wealthiest and most economically prosperous region in Slovakia, despite being the smallest by area and having the second smallest population of the eight Slovak regions.
In 1938, Nazi Germany annexed neighbouring Austria in the Anschluss; later that year it also annexed the still-separate from Bratislava Petržalka and Devín boroughs on ethnic grounds, as these had many ethnic Germans.
The city has also hosted several important cultural and political events.
The Communist government also built several new grandiose buildings, such as the ''Most Slovenského národného povstania'' bridge and the Slovak Radio headquarters.
This strategic position destined the city to be the site of frequent attacks and battles, but also brought it economic development and high political status.
The A6 motorway between Bratislava and Vienna was opened in November 2007.
At the end of World War II, most of Bratislava's ethnic Germans were helped to evacuate by the German authorities.
The Council usually convenes once a month and consists of 45 members elected to four-year terms concurrent with the mayor's.
Before then FC Košice in the 1997–98 season lost all six matches, despite being the first Slovak side since independence to play in the competition.
Bratislava is the seat of the Slovak National Theatre, housed in two buildings.
The city's Hungarian name, ''Pozsony'', was given after the castle's first castellan, "Poson".
Another known club from the city is FK Inter Bratislava.
It is only  from the border with the Czech Republic and only  from the Austrian capital Vienna.
The largest numbers of foreign visitors come from the Czech Republic, Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, Poland and Austria.
Many of Slovakia's large businesses and financial institutions also have headquarters there.
M. R. Štefánik Airport is located  north-east of the city centre.
The Slovak economy's strong growth in the 2000s has led to a boom in the construction industry, and several major projects have been completed or are planned in Bratislava.
Bratislava is home to three winter sports arenas: Ondrej Nepela Winter Sports Stadium, V. Dzurilla Winter Sports Stadium, and Dúbravka Winter Sports Stadium.
On February 12, 1919 the German and Hungarian population started a protest against the Czechoslovak occupation, but the Czechoslovak Legions opened fire on the unarmed demonstrators.
Two displays in Bratislava are next to one another at Esterházy Palace (''Esterházyho palác'',''Eszterházy palota'') and the Water Barracks (''Vodné kasárne'',''Vizikaszárnya'') on the Danube riverfront in the Old Town.
In older documents, confusion can be caused by the Latin forms ''Bratislavia, Wratislavia'' etc., which refer to Wrocław, Poland – not to Bratislava.
It hosts several international and national canoe and kayak competitions annually.
Other rivers are the Morava River, which forms the north-western border of the city and enters the Danube at Devín, the Little Danube, and the Vydrica, which enters the Danube in the borough of Karlova Ves.
The first newspapers in Hungarian and Slovak were published here: ''Magyar hírmondó'' in 1780, and ''Presspurske Nowiny'' in 1783.
Under Queen Maria Theresa, the castle became a prestigious royal seat.
Examples include Štrkovec lake in Ružinov, Kuchajda in Nové Mesto, Zlaté Piesky and the Vajnory lakes in the north-east, and Rusovce lake in the south, which is popular with nudists.
It is the largest cultural institution in Slovakia, and manages 16 specialised museums in Bratislava and beyond.
Since the 1950s, the Slovaks have been the dominant ethnicity in the town, making up around 90% of the city's population.
The construction boom has spawned new public buildings, such as the Most Apollo and a new building of the Slovak National Theatre, as well as private real-estate development.
The Ice Hockey World Championships in 1959 and 1992 were played in Bratislava, and the 2011 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships were held in Bratislava and Košice, for which a new arena was built.
Bratislava is also served by the Vienna International Airport located  west of the city centre.
Music in Bratislava flourished in the 18th century and was closely linked to Viennese musical life.
Bratislava is the cultural heart of Slovakia.
Construction was expected to begin in 2008, but has since stalled.
Some smaller houses are historically significant; composer Johann Nepomuk Hummel was born in an 18th-century house in the Old Town.
Most historical buildings are concentrated in the Old Town.
Altogether, visitors made 1,338,497 overnight stays.
In 1941–1942 and 1944–1945, the new Slovak government cooperated in deporting most of Bratislava's approximately 15,000 Jews; they were transported to concentration camps, where most were killed or died before the end of the war.
Ludwig van Beethoven was a guest in 1796 in the Keglević Palace.
Notable cathedrals and churches include the Gothic St. Martin's Cathedral built in the 13th–16th centuries, which served as the coronation church of the Kingdom of Hungary between 1563 and 1830.
The gallery offers permanent displays at Pálffy Palace (''Pálffyho palác'',''Pálffy palota'') and Mirbach Palace (''Mirbachov palác'',''Mirbach palota''), in the Old Town.
Czechs and Slovaks moved their households to Bratislava.
The Čunovo Water Sports Centre is a whitewater slalom and rafting area, close to the Gabčíkovo dam.
The ruined and recently renovated Devín Castle is in the borough of Devín, on top of a rock where the Morava River, which forms the border between Austria and Slovakia, enters the Danube.
An additional service, ''Bratislavská integrovaná doprava'' (Bratislava Integrated Transport), links train and bus routes in the city with points beyond.
A few returned after the war, but were soon expelled without their properties under the Beneš decrees, part of a widespread expulsion of ethnic Germans from eastern Europe.
FC Petržalka akadémia currently competes in 5. liga after bankruptcy in summer 2014.
As a rail hub, the city has direct connections to Austria, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland, Germany and the rest of Slovakia.
The Bratislava City Gallery, founded in 1961, is the second-largest Slovak gallery of its kind.
The current mayor of Bratislava is Ivo Nesrovnal, who won the election held on November 15, 2014 as an independent candidate.
The city is represented in the top Slovak leagues in women's and men's basketball, women's handball and volleyball, and men's water polo.
Reasons for the influx of multi-national corporations include proximity to Western Europe, skilled labour force and the high density of universities and research facilities.
Shortly thereafter, it became capital of the Slovak Socialist Republic, one of the two states of the federalized Czechoslovakia.
Among other factors, the growth of low-cost airline flights to Bratislava, led by Ryanair, has led to conspicuous stag parties, primarily from the UK.
following ŠKP Devín (successful team from 1990s) and partially following the original Inter (original Inter bankrupted in 2009, sold the Corgoň Liga license to FK Senica and legally merged with FC ŠKP Dúbravka; current Inter has taken over the tradition, name, colours, fans etc., but legally is no successor of the original Inter); FC Tatran Devín, the club that was successful mostly at youth level and merged with ŠKP Bratislava in 1995; MŠK Iskra Petržalka, playing under the name ''ŠK Iskra Matadorfix Bratislava'' in the former 1st League (today 2nd) in 1997/98.
The name ''Bratislava'', which was used before only by some Slovak patriots, became official in March 1919.
A race track is located in Petržalka, where horse racing and dog racing events and dog shows are held regularly.
The river passes through the city from the west to the south-east.
Its location on the borders with Austria and Hungary makes it the only national capital that borders between two countries.
