His methods resulted in almost immediate profitability, despite a large mortgage on the property.
Bragg's objective was to cut off Rosecrans from Chattanooga and destroy his army.
By January 2, 1863, however, the Union troops remained in place and the battle resumed as Bragg launched an unsuccessful attack by the troops of Maj. Gen. John C. Breckinridge against the well-defended Union left flank.
Unfortunately, he was a close friend of Davis, who was unwilling to relieve him.
For years he had suffered from rheumatism, dyspepsia, nerves, and severe migraine headaches, ailments that undoubtedly contributed to his disagreeable personal style.
Braxton Bragg was born in Warrenton, North Carolina, one of the six sons of Thomas and Margaret Crosland Bragg.
Kirby Smith pleaded with Bragg to follow up on his success: "For God's sake, General, let us fight Buell here."
After the war Bragg worked as the superintendent of the New Orleans waterworks, a supervisor of harbor improvements at Mobile, Alabama, and as a railroad engineer and inspector in Texas.
In February 1864, Bragg was summoned to Richmond for consultation with Davis.
Leonidas Polk did not reply to the implied question, but he wrote directly to his friend, Jefferson Davis, recommending that Bragg be replaced.
Senator Willie P. Mangum and West Point admitted Braxton at the age of 16.
A physician familiar with his history believe that he "died by the brain" (or of "paralysis of the brain"), suffering from the degeneration of cerebral blood vessels.
Although considered by his neighbors to be from the lower class, Thomas Bragg was a carpenter and contractor who became wealthy enough to send Braxton to the Warrenton Male Academy, one of the best schools in the state.
Bragg renamed his force as the Army of Tennessee on November 20.
On September 10, Maj. Gens.
Rosecrans's initial movements on June 23 took Bragg by surprise.
Here, Bragg was stationed with three future Union Army generals that he came to consider close friends: George H. Thomas, John F. Reynolds (both of whom were lieutenants who reported to Bragg) and William T. Sherman.
He and his wife purchased a sugar plantation of   north of Thibodaux.
He submitted a requisition for supplies for his company, then as quartermaster declined to fill it.
Unable to command Smith to honor their plan, Bragg focused on a movement to Lexington instead of Nashville.
Bragg traveled to New York, Washington, Mobile, and New Orleans, and in each place he was honored.
Once the armies were combined, Bragg's seniority would apply and Smith would be under his direct command.
He demurred, concerned about the daunting geographical obstacles and logistical challenges, preferring to wait for Rosecrans to solve those same problems and attack him.
Polk in particular was outraged at being relieved of command.
On January 11, 1861, Bragg led a group of 500 volunteers to Baton Rouge, where they persuaded the commander of the federal arsenal there to surrender.
Polk, although personally brave and charismatic, was simply an average tactician known for piecemeal attacks and was seriously insubordinate.
Bragg, who had been headquartered at Raleigh, North Carolina, caught up with the Davis near Abbeville, South Carolina, on May 1.
He became widely admired (professionally, not personally) in Taylor's army for the discipline and drill of his men and the newly tried tactics of light artillery that proved decisive in most of his engagements against the Mexican Army.
Buckner's attitude was colored by Bragg's unsuccessful invasion of Buckner's native Kentucky in 1862, as well as by the loss of his command through the merger.
After the fall of Richmond on April 2, Jefferson Davis and remnants of the Confederate government fled to the southwest.
Congressman David Outlaw wrote about the honor: "Col. Bragg having, no thanks to them, won for himself a brilliant reputation, is now the object of the most fulsome adulation.
Bragg continued his controversial writing, this time a series of nine articles published 1844&ndash;45 in the ''Southern Literary Messenger''.
He saw that his army had not much to gain from a further, isolated victory, whereas a defeat might cost not only the bountiful food and supplies yet collected, but also his army.
Throughout these campaigns, Bragg fought almost as bitterly against some of his uncooperative subordinates as he did against the enemy, and they made multiple attempts to have him replaced as army commander.
Bragg had a reputation for being a strict disciplinarian and one who adhered to regulations literally.
Davis chose Hood to replace Johnston.
Judith Hallock noted that there was mutual admiration between Davis and Bragg during his assignment in Richmond, perhaps because of the respect Bragg gave to the president.
An inquest ruled that his death was due to "fatal syncope," possibly induced by organic disease of the heart.
The following day in the Battle of Missionary Ridge, his primary defensive line successfully resisted an attack on its right flank, but the center was overwhelmed in a frontal assault by George Thomas's army.
In this assignment, he stayed relatively healthy, but tended toward overwork, laboring administratively to improve the living conditions of his men.
While Bragg was on leave in Washington, D.C., in March 1844, Clinton called him to testify before his House Committee on Public Expenditures.
Although the Army of Tennessee had about 52,000 men at the end of July, the Confederate government merged the Department of East Tennessee, under Maj. Gen. Simon B. Buckner, into Bragg's Department of Tennessee, which added 17,800 men to Bragg's army, but also extended his command responsibilities northward to the Knoxville area.
In 1863, he fought a series of battles against Maj. Gen. William S. Rosecrans and the Union Army of the Cumberland.
In December, President Davis asked Bragg to take command of the Trans-Mississippi Department, but Bragg declined.
Before Rosecrans could attack, Bragg launched a strong, surprise attack against Rosecrans's right flank on December 31, 1862, the start of the Battle of Stones River.
The newlyweds relocated to Jefferson Barracks, Missouri, on September 10.
Bragg commanded a corps (and was also chief of staff) under Johnston at the Battle of Shiloh, April 6&ndash;7, 1862.
Bragg ordered the wing of his army under Maj. Gen. Leonidas Polk to attack what he thought was an isolated portion of Buell's command, but had difficulty motivating Polk to begin the fight until Bragg arrived in person.
Bragg traveled to Washington to implore Secretary of War Jefferson Davis to reassign his artillery battery away from frontier duty, but was unsuccessful.
Assuming that Buell's army could be destroyed, Bragg and Smith would march farther north into Kentucky, a movement they assumed would be welcomed by the local populace.
On September 13, Bragg ordered Leonidas Polk to attack Maj. Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden's corps, but Polk ignored the orders and demanded more troops, insisting that it was he who was about to be attacked.
Rosecrans used the time lost in these delays to concentrate his scattered forces.
The Confederate War Department asked Bragg in early August if he could assume the offensive against Rosecrans if he were given reinforcements from Mississippi.
As the Union army outmaneuvered the Confederates, Bragg was forced to abandon Tullahoma and on July 4 retreated behind the Tennessee River.
He launched a series of argumentative letters with senior Army officials, including the adjutant general and Army paymaster, that established his reputation as "disputatious."
On August 9, Smith informed Bragg that he was breaking the agreement and intended to bypass Cumberland Gap, leaving a small holding force to neutralize the Union garrison, and to move north.
The couple moved in with his brother, a plantation owner in Lowndesboro, Alabama, but they found the life of seclusion there to be intolerable.
Although Bragg was the senior general in the theater, President Davis had established Kirby Smith's Department of East Tennessee as an independent command, reporting directly to Richmond.
Bragg's now-fragile military career began to crumble around him.
The Confederates succeeded in driving the Union army back to a small defensive position, but could not destroy it, nor could they break its supply line to Nashville, as Bragg intended.
While most agree he was not a particularly good army commander, historians such as Hallock and Steven E. Woodworth cite his skills as an organizer and that his defeat in several battles can also be partially blamed upon bad luck and incompetent subordinates, notably Polk.
Bragg, a native of North Carolina, was educated at West Point and became an artillery officer.
Realizing that he was at a personal impasse, he referred the matter to the post commandant, who exclaimed, "My God, Mr. Bragg, you have quarreled with every officer in the army, and now you are quarreling with yourself!"
To his disgust, Joseph E. Johnston was returned to service to command the remnants of the Army of Tennessee and other forces defending against Sherman in North Carolina.
Bragg was slow to react and his subordinates were typically uncooperative: the mistrust among the general officers of the Army of Tennessee for the past months led to little direct communication about strategy, and neither Polk nor Hardee had a firm understanding of Bragg's plans.
Recognizing his lack of progress, the severe winter weather, the arrival of supplies and reinforcements for Rosecrans, and heeding the recommendations of corps commanders Hardee and Polk, Bragg withdrew his army from the field to Tullahoma, Tennessee.
His tenure was successful and he trained his men to be some of the best disciplined troops in the Confederate Army, such as the 5th Georgia and the 6th Florida Regiments.
After the Siege of Corinth, Beauregard departed on sick leave, leaving Bragg in temporary command of the army in Tupelo, Mississippi, but he failed to inform President Davis of his departure and spent two weeks absent without leave.
Bragg was arrested and sent to Fort Monroe, Virginia, where he was court-martialed for disobedience to orders and disrespect toward his superior officers.
Johnston explicitly refused any suggestion that he take command, concerned that people would think he had taken advantage of the situation for his own personal gain.
His timely placement of artillery into a gap in the line helped repulse a numerically superior Mexican attack.
As company commander, he resubmitted the requisition, giving additional reasons for his requirements, but as the quartermaster he denied the request again.
Of his troublesome subordinates, Hardee was considered to be a solid soldier even by Bragg.
On the second day of battle, the Union army counterattacked and the Confederates retreated back to Corinth.
Davis assumed that Johnston, Bragg's superior, would find the situation wanting and take command of the army in the field, easing Bragg aside.
In the thousands of letters that Bragg wrote during his lifetime, he spoke fondly of his father, but never mentioned his mother.
In October 1864, President Davis sent Bragg to assume temporary command of the defenses of Wilmington, North Carolina, and his responsibility was soon increased at the recommendation of Robert E. Lee to include all of the Department of North Carolina and Southern Virginia.
When Davis ordered Johnston to send Bragg to Richmond, Johnston delayed because of Elise Bragg's illness; when her health improved Johnston was unable to assume command because of lingering medical problems from his wound at the Battle of Seven Pines in 1862.
Bragg was rightfully concerned about a sizable Union force under Maj. Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside that was threatening Knoxville to the northeast, and Rosecrans reinforced this concern by feinting to his left and shelling the city of Chattanooga from the heights north of the river.
On March 1, 1845, Bragg and his artillery company were ordered to join Gen. Zachary Taylor in the defense of Texas from Mexico.
The bulk of the Union army crossed the Tennessee southeast of Chattanooga by September 4 and Bragg realized that his position there was no longer tenable.
The orders for his new assignment on February 24 read that he was "charged with the conduct of military operations of the Confederate States", but he was essentially Davis's military adviser or chief of staff without a direct command, a post once held by Robert E. Lee.
There is a famous, apocryphal story, included in Ulysses S. Grant's memoirs, about Bragg as a company commander at a frontier post where he also served as quartermaster.
During his tenure in Richmond, he had numerous quarrels with significant figures, including the Secretary of War, the Commissary General, members of Congress, the press, and many of his  fellow generals; the exception to the latter was Robert E. Lee, who treated Bragg politely and with deference and who had, Bragg knew, an exceptionally close relationship with the president.
There were also numerous attacks on Army administrative policies and officers.
He graduated fifth of fifty cadets from the West Point Class of 1837 and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S.
His men became bogged down against a Union salient called the Hornet's Nest, which he attacked for hours with piecemeal frontal assaults.
Bragg and Elise had lost their home in late 1862 when the plantation in Thibodaux was confiscated by the Federal Army.
He and Edmund Kirby Smith attempted an invasion of Kentucky in 1862, but Bragg retreated following the inconclusive Battle of Perryville, Kentucky, in October.
At the age of 59, Bragg was walking down a street with a friend in Galveston, Texas, when he suddenly fell over unconscious.
In the more serious of the two incidents, one of his soldiers exploded a 12-pound artillery shell underneath his cot.
When Bragg was only ten years old, his father decided on a military career for him and sought ways to obtain a nomination to the United States Military Academy.
Eight months later, they were transferred to Fort Washita, near the Texas border.
He began to wage a battle against the subordinates he resented for failing him in the campaign&mdash;Hindman for his lack of action in McLemore's Cove, and Polk for delaying the morning attack Bragg ordered on September 20.
Bragg continued to suffer from the conduct of his subordinates, who were not attentive to his orders.
The citizens of Warrenton presented him with a ceremonial sword.
He eventually heeded Kirby Smith's calls for reinforcement and decided to relocate his Army of Mississippi to join with him.
His men were able to win a minor victory at the Second Battle of Kinston, March 7&ndash;10, and fought unsuccessfully at the Battle of Bentonville, March 19&ndash;21.
The command went to Earl Van Dorn.
It was not a complete victory, however.
In November, with William T. Sherman's March to the Sea under way, Davis ordered him to the defenses of Augusta, Georgia, and then to Savannah, Georgia, Charleston, South Carolina, and in January 1865, the defenses of Wilmington again.
Instead, following a partial rout of the Union army by Longstreet's wing, a stout defense by Maj. Gen. George H. Thomas allowed Rosecrans and almost all of his army to escape.
He considered but rejected a position in the Egyptian Army.
Tullahoma is recognized as a "brilliant" campaign for Rosecrans, achieving with minimal losses his goal of driving Bragg from Middle Tennessee.
Bragg was also promoted to captain within the regular army in June 1846.
The state convention on secession also established a state army and Moore appointed Bragg its commander, with the rank of major general, on February 20, 1861.
He took over responsibility for administration of the military prison system and its hospitals.
Bragg transported about 10,000 men to Corinth, Mississippi, in February 1862 and was charged with improving the poor discipline of the Confederate troops already assembled under General Albert Sidney Johnston.
Lt. Gen. James Longstreet wrote to the Secretary of War with the prediction that "nothing but the hand of God can save us or help us as long as we have our present commander."
Although the author of the petition is not known, historians suspect it was Simon Buckner, whose signature was first on the list.
In August 1871 he was employed by the city of Mobile, Alabama, to improve the river, harbor, and bay, leaving after quarreling with a "combination of capitalists."
He was often ridiculed as a child because of rumors about his mother's prison sentence for allegedly murdering an African American freeman, and some of those rumors stated that he was born in prison.
He was also experiencing one of his periodic episodes of ill health that would plague him throughout the war.
In June, he was outmaneuvered in the Tullahoma Campaign and retreated into Chattanooga.
While keeping Polk's corps occupied with small actions in the center of the Confederate line, Rosecrans sent the majority of his army around Bragg's right flank.
He reshaped the Confederacy's conscription process by streamlining the chain of command and reducing conscripts' avenues of appeal.
In late 1869 Jefferson Davis offered Bragg a job as an agent for the Carolina Life Insurance Company.
Disheartening news had arrived from northern Mississippi that Earl Van Dorn and Sterling Price had been defeated at Corinth, just as Robert E. Lee had failed in his Maryland Campaign.
In early October, an attempted mutiny of Bragg's subordinates resulted in D.H. Hill being relieved from his command.
Bragg proposed to Davis that he change his strategy of attempting to defend every square mile of Confederate territory, recommending that his troops were of less value on the Gulf Coast than they would be farther to the north, concentrated with other forces for an attack against the Union Army in Tennessee.
He remained in Texas as inspector of railroads.
Bragg replied, "I will do it, sir," but then displaying what one observer called "a perplexity and vacillation which had now become simply appalling to Smith, to Hardee, and to Polk," he ordered his army to retreat through the Cumberland Gap to Knoxville.
He took the assignment, even though he'd been opposed to secession.
Meanwhile, Davis was concerned that Joseph Johnston, Bragg's successor at the Army of Tennessee, was defending too timidly against Sherman's Atlanta Campaign.
Judith Hallock wrote that Bragg was "outfoxed" and that his ill health may have been partially to blame for his performance, but her overall assessment was that he performed credibly during the retreat from Tullahoma, keeping his army intact under difficult circumstances.
Historians Grady McWhiney and Woodworth have stated that, contrary to popular belief, Davis and Bragg were not friends, having bitterly quarreled during the antebellum years.
Longstreet was dispatched with his corps to the Knoxville Campaign against Ambrose Burnside, seriously weakening Bragg's army at Chattanooga.
Any remaining Federal force would be defeated in a grand battle in Kentucky, establishing the Confederate frontier at the Ohio River.
While Bragg fought with his subordinates and reduced his force by dispatching Longstreet to Knoxville, the besieged Union army received a new commander&mdash;Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant&mdash;and significant reinforcements from Mississippi and Virginia.
Although Davis decided to leave the general in command, Bragg's relationship with his subordinates would be severely damaged.
Bragg had extensive conversations with a more junior corps commander, Lt. Gen. John Bell Hood, and was impressed with his plans for taking offensive action, about which Hood had also been confidentially corresponding to Richmond for weeks behind Johnston's back.
He opposed the concept of secession, believing that in a republic no majority could set aside a written constitution, but this belief would soon be tested.
And John C. Breckinridge, who had hated Bragg since the debacle at Perryville, was named Secretary of War.
An opposed crossing of the Tennessee River was not feasible, so Rosecrans devised a deception to distract Bragg above Chattanooga while the army crossed downstream.
On his celebratory tour, Bragg visited Evergreen Plantation in Thibodaux, Louisiana, where he met 23-year-old Eliza Brooks Ellis, known to her friends as Elise, a wealthy sugar heiress.
Bragg's critics, including William J. Hardee, interpreted the letter as having an implied secondary question&mdash;had Bragg lost the confidence of his senior commanders?
But it was Buena Vista that brought him national fame.
(Bragg's army was too exhausted from its long journey to begin immediate offensive operations.)
Bragg," which caused him to redouble his efforts and save the day; the stories are probably apocryphal.
Bragg offered his resignation on November 29 and was chagrined when Pres.
Davis had hinted to Bragg that he thought Hardee would be an appropriate successor, but Bragg was reluctant to promote an old enemy and reported back that Hardee would provide no change in strategy from Johnston's.
They were forced to leave this relatively comfortable assignment in October 1853 when they were transferred to Fort Gibson in the Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma).
Bragg's articles came to the attention of Representative James G. Clinton, a New York Democrat and political opponent of Scott's.
Davis responded to the complaints by dispatching Gen. Joseph E. Johnston to investigate the condition of the army.
Davis was sympathetic to Bragg's discomfort and discussed transferring him to command the Trans-Mississippi Department, replacing Edmund Kirby Smith, but the politicians from that region were strongly opposed.
A northwestern outpost, Fort Bragg, California, was named in his honor.
Throughout the 1850s, Bragg had been disturbed by the accelerating sectional crisis.
He was quickly called to Richmond to explain to Jefferson Davis the charges brought by his officers about how he had conducted his campaign, demanding that he be replaced as head of the army.
He attended the final cabinet meeting and was instrumental in convincing Davis that the cause was lost.
An anecdote circulated about Gen. Taylor commanding, "A little more of the grape, Capt.
On the way, he was distracted by the capture of a Union fort at Munfordville.
He became active in local politics and was elected to the Board of Public Works in 1860.
Davis was looking for someone to replace Beauregard because of his perceived poor performance at Corinth, and the opportunity presented itself when Beauregard left without permission.
Finally, on September 19&ndash;20, 1863, Bragg, reinforced by two divisions from Mississippi, one division and several brigades from the Department of East Tennessee, and two divisions under Lt. Gen. James Longstreet from Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia, turned on the pursuing Rosecrans in northeastern Georgia and at high cost defeated him at the Battle of Chickamauga, the greatest Confederate victory in the Western Theater during the war.
He commanded forces in Pensacola, Florida, Alabama, and the Department of West Florida and was promoted to major general on September 12, 1861.
Grady McWhiney, the principal biographer of Bragg's early life and career, states that despite these rumors, the Bragg family was law-abiding.
Thus, he did not come to the fort's assistance in a timely fashion after it was attacked the second time.
He included thoughtful recommendations on a proposed structure for the Army general staff, which were echoed in reorganizations that occurred in the early 20th century, but were ignored at the time.
Those who formerly sneered at the Braggs as plebeians, as unfit associates for them, they are glad to honor.
With what scorn must Col. Bragg, in his secret heart regard them."
He wrote to his wife, "With the whole southwest thus in the enemy's possession, my crime would have been unpardonable had I kept my noble little army to be ice-bound in the northern clime, without tents or shoes, and obliged to forage daily for bread, etc."
He was descended from Thomas Bragg (1579 - 1665), who was born in England and settled in the Colony of Virginia.
Scott ordered him not to testify, in defiance of the Congressional subpoena.
He evacuated the city on September 8.
On December 12, 1860, Governor Thomas O. Moore appointed him to the state military board, an organization charged with creating a 5,000-man army.
He became a company commander in the 3rd Artillery and commanded Fort Marion, near St. Augustine.
The Confederates were able to successfully repulse the first Union attempt to capture Fort Fisher, which dominated the seaborne supply line to Wilmington.
Bragg chose to rejoin Smith.
A positive aspect for Bragg was Hardee's request to be transferred to Mississippi in July, but he was replaced by Lt. Gen. D.H. Hill, a general who had not gotten along with Robert E. Lee in Virginia.
Bragg was dismayed when Beauregard called off a late afternoon assault against the Union's final position, which was strongly defended, calling it their last opportunity for victory.
He fought in support of Col. Jefferson Davis and the Mississippi Rifles, which earned him the admiration of the future U.S. Secretary of War and president of the Confederacy.
The defeat at Chattanooga was the last straw, and Bragg was recalled in early 1864 to Richmond, where he became the military adviser to Confederate President Jefferson Davis.
Bragg had suspicions about the identity of the perpetrator, but had insufficient evidence to bring charges.
Bragg referred to his retreat as a withdrawal, the successful culmination of a giant raid.
He is buried in Magnolia Cemetery, Mobile, Alabama.
Bragg's generals were vocal in their dissatisfaction of his command during the Kentucky campaign and Stones River.
However, when the Union returned in January, Bragg's performance in the Second Battle of Fort Fisher was poor.
Bragg received public praise for his conduct in the battle and on April 12, 1862, Jefferson Davis appointed Bragg a full general, the sixth man to achieve that rank and one of only seven in the history of the Confederacy.
He had to decide whether to continue toward a fight with Buell (over Louisville) or rejoin Smith, who had gained control of the center of the state by capturing Richmond and Lexington, and threatened to move on Cincinnati.
In December, he fought another inconclusive battle at Murfreesboro, Tennessee, the Battle of Stones River, but once again withdrew his army.
Bragg's shortcomings as an army commander included his unimaginative tactics, mostly his reliance on frontal assault (such as the Hornet's Nest at Shiloh, Breckinridge's assault at Stones River, and numerous instances at Chickamauga), and his lack of post-battle follow-up that turned tactical victories or draws into strategic disappointments (Perryville and Chickamauga).
It briefly served as a shelter, the Bragg Home Colony, for freed slaves under the control of the Freedmen's Bureau.
On October 8, the armies met unexpectedly at the Battle of Perryville; they had skirmished the previous day as they were searching for water sources in the vicinity.
In late December, Rosecrans advanced from Nashville against Bragg's position at Murfreesboro.
The Confederates were forced to evacuate Wilmington, their last remaining seaport on the Atlantic coast.
Smith and Bragg met in Chattanooga on July 31, 1862, and devised a plan for the campaign: Kirby Smith's Army of Kentucky would first march into Kentucky to dispose of the Union defenders of Cumberland Gap.
It is alleged that some of his troops attempted to assassinate him on two occasions in August and September 1847, but he was not injured either time.
Despite this, Bragg considered the first day of battle to be a victory and assumed that Rosecrans would soon retreat.
He assumed that the first failed siege meant that the fort was invulnerable, when in fact bad weather played a large role.
Peter Cozzens wrote about his relationship with subordinates:
He told Bragg that he had "the best organized, armed, equipped, and disciplined army in the Confederacy."
Beauregard to an important role in the defense of Richmond and Petersburg.
In the initial surprise Confederate advance, Bragg's corps was ordered to attack in a line that was almost  long, but he soon began directing activities of the units that found themselves around the center of the battlefield.
Bragg became in effect a corps commander (although his command was less than a division in size) under Johnston for the remainder of the Carolinas Campaign.
Map of the Battle of Shiloh, morning of April 6, 1862
Eventually Polk attacked the corps of Maj. Gen. Alexander M. McCook on the Union army's left flank and forced it to fall back.
At about the same time, Bragg lost his position as military adviser to Davis when Robert E. Lee was promoted to be general in chief of all the Confederate armies in February.
Eventually the oldest Bragg son, John, recently elected as a state legislator, obtained the support of U.S.
After a series of posts in the Indian Territory, he resigned from the U.S. Army in 1856 to become a sugar plantation owner in Louisiana.
Near the end of the war, he defended Wilmington, North Carolina, and served as a corps commander in the Carolinas Campaign.
