Domestic tourism is a fundamental market segment for the industry, as 51 million people traveled throughout the country in 2005, and direct revenues from Brazilian tourists reached USD 22 billion, 5.6 times more receipts than international tourists in 2005.
Among the most popular destinations are the Amazon Rainforest, beaches and dunes in the Northeast Region, the Pantanal in the Center-West Region, beaches at Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina, cultural tourism in Minas Gerais and business trips to São Paulo city.
Scientists estimate that the total number of plant and animal species in Brazil could approach four million, mostly invertebrates.
Brazilian art has developed since the 16th century into different styles that range from Baroque (the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century) to Romanticism, Modernism, Expressionism, Cubism, Surrealism and Abstractionism.
Brazil is one of the three countries in Latin America with an operational Synchrotron Laboratory, a research facility on physics, chemistry, material science and life sciences.
Brazil's railway system has been declining since 1945, when emphasis shifted to highway construction.
South of Bahia, near the coasts, and more southerly most of the state of São Paulo, the distribution of rainfall changes, with rain falling throughout the year.
The Portuguese encountered indigenous peoples divided into several tribes, most of whom spoke languages of the Tupi–Guarani family, and fought among themselves.
* Mortality caused by external causes (transportation, violence and suicide): 71.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants (14.9% of all deaths in the country), reaching 82.3 deaths in the southeast region.
Uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory, mostly for research purposes (as Brazil obtains 88% from its electricity from hydroelectricity) and the country's first nuclear submarine will be delivered in 2015 (by France).
Brazil has been the world's largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years.
Legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in Brazil.
These differences are comparable to those between American and British English.
In May 2010, Brazil launched TV Brasil Internacional, an international television station, initially broadcasting to 49 countries.
In 1894, following the unfoldings of two severe crises, an economic along with a military one, the republican civilians rose to power.
This favorable trend is the result of the strong devaluation of the US dollar against the Brazilian Real, which began in 2004, but which makes Brazil a more expensive international destination.
Doctrinal works and the works of academic jurists have strong influence in law creation and in law cases.
The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them, declaring the country's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822.
The Brazilian film industry began in the late 19th century, during the early days of the Belle Époque.
The country still has above-average levels of violent crime and particularly high levels of gun violence and homicide.
It has built a tradition of participating in UN peacekeeping missions such as in Haiti and East Timor.
The country has been expanding its presence in international financial and commodities markets, and is one of a group of four emerging economies called the BRIC countries.
The Union, the states and the Federal District, and the municipalities, are the "spheres of government".
Brazilian roads are the primary carriers of freight and passenger traffic.
Brazil is the only country in the world that has the equator and the Tropic of Capricorn running through it.
Despite this, states have much less autonomy to create their own laws than in the United States.
The south enjoys subtropical conditions, with cool winters and average annual temperatures not exceeding ; winter frosts and snowfall are not rare in the highest areas.
Nevertheless, the Supreme Federal Tribunal was the first court in the world to transmit its sessions on television, and also via YouTube.
The year 2010 was a new record in terms of value with 115 billion USD of transactions.
An increasingly well-developed tool of Brazil's foreign policy is providing aid as a donor to other developing countries.
* Mortality by non-transmissible illness: 151.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants caused by heart and circulatory diseases, along with 72.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants caused by cancer.
Among the most renowned Brazilian inventors are priests Bartolomeu de Gusmão, Landell de Moura and Francisco João de Azevedo, besides Alberto Santos-Dumont, Evaristo Conrado Engelberg, Manuel Dias de Abreu, Andreas Pavel e Nélio José Nicolai.
The Brazilian military has also three times intervened militarily to overthrow the Brazilian government.
It spans four time zones; from UTC−5 comprising the state of Acre and the westernmost portion of Amazonas, to UTC−4 in the western states, to UTC−3 in the eastern states (the national time) and UTC−2 in the Atlantic islands.
Brazil pegged its currency, the real, to the U.S. dollar in 1994.
'''Brazil''' (;  ), officially the '''Federative Republic of Brazil''' (, ), is the largest country in both South America and Latin America.
In many areas of the country, the natural environment is threatened by development.
The legal system is based on the Federal Constitution, which was promulgated on 5 October 1988, and is the fundamental law of Brazil.
Corruption costs Brazil almost $41 billion a year alone, with 69.9% of the country's firms identifying the issue as a major constraint in successfully penetrating the global market.
Brazil's central bank paid back the IMF loan in 2005, although it was not due to be repaid until 2006.
Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of current day Brazil had an estimated indigenous population of 7 million people, mostly semi-nomadic who subsisted on hunting, fishing, gathering, and migrant agriculture.
On 2 October 2009, Rio de Janeiro was selected to host the 2016 Olympic Games and 2016 Paralympic Games, making it the first South American city to host the games and second in Latin America after Mexico City.
Several brief interim governments succeeded after Vargas's suicide.
Notable film festivals in Brazil include the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro International Film Festivals and the Gramado Festival.
The 1941 unfinished film ''It's All True'' was divided in four segments, two of which were filmed in Brazil and directed by Orson Welles; it was originally produced as part of the United States' Good Neighbor Policy during Getúlio Vargas' Estado Novo government.
For most of its democratic history, Brazil has had a multi-party system, proportional representation.
Peanuts are used to make paçoca, rapadura and pé-de-moleque.
The foreign affairs in the monarchy were basically related issues with the countries of the Southern Cone with which Brazil has borders.
All other legislation and court decisions must conform to its rules.
The country is also a pioneer in the search for oil in deep water, from where extracts 73% of its reserves.
Independence was achieved in 1822 with the creation of the Empire of Brazil, a unitary state governed under a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary system.
Municipalities and the Federal District have "organic laws" (), which act in a similar way to constitutions.
They have a governor and a unicameral legislative body elected directly by their voters.
* Motherhood mortality: about 73.1 deaths per 100,000 born children in 2002.
With the end of the Peninsular War in 1814, the courts of Europe demanded that Queen Maria I and Prince Regent João return to Portugal, deeming it unfit for the head of an ancient European monarchy to reside in a colony.
Brazil's conscription policy gives it one of the world's largest military forces,  estimated at more than 1.6 million reservist annually.
The "early republican government was little more than a military dictatorship, with army dominating affairs both at Rio de Janeiro and in the states.
Juscelino Kubitschek became president in 1956 and assumed a conciliatory posture towards the political opposition that allowed him to govern without major crises.
While there were national film productions during the early 20th century, American films such as ''Rio the Magnificent'' were made in Rio de Janeiro to promote tourism in the city.
The 1935 uprising created a security crisis in which the Congress transferred more power to the executive.
However, in 2006 a slow-down took place, and international arrivals had almost no growth in 2007–08.
An authoritarian military junta came to power in 1964 and ruled until 1985, after which civilian governance resumed.
There are about 2,500 airports in Brazil, including landing fields: the second largest number in the world, after the United States.
There are also specialized military, labor, and electoral courts.
The states' Military Police and the Military Firefighters Corps are described as an ancillary forces of the Army by the constitution, but are under the control of each state's governor.
Brazil received an International Monetary Fund rescue package in mid-2002 of $30.4&nbsp;billion, then a record sum.
The Brazilian regions are merely geographical, not political or administrative divisions, and they do not have any specific form of government.
Nonetheless, foreign direct investment (FDI), related to long-term, less speculative investment in production, is estimated to be $193.8&nbsp;billion for 2007.
Of the 36 deep-water ports, Santos, Itajaí, Rio Grande, Paranaguá, Rio de Janeiro, Sepetiba, Vitória, Suape, Manaus and São Francisco do Sul are the most important.
Brazil has a mixed economy with abundant natural resources.
Industry is highly concentrated in metropolitan São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Campinas, Porto Alegre, and Belo Horizonte.
Religious pluralism increased during the 20th century, and the Protestant community has grown to include over 22% of the population.
After Protestantism, individuals professing no religion are also a significant group, exceeding 7% of the population as of the 2000 census.
Despite its brutality, like other totalitarian regimes in history, due to an economic boom, known as an "economic miracle", the regime reached its highest level of popularity in the early 1970s.
It borders all other South American countries except Ecuador and Chile and covers 47.3% of the continent's land area.
It consists of the Brazilian Army (including the Army Aviation Command), the Brazilian Navy (including the Marine Corps and Naval Aviation), and the Brazilian Air Force.
This increased level of immigration in turn caused some conflicts between newcomers and old settlers.
Owner of relative technological sophistication, the country develops submarines, aircraft, as well as being involved in space research, having a Vehicle Launch Center Light and being the only country in the Southern Hemisphere the integrate team building International Space Station (ISS).
In the 1930s, three major attempts to remove Vargas and his supporters from power occurred.
There are also non-capital metropolitan areas in the states of São Paulo (Campinas, Santos and the Paraíba Valley), Minas Gerais (Steel Valley), Rio Grande do Sul (Sinos Valley) and Santa Catarina (Itajaí Valley).
The 2002 crime film ''City of God'', directed by Fernando Meirelles, was critically acclaimed, scoring 90% on Rotten Tomatoes, being placed in Roger Ebert's Best Films of the Decade list and receiving four Academy Award nominations in 2004, including Best Director.
It is common for politicians to switch parties, and thus the proportion of congressional seats held by particular parties changes regularly.
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faced a conservative challenger for her re-election bid in the October 26, 2014, runoff, but managed to secure a re-election with just over 51% of votes.
Socially significant closeness to one racial group is taken in account more in the basis of appearance (phenotypes) rather than ancestry, to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different "racial" groups.
Cachaça is distilled from sugar cane and is the main ingredient in the national cocktail, Caipirinha.
At least 70 dams are said to be planned for the Amazon region, including the controversial Belo Monte hydroelectric dam.
A member of the BRICS group, Brazil until 2010 had one of the world's fastest growing major economies, with its economic reforms giving the country new international recognition and influence.
Judges and other judicial officials are appointed after passing entry exams.
The indigenous Amerindians influenced Brazil's language and cuisine; and the Africans influenced language, cuisine, music, dance and religion.
Brazilian society is more markedly divided by social class lines, although a high income disparity is found between race groups, so racism and classism can be conflated.
According to the IBGE, in 2011, the literacy rate of the population was 90.4%, meaning that 13 million (9.6% of population) people are still illiterate in the country; functional illiteracy has reached 21.6% of the population.
In World War II Brazil remained neutral until August 1942, when the country entered on the allied side, after suffering retaliations undertaken by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, due to the country having severed diplomatic relations with Axis powers in the wake of the Pan-American Conference.
Portuguese expeditions known as Bandeiras gradually advanced the Portugal colonial original frontiers in South America to approximately the current Brazilian borders.
The core culture of Brazil is derived from Portuguese culture, because of its strong colonial ties with the Portuguese empire.
During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate was centered on the issue of slavery.
Lawsuits on appeal may take several years to resolve, and in some cases more than a decade elapses before definitive rulings.
For example, criminal and civil laws can be voted by only the federal bicameral Congress and are uniform throughout the country.
The first was José Maurício Nunes Garcia, author of sacred pieces with influence of Viennese classicism.
Natural areas are its most popular tourism product, a combination of ecotourism with leisure and recreation, mainly sun and beach, and adventure travel, as well as cultural tourism.
A similarly devastating drought occurred in 1915.
Brazilian cuisine varies greatly by region, reflecting the country's varying mix of indigenous and immigrant populations.
Revenues from international tourists reached  billion in 2010, showing a recovery from the 2008–2009 economic crisis.
In 1815, in order to justify continuing to live in Brazil, where the royal court had thrived for the past six years, the Crown established the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves, thus creating a pluricontinental transatlantic monarchic state.
According to the World Tourism Organization (WTO), international travel to Brazil accelerated in 2000, particularly during 2004 and 2005.
According to the 2000 Demographic Census (the PNAD survey does not inquire about religion), 73.57% of the population followed Roman Catholicism; 15.41% Protestantism; 1.33% Kardecist spiritism; 1.22% other Christian denominations; 0.31% Afro-Brazilian religions; 0.13% Buddhism; 0.05% Judaism; 0.02% Islam; 0.01% Amerindian religions; 0.59% other religions, undeclared or undetermined; while 7.35% have no religion.
Choro is a very popular music instrumental style.
The executive and legislative are organized independently in all three spheres of government, while the judiciary is organized only at the federal and state/Federal District spheres.
This spelling reform went into effect in Brazil on 1 January 2009.
According to the Global Information Technology Report 2009-2010 of the World Economic Forum, Brazil is the 61 world's largest developer of information technology.
Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power".
In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other.
Lula was succeeded after the elections of 2010 by Dilma Rousseff, the country's first woman president.
In the north, the Guiana Highlands form a major drainage divide, separating rivers that flow south into the Amazon Basin from rivers that empty into the Orinoco River system, in Venezuela, to the north.
Bolivia and Paraguay have been given free ports at Santos.
Fried potatoes, fried cassava, fried banana, fried meat and fried cheese are very often eaten in lunch and served in most typical restaurants.
In 2005, tourism contributed with 3.2% of the country's revenues from exports of goods and services, and represented 7% of direct and indirect employment in the Brazilian economy.
In 1815, the colony was elevated to the rank of kingdom upon the formation of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves.
Brazilian cinema dates back to the birth of the medium in the late 19th century and has gained a new level of international acclaim since the 1960s.
Brazil also has high levels of incarceration and the third largest prison population in the world (behind only China and the United States), with an estimated total of approximately 700,000 prisoners around the country (June 2014), an increase of about 300% compared to the index registered in 1992.
The road system totaled 1.98 million km (1.23 million mi) in 2002.
The country had 5 million visitors in 2010, ranking in terms of international tourist arrivals as the second destination in South America, and third in Latin America after Mexico and Argentina.
It's the only navy in Latin America that operates an aircraft carrier, NAe São Paulo, and one of the ten navies of the world to operate this type of ship.
There he swore oath to the new constitution, leaving his son, Prince Pedro de Alcântara, as Regent of the Kingdom of Brazil.
The law mandates the use of the Brazilian Sign Language, more commonly known by its Portuguese acronym LIBRAS, in education and government services.
Its size, relief, climate, and natural resources make Brazil geographically diverse.
The most popular destinations for business trips were São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Porto Alegre.
However, after the East Asian financial crisis, the Russian default in 1998 and the series of adverse financial events that followed it, the Central Bank of Brazil temporarily changed its monetary policy to a managed-float scheme while undergoing a currency crisis, until definitively changing the exchange regime to free-float in January 1999.
The language must be taught as a part of the education and speech and language pathology curricula.
The high number of prisoners eventually overloaded the Brazilian prison system, leading to a shortfall of about two hundred thousand accommodations.
The Brazilian Federation is the "indissoluble union" of the States, the Municipalities and the Federal District.
The purchasing power in Brazil is eroded by the so-called Brazil cost.
Of these, the first three are affiliated with federal authorities and the last two are subordinate to state governments.
As the world's fifth-largest country by both area and population, it is the largest country to have Portuguese as an official language–and the only one in the Americas.
It also encompasses a number of oceanic archipelagos, such as Fernando de Noronha, Rocas Atoll, Saint Peter and Paul Rocks, and Trindade and Martim Vaz.
Some aspects of Brazilian culture were influenced by the contributions of Italian, German and other European as well Japanese, Jewish and Arab immigrants who arrived in large numbers in the South and Southeast of Brazil.
(1997) and ''Central do Brasil'' (1998), all of which were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the latter receiving a Best Actress nomination for Fernanda Montenegro.
Slowly however, the wear and tear of years of dictatorial power that had not slowed the repression, even after the defeat of the leftist guerrillas, plus the inability to deal with the economic crises of the period and popular pressure, made an opening policy inevitable, which from the regime side was led by Generals Geisel and Golbery.
In this era other European powers tried to colonize parts of Brazil, in incursions that the Portuguese had to fight, notably the French in Rio during the 1560s, in Maranhão during the 1610s, and the Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco, during the Dutch–Portuguese War, after the end of Iberian Union.
In spite of the name, the style often has a fast and happy rhythm, characterized by virtuosity, improvisation, subtle modulations and full of syncopation and counterpoint.
, there have been 53 amendments.
* Childhood mortality: about 2.51% of childhood mortality, reaching 3.77% in the northeast region.
Brazil was inhabited by numerous tribal nations prior to the landing in 1500 of explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral, who claimed the area for the Portuguese Empire.
The armed forces of Brazil are the second largest in Latin America by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment.
The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to .
By the end of the 17th century, sugarcane exports began to decline, and the discovery of gold by bandeirantes in the 1690s would become the new backbone of the colony's economy, fostering a Brazilian Gold Rush  which attracted thousands of new settlers to Brazil from Portugal and all Portuguese colonies around the world.
Greater Rio de Janeiro, not including the city proper, is the most irreligious and least Roman Catholic Brazilian periphery, while Greater Porto Alegre and Greater Fortaleza are on the opposite sides of the lists, respectively.
The largest transaction with involvement of Brazilian companies has been: Cia Vale do Rio Doce acquired Inco in a tender offer valued at US$18.9 billion.
The rich wildlife of Brazil reflects the variety of natural habitats.
Brazilian science is represented by the likes of César Lattes (Brazilian physicist Pathfinder of ''Pi Meson''), Mário Schenberg (considered the greatest theoretical physicist of Brazil), José Leite Lopes (only Brazilian physicist holder of ''UNESCO Science Prize''), Artur Ávila (the first Latin American winner of Fields Medal) and Fritz Müller (pioneer in factual support the theory of evolution by Charles Darwin).
The Brazilian public health system, the National Health System (SUS), is managed and provided by all levels of government.
The music of Brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of European and African elements.
Additionally, Brazil has no contested territorial disputes with any of its neighbours and neither does it have rivalries, like Chile and Bolivia have with each other.
Civilians returned to power in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency, becoming unpopular during his tenure due to his failure in controlling the economic crisis and hyperinflation inherited from the military regime.
The Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along this process, spread through northern, northeastern regions and in Cisplatina province.
A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the regnal title of Dom Pedro&nbsp;I, resulting in the foundation of the Empire of Brazil.
Little by little, a cycle of general instability sparked by these crises undermined the regime to such an extent, that in the wake of the murder of his running mate, the defeated opposition presidential candidate Getúlio Vargas supported by most of the military, successfully led the Brazilian Revolution of 1930.
Among other influences, the Portuguese introduced the Portuguese language, Roman Catholicism and colonial architectural styles.
Technological research in Brazil is largely carried out in public universities and research institutes, with the majority of funding for basic research coming from various government agencies.
The culture was, however, also strongly influenced by African, indigenous and non-Portuguese European cultures and traditions.
One of the issues the Central Bank of Brazil recently dealt with was an excess of speculative short-term capital inflows to the country, which may have contributed to a fall in the value of the U.S. dollar against the real during that period.
The São Paulo Metro was the first underground transit system in Brazil.
In the Brazilian GDP, the forest sector represents just over 1% and fishing 0.4%.
The 1937 ''coup d'état'' resulted in the cancellation of the 1938 election, installed Vargas as a dictator, and began the Estado Novo era, noted for government brutality and censorship of the press.
The phrase "bossa nova" means literally "new trend".
The natural heritage of Brazil is severely threatened by cattle ranching and agriculture, logging, mining, resettlement, oil and gas extraction, over-fishing, wildlife trade, dams and infrastructure, water pollution, climate change, fire, and invasive species.
These wars also involved large-scale military actions on land and water, with cannibalistic rituals on prisoners of war.
In 1809, in retaliation for being forced into exile, the Prince Regent ordered the Portuguese conquest of French Guiana.
The current president is Michel Temer, who replaced Dilma Rousseff after her impeachment.
In 2008, the illiteracy rate was 11.48% and among the youth (ages 15–19) 1.74%.
The Air Force, it is the largest in Latin America has about 700 manned aircraft in service and effective about 67 thousand military.
The total length of railway track was  in 2002, as compared with  in 1970.
During the 1960s the Cinema Novo movement rose to prominence with directors such as Glauber Rocha, Nelson Pereira dos Santos, Paulo Cesar Saraceni and Arnaldo Jabor.
Brazil does not just use its growing economic strength to provide financial aid, but it also provides high levels of expertise and most importantly of all, a quiet non-confrontational diplomacy to improve governance levels.
The number considered tolerable by the WHO is about 10 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.
These were the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War, the largest war effort in Brazilian history.
Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism — novelists like Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain.
The president is both head of state and head of government of the Union and is elected for a four-year term, with the possibility of re-election for a second successive term.
Legally recognized in 2002, the law was regulated in 2005.
Currently, the Brazilian government, unlike the past, seeks to encourage this mode of transport; an example of this incentive is the project of the Rio–São Paulo high-speed rail, that will connect the two main cities of the country to carry passengers.
This region is as extensive as the Amazon basin but has a very different climate as it lies farther south at a higher altitude.
Major rivers include the Amazon (the world's second-longest river and the largest in terms of volume of water), the Paraná and its major tributary the Iguaçu (which includes the Iguazu Falls), the Negro, São Francisco, Xingu, Madeira and Tapajós rivers.
It has been steadily falling since the 1960s, from 3.04% per year between 1950 and 1960 to 1.05% in 2008 and is expected to fall to a negative value of&nbsp;–0.29% by 2050 thus completing the demographic transition.
For freight transport waterways are of importance, e.g.
Since then television has grown in the country, creating large public networks such as Globo, SBT, Record and Bandeirantes.
Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country.
Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers, one of the world's most extensive, with eight major drainage basins, all of which drain into the Atlantic.
The public health services are universal and available to all citizens of the country for free.
Maracatu and Afoxê are two Afro-Brazilian music traditions that have been popularized by their appearance in the annual Brazilian Carnivals.
The first was the failed Constitutionalist Revolution of 1932, the second was the anti-fascist Brazilian uprising of 1935 led by communists, and the fascist Integralist Movement attempted a coup in May 1938.
In the south, the Araucaria pine forest grows under temperate conditions.
Brazil is a democracy, according to the Democracy Index 2010.
About five million people from over 60 countries migrated to Brazil between 1808 and 1972, most of them of Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, Ukrainian, Polish, Jewish, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, and Arab origin.
Schools and health services must provide access ("inclusion") to deaf people.
Judiciary authorities exercise jurisdictional duties almost exclusively.
However, in the last ten years Protestantism, particularly Pentecostalism and Evangelicalism, has spread in Brazil, while the proportion of Catholics has dropped significantly.
Agriculture and allied sectors like forestry, logging and fishing accounted for 5.1% of the gross domestic product in 2007.
In the interior northeast, seasonal rainfall is even more extreme.
Early sailors sometimes also called it the "Land of Parrots" (''Terra di Papaga'').
The semiarid climatic region generally receives less than  of rain, most of which generally falls in a period of three to five months of the year and occasionally less than this, creating long periods of drought.
The National Public Security Force also can act in public disorder situations arising anywhere in the country.
