In those who have been diagnosed with cancer, a number of treatments may be used, including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy and targeted therapy.
As Paget's disease of the breast advances, symptoms may include tingling, itching, increased sensitivity, burning, and pain.
Regarding future pregnancy among breast cancer survivors, there is often fear of cancer recurrence.
About 5–10% of cases are due to genes inherited from a person's parents, including BRCA1 and BRCA2 among others.
The 1995 reports from the Nurses' Health Study and the 2002 conclusions of the Women's Health Initiative trial conclusively proved that hormone replacement therapy significantly increased the incidence of breast cancer.
File:Diagram showing stage 4 breast cancer CRUK 228.svg|Stage 4 breast cancer
Younger women with an age of less than 40 years or women over 80 years tend to have a poorer prognosis than post-menopausal women due to several factors.
They can be identified by the presence of estrogen receptors (ER+) and progesterone receptors (PR+) on their surface (sometimes referred to together as hormone receptors).
Survival rates in the developed world are high, with between 80% and 90% of those in England and the United States alive for at least 5 years.
Ultimately there is a concern that favouring sufferers of breast cancer with disproportionate funding and research on their behalf may well be costing lives elsewhere.
Dietary factors which may increase risk include a high fat diet, high alcohol intake, and obesity-related high cholesterol levels.
Clinical breast exams are performed by health care providers, while self breast exams are performed by the person themselves.
New or potentially new markers for breast cancer include BRCA1 and BRCA2 to identify patients at high risk of developing breast cancer, HER-2 and SCD1 for predicting response to therapeutic regimens, and urokinase plasminogen activator, PA1-1 and SCD1 for assessing prognosis.
There are currently three main groups of medications used for adjuvant breast cancer treatment:  hormone-blocking agents, chemotherapy, and monoclonal antibodies.
However, it proved completely ineffective, and 15–20% of women died because of the brutal treatment.
These task force reports point out that in addition to unnecessary surgery and anxiety, the risks of more frequent mammograms include a small but significant increase in breast cancer induced by radiation.
The French surgeon Bernard Peyrilhe (1737–1804) realized the first experimental transmission of cancer by injecting extracts of breast cancer into an animal.
Pathologists describe cells as well differentiated (low grade), moderately differentiated (intermediate grade), and poorly differentiated (high grade) as the cells progressively lose the features seen in normal breast cells.
Other potential risk factors include genetics, lack of childbearing or lack of breastfeeding, higher levels of certain hormones, certain dietary patterns, and obesity.
The incidence of breast cancer varies greatly around the world: it is lowest in less-developed countries and greatest in the more-developed countries.
The most widely used grading system is the Nottingham scheme; details are provided in the discussion of breast cancer grade.
Pain ("mastodynia") is an unreliable tool in determining the presence or absence of breast cancer, but may be indicative of other breast health issues.
Breast cancer is usually treated with surgery, which may be followed by chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or both.
File:Diagram showing stage T2 breast cancer CRUK 252.svg|Stage T2 breast cancer
The inherited mutation in ''BRCA1'' or ''BRCA2'' genes can interfere with repair of DNA cross links and DNA double strand breaks (known functions of the encoded protein).
File:Diagram 3 of 3 showing stage 2B breast cancer CRUK 015.svg|Stage 2B breast cancer
Chemical messengers such as hormones bind to receptors, and this causes changes in the cell.
On the other hand, many still regard pregnancy and parenthood to represent normalcy, happiness and life fulfillment.
A 2015 review found that studies trying to link fiber intake with breast cancer produced mixed results.
A finding of clear fluid makes the lump highly unlikely to be cancerous, but bloody fluid may be sent off for inspection under a microscope for cancerous cells.
''Carcinoma in situ'' is growth of low grade cancerous or precancerous cells within a particular tissue compartment such as the mammary duct without invasion of the surrounding tissue.
Diagnosing a new cancer in a pregnant woman is difficult, in part because any symptoms are commonly assumed to be a normal discomfort associated with pregnancy.
As inflammatory breast cancer does not present as a lump there can sometimes be a delay in diagnosis.
One result of breast cancer's high visibility is that statistical results can sometimes be misinterpreted, such as the claim that one in eight women will be diagnosed with breast cancer during their lives—a claim that depends on the unrealistic assumption that no woman will die of any other disease before the age of 95.
Mutations that can lead to breast cancer have been experimentally linked to estrogen exposure.
Breast cancer most commonly develops in cells from the lining of milk ducts and the lobules that supply the ducts with milk.
These mutations are either inherited or acquired after birth.
Poorly differentiated cancers (the ones whose tissue is least like normal breast tissue) have a worse prognosis.
When stimulated by certain growth factors, HER2 causes cellular growth and division; in the absence of stimulation by the growth factor, the cell will normally stop growing.
Other cancers found during or shortly after pregnancy appear at approximately the same rate as other cancers in women of a similar age.
Partly because of its relatively high prevalence and long-term survival rates, research is biased towards breast cancer.
Once the diagnosis is made, further tests are done to determine if the cancer has spread beyond the breast and which treatments it may respond to.
The balance of benefits versus harms of breast cancer screening is controversial.
Lumps found in lymph nodes located in the armpits can also indicate breast cancer.
The study of a woman's remains from the necropolis of Qubbet el-Hawa showed the typical destructive damage due to metastatic spread.
:Where available, imaging studies may be employed as part of the staging process in select cases to look for signs of metastatic cancer.
In 2008, breast cancer caused 458,503 deaths worldwide (13.7% of cancer deaths in women and 6.0% of all cancer deaths for men and women together).
Approximately half of women diagnosed with Paget's disease of the breast also have a lump in the breast.
In cancer, the cells that would normally line up in an orderly way to make up the milk ducts become disorganized.
Radiation treatments may interfere with the mother's ability to breastfeed her baby because it reduces the ability of that breast to produce milk and increases the risk of mastitis.
(The most common form of cancer is non-invasive non-melanoma skin cancer; non-invasive cancers are generally easily cured, cause very few deaths, and are routinely excluded from cancer statistics.)
About half of hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndromes involve unknown genes.
Those who do not test positive for these specific receptors will not be able to respond to hormone therapy, and this can affect their chance of survival depending upon what treatment options remain, the exact type of the cancer, and how advanced the disease is.
File:Diagram 2 of 3 showing stage 3A breast cancer CRUK 013.svg|Stage 3A breast cancer
These provide an unlimited source of homogenous self-replicating material, free of contaminating stromal cells, and often easily cultured in simple standard media.
A number of national bodies recommend breast cancer screening.
The breast cancer movement of the 1980s and 1990s developed out of the larger feminist movements and women's health movement of the 20th century.
Some imaging procedures, such as MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging), CT scans, ultrasounds, and mammograms with fetal shielding are considered safe during pregnancy; some others, such as PET scans are not.
These ER+ cancers can be treated with drugs that either block the receptors, e.g.
Breast cancer cells have receptors on their surface and in their cytoplasm and nucleus.
Hormone receptor-positive cancers are often treated with hormone-blocking therapy over courses of several years.
The writing says about the disease, "There is no treatment."
When surgery advanced, and long-term survival rates improved, women began raising awareness of the disease and the possibility of successful treatment.
This syndrome presents as skin changes resembling eczema, such as redness, discoloration, or mild flaking of the nipple skin.
say that cancer may not be inevitable for all carriers of ''BRCA1'' and ''BRCA2'' mutations.
Overall, however, genetics is believed to be the primary cause of 5–10% of all cases.
In 2012, it comprised 25.2% of cancers diagnosed in women, making it the most common female cancer.
Modern chemotherapy developed after World War II.
File:Diagram 1 of 2 showing stage 2A breast cancer CRUK 003.svg|Stage 2A breast cancer
Breast cancer is usually classified primarily by its histological appearance.
The two most commonly used screening methods, physical examination of the breasts by a healthcare provider and mammography, can offer an approximate likelihood that a lump is cancer, and may also detect some other lesions, such as a simple cyst.
The woman with breast cancer is given a cultural template that constrains her emotional and social responses into a socially acceptable discourse:  She is to use the emotional trauma of being diagnosed with breast cancer and the suffering of extended treatment to transform herself into a stronger, happier and more sensitive person who is grateful for the opportunity to become a better person.
Whether MRI as a screening method has greater harms or benefits when compared to standard mammography is not known.
This is because the active aromatase in postmenopausal women is different from the prevalent form in premenopausal women, and therefore these agents are ineffective in inhibiting the predominant aromatase of premenopausal women.
In addition, there are more than 18 other sub-types of breast cancer.
File:Diagram showing stage 1B breast cancer CRUK 202.svg|Stage 1B breast cancer
More than 80% of breast cancer cases are discovered when the woman feels a lump.
In the 1980s, the abortion–breast cancer hypothesis posited that induced abortion increased the risk of developing breast cancer.
A number of dietary factors have been linked to the risk for breast cancer.
However, the medications also damage fast-growing normal cells, which may cause serious side effects.
Fewer than 20% of lumps, for example, are cancerous, and benign breast diseases such as mastitis and fibroadenoma of the breast are more common causes of breast disorder symptoms.
Drugs used after and in addition to surgery are called adjuvant therapy.
These cancers are known as postpartum breast cancer and have worse outcomes including an increased risk of distant spread of disease and mortality.
This series of political and educational campaigns, partly inspired by the politically and socially effective AIDS awareness campaigns, resulted in the widespread acceptance of second opinions before surgery, less invasive surgical procedures, support groups, and other advances in patient care.
Some cancers, such as ductal carcinoma in situ, develop from pre-invasive lesions.
Anger, sadness and negativity must be silenced.
The stage is raised by the invasiveness of disease to lymph nodes, chest wall, skin or beyond, and the aggressiveness of the cancer cells.
The stage of the breast cancer is the most important component of traditional classification methods of breast cancer, because it has a greater effect on the prognosis than the other considerations.
In less than 5% of cases, genetics plays a more significant role by causing a hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome.
File:Diagram 2 of 2 showing stage 3B breast cancer CRUK 010.svg|Stage 3B breast cancer
Breast cancer comprises 22.9% of invasive cancers in women and 16% of all female cancers.
There may also be discharge from the nipple.
Other significant mutations include ''p53'' (Li–Fraumeni syndrome), ''PTEN'' (Cowden syndrome), and ''STK11'' (Peutz–Jeghers syndrome), ''CHEK2'', ''ATM'', ''BRIP1'', and ''PALB2''.
The Edwin Smith Papyrus describes 8 cases of tumors or ulcers of the breast that were treated by cauterization.
Most breast cancers are derived from the epithelium lining the ducts or lobules, and these cancers are classified as ductal or lobular carcinoma.
They may be worn to honor those who have been diagnosed with breast cancer, or to identify products that the manufacturer would like to sell to consumers that are interested in breast cancer—usually white, middle-aged, middle-class and upper-class, educated women.
The primary purposes or goals of breast cancer culture are to maintain breast cancer's dominance as the preëminent women's health issue, to promote the appearance that society is "doing something" effective about breast cancer, and to sustain and expand the social, political, and financial power of breast cancer activists.
Chemotherapy or other types of therapy prior to surgery are called neoadjuvant therapy.
Sitting regularly for prolonged periods is associated with higher mortality from breast cancer.
One of the protective pathways is the PI3K/AKT pathway; another is the RAS/MEK/ERK pathway.
Indications of breast cancer other than a lump may include thickening different from the other breast tissue, one breast becoming larger or lower, a nipple changing position or shape or becoming inverted, skin puckering or dimpling, a rash on or around a nipple, discharge from nipple/s, constant pain in part of the breast or armpit, and swelling beneath the armpit or around the collarbone.
Breast cancers occur during pregnancy at the same rate as breast cancers in non-pregnant women of the same age.
Treatment is generally the same as for non-pregnant women.
There is no overall change in the risk of death.
The main stages are:
A clinical or self breast exam involves feeling the breast for lumps or other abnormalities.
The stage is lowered by the presence of cancer-free zones and close-to-normal cell behaviour (grading).
There were more than 41,000 newly diagnosed cases of breast cancer registered in England in 2011, around 80% of these cases were in women age 50 or older  Based on U.S. statistics in 2015 there were 2.8 million women affected by breast cancer.
Aromatase inhibitors are only suitable for women after menopause; however, in this group, they appear better than tamoxifen.
:Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody to HER2 (a cell receptor that is especially active in some breast cancer cells), has improved the 5-year disease free survival of stage 1–3 HER2-positive breast cancers to about 87% (overall survival 95%).
Since breast cancer in males is usually detected at later stages, outcomes are typically worse.
Letrozole is recommended for 5 years.
The needle aspiration may be performed in a healthcare provider's office or clinic using local anaesthetic if required.
Cell nuclei become less uniform.
As little could be safely done with primitive surgical techniques, women tended to suffer silently rather than seeking care.
Very often the results of physical examination by a healthcare provider, mammography, and additional tests that may be performed in special circumstances (such as imaging by ultrasound or MRI) are sufficient to warrant excisional biopsy as the definitive diagnostic and primary treatment method.
Their breasts may change with their menstrual cycles, they may be nursing infants, and they may be unaware of changes in their breasts.
It is also criticized for reinforcing gender stereotypes and objectifying women and their breasts.
When these examinations are inconclusive, a healthcare provider can remove a sample of the fluid in the lump for microscopic analysis (a procedure known as fine needle aspiration, or fine needle aspiration and cytology—FNAC) to help establish the diagnosis.
Image:Breast cancer.JPG|Excised human breast tissue, showing an irregular, dense, white stellate area of cancer 2&nbsp;cm in diameter, within yellow fatty tissue.
The Cochrane collaboration (2013) states that the best quality evidence neither demonstrates a reduction in cancer specific, nor a reduction in all cause mortality from screening mammography.
File:Diagram 2 of 3 showing stage 2B breast cancer CRUK 012.svg|Stage 2B breast cancer
Compared to other diseases or other cancers, breast cancer receives a proportionately greater share of resources and attention.
** Stage 4 is 'metastatic' cancer that has a less favorable prognosis since it has spread beyond the breast and regional lymph nodes.
The French surgeon Jean Louis Petit (1674–1750) and later the Scottish surgeon Benjamin Bell (1749–1806) were the first to remove the lymph nodes, breast tissue, and underlying chest muscle.
:Some breast cancers require estrogen to continue growing.
These mutations  account for up to 90% of the total genetic influence with a risk of breast cancer of 60–80% in those affected.
* '''Histopathology'''.
Pink ribbons, which can be made inexpensively, are sometimes sold as fundraisers, much like poppies on Remembrance Day.
NFAT1 regulates the expression of the TWEAKR and its ligand TWEAK with the Lipocalin 2 to increase breast cancer cell invasion and NFAT3 inhibits Lipocalin 2 expression to blunt the cell invasion.
If cells are not well differentiated, they will appear immature, will divide more rapidly, and will tend to spread.
Damage to the heart muscle is the most dangerous complication of doxorubicin, for example.
In breast adipose tissue, overexpression of leptin leads to increased cell proliferation and cancer.
The benefits with moderate exercise such as brisk walking  are seen at all age groups including postmenopausal women.
'''Hormone blocking therapy'''
The familial tendency to develop these cancers is called hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome.
'''Breast cancer''' is cancer that develops from breast tissue.
Breast cancer therapy becomes a rite of passage rather than a disease.
High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of breast cancer by about 14%.
File:Diagram 3 of 3 showing stage 3A breast cancer CRUK 016.svg|Stage 3A breast cancer
A very few of them, namely MCF-7, T-47D, and MDA-MB-231, account for more than two-thirds of all abstracts reporting studies on mentioned breast cancer cell lines, as concluded from a Medline-based survey.
If there is indeed a link, the absolute effect is small.
Breast Cancer Action launched the "Think Before You Pink" campaign, and said that businesses have co-opted the pink campaign to promote products that cause breast cancer, such as alcoholic beverages.
The oldest evidence of breast cancer was discovered in Egypt in 2015 and dates back to the Sixth Dynasty.
For example, Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) involving the entire breast will still be stage zero and consequently an excellent prognosis with a 10-year disease free survival of about 98%.
When less rigorous trials are added to the analysis there is a reduction in mortality due to breast cancer of 0.05% (a decrease of 1 in 2000 deaths from breast cancer over 10 years or a relative decrease of 15% from breast cancer).
** Stage 0 is a pre-cancerous or marker condition, either ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS).
File:Diagram 1 of 3 showing stage 3A breast cancer CRUK 007.svg|Stage 3A breast cancer
Size is not a factor in staging unless the cancer is invasive.
Normal cells in an organ like the breast become differentiated, meaning that they take on specific shapes and forms that reflect their function as part of that organ.
Outcomes for breast cancer vary depending on the cancer type, extent of disease, and person's age.
A considerable part of the current knowledge on breast carcinomas is based on in vivo and in vitro studies performed with cell lines derived from breast cancers.
Early deliveries to speed the start of treatment are not uncommon.
Survival is usually calculated as an average number of months (or years) that 50% of patients survive, or the percentage of patients that are alive after 1, 5, 15, and 20 years.
This hypothesis was the subject of extensive scientific inquiry, which concluded that neither miscarriages nor abortions are associated with a heightened risk for breast cancer.
This is caused by unobserved risk factors.
This poor efficiency was often due to technical difficulties associated with the extraction of viable tumor cells from their surrounding stroma.
Patients whose cancer cells are positive for HER2 have a more aggressive disease and may be treated with the 'targeted therapy', trastuzumab (Herceptin), a monoclonal antibody that targets this protein and improves the prognosis significantly.
For centuries, physicians described similar cases in their practices, with the same conclusion.
It is more common in developed countries and is more than 100 times more common in women than in men.
Staging takes into consideration size, local involvement, lymph node status and whether metastatic disease is present.
File:Needle Breast Biopsy.png|Needle breast biopsy.
However, in cases of breast cancer with low risk for metastasis, the risks associated with PET scans, CT scans, or bone scans outweigh the possible benefits, as these procedures expose the patient to a substantial amount of potentially dangerous ionizing radiation.
Normal cells divide as many times as needed and stop.
A prognosis is an estimate, as patients with the same classification will survive a different amount of time, and classifications are not always precise.
Removal of both breasts before any cancer has been diagnosed or any suspicious lump or other lesion has appeared (a procedure known as prophylactic bilateral mastectomy) may be considered in people with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, which are associated with a substantially heightened risk for an eventual diagnosis of breast cancer.
In breast cancer survivors, non-hormonal birth control methods should be used as first-line options.
Breast cancers are classified by several grading systems.
File:Diagram 1 of 2 showing stage 3B breast cancer CRUK 004.svg|Stage 3B breast cancer
Phyllodes tumors are not staged in the usual sense; they are classified on the basis of their appearance under the microscope as benign, borderline, or malignant.
Testing in an average-risk person is particularly likely to return one of these indeterminate, useless results.
Until then, they are protected from cell suicide by several protein clusters and pathways.
When trastuzumab binds to the HER2 in breast cancer cells that overexpress the receptor, trastuzumab prevents growth factors from being able to bind to and stimulate the receptors, effectively blocking the growth of the cancer cells.
One-third of diagnosed breast cancers might recede on their own.
Breast cancer also receives significantly more media coverage than other, equally prevalent cancers, with a study by Prostate Coalition showing 2.6 breast cancer stories for each one covering cancer of the prostate.
Nevertheless, the appearance of a new symptom should be taken seriously by both patients and their doctors, because of the possibility of an underlying breast cancer at almost any age.
The presence of estrogen and progesterone receptors in the cancer cell is important in guiding treatment.
These modifications might prevent 38% of breast cancers in the US, 42% in the UK, 28% in Brazil and 20% in China.
Breast cancer staging using the TNM system is based on the size of the tumor ('''T'''), whether or not the tumor has spread to the lymph nodes ('''N''') in the armpits, and whether the tumor has metastasized ('''M''') (i.e.
Screening mammography efficiently finds non-life-threatening, asymptomatic breast cancers and pre-cancers, even while overlooking serious cancers.
In some cases, some or all treatments are postponed until after birth if the cancer is diagnosed late in the pregnancy.
The culture is criticized for treating adult women like little girls, as evidenced by "baby" toys such as pink teddy bears given to adult women.
The first noticeable symptom of breast cancer is typically a lump that feels different from the rest of the breast tissue.
During the 1970s, a new understanding of metastasis led to perceiving cancer as a systemic illness as well as a localized one, and more sparing procedures were developed that proved equally effective.
Not all breast cancer patients experience their illness in the same manner.
Breast cancer culture, or pink ribbon culture, is the set of activities, attitudes, and values that surround and shape breast cancer in public.
There is an association between use of hormonal birth control and the development of premenopausal breast cancer, but whether oral contraceptives use may actually cause premenopausal breast cancer is a matter of debate.
Also, when chemotherapy is being given after birth, many of the drugs pass through breast milk to the baby, which could harm the baby.
File:Diagram 1 of 3 showing stage 2B breast cancer CRUK 006.svg|Stage 2B breast cancer
Image:Breast carcinoma in a lymph node.jpg|Micrograph showing a lymph node invaded by ductal breast carcinoma, with extension of the tumour beyond the lymph node.
File:Diagram 2 of 2 showing stage 2A breast cancer CRUK 009.svg|Stage 2A breast cancer
tamoxifen, or alternatively block the production of estrogen with an aromatase inhibitor, e.g.
High consumption of soy-based foods may reduce risk.
Breast cancer sufferers get better treatment in terms of bed spaces, facilities and doctors and nurses."
Critics say that the feel-good nature of pink ribbons and pink consumption distracts society from the lack of progress on preventing and curing breast cancer.
Trastuzumab, however, is very expensive, and its use may cause serious side effects (approximately 2% of patients who receive it suffer significant heart damage).
Many of the currently used BCC lines were established in the late 1970s.
Ten-year survival rate is 5% without treatment and 10% with optimal treatment.
Additionally, it is not clear if the association exists with newer hormonal birth controls.
It affects about 12% of women worldwide.
