In Mesopotamia the brewer's craft was the only profession which derived social sanction and divine protection from female deities/goddesses, specifically: Ninkasi, who covered the production of beer, Siris, who was used in a metonymic way to refer to beer, and Siduri, who covered the enjoyment of beer.
It may be done in a brewery by a commercial brewer, at home by a homebrewer, or by a variety of traditional methods such as communally by the indigenous peoples in Brazil when making cauim.
Hops are the female flower clusters or seed cones of the hop vine ''Humulus lupulus'', which are used as a flavouring and preservative agent in nearly all beer made today.
During secondary fermentation, most of the remaining yeast will settle to the bottom of the second fermenter, yielding a less hazy product.
Regions have water with different mineral components; as a result, different regions were originally better suited to making certain types of beer, thus giving them a regional character.
This terminology is somewhat inappropriate in the modern era; after the widespread application of brewing mycology it was discovered that the two separate collecting methods involved two different yeast species that favoured different temperature regimes, namely ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' in top-cropping at warmer temperatures and ''Saccharomyces pastorianus'' in bottom-cropping at cooler temperatures.
Beer may have been known in Neolithic Europe as far back as 5,000 years ago, and was mainly brewed on a domestic scale.
This yeast strain was originally classified as ''Saccharomyces carlsbergensis'' a now defunct species name which has been superseded by the currently accepted taxonomic classification ''Saccharomyces pastorianus''.
Mashing converts the starches released during the malting stage into sugars that can be fermented.
Mashing is a form of steeping, and defines the act of brewing, such as with making tea, sake, and soy sauce.
A mixture of starch sources may be used, with a secondary saccharide, such as maize (corn), rice, or sugar, often being termed an adjunct, especially when used as a lower-cost substitute for malted barley.
The whirlpool was devised by the Molson Brewery in 1960 to utilise the so-called tea leaf paradox to force the denser solids known as "trub" (coagulated proteins, vegetable matter from hops) into a cone in the centre of the whirlpool tank.
The milled grain is mixed with hot water in a large vessel known as a mash tun.
Often the sheets contain powdered filtration media to aid in filtration.
As almost any cereal containing certain sugars can undergo spontaneous fermentation due to wild yeasts in the air, it is possible that beer-like beverages were independently developed throughout the world soon after a tribe or culture had domesticated cereal.
When the yeast is added to the wort, the fermenting process begins, where the sugars turn into alcohol, carbon dioxide and other components.
Hopbacks utilizing a sealed chamber facilitate maximum retention of volatile hop aroma compounds that would normally be driven off when the hops contact the hot wort.
Fermentation may take place in an open or closed fermenting vessel; a secondary fermentation may also occur in the cask or bottle.
Kräusening is a conditioning method in which fermenting wort is added to the finished beer.
Examples include Budweiser Budvar, Birra Moretti, Stella Artois, Red Stripe, and Singha.
Beer is composed mostly of water.
Most breweries use a steam-fired kettle, which uses steam jackets in the kettle to boil the wort.
The earliest chemically confirmed barley beer to date was discovered at Godin Tepe in the central Zagros Mountains of Iran, where fragments of a jug, at least 5,000 years old was found to be coated with beerstone, a by-product of the brewing process.
The development of hydrometers and thermometers changed brewing by allowing the brewer more control of the process, and greater knowledge of the results.
Lautering is the separation of the wort (the liquid containing the sugar extracted during mashing) from the grains.
It is during this stage that sugars won from the malt are converted into alcohol and carbon dioxide, and the product can be called beer for the first time.
First, during steeping, the grain is added to a vat with water and allowed to soak for approximately 40 hours.
Most breweries today use cylindroconical vessels, or CCVs, which have a conical bottom and a cylindrical top.
After mashing, the beer wort is boiled with hops (and other flavourings if used) in a large tank known as a "copper" or brew kettle – though historically the mash vessel was used and is still in some small breweries.
The dominant types of yeast used to make beer are ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', known as ale yeast, and ''Saccharomyces pastorianus'', known as lager yeast;  ''Brettanomyces'' ferments lambics, and ''Torulaspora delbrueckii'' ferments Bavarian weissbier.
Prior to lautering, the mash temperature may be raised to about  (known as a mashout) to free up more starch and reduce mash viscosity.
Brewing yeasts are traditionally classed as "top-cropping" (or "top-fermenting") and "bottom-cropping" (or "bottom-fermenting").
The process of natural selection meant that the wild yeasts that were most cold tolerant would be the ones that would remain actively fermenting in the beer that was stored in the caves.
A 3900-year-old Sumerian poem honouring Ninkasi, the patron goddess of brewing, contains the oldest surviving beer recipe, describing the production of beer from barley via bread.
Restrictions on homebrewing were lifted in the UK in 1963, Australia followed suit in 1972, and the USA in 1978, though individual states were allowed to pass their own laws limiting production.
On its way out of the brewery, the steam created during the boil is passed over a coil through which unheated water flows.
The resulting fermentation generates CO2 that is trapped in the bottle, remaining in solution and providing natural carbonation.
The starch source in a beer provides the fermentable material and is a key determinant of the strength and flavour of the beer.
The mash filter is a plate-and-frame filter.
During the Industrial Revolution, the production of beer moved from artisanal manufacture to industrial manufacture, and domestic manufacture ceased to be significant by the end of the 19th century.
This "conversion" is called saccharification.
Lager is beer that has been cool fermented at around  (compared to typical warm fermentation temperatures of ), then stored for around 30 days at temperatures close to freezing point; during this storage sulphur components developed during fermentation dissipate.
Yeast is the microorganism that is responsible for fermentation in beer.
The invention of bread and beer has been argued to be responsible for humanity's ability to develop technology and build civilization.
Water or glycol run in channels in the opposite direction of the wort, causing a rapid drop in temperature.
SABMiller became the largest brewing company in the world when it acquired Royal Grolsch, brewer of Dutch premium beer brand Grolsch.
The wort is moved into a large tank known as a "copper" or kettle where it is boiled with hops and sometimes other ingredients such as herbs or sugars.
Though it is the cool fermentation that defines lager, the main technical difference with lager yeast, ''Saccharomyces pastorianus'', is its divergent genome and its ability to metabolize both melibiose, a disaccharide of galactose and glucose and raffinose (a trisaccharide composed of the sugars galactose, fructose, and glucose).
Generally, warm-fermented beers are ready to drink within three weeks after the beginning of fermentation, although some brewers will condition them for several months.
In addition to fermenting the beer, yeast influences the character and flavour.
There are several forms of filters, they may be in the form of sheets or "candles", or they may be a fine powder such as diatomaceous earth, also called kieselguhr.
;Secondary fermentation
Finally, the vapours produced during the boil volatilise off-flavours, including dimethyl sulfide precursors.
It is a chamber between the brewing kettle and wort chiller.
This may be a second or third fermentation.
Steps in the brewing process include malting, milling, mashing, lautering, boiling, fermenting, conditioning, filtering, and packaging.
Grains are typically dry-milled with roller mills or hammer mills.
Some beers today, such as ''Fraoch'' by the Scottish Heather Ales company and ''Cervoise Lancelot'' by the French Brasserie-Lancelot company, use plants other than hops for flavouring.
A hopback is a traditional additional chamber that acts as a sieve or filter by using whole hops to clear debris (or "trub") from the unfermented (or "green") wort, as the whirlpool does, and also to increase hop aroma in the finished beer.
In the modern mashing process, commercial fungal based β-glucanase may be added as a supplement.
Only a very few breweries still use wooden vats for fermentation as wood is difficult to keep clean and infection-free and must be repitched more or less yearly.
Common media include diatomaceous earth and perlite.
;Sheet (pad) filters
Grain is malted by soaking it in water, allowing it to begin germination, and then drying the partially germinated grain in a kiln.
Packaging is putting the beer into the containers in which it will leave the brewery.
If there is no residual fermentable sugar left, sugar or wort or both may be added in a process known as priming.
The sheets are usually disposable and are replaced between filtration sessions.
The result of the mashing process is a sugar-rich liquid or "wort", which is then strained through the bottom of the mash tun in a process known as lautering.
Ale produced before the Industrial Revolution continued to be made and sold on a domestic scale, although by the 7th century AD beer was also being produced and sold by European monasteries.
The boil is conducted so that it is even and intense – a continuous "rolling boil".
When cold water is used to cool the wort in a heat exchanger, the water is significantly warmed.
Hammer mills, which produce a very fine mash, are often used when mash filters are going to be employed in the lautering process because the grain does not have to form its own filter bed.
A mash rest from  activates various proteases, which break down proteins that might otherwise cause the beer to be hazy.
The plates, frames, and filter cloths are arranged in a carrier frame like so: frame, cloth, plate, cloth, with plates at each end of the structure.
CCVs can handle both fermenting and conditioning in the same tank.
Yeast metabolises the sugars extracted from grains, which produces alcohol and carbon dioxide, and thereby turns wort into beer.
The cooling medium, usually water, goes through the other gaps.
Additional water may be sprinkled on the grains to extract additional sugars (a process known as sparging).
The basic ingredients of beer are water and a fermentable starch source such as malted barley.
This stage is where many chemical and technical reactions take place, and where important decisions about the flavour, colour, and aroma of the beer are made.
When the fermentation is complete the brewer may rack the beer into a new tank, called a conditioning tank.
If a beer is marked "suitable for Vegans", it was generally clarified either with seaweed or with artificial agents, although the "Fast Cask" method invented by Marston's in 2009 may provide another method.
In modern breweries this is achieved through a plate heat exchanger.
Cask ale or cask-conditioned beer is unfiltered and unpasteurised beer that is conditioned (including secondary fermentation) and served from a cask, either pumped up from a cellar via a beer engine (hand pump), or from a tap by gravity.
The preservative in hops comes from the lupulin glands which contain soft resins with alpha and beta acids.
Nonetheless, these sugars are not present in typical beer wort made from malted barley and their metabolism or lack of it will not affect the subsequent beer organoleptic qualities in any way.
There are three main fermentation methods, warm, cool and spontaneous.
Filters range from rough filters that remove much of the yeast and any solids (e.g., hops, grain particles) left in the beer, to filters tight enough to strain colour and body from the beer.
During germination, the grain is spread out on the floor of the germination room for around 5 days.
Lambic beers are historically brewed in Brussels and the nearby Pajottenland region of Belgium without any yeast inoculation.
Fermentation tanks are typically made of stainless steel.
The last few plates often use a cooling medium which can be cooled to below the freezing point, which allows a finer control over the wort-out temperature, and also enables cooling to around 10&nbsp;°C.
Care must be taken when milling to ensure that the starch reserves are sufficiently milled without damaging the husk and providing coarse enough grits that a good filter bed can be formed during lautering.
At the end of the boil, solid particles in the hopped wort are separated out, usually in a vessel called a "whirlpool".
Before the role of yeast in fermentation was understood, fermentation involved wild or airborne yeasts, and a few styles such as lambics still use this method today.
In an efficient brewery, cold water is passed through the heat exchanger at a rate set to maximize the water's temperature upon exiting.
There are two main methods – infusion mashing, in which the grains are heated in one vessel; and decoction mashing, in which a proportion of the grains are boiled and then returned to the mash, raising the temperature.
At the end of the boil, the hopped wort settles to clarify in a vessel called a "whirlpool", where the more solid particles in the wort are separated out.
Not all beer is filtered.
Sheets are sold in nominal ratings, and typically 90% of particles larger than the nominal rating are caught by the sheet.
Examples of clarifying agents include isinglass, obtained from swimbladders of fish; Irish moss, a seaweed; kappa carrageenan, from the seaweed ''Kappaphycus cottonii''; Polyclar (artificial); and gelatin.
The powder is added to the beer and recirculated past screens to form a filtration bed.
The hopback has mainly been substituted in modern breweries by the whirlpool.
Brewing at home is subject to regulation and prohibition in many countries.
At the end of the boil, solid particles in the hopped wort are separated out, usually in a vessel called a "whirlpool" or "settling tank".
Spent grains can also be used as fertilizer, whole grains in bread, as well as in the production of biogas.
Chemical tests of ancient pottery jars reveal that beer was produced as far back as about 7,000 years ago in what is today Iran.
Copper is the traditional material for the boiling vessel, because copper transfers heat quickly and evenly, and because the bubbles produced during boiling, and which would act as an insulator against the heat, do not cling to the surface of copper, so the wort is heated in a consistent manner.
Modern quantitative genomics has revealed the complexity of ''Saccharomyces'' species to the extent that yeasts involved in beer and wine production commonly involve hybrids of so-called pure species.
Another common method of energy recovery takes place during the wort cooling.
The amount of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill.
The most common starch source used in beer is malted grain.
The sheets are placed into a filtering frame, sanitized (with boiling water, for example) and then used to filter the beer.
The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum, which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ales will add gypsum to the local water in a process known as Burtonisation.
The cone's aperture is typically around 60°, an angle that will allow the yeast to flow towards the cone's apex, but is not so steep as to take up too much vertical space.
Brewers in Bavaria had for centuries been selecting cold-fermenting yeasts by storing ("lagern") their beers in cold alpine caves.
Hops had been used for medicinal and food flavouring purposes since Roman times; by the 7th century in Carolingian monasteries in what is now Germany, beer was being made with hops, though it isn't until the thirteenth century that widespread cultivation of hops for use in beer is recorded.
This prevents the formation of unwanted flavours and harmful compounds such as acetylaldehyde.
More than  are sold per year—producing total global revenues of $294.5 billion (£147.7 billion) as of 2006.
After an initial or primary fermentation, beer is ''conditioned'', matured or aged, in one of several ways, which can take from 2 to 4 weeks, several months, or several years, depending on the brewer's intention for the beer.
While a hopback has a similar filtering effect as a whirlpool, it operates differently: a whirlpool uses centrifugal forces, a hopback uses a layer of whole hops to act as a filter bed.
A type of yeast is selected and added, or "pitched", to the fermentation tank.
A mash rest at  activates β-glucanase, which breaks down gummy β-glucans in the mash, making the sugars flow out more freely later in the process.
However, baking and brewing yeasts typically belong to different strains, cultivated to favour different characteristics: baking yeast strains are more aggressive, in order to carbonate dough in the shortest amount of time; brewing yeast strains act slower, but tend to tolerate higher alcohol concentrations (normally 12–15% abv is the maximum, though under special treatment some ethanol-tolerant strains can be coaxed up to around 20%).
Specific bacteria cultures are also available to reproduce certain styles.
Nearly all beer includes barley malt as the majority of the starch.
The end product of mashing is called a "mash".
Hops add flavour, aroma and bitterness to the beer.
Duration and pH variances also affect the sugar composition of the resulting wort.
There are three main fermentation methods, warm, cool and wild or spontaneous.
After the whirlpool, the wort must be brought down to fermentation temperatures (20–26°Celsius) before yeast is added.
Though much studied, the preservative nature of the soft resins is not yet fully understood, though it has been observed that unless stored at a cool temperature, the preservative nature will decrease.
Spent grains can be used in the production of red bricks, to improve the open porosity and reduce thermal conductivity of the ceramic mass.
Finally, a mash rest temperature of  is used to convert the starches in the malt to sugar, which is then usable by the yeast later in the brewing process.
Pre-made filters have two sides.
The basic ingredients of beer are water; a starch source, such as malted barley, able to be fermented (converted into alcohol); a brewer's yeast to produce the fermentation; and a flavouring, such as hops, to offset the sweetness of the malt.
Secondary sources (adjuncts), such as maize (corn), rice, or sugar, may also be used, sometimes to reduce cost, or to add a feature, such as adding wheat to aid in retaining the foamy head of the beer.
Whirlpool systems vary: smaller breweries tend to use the brew kettle, larger breweries use a separate tank, and design will differ, with tank floors either flat, sloped, conical or with a cup in the centre.
The grain does not act like a filtration medium in a mash filter.
Filtration ratings are divided into rough, fine, and sterile.
Milling also separates the seed from the husk.
More than 133&nbsp;billion litres (35&nbsp;billion gallons) are sold per year—producing total global revenues of $294.5&nbsp;billion (£147.7&nbsp;billion) in 2006.
After cooling, oxygen is often dissolved into the wort to revitalize the yeast and aid its reproduction.
After the wort goes through the heat exchanger, the cooled wort goes into a fermentation tank.
The process of storing, or conditioning, or maturing, or aging a beer at a low temperature for a long period is called "lagering", and while it is associated with lagers, the process may also be done with ales, with the same results – that of cleaning up various chemicals, acids and compounds.
In this vessel, the grain and water are mixed together to create a cereal mash.
It consists primarily of grain husks, pericarp, and fragments of endosperm.
''Brettanomyces'' is a genus of yeast important in brewing lambic, a beer produced not by the deliberate addition of brewer's yeasts, but by spontaneous fermentation with wild yeasts and bacteria.
The bed of grist that settles on it is the actual filter.
Emil Christian Hansen, a Danish biochemist employed by the Carlsberg Laboratory, developed pure yeast cultures which were introduced into the Carlsberg brewery in 1883, and pure yeast strains are now the main fermenting source used worldwide.
The sheets can be flushed if the filter becomes blocked.
By adjusting the rate of flow, the output temperature of the water can be controlled.
Malting is the process where barley grain is made ready for brewing.
Filters that use a powder medium are considerably more complicated to operate, but can filter much more beer before regeneration.
;Kieselguhr filters
A plate heat exchanger has many ridged plates, which form two separate paths.
Less widely used starch sources include millet, sorghum and cassava.
Some brewers add one or more clarifying agents to beer, which typically precipitate (collect as a solid) out of the beer along with protein solids and are found only in trace amounts in the finished product.
Mashing allows the enzymes in the malt to break down the starch in the grain into sugars, typically maltose to create a malty liquid called wort.
This is done either in a mash tun outfitted with a false bottom, in a lauter tun, or in a mash filter.
There may be a secondary fermentation which can take place in the brewery, in the cask or in the bottle.
Today, lagers represent the vast majority of beers produced.
For example, Dublin has hard water well suited to making stout, such as Guinness; while Pilsen has soft water well suited to making pale lager, such as Pilsner Urquell.
These vessels have no tops, which makes harvesting top-fermenting yeasts very easy.
Another specialized pure yeast production plant was soon installed at the Heineken Brewery in Rotterdam the following year and together they began supply of pure cultured yeast to brewers across Europe.
This now-hot water is then stored in a hot water tank.
Different roasting times and temperatures are used to produce different colours of malt from the same grain.
During the mash, naturally occurring enzymes present in the malt convert the starches (long chain carbohydrates) in the grain into smaller molecules or simple sugars (mono-, di-, and tri-saccharides).
Sometimes a cask breather is used to keep the beer fresh by allowing carbon dioxide to replace oxygen as the beer is drawn off the cask.
However, with the advent of yeast banks and the National Collection of Yeast Cultures, brewing these beers – albeit not through spontaneous fermentation – is possible anywhere.
The final part of malting is kilning when the malt goes through a very high temperature drying in a kiln; with gradual temperature increase over several hours.
This is because of its fibrous husk, which is important not only in the sparging stage of brewing (in which water is washed over the mashed barley grains to form the wort) but also as a rich source of amylase, a digestive enzyme that facilitates conversion of starch into sugars.
The brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers known as  microbreweries or regional breweries depending on size and region.
There are several additional brewing methods, such as barrel aging, double dropping, and Yorkshire Square.
This process makes the beer appear bright and clean, rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles of beer such as wheat beers.
A rest closer to the higher end of the range favours α-amylase enzymes, creating more higher-order sugars and dextrins which are less fermentable by the yeast, so a fuller-bodied beer with less alcohol is the result.
For both types, yeast is fully distributed through the beer while it is fermenting, and both equally flocculate (clump together and precipitate to the bottom of the vessel) when fermentation is finished.
After conditioning for a week to several months, the beer may be filtered and force carbonated for bottling, or fined in the cask.
Hops are added to the chamber, the hot wort from the kettle is run through it, and then immediately cooled in the wort chiller before entering the fermentation chamber.
Lager yeast normally ferments at a temperature of approximately .
Fermentation may take place in open or closed vessels.
This is also often done using a plate heat exchanger.
A sample of these Bavarian yeasts was sent from the Spaten brewery in Munich to the Carlsberg brewery in Copenhagen in 1845 who began brewing with it.
The proportion of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill.
'''Brewing''' is the production of beer by steeping a starch source (commonly cereal grains, the most popular of which is barley) in water and fermenting the resulting sweet liquid with yeast.
Brewer's spent grain (also called spent grain, brewer's grain or draff) is the main byproduct of the brewing process, it consists of the residue of malt and grain which remains in the mash-kettle after the mashing and lautering process.
Mashing involves pauses at certain temperatures (notably ), and takes place in a "mash tun" – an insulated brewing vessel with a false bottom.
The most common top-cropping brewer's yeast, ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', is the same species as the common baking yeast.
The plates contain a support structure for the filter cloth.
Ale yeasts, ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', can only partially metabolize raffinose and cannot metabolize melibiose at all.
The term "real ale" as used by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) refers to beer "served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide", which would disallow the use of a cask breather.
Lager yeast can be fermented at a higher temperature normally used for top-fermenting yeast, and this application is often used in a beer style known as ''California Common'' or colloquially as "steam beer".
Conditioning of the beer is the process in which the beer ages, the flavour becomes smoother, and flavours that are unwanted dissipate.
Since the nineteenth century the brewing industry has been part of most western economies.
Mashing is the process of combining a mix of milled grain (typically malted barley with supplementary grains such as corn, sorghum, rye or wheat), known as the "grain bill", and water, known as "liquor", and heating this mixture in a vessel called a "mash tun".
Some lagers are marketed as Pilsner, which originated in Pilsen, Czech Republic ''(Plzeň in Czech)''.
The lauter tun is a tank with holes in the bottom small enough to hold back the large bits of grist and hulls.
Most separation processes have two stages: first wort run-off, during which the extract is separated in an undiluted state from the spent grains, and sparging, in which extract which remains with the grains is rinsed off with hot water.
In Mesopotamia, the oldest evidence of beer is believed to be a 6,000-year-old Sumerian tablet depicting people drinking a beverage through reed straws from a communal bowl.
The active yeast will restart fermentation in the finished beer, and so introduce fresh carbon dioxide; the conditioning tank will be then sealed so that the carbon dioxide is dissolved into the beer producing a lively "condition" or level of carbonation.
