It is characterised by mild, calm weather with high levels of sunshine, sea breezes and a "healthy, bracing air" attributed to the low level of tree cover.
Compass Travel, The Big Lemon, Metrobus, Stagecoach South and The Sussex Bus also operate some services to central Brighton.
Eastwards from the Hove boundary, the names are Boundary, Norfolk, Bedford, Metropole, Grand (referring to the four hotels with those names), Centre, King's, Old Ship, Volk's, Albion, Palace Pier, Aquarium, Athina (where the MS ''Athina B'' ran aground), Paston, Banjo, Duke's, Cliff, Crescent and Black Rock.
The earliest settlement was by the beach at the bottom of the valley, which was partly protected from erosion by an underwater shale-bar.
After the Romans left in the early 4th century AD, the Brighton area returned to the control of the native Celts.
Snow is rare, but particularly severe falls were recorded in 1881 and 1967.
The A23 joins the M23 motorway at Pease Pottage near Gatwick Airport.
Most trains serve Gatwick Airport, and those operated by Thameslink continue to St Albans, Luton, Luton Airport Parkway and Bedford.
''Brighthelm'' gives its name to, among other things, a church and a pub in Brighton and some halls of residence at the University of Sussex.
Brighton has two competitive swimming clubs.
Changes in sea level affected the foreshore several times:  disappeared in the first half of the 14th century, and the Great Storm of 1703 caused widespread destruction.
By 1985 there were about 5,000 parking spaces in central Brighton.
By that time Brighton was Sussex's most populous and important town.
Events range from political party conferences to concerts.
During a heatwave in October 2011, 200,000 tourists visited in a single weekend and spent about £5 million.
On 6 March 2013, newly established operator Brighton City Airways started running a scheduled service to Paris Pontoise–Cormeilles Airport in France.
Volk's Electric Railway runs along the inland edge of the beach from Brighton Pier to Black Rock and Brighton Marina.
Its importance grew from the Norman era onwards.
They were attracted by the easy access for boats, sheltered areas of raised land for building, and better conditions compared to the damp, cold and misty Weald to the north.
There are also a number of New Age outlets and groups.
Brighton Football Club (RFU) is one of the oldest Rugby Clubs in England.
A later building (1727) known as the Town Hall was principally used as a workhouse.
Two large headquarters buildings were vacated in quick succession when British Bookshops left in March 2011 and ''The Argus'' newspaper moved out of its headquarters in 2012—although the Brighton & Hove Bus and Coach Company signed a contract to move its 1,250 employees into the latter building.
Brighton's Quakers run the Friends' Meeting House in the Lanes.
Later, there was a Roman villa at Preston Village, a Roman road from London ran nearby, and much physical evidence of Roman occupation has been discovered locally.
In 2003, the universities of Sussex and Brighton formed a medical school, known as Brighton and Sussex Medical School.
The newly created Borough of Brighton consisted of six wards in 1854: St Nicholas, St Peter, Pier, Park, Pavilion and West.
The name is of Saxon origin.
The West Pier was built in 1866 and is one of only two Grade I listed piers in the United Kingdom.
Below this are thin layers of Upper and Lower Greensand separated by a thicker band of Gault clay.
From 1 April 1952, more of Falmer and part of the adjacent Stanmer parish were added; 20 years later, land and marine territory associated with the new Brighton Marina development also became part of Brighton.
Brighton is the terminus of a number of London-to-Brighton rides, and runs, such as the veteran car run and bike ride.
The cliff itself, like the rest of Brighton's soil, is chalk.
Trolleybuses, trams, ferries and hydrofoil services have operated in the past.
In December 2013, Brighton was the third-highest ranked place on the UK Vitality Index Report, which measures the economic strength of towns and cities in the United Kingdom.
On 1 April 1928, Brighton became a county borough and grew by nearly five times by adding Ovingdean and Rottingdean parishes in their entirety and parts of Falmer, Patcham and West Blatchington.
The Brighton and Hove Pétanque Club runs an annual triples, doubles and singles competition, informal KOs, winter and summer league, plus Open competitions with other clubs.
The presence of a British subsidiary of the United States arms company EDO Corporation on the Home Farm Industrial Estate in Moulsecoomb has been the cause of protests since 2004.
Brighton is at the heart of the Greater Brighton City Region, a partnership of local authorities and other organisations that signifies Brighton's wider regional economic significance.
However, the site of the pool itself remains empty except for a skate park and graffiti wall.
Others were already visiting the town for recreational purposes before Russell became famous, and his actions coincided with other developments which made Brighton more attractive to visitors.
Asda's superstore opened in November 1987, MFI followed two years later, and other retail units were built in the 1990s.
From the 1730s, Brighton entered its second phase of development—one which brought a rapid improvement in its fortunes.
The seven were split into 14 in 1894: Hanover, Kemp Town (renamed King's Cliff in 1908), Lewes Road, Montpelier, Pavilion, Pier, Preston, Preston Park, Queen's Park, Regency, St John, St Nicholas, St Peter, and West.
The 20-year City Plan released in January 2013 ruled out an official park-and-ride facility, stating it would be an "inefficient use of public money, particularly in an era of declining car use".
The ancient settlement of "Brighthelmstone" was documented in the ''Domesday Book'' (1086).
From 1780, development of the Georgian terraces had started, and the fishing village developed as the fashionable resort of Brighton.
Currently, they play in the Conference South having won promotion three times in the space four years between 2009–13.
He sent many patients to "take the cure" in the sea at Brighton, published a popular treatise on the subject, and moved to the town soon afterwards (the Royal Albion, one of Brighton's early hotels, occupies the site of his house).
All are connected by the Undercliff Walk, which has been affected by several cliff falls since 2000.
Brighton Corporation spent £40,000 to extend it in 1897–99 to the Classical design of Brighton Borough Surveyor Francis May.
Despite 16th-century writer Andrew Boorde's claim that "Bryght-Hempston is among the noble ports and havens of the realm", Brighton never developed as a significant port: rather, it was considered as part of Shoreham.
Its fleet has about 280 buses.
More foreign attacks, storms (especially the devastating Great Storm of 1703), a declining fishing industry, and the emergence of nearby Shoreham as a significant port caused its economy to suffer.
Other notable churches include the very tall brick-built St Bartholomew's (1874) designed by the architect Edmund Scott,   St Peter's (1828), and St. Martin's, noted for its decorated interior.
There are two multiplex cinemas, the Odeon on North Street and Cineworld in the Marina.
Brighton is connected to the national road network by the A23 (London Road) northwards, and by two east–west routes: the A259 along the coast and the A27 trunk route inland.
Brighton is generally agreed to be the unofficial "gay capital" of the UK, and records LGBT history in the city since the 19th century.
The Wellesbourne occasionally reappears during times of prolonged heavy rain; author Mark Antony Lower referred to an early 19th-century drawing of the Royal Pavilion showing "quite a pool of water across the Steyne".
From the 1st century AD, the Romans built a number of villas in Brighton and Romano-British Brythonic Celts formed farming settlements in the area.
Archaeological evidence of settlement in the area dates back to the Bronze Age, Roman and Anglo-Saxon periods.
The Duke of York's Picturehouse, dating from 1910, was opened by Mrs Violet Melnotte-Wyatt.
Theatres include the Brighton Dome and associated Pavilion Theatre, the expanded Komedia (primarily a comedy and music venue but also a theatre), the Old Market which was renovated and re-opened in 2010 and the Theatre Royal  which celebrated its 200th anniversary in 2007.
Served by frequent trains (to Falmer railway station) and 24-hour buses, it has a student population of 12,500 of which 70% are undergraduates.
Several LGBT charities, publishers, social and support groups are also based in the city.
The Gamer Network, whose portfolio of websites relating to computer gaming (including Eurogamer) and creative industries was founded in 1999, is based in Brighton.
The Duke of York's Picturehouse expanded in 2012, adding two additional screens in a different location.
Brighton is a popular destination for conferences, exhibitions and trade fairs, and has had a purpose-built conference centre—the Brighton Centre—since 1977.
Over the next few decades, though, events severely affected its local and national standing, such that by 1730 "it was a forlorn town decidedly down on its luck".
The club's notable achievements including winning promotion to the Football League First Division for the first time in 1979, staying there for four seasons, during the last of which they reached the FA Cup Final and took Manchester United to a replay before losing 4–0.
Brighton and Hove is home to the Sussex County Cricket Club at Eaton Road in Hove.
Archaeologists have only partially explored it, but have found numerous burial mounds, tools and bones, suggesting it was a place of some importance.
Parishes moved in and out several times, and by 1801 only Brighton and West Blatchington were included in the Hundred.
Many of the major attractions were built during the Victorian era, including the Grand Hotel, the West Pier, and the Brighton Palace Pier.
It is being gradually restored by English Heritage.
Northwards from Western Road, it runs to the west of Norfolk Road, Norfolk Terrace, Windlesham Road and Windlesham Gardens in the Montpelier area, then along the south side of Davigdor Road to Seven Dials.
The largest car parks are at London Road, King Street, and the Churchill Square/Regency Road/Russell Road complex.
The ''tūn'' element is common in Sussex, especially on the coast, although it occurs infrequently in combination with a personal name.
A wider range of long-distance destinations was served until 2007–08 when rationalisation caused the ending of InterCity services via Kensington (Olympia) and Reading to Birmingham, Manchester and Edinburgh.
Councillors and residents in Woodingdean and Rottingdean have claimed that streets and car parks in those areas have become unofficial park-and-ride sites: drivers park for free and take buses into the city centre.
The Lanes contain predominantly clothing stores, jewellers, antique shops, restaurants and pubs.
Brighton has a  expanse of shingle beach, part of the unbroken  section within the city limits.
There are also several mosques and Buddhist centres.
The 1920s building is celebrated for its façade and internal quads.
From the 1760s it was a boarding point for boats travelling to France; road transport to London was improved when the main road via Crawley was turnpiked in 1770; and spas and indoor baths were opened by other entrepreneurial physicians such as Sake Dean Mahomed and Anthony Relhan (who also wrote the town's first guidebook).
Brighton museums include Brighton Museum & Art Gallery, Preston Manor, Booth Museum of Natural History, Brighton Toy and Model Museum, and Brighton Fishing Museum, the long established social epicentre of the seafront, which includes artefacts from the West Pier.
The school is based in Falmer and works closely with the Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust.
The village of ''Bristelmestune'' was founded by these Anglo-Saxon invaders, probably in the early Saxon period.
The mid 19th-century nickname "School Town" referred to the remarkable number of boarding, charity and church schools in the town at the time.
In 1971, the borough councils of Worthing, Hove and Brighton bought it and operated it jointly as a municipal airport, but since 2006 it has been privately owned.
In the Georgian era, Brighton developed as a fashionable seaside resort, encouraged by the patronage of the Prince Regent (later King George IV), who spent much time in the town and constructed the Royal Pavilion during the early part of his Regency.
Its nighttime blue lighting is particularly prominent along the foreshore.
By 1708 other parishes in Sussex were charged rates to alleviate poverty in Brighton, and Daniel Defoe wrote that the expected £8,000 cost of providing sea defences was "more than the whole town was worth".
The main Sussex beer festival is held in nearby Hove, and there is a smaller beer festival in the Hanover area.
Common beliefs were that most of the working population commuted to London every day; that tourism provided most of Brighton's jobs and income; or that the borough's residents were "composed entirely of wealthy theatricals and retired businesspeople" rather than workers.
Recent housing in North Laine, for instance, has been designed in keeping with the area.
The Royal Pavilion is also open to the public, serving as a museum to the British Regency.
As with the state schools, some independents are faith-based; Torah Academy, the last Jewish primary school, became a Pre-K/Nursery School at the end of the 2007.
It is home to several major companies, some of which employ thousands of people locally; as a retail centre it is of regional importance; creative, digital and new media businesses are increasingly significant; and, although Brighton was never a major industrial centre, its railway works contributed to Britain's rail industry in the 19th and 20th centuries, particularly in the manufacture of steam locomotives.
The population grew from around 7,000 in 1801 to more than 120,000 by 1901.
There is also an from time to time a beach soccer competition in a temporary stadium on imported sand on the beach.
Brighton Ultimate, an ultimate Frisbee team was set up in 1985.
The airport was rebranded Brighton (Shoreham) Airport around the same time.
Brighton has a temperate climate: its Köppen climate classification is ''Cfb''.
Most scholars believe that it derives from ''Beorthelm'' + ''tūn''—the homestead of Beorthelm, a common Saxon name associated with villages elsewhere in England.
Behind the estuary was a stagnant pond called the Pool or Poole, so named since the medieval era.
Brighton Corporation laid out the estate on  of land around Crowhurst Road in 1950.
Brighton has three synagogues: the Middle Street Synagogue is a Grade II-listed building built in 1874–75.
+Average sea temperature
For some time it was under consideration for restoration, but two fires in 2003, and other setbacks, led to these plans being abandoned.
Real-time travel information displays are provided at many stops.
The Kemptown area has its own small annual street festival, the Kemptown Carnival, and the Hanover area similarly has a "Hanover Day".
There was also a Bronze Age settlement at Coldean.
A wide range of cuisines is available.
Computer game design company Black Rock Studio was founded in 1998 and was taken over by Disney Interactive Studios, who closed it down in 2011.
Brandwatch is a social media monitoring company based in offices near Brighton station.
The 11th century (1086)  St Nicholas Church is the oldest building in Brighton, commonly known as "The Mother Church".
Average rainfall levels increase as the land rises: the 1958–1990 mean was  on the seafront and about  at the top of the South Downs above Brighton.
Many events and performance companies operate in the city.
Notable former managers of the club include Brian Clough, Peter Taylor (born 1928), Peter Taylor (born 1953), Jimmy Melia, Liam Brady, Jimmy Case, Steve Gritt, Brian Horton, Steve Coppell and Mark McGhee.
Elm Grove and Patcham wards were created at the same time, bringing the total to 19.
There is also a twice-yearly general food festival.
A bypass was first proposed in 1932, six routes were submitted for approval in 1973, and the Department of the Environment published its recommended route in 1980.
The arrival of the London and Brighton Railway in 1841 brought Brighton within the reach of day-trippers from London.
Transport rallies are also hosted on the seafront.
"London-by-Sea" is well-known, reflecting Brighton's popularity with Londoners as a day-trip resort, a commuter dormitory and a desirable destination for those wanting to move out of the metropolis.
Many Brighton residents commute to work in London and destinations include London Victoria, London Bridge and St Pancras International.
Brighton attracts over 8.5 million visitors annually and is the most popular seaside destination in the UK for overseas tourists.
More academic subjects can be studied by 16–18-year-olds at Brighton Hove & Sussex Sixth Form College (BHASVIC) in the Seven Dials area.
For a number of years, Andrew Logan's Alternative Miss World extravaganza was held in the city.
Food and drink related festivals include the traditional Blessing of the Fisheries, where barbecued mackerel are eaten on the beach and the more recent Fiery Foods Chilli Festival.
Brighton Town Hall occupies a large site in The Lanes.
Many of the major attractions were built during the Victorian era, such as the Grand Hotel (1864), the West Pier (1866), and the Palace Pier (1899).
Notable former/current players include Sergio Torres, Jake Robinson, Matthew Lawrence and Darren Freeman.
Southdown were part of the nationalised NBC group and were based at Freshfield Road in the Kemptown area; Brighton Borough Transport were owned by the council and used the former tram depot at Lewes Road as their headquarters.
The University of Sussex established in 1961 is a campus university between Stanmer Park and Falmer, four miles (6&nbsp;km) from the city centre.
The major expansion of 1928 also incorporated the villages of Patcham, Ovingdean and Rottingdean, and much council housing was built in parts of Woodingdean after the Second World War.
Brighton SC formed in 1860 claims to be the oldest swimming club in England.
Brighton is home to many independent record labels such as FatCat Records and Memorials of Distinction.
The Brighton Institute of Modern Music, a fully accredited music college, opened in 2001 and has since expanded to five locations throughout the UK.
Brighton also hosts an annual trans pride event, which is the first of its kind in the UK.
'''Brighton'''  is a seaside resort town and the largest settlement within the City of Brighton and Hove, situated in East Sussex, England.
Brighton & Hove Albion Football Club is the city's professional football team.
The inaugural contest in June 2002 featured football stars such as Eric Cantona and Matt Le Tissier.
Public enquiries took place in 1983 and 1987, construction started in 1989 and the first section—between London Road at Patcham and the road to Devil's Dyke—opened in summer 1991.
There is a greyhound racing circuit – the Brighton & Hove Greyhound Stadium – in Hove, run by Coral, at which Motorcycle speedway racing was staged in 1928.
Except for a small addition of rural land in 1993 (from Pyecombe parish), Brighton Borough's boundaries remained the same until it was joined to Hove Borough in 1997 to form the unitary authority of Brighton and Hove.
The contemporary fad for drinking and bathing in seawater as a purported cure for illnesses was enthusiastically encouraged by Dr Richard Russell from nearby Lewes.
Neighbouring Hove is known for its hundreds of painted timber beach huts, but brick-walled chalets are also available on Brighton seafront, especially towards Rottingdean and Saltdean.
Brighton's ecclesiastical and civil parish boundaries were coterminous until 1873.
The only park and ride facility in Brighton is based at the Withdean Stadium.
In 1969, a 520-space multi-storey car park was built beneath the central gardens of Regency Square.
Groups of mods and Rockers still bring their scooters and motorbikes to the town, but their gatherings are now much more sedate than the violent 1960s confrontations depicted in ''Quadrophenia''.
In European elections, Brighton is part of the European Parliament constituency of South-East England.
By 1956, large-scale employment was provided at a bakery, a typewriter factory and a machine tools manufacturer among others.
The men's 1XI gained promotion to the England Hockey League system, Conference East, in 2013.
Other festivals include The Great Escape, featuring three nights of live music in venues across the city; the Soundwaves Festival in June, which shows classical music composed in the 21st Century, and involves both amateur and professional performers; Paddle Round the Pier; Brighton Live which each September stages a week of free gigs in pubs to show local bands; Burning the Clocks, a winter solstice celebration; and Brighton Pride (see lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, below).
By the early 21st century, the market for office accommodation in the city was characterised by fluctuating demand and a lack of supply of high-quality buildings.
The University of Brighton, the former Brighton Polytechnic, has a student population of 20,017 of which 80% are undergraduates.
Work on the first purpose-built town hall began in 1830; Thomas Read Kemp laid the first stone, and Thomas Cooper designed it on behalf of the Brighton Town Commissioners (of which he was a member).
When the territory was extended to include part of Preston parish in 1873, the new area became a seventh ward named Preston.
Gentrification since then has made Brighton more fashionable again.
Between Western Road and the seafront, the boundary runs up Little Western Street (pavement on eastern side, in Brighton), but it is not visible.
The other game was between Samoa and the United States.
An inaugural White Nights (Nuit Blanche) all-night arts festival took place in October 2008 and continued for 4 years until it was postponed in 2012 due to a lack of European funding.
Brighton continued to grow as a major centre of tourism following the arrival of the railways in 1841, becoming a popular destination for day-trippers from London.
At the 2010 general election, Brighton Kemptown elected the Conservative MP Simon Kirby, while Brighton Pavilion elected Caroline Lucas, the first Green Party MP elected to Westminster.
Because of boundary changes, the land area of Brighton expanded from 1,640&nbsp;acres&nbsp;(7&nbsp;km2) in 1854 to 14,347&nbsp;acres&nbsp;(58&nbsp;km2) in 1952.
The seafront has bars, restaurants, nightclubs, sports facilities and amusement arcades, principally along the central section between the West and Palace Piers.
There are over 300 pubs in the town.
Brighton was originally an informal shortened form, first seen in 1660; it gradually supplanted the longer name, and was in general use from the late 18th century.
Local resident Fatboy Slim puts on a "Big Beach Boutique" show most years.
Whitehawk play their games at The Enclosed Ground, beautifully set into the South Downs, close to Brighton Marina.
The old boundary between Brighton and Hove is most clearly seen on the seafront, where the King Edward Peace Statue (1912) straddles the border, and in a twitten called Boundary Passage which runs northwards from Western Road to Montpelier Road.
It was built in the 1960s as an open-air, multi-level pedestrianised shopping centre, but was rebuilt and enlarged in 1998 and is no longer open-air.
At the time of the Domesday survey in 1086, Brighton was in the Rape of Lewes and the Hundred of Welesmere.
Its ecclesiastical parish was not affected.
One original house survives from the time of the pool's enclosure.
Brighton has about 400 restaurants, more per head than anywhere else in the UK outside London.
It was Brighton's first ultramodern commercial property and was intended for mixed commercial and industrial use, but its completion coincided with a slump in demand for high-tech premises.
Since the demolition in 1978 of the Black Rock open-air lido at the eastern end of Brighton's seafront, the area has been developed and now features one of Europe's largest marinas.
There are a number of private schools, including Brighton College, Roedean School, Steiner School, BHHS and a Montessori School.
Part of the beach adjoining Madeira Drive, to the east of the city centre, has been redeveloped into a sports complex and opened to the public in March 2007, with courts for pursuits such as beach volleyball and ultimate Frisbee among others.
It has been closed since 1975.
The city also had the highest percentage of same-sex households in the UK in 2004 and the largest number of civil partnership registrations outside London in 2013.
Flights were suspended shortly afterwards.
The East Cliff runs for several miles from Pool Valley towards Rottingdean and Saltdean, reaching  above sea level.
Preston ward was extended in 1923 to incorporate the area taken into the borough from Patcham parish in 1923 for the construction of the Moulsecoomb estate, and in 1928 the ward was divided into four: Hollingbury, Moulsecoomb, Preston and Preston Park.
Most of the large factories closed during the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s, employment fell to 1,000, and structural changes started in the mid-1980s with a move towards small-scale industrial units (the Enterprise Estate was finished in October 1985) and then retail warehouses.
The Hollingbury Industrial Estate is one of the largest such facilities in Brighton; in its early days about 6,000 people were employed, principally in industrial jobs, but in the late 20th and early 21st centuries its focus has switched to commercial and retail development, limiting Brighton's potential for industrial growth.
Medieval Brighthelmston had a town hall, although it was called the Townhouse and functioned more like a market hall.
''Brighthelmstone'' was the town's official name until 1810, though.
The civil parish was first extended from 31 October 1873, when  was annexed from Preston.
Beyond Black Rock, the cliffs (part of the Brighton to Newhaven Cliffs Site of Special Scientific Interest) rise to more than  and there are three small beaches at Ovingdean Gap, Rottingdean Gap and Saltdean Gap.
Storms caused serious damage in 1703, 1806, 1824, 1836, 1848, 1850, 1896, 1910 and 1987.
As an example, the Trafalgar Place development ( 1990), "now considered a prime office location", stood partly empty for a decade.
The West Coastway Line serves stations to Hove, Worthing, Portsmouth and Southampton; and the East Coastway Line runs via Lewes to Newhaven, Eastbourne, Hastings and Ashford, Kent, crossing the landmark London Road viaduct en route and providing "a dramatic high-level view" of Brighton.
Brighton has become known as one of the least religious places in the UK, based upon analysis of the 2011 census which revealed that 42 per cent of the population profess no religion, far higher than the national average of 25%.
Brighton is the home of the UK's first Walk of Fame which celebrates the many rich and famous people associated with the city.
This part is the most popular: daily visits exceed 150,000 at weekends in high summer.
