Chief Justice Forbes gave the new settlement the name of Edenglassie before it was named Brisbane.
More recently, on 27 November 2014, a very strong storm made a direct hit on the city centre.
Since 1 July 2007 Queensland regulation changes have opened up the retail energy market, allowing multiple companies to resell both gas and electricity.
The State Government and Brisbane City Council have responded with infrastructure plans and increased funding for transportation projects, such as the South East Queensland Infrastructure Plan and Program.
Most of the port facilities are less than three decades old and some are built on reclaimed mangroves and wetlands.
Brisbane is also home to numerous other independent tertiary providers, including the Australian College of Natural Medicine, the Brisbane College of Theology, QANTM, Jazz Music Institute, as well as Jschool: Journalism Education & Training, JMC Academy.
In 1823 Governor of New South Wales Sir Thomas Brisbane instructed that a new northern penal settlement be developed, and an exploration party led by John Oxley further explored Moreton Bay.
Many of these houses are elevated on stumps (also called "stilts"), that were originally timber, but are now frequently replaced by steel or concrete.
Many of Brisbane's preschool, primary, and secondary schools are under the jurisdiction of Education Queensland, a branch of the Queensland Government.
There are currently multiple tunnel and bridge projects underway as part of the TransApex plan.
Brisbane is served by all five major television networks in Australia, which broadcast from the summit of Mount Coot-tha.
Since the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Queensland State Government has been developing technology and science industries in Queensland as a whole, and Brisbane in particular, as part of its "Smart State" initiative.
In total there are ten road bridges, mostly concentrated in the inner city area.
From November to March, thunderstorms are common over Brisbane, with the more severe events accompanied by large damaging hail stones, torrential rain and destructive winds.
Brisbane was chosen as the capital when Queensland was proclaimed a separate colony from New South Wales in 1859.
The three commercial stations, Seven, Nine, and Ten, are accompanied by two government networks, ABC and SBS, with all five providing digital television.
The city is a popular tourist destination, serving as a gateway for visitors to the state of Queensland, particularly to the Gold Coast and the Sunshine Coast, popular resort towns immediately south and north of Brisbane, respectively.
The State government under Joh Bjelke-Petersen began a major program of change and urban renewal, beginning with the central business district and inner suburbs.
Brisbane also hosts a professional soccer team named Brisbane Roar FC and an AFL club the Brisbane Lions.
The city of Brisbane is hilly.
It also provides the route for an Airtrain service under joint public/private control between the City and Brisbane Airport.
They were allocated 260 hectares and set about establishing the mission, which became known as the German Station.
Sheffield ShieldRyobi One Day Cup
However, this settlement was abandoned after a year and the colony was moved to a site on the Brisbane River now known as North Quay,  south, which offered a more reliable water supply.
Average annual temperature of the sea is , from  in July to  in February.
It was launched by Brisbane Marketing in 2002 to promote Fortitude Valley as a hub for arts and youth culture.
Optus and Foxtel operate PayTV services in Brisbane, via cable and satellite means.
The relatively low cost of timber in South-East Queensland meant that until recently most residences were constructed of timber, rather than brick or stone.
The river itself was popular with bathers, and it permitted boating excursions to Moreton Bay when the main port was in the city reaches.
BIFF features new films and retrospectives by domestic and international filmmakers along with seminars and awards.
On an annual basis, Brisbane averages 124 clear days.
Along with Beijing, Berlin, Birmingham and Marseille, Brisbane was nominated as one of the Top 5 International Music Hotspots by ''Billboard'' in 2007.
Telstra and Optus provide both high speed internet as well as Pay TV through their cable services for the bulk of the city's metropolitan area.
Also, on the west, are the higher Mount Glorious, (680&nbsp;m), and Mount Nebo (550&nbsp;m).
The 1974 Brisbane flood was a major disaster which temporarily crippled the city.
White-collar industries include information technology, financial services, higher education and public sector administration generally concentrated in and around the central business district and recently established office areas in the inner suburbs.
Sir Thomas Brisbane visited the settlement and travelled 28 miles up the Brisbane River in December 1824, bestowing upon Brisbane the distinction of being the only Australian capital city set foot upon by its namesake.
Also used as a headquarters by the American troops during World War II was the T & G Building.
GOMA also boasts Australia's largest purpose-built Cinémathèque.
The last to affect Brisbane but not directly cross the city was Tropical Cyclone Hamish in March 2009: it remained  north of Brisbane but caused significant damage to beaches as well as the worst oil spill in Moreton Bay.
Wind gusts of  were recorded in some suburbs, many houses were severely damaged, cars were destroyed and planes were flipped at the Brisbane and Archerfield Airports.
Water restrictions have been replaced with water conservation measures that aim at a target of 200 litres per day/per person, but consumption is rarely over 160 litres.
Brisbane also lies in the Tropical Cyclone risk area, although cyclones are rare.
Brisbane is covered by Queensland Health's "Northside" and "Southside" health service areas.
Oxley discovered, named, and explored the Brisbane River as far as Goodna,  upstream from the Brisbane central business district.
Australian rules football
The Eleanor Schonell Bridge (originally named, and still generally known as, The Green Bridge) between the University of Queensland and Dutton Park is for use by buses, pedestrians and cyclists.
The Gallery of Modern Art is located next to the State Library of Queensland and the Queensland Art Gallery.
German missionaries settled at Zions Hill, Nundah as early as 1837, five years before Brisbane was officially declared a free settlement.
Brisbane is home to several of Australia's tallest buildings.
The government has invested in several biotechnology and research facilities at several universities in Brisbane.
Brisbane is one of the major business hubs in Australia.
Today fishing and boating are more common.
"Bris Vegas" is an ironic nickname given to the city.
The Queensland Rail City network network consists of 10 suburban lines and covers mostly the west, north and east sides of the city.
The ABC transmits all five of its radio networks to Brisbane; 612 ABC Brisbane, ABC Classic FM, ABC NewsRadio, Radio National, and Triple J. SBS broadcasts its national radio network.
The city has retained some heritage buildings dating back to the 1820s.
The Bridge to Brisbane fun run has become a major annual charity event for Brisbane.
It also receives attention for its damaging flood events, most notably in 1974 and 2011.
The Queensland Conservatorium, in which professional companies and Conservatorium students also stage performances, is located within the South Bank Parklands.
The urban area, including the central business district, are partially elevated by spurs of the Herbert Taylor Range, such as the summit of Mount Coot-tha, reaching up to  and the smaller Enoggera Hill.
Oxley recommended Red Cliff Point for the new colony, reporting that ships could land at any tide and easily get close to the shore.
There are also three railway bridges and two pedestrian bridges.
Warana (meaning ''Blue Skies'') was a former spring festival which began in 1961 and was held in September each year.
Dust storms in Brisbane are extremely rare; on 23 September 2009, however, a severe dust storm blanketed Brisbane, as well as other parts of eastern Australia.
Australian Football League
In October 2015 Lord Mayor Graham Quirk announced plans to offer incentives for developers to build aged care and retirement facilities in some of the city's inner-suburban neighbourhoods.
Brisbane's wettest day occurred on 21 January 1887, when  of rain fell on the city, the highest maximum daily rainfall of Australia's capital cities.
The suburb of Mount Coot-tha is home to a popular state forest, and the Brisbane Botanic Gardens which houses the Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium and the "Tsuki-yama-chisen" Japanese Garden (formerly of the Japanese Government Pavilion of Brisbane's World Expo '88).
At the meteorological station in the city's downtown core (Brisbane Station), only 0.2&nbsp;mm of precipitation was recorded in August 2012.
Brisbane has the largest number of enabled DSL telephone exchanges in Queensland.
Furthermore, August 2012 was the city's driest August and the driest month ever experienced in its recorded history (records at the Brisbane Airport commenced in 1929, although the station closed in February 2000).
Archerfield Airport (in Brisbane's southern suburbs) acts as a general aviation airport.
Major public works included the Riverside Expressway, the Gateway Bridge, and later, the redevelopment of South Bank, starting with the Queensland Art Gallery.
Brisbane's population growth placed strains on South East Queensland's transport system.
Free settlers entered the area over the following five years and by the end of 1840 Robert Dixon began work on the first plan of Brisbane Town, in anticipation of future development.
Other popular recreation activities include the Story Bridge adventure climb and rock climbing at the Kangaroo Point Cliffs.
The city is susceptible to severe thunderstorms in the spring and summer months; on 16 November 2008 a severe storm caused tremendous damage in the outer suburbs, most notably The Gap.
During this era, Brisbane grew and modernised rapidly becoming a destination of interstate migration.
Other prominent rises in Brisbane are Mount Gravatt and nearby Toohey Mountain.
The reason given was to enable people in inner suburban neighbourhoods to retire and go into aged care in the areas where they lived, and to increase aged care rooms and retirement units overall to meet growing demand.
The La Boite Theatre Company now performs at the Roundhouse Theatre at Kelvin Grove.
Brisbane Airport (IATA code: ''BNE'') is the city's main airport, the third busiest in Australia after Sydney Airport and Melbourne Airport.
Described as 'the worst storm in a decade,' very large hail smashed skyscraper windows while a flash flood tore through the CBD.
GOMA holds the Asia Pacific Triennial (APT) which focuses on contemporary art from the Asia and Pacific in a variety of media from painting to video work.
These choirs include the Brisbane Chorale, Queensland Choir, Brisbane Chamber Choir, Canticum Chamber Choir, Brisbane Concert Choir, Imogen Children's Chorale and Brisbane Birralee Voices.
The city was marred by the Australian frontier wars between 1843 and 1855, and development was partly set back by the Great Fire of Brisbane, and the Great Brisbane Flood.
Brisbane has multi-campus universities and colleges including the University of Queensland (UQ), Queensland University of Technology (QUT) and Griffith University, all among Australia's highest rated universities.
Brisbane hosted the 1982 Commonwealth Games and the 1988 World Exposition (known locally as World Expo 88).
In 2009 Brisbane recorded its hottest winter day at  on 24 August.
In November 2011, Brisbane saw 22 days with no recorded rainfall, which was the driest start to a November since 1919.
The Bruce Highway terminates  away in Cairns and passes through most major cities along the Queensland coast.
Rugby Union is also very popular in Brisbane and the city hosts the Queensland Reds who play Super Rugby.
State of Origin series
The Port of Brisbane is on the lower reaches of the Brisbane River and on Fisherman's Island at the rivers mouth, and is the 3rd most important port in Australia for value of goods.
Other professional theatres in the city include the Twelfth Night Theatre at Bowen Hills, the Metro Arts Theatre located in Edward Street, and the Queensland Theatre Company's Bille Brown Studio in West End.
Brisbane is featured in music including The Saints' "Brisbane (Security City)" (1978); The Stranglers' "Nuclear Device" (1979) about Joh Bjelke-Petersen; "Love You Brisbane" theme single from the 1980s; Midnight Oil's single "Dreamworld" (1987); Powderfinger's album ''Vulture Street'' (2003).
The Brisbane Medieval Fayre and Tournament is held each June in Musgrave Park.
Brisbane has teams in all major interstate competitions, excluding the National Basketball League.
Additional channels are also available via DAB Digital Radio.
The Old Windmill tower's other significant claim to fame, largely ignored, is that the first television signals in the southern hemisphere were transmitted from it by experimenters in April 1934—long before TV commenced in most places.
The maximum allowed limit of lashes was 50 however Logan regularly applied sentences of 150 lashes.
Blue-collar industries, including petroleum refining, stevedoring, paper milling, metalworking and QR railway workshops, tend to be located on the lower reaches of the Brisbane River and in new industrial zones on the urban fringe.
Within the greater Brisbane area there are 8 major public hospitals, 4 major private hospitals, and smaller public and private facilities.
The Institute for Molecular Bioscience at the University of Queensland (UQ) Saint Lucia Campus is a large CSIRO and Queensland state government initiative for research and innovation that is currently being emulated at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) Campus at Kelvin Grove with the establishment of the Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI).
The party settled in Redcliffe on 13&nbsp;September 1824, under the command of Lieutenant Henry Miller with 14 soldiers (some with wives and children) and 29 convicts.
Commercially, the area has attracted a mix of companies from throughout the Asia Pacific region.
There are three major TAFE colleges in Brisbane; the Brisbane North Institute of TAFE, the Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE, and the Southbank Institute of TAFE.
Brisbane is in the southeast corner of Queensland.
Source: Bureau of Meteorology.
Metropolitan Brisbane is serviced by all major and most minor telecommunications companies and their networks.
Due to the lack of a suitable purpose built performance venue for choral music, these choirs typically perform in the city's many churches.
Both of these providers also host wireless networks with hotspots within both the inner and suburban areas.
The Gateway Motorway is a private toll road which connects the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coasts by providing an alternate route via the Gateway Bridge avoiding Brisbane's inner city area.
Home grown major companies include Suncorp-Metway Limited, Flight Centre, Sunsuper, Orrcon, Credit Union Australia, Boeing Australia, Donut King, Wotif.com, WebCentral, PIPE Networks, Krome Studios, Mincom Limited, TechnologyOne, Thiess Pty Ltd and Virgin Australia.
Brisbane's metropolitan area sprawls along the Moreton Bay floodplain from Caboolture in the north to Beenleigh in the south, and across to Ipswich in the south west.
Brisbane has hosted several major sporting events including the 1982 Commonwealth Games and the 2001 Goodwill Games.
Popular tourist and recreation areas in Brisbane include the South Bank Parklands, Roma Street Parkland, the City Botanic Gardens, Brisbane Forest Park and Portside Wharf.
millimetres (inches)
Since 2000, Brisbane has been developing a busway network, including the South East Busway, Northern Busway and the Eastern Busway.
The Council's annual budget is about AUD 1.6&nbsp;billion, and it has an asset base of AUD 13&nbsp;billion.
Other universities which have campuses in Brisbane include the Australian Catholic University, Central Queensland University, James Cook University, University of Southern Queensland and the University of the Sunshine Coast.
National Rugby League
From 2001 until 2010, Brisbane and surrounding temperate areas had been experiencing the most severe drought in over a century, with dam levels dropping to 16.9% of their capacity on 10 August 2007.
The Caxton Street Seafood and Wine Festival was launched in 1994 by the Caxton Street Development Association to promote Caxton Street in historic Petrie Terrace as a significant entertainment precinct that celebrates and promotes Australian music, seafood and wine.
There are also a large number of independent (private), Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and other Christian run schools.
Brisbane City Council's Labor opposition said the changes would benefit developers rather than consumers, claiming  the discounts don't necessarily tend to translate into more affordable property and called for some of the reductions be used to help reduce property purchase prices.
It features free live music, market stalls, food and drink from many local restaurants and cafés, and other entertainment.
The Brisbane central business district stands on the original European settlement and is situated inside a bend of the Brisbane River, about  from its mouth at Moreton Bay.
Water storage, treatment and delivery for Brisbane is handled by SEQ Water, which sells on to Queensland Urban Utilities (previously Brisbane Water) for distribution to the greater Brisbane area.
Several large cultural, international and sporting events have been held at Brisbane, including the 1982 Commonwealth Games, World Expo '88, the final Goodwill Games in 2001, and the 2014 G-20 summit.
Trams in Brisbane were a popular mode of public transport until the network was closed in 1969, leaving Melbourne as the last Australian city to operate a tram network until recently.
Most of the focus has been placed on expanding current road infrastructure, particularly tunnels and bypasses, as well as improving the public transport system.
The Brisbane International Film Festival (BIFF) is held in July/August in a variety of venues around Brisbane.
Queensland was separated from New South Wales by Letters Patent dated 6 June 1859, proclaimed by Sir George Ferguson Bowen on 10 December 1859, whereupon he became Queensland's first governor, with Brisbane chosen as its capital, although it was not incorporated as a city until 1902.
The Property Council of Australia said the policy would position Brisbane as a national leader in aged-care provision and avert a "seniors' housing shortfall".
On 9 January 2011, an upper low crossed north of Brisbane and dropped rainfall on an already saturated southeast coast of Queensland, resulting in severe flooding and damage in Brisbane and the surrounding area; the same storm season also caused the water storage to climb to over 98% of maximum capacity and broke the drought.
The Pacific Motorway connects the central city with the Gold Coast to the south.
The Brisbane International is held here from January 2009.
The main newspapers of Brisbane are ''The Courier-Mail'' and ''The Sunday Mail'', both owned by News Corporation.
The Old Commissariat Store, on William Street, built by convict labour in 1828, was originally used partly as a grainhouse, has also been a hostel for immigrants and used for the storage of records.
Brisbane is serviced by major commercial radio stations, including 4KQ, 4BC, 4BH, 97.3 FM, B105 FM, Nova 106.9, RadioTAB and Triple M. Brisbane is also serviced by major community radio stations such as 96five Family FM, 4MBS Classic FM 103.7, 4EB FM and 4ZZZ 102.1.
It is located north-east of the city centre and provides domestic and international passenger services.
Brisbane rainfall data (Brisbane Regional Office 1840–1994)
In 1996 the annual festival was changed to a biennial Brisbane Festival.
There are also popular entertainment pubs and clubs within both the City and Fortitude Valley.
The construction was completed in 2008.
Australian Baseball League
Brisbane is also home to the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts.
Today, Brisbane is well known for its distinct Queenslander architecture which forms much of the city's built heritage.
Water for the area is stored in one of three dams; Wivenhoe, Somerset and North Pine.
Channels available in addition to ABC, Seven, Nine, Ten and SBS include One, Eleven, TVSN, Spree TV, ABC2/KIDS, ABC3, ABC News 24, SBS HD (SBS broadcast in HD), SBS2, Food Network, NITV, 7Two, 7mate, 7flix, TV4ME, RACING.COM, 9HD (Nine broadcast in HD), 9Gem, 9Go!, 9Life and eXtra.
Queensland State Hockey Centre
More recently, restrictions were lifted and water conservation is no longer a major concern of council, although residents are asked to follow permanent conservation measures.
Early legislation decreed a minimum size for residential blocks causing few terrace houses being constructed in Brisbane.
The city's highest recorded temperature was  on 26 January 1940, but temperatures above  are uncommon.
Brisbane receives the national daily, ''The Australian'', and the ''Weekend Australian'', together with Fairfax papers ''Australian Financial Review'', the ''Sydney Morning Herald'' and ''The Age'', and Fairfax website Brisbane Times.
The city is centred along the Brisbane River, and its eastern suburbs line the shores of Moreton Bay.
Non-convict European settlement of the Brisbane region commenced in 1838.
Brisbane is served by several urban and inter-urban motorways.
Dewpoints in the summer average at around ; the apparent temperature exceeds  on almost all summer days.
Brisbane has over  of bicycle pathways, mostly surrounding the Brisbane river and city centre, extending to the west of the city.
Electricity and gas grids in Brisbane are handled by Energex (electricity), and Origin Energy (gas), with each company previously holding a monopoly on domestic retail supply.
Tourism is an important part of the Brisbane economy, both in its own right and as a gateway to other areas of Queensland.
Greater Brisbane had a density of 140 people per square kilometre in 2013.
The Old Windmill, in Wickham Park, built by convict labour in 1824, is the oldest surviving building in Brisbane.
It features live music, food and drink from Caxton Street restaurants and cafés, as well as Art Exhibitions and Historical Displays and a dedicated annual Festival Band Competition.
Some of Brisbane's popular landmarks were lost, including the Bellevue Hotel in 1979 and Cloudland in 1982, demolished in controversial circumstances by the Deen Brothers demolition crew.
This incident became known colloquially as the Battle of Brisbane.
Named after the Brisbane River on which it is located – which in turn was named after Scotsman Sir Thomas Brisbane, the Governor of New South Wales from 1821 to 1825 – the area was chosen as a place for secondary offenders from the Sydney Colony.
Many suburban creeks criss-cross the city, increasing the risk of flooding.
Tourism plays a major role in Brisbane's economy, being the third-most popular destination for international tourists after Sydney and Melbourne.
The annual Buddha Birth Day festival at Brisbane's South Bank is thought to be the world's largest, attracting over 200,000 visitors each year.
These events were accompanied by a scale of public expenditure, construction and development not previously seen in the state of Queensland.
31, a community station, also broadcasts in Brisbane.
Built with Brisbane tuff from the nearby Kangaroo Point Cliffs and sandstone from a quarry near today's Albion Park Racecourse, it is now the home of the Royal Historical Society of Brisbane.
These experimental TV broadcasts continued until World War II.
Brisbane has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: ''Cfa'') with hot, humid summers and dry moderately warm winters.
Brisbane has a substantial live theatre and music scene – both popular and classical.
The Moreton Bay area was initially explored by Matthew Flinders.
Since 13 May 2005, Brisbane has enforced water restrictions due to drought.
Australian Hockey League
The greater Brisbane region is on the coastal plain east of the Great Dividing Range.
The remainder of the metropolitan area falls into the LGAs of Logan City to the south, Moreton Bay Region in the northern suburbs, the City of Ipswich to the south west, Redland City to the south east on the bayside, with a small strip to the far west in the Scenic Rim Region.
Geographically, Australia TradeCoast occupies a large swathe of land around the airport and port.
The city also hosted events during the 1987 Rugby World Cup, 1992 Cricket World Cup, 2000 Sydney Olympics, the 2003 Rugby World Cup and hosted the Final of the 2008 Rugby League World Cup and will host along with the Gold Coast, some events for the 2018 Commonwealth Games.
Brisbane's CityCat high speed ferry service, popular with tourists and commuters, operates services along the Brisbane River between the University of Queensland and Apollo Road.
The Paniyiri festival at Musgrave Park (corner of Russell and Edmondstone Streets, South Brisbane) is an annual Greek cultural festival held over two days in May.
Like many western cities, Brisbane sprawls into the greater metropolitan area.
The Brisbane central business district (CBD) is the central hub for all public transport services with services focusing on Queen Street Bus Station, Roma Street and Central railway stations, and various city ferries wharves.
It is believed to have been first used in print in a 1996 edition of ''The Courier-Mail'', also about the time of the opening of the Treasury Casino in Brisbane and the popularisation of poker machines in Brisbane bars and clubs, a play on the popular gaming ground of Las Vegas.
In Addition, its size enables the gallery to exhibit particularly large shows&nbsp;— the Andy Warhol exhibition being the largest survey of his work in Australia.
Public transport is provided by bus, rail and ferry services.
He is also infamous for his extreme use of the Cat o' nine tails on convicts.
In the late 1950s an anonymous poet known as The Brisbane Bard generated much attention on the city which helped shake this stigma.
The Old Windmill was originally used for the grinding of grain and a punishment for the convicts who manually operated the grinding mill.
Suncorp Stadium (Lang Park)
Mount Petrie at  and the lower rises of Highgate Hill, Mount Ommaney, Stephens Mountain and Whites Hill are dotted across the city.
The airport is served by the Brisbane Airtrain, which provides a rail service from Brisbane's city centre to and from the airport.
The Port of Brisbane Motorway links the Gateway to the Port of Brisbane, while Inner City Bypass and the Riverside Expressway act as the inner ring freeway system to prevent motorists from travelling through the city's congested centre.
