Several Georgian squares were designed for the middle class as prosperity increased during the 18th century.
Edmund Burke, MP for the Bristol constituency for six years beginning in 1774, insisted that he was a member of parliament first and a representative of his constituents' interests second.
Although the docks' existence was once in jeopardy (since the area was seen as a derelict industrial site), the inaugural 1996 International Festival of the Sea held in and around the docks affirmed the area as a leisure asset of the city.
The MetroBus rapid transit scheme will run on both bus lanes and segregated guided busways on three routes; Ashton Vale to Temple Meads (AVTM), North Fringe to Hengrove and South Bristol Link (SBL).
The graffiti artist Banksy is believed to be from Bristol, and many of his works are on display in the city.
The club played at the Memorial Ground, which it shared with Bristol Rovers from 1996.
Commercial buildings such as the Exchange and Old Post Office from the 1740s are also included in the list.
Fishermen from Bristol (who had fished the Grand Banks of Newfoundland since the 15th century) began settling Newfoundland permanently in larger numbers during the 17th century, establishing colonies at Bristol's Hope and Cuper's Cove.
The city has 129 infant, junior and primary schools,
Temperatures at Long Ashton from 1959 to 2002 ranged from  in July 1976 to  in January 1982.
During the mid-19th century Bristol Byzantine, a style unique to the city, was developed, and several examples have survived.
By 1867, ships were getting larger and the meanders in the river Avon prevented boats over  from reaching the harbour, resulting in falling trade.
An election for the new post was held on 15 November 2012, and Independent candidate George Ferguson became Mayor of Bristol.
The 18th- and 19th-century portrait painter Thomas Lawrence, 19th-century architect Francis Greenway (designer of many of Sydney's first buildings) were born in the city.
Although Portishead Railway's passenger service was a casualty of the Beeching cuts, freight service to the Royal Portbury Dock was restored from 2000 to 2002 with a Strategic Rail Authority rail-freight grant.
A polytechnic university opened in 1969, giving the city a second institute of higher education which became the University of the West of England in 1992.
Women's-rights advocate Emmeline Pethick-Lawrence (1867–1954) was born in Bristol, and left-wing politician Tony Benn was MP for Bristol South East in 1950–1960 and 1963–83.
Three 17th-century town houses which were attached to the hospital were incorporated into model workers' flats in 1865, and converted to offices in 1978.
The stone bridge built in 1247 was replaced by the current bridge during the 1760s.
Bristol is home to the regional headquarters of BBC West and the BBC Natural History Unit.
Construction was due to begin in mid-2014, but in March 2015 the sale of the Memorial Stadium site (needed to finance the new stadium) was in jeopardy.
Bristol is unusual among major British towns and cities in its larger black than Asian population.
During the 20th century, Bristol's manufacturing activities expanded to include aircraft production at Filton by the Bristol Aeroplane Company and aircraft-engine manufacturing by Bristol Aero Engines (later Rolls-Royce) at Patchway.
The museum also has statues of King Edward I (moved from Arno's Court Triumphal Arch) and King Edward III (taken from Lawfords' Gate in the city walls when they were demolished about 1760), and 13th-century statues of Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester (builder of Bristol Castle) and Geoffrey de Montbray (who built the city's walls) from Bristol's Newgate.
These include nature documentaries, including ''The Blue Planet'' and ''Planet Earth''.
The second oldest is Bristol Cathedral and its associated Great Gatehouse.
The city has produced a number of scientists, including 19th-century chemist Humphry Davy (who worked in Hotwells).
The Bristol Old Vic, founded in 1946 as an offshoot of The Old Vic in London, occupies the 1766 Theatre Royal (607 seats) on King Street; the 150-seat New Vic (a studio-type theatre), and a foyer and bar in the adjacent Coopers' Hall (built in 1743).
The oldest Grade I listed buildings in Bristol are religious.
From the 13th to the 18th century, Bristol was among the top three English cities after London (with York and Norwich) in tax receipts.
Theatre Bristol is a partnership between the city council, Arts Council England and local residents to develop the city's theatre industry.
The city is a stronghold of drum and bass, with artists such as Roni Size's Mercury Prize-winning Reprazent, as DJ Krust and More Rockers.
17 secondary schools, and three learning centres.
Bristol is the birthplace of 18th-century poets Robert Southey and Thomas Chatterton.
Although the city council has included a light rail system in its local transport plan since 2000, it has not yet funded the project; Bristol was offered European Union funding for the system, but the Department for Transport did not provide the required additional funding.
Bristol was designated as England's first "cycling city" in 2008 and is home to Sustrans, the sustainable transport charity.
The pronoun "thee" is also used in the subject position ("What bist thee doing?
A third bomb-damaged church nearby, St Nicholas, has been restored and is a museum housing a 1756 William Hogarth triptych painted for the high altar of St Mary Redcliffe.
The city has two universities, the University of the West of England and the University of Bristol and a variety of artistic and sporting organisations and venues including the Royal West of England Academy, the Arnolfini, Spike Island, Ashton Gate and the Memorial Stadium.
Colin Pillinger was the planetary scientist behind the Beagle 2 project, and neuropsychologist Richard Gregory founded the Exploratory (a hands-on science centre which was the predecessor of At-Bristol).
Westbury Park declined the merger and folded, with many of its players joining Bristol.
The town incorporated neighbouring suburbs and became a county in 1373, the first town in England to be given this status.
The city received the 2015 European Green Capital Award, becoming the first UK city to receive this award.
Bristol's television productions include ''Points West'' for BBC West, Endemol productions such as ''Deal or No Deal'', and ''ITV News West Country'' for ITV West & Wales (formerly HTV West) and ITV Westcountry.
Bristol was surpassed by the rapid rise of Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham during the Industrial Revolution.
Publishers in the city have included 18th-century Bristolian Joseph Cottle, who helped introduce Romanticism by publishing the works of William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
These Atlantic voyages, also aimed at China, culminated in Venetian John Cabot's 1497 exploration of North America and subsequent expeditions to the New World, underwritten by Bristol merchants and King Henry VII until 1508.
In 2003 British Airways and Air France decided to discontinue Concorde flights, retiring the aircraft to locations (primarily museums) worldwide.
The Liberal Democrats lost a further seven seats.
Bristol was the place of exile for Diarmait Mac Murchada, the Irish king of Leinster, after being overthrown.
In 2010 they increased their representation to 38 seats, giving them a majority of 6.
From a population of about 330,000 in 1901, Bristol grew steadily during the 20th century, peaking at 428,089 in 1971.
Bristol has been a location for the Channel 4 comedy-drama ''Teachers'', the BBC drama ''Mistresses'', the E4 teen drama ''Skins'' and the BBC3 comedy-drama ''Being Human''; the latter moved to Barry after series two.
These provide architectural examples from the Georgian to the Regency style, with many fine terraces and villas facing the road, and at right angles to it.
Although the city is partially sheltered by the Mendip Hills, it is exposed to the Severn Estuary and the Bristol Channel.
After a section of north London, Bristol has England's second-highest number of independent-school places.
With a highly skilled workforce drawn from its universities, Bristol claims to have the largest cluster of computer chip designers and manufacturers outside Silicon Valley.
Major aerospace companies in Bristol include BAE Systems, a merger of Marconi Electronic Systems and BAe (the latter a merger of BAC, Hawker Siddeley and Scottish Aviation).
In 2011 they lost their majority, leading to a hung council.
Founded in 1140, the church became the seat of the bishop and cathedral of the new Diocese of Bristol in 1542.
Local support of fair trade was recognised in 2005, when Bristol became a Fairtrade zone.
Bristol Rugby (Rugby Union) and Gloucestershire County Cricket Club are also based in the city.
Nonconformist chapels include Buckingham Baptist Chapel and John Wesley's New Room in Broadmead.
During the 18th century, Bristol was Britain's second-busiest port; business was conducted in the trading area around The Exchange in Corn Street over bronze tables known as Nails.
The city borders the Unitary Authority areas of North Somerset and South Gloucestershire, with the historic cities of Bath and Gloucester to the south-east and north-east, respectively.
Thus, since wards do not have both councillors up for election at the same time, two-thirds of the wards participate in each election.
The Theatre Royal, a grade I listed building, is the oldest continuously operating theatre in England.
Bristol City and Bristol Rovers are the city's main football clubs.
Arrowsmith published the Victorian comedies ''Three Men in a Boat'' (by Jerome K. Jerome) and ''The Diary of a Nobody'' by George and Weedon Grossmith.
Bristol Aeroplane was known for their World War I Bristol Fighter and World War II Blenheim and Beaufighter planes.
Bristol has a long history of trade, originally exporting wool cloth and importing fish, wine, grain and dairy products; later imports were tobacco, tropical fruits and plantation goods.
One-third to one-half the population died in the Black Death of 1348–49, which checked population growth, and its population remained between 10,000 and 12,000 for most of the 15th and 16th centuries.
The 18th century saw an expansion of England's role in the Atlantic trade in Africans taken for slavery to the Americas.
Bristol also gained city status that year.
Bristol natives have a rhotic accent, in which the post-vocalic ''r'' in "car" and "card" is pronounced (unlike in Received Pronunciation).
Filton played a key role in the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner project during the 1960s.
Located in southern England, Bristol is one of the warmest cities in the UK with a mean annual temperature of approximately .
At 38, he was the youngest person to serve as Lord Mayor of Bristol and the first Muslim elected to the office.
The city centre has water transport operated by Bristol Ferry Boats, Bristol Packet Boat Trips and Number Seven Boat Trips, providing leisure and commuter service in the harbour.
Limited service to London Waterloo via Clapham Junction from Bristol Temple Meads is operated by South West Trains, and there are scheduled coach links to most major UK cities.
The county was expanded in 1835 to include suburbs such as Clifton, and it was named a county borough in 1889 when that designation was introduced.
Brycgstow (Old English "the place at the bridge") was founded by 1000; by about 1020, it was a trading centre with a mint producing silver pennies bearing its name.
The rivers Avon and Frome cut through the limestone to the underlying clay, creating Bristol's characteristically hilly landscape.
In 2007, Labour and the Conservatives united to defeat the Liberal Democrat administration; Labour ruled the council as a minority administration, with Helen Holland as council leader.
In 2010 PRS for Music called Bristol the UK's most musical city, based on the number of its members born there relative to the city's population.
One of the UK's most popular tourist destinations, Bristol was selected in 2009 as one of the world's top ten cities by international travel publishers Dorling Kindersley in their ''Eyewitness'' series of travel guides.
Riots broke out in 1793 and 1831; the first over the renewal of tolls on Bristol Bridge, and the second against the rejection of the second Reform Bill by the House of Lords.
The Seven Stars public house, where abolitionist Thomas Clarkson collected information on the slave trade, is still operating.
In Bristolese, as in French and German, the second-person singular was not used when speaking to a superior (except by the egalitarian Quakers).
A dialect of English, known as Bristolian, Bristolese, Brizzle or Bristle (after the publication of Derek Robson's "Krek Waiters peak Bristle") is spoken by longtime residents, who are known as Bristolians.
Bristol's modern economy is built on the creative media, electronics and aerospace industries, and the city-centre docks have been redeveloped as centres of heritage and culture.
On a ship out of Bristol in 1497 John Cabot, a Venetian, became the first European since the Vikings to land on mainland North America.
Others include the Bristol Academy, The Fleece, The Croft, the Exchange, Fiddlers, the Victoria Rooms, Trinity Centre, St George's Bristol and several pubs, from the jazz-oriented The Old Duke to rock at the Fleece and Firkin and indie bands at the Louisiana.
Bristol's location on the west side of Great Britain gave its ships an advantage in sailing to and from the New World, and the city's merchants made the most of it.
Cecil Frank Powell was the Melvill Wills Professor of Physics at the University of Bristol when he received the 1950 Nobel Prize for, among other discoveries, his photographic method of studying nuclear processes.
The Bristol merchants subsequently played a prominent role in funding Richard Strongbow de Clare and the Norman invasion of Ireland.
The Bristol Old Vic Theatre School (which originated in King Street) is a separate company, and the Bristol Hippodrome is a 1,951-seat theatre for national touring productions.
The new railway replaced the Kennet and Avon Canal, which had fully opened in 1810 as the main route for the transport of goods between Bristol and London.
The term Greater Bristol, used by the Government Office of the South West (now abolished), the Office for National Statistics and others, refers to the city and portions of the three neighbouring local authoritiesBath and North East Somerset, North Somerset and South Gloucestershirean area sometimes called the "former Avon area" or the West of England Partnership (WEP) area.
In February 2009, the Labour group resigned and the Liberal Democrats took office with a minority administration.
Several organisations support Bristol theatre; the Residence (an artist-led community) provides office, social and rehearsal space for theatre and performance companies, and Equity has a branch in the city.
To the west the Avon cuts through the limestone to form the Avon Gorge, aided by glacial meltwater after the last ice age.
Councillor Faruk Choudhury was selected by his fellow councillors for the position in 2013.
Since the 13th century, the rivers have been modified for docks; during the 1240s, the Frome was diverted into a deep, man-made channel (known as Saint Augustine's Reach) which flowed into the River Avon.
Whether this is a broad ''l'' or a ''w'' is a subject of debate, with "area" pronounced "areal" or "areaw".
Surviving elements of the fortifications and castle date to the medieval period, and the Church of St James dates back to the 12th century.
During the English Civil War in the 1640s the city was occupied by Royalists, who built the Royal Fort House on the site of an earlier Parliamentarian stronghold.
Other smaller theatres include the Tobacco Factory, QEH, the Redgrave Theatre at Clifton College and the Alma Tavern.
MetroBus services are expected to start in 2017.
William Wordsworth spent time in Bristol, where Joseph Cottle published ''Lyrical Ballads'' in 1798.
Bristol has teams representing all the major national sports.
In the third side of the triangle, plantation goods such as sugar, tobacco, rum, rice, cotton and a few slaves (sold to the aristocracy as house servants) returned across the Atlantic.
Bristol is home to ''YouTube'' video producers The Yogscast, with founders Simon Lane and Lewis Brindley moving their operations from Reading to Bristol in 2012.
The Bristol Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone, focused on creative, high-tech and low-carbon industries around Bristol Temple Meads railway station, was announced in 2011 and launched the following year.
Another aviation company in the city is Cameron Balloons, who manufacture hot air balloons; each August the city hosts the Bristol International Balloon Fiesta, one of Europe's largest hot-air balloon festivals.
The most prominent of Bristol's smaller rugby clubs include Clifton Rugby, Dings Crusaders, and Cleve.
Summers are warm and drier, with variable sunshine, rain and clouds, and spring weather is unsettled.
Although large cities in general experience an urban heat island effect, with warmer temperatures than their surrounding rural areas, this phenomenon is minimal in Bristol.
The Avon flows from Bath in the east, through flood plains and areas which were marshes before the city's growth.
Bristol is the only big city whose wealth per capita is higher than that of Britain as a whole.
Councillors are elected in thirds, with elections held in three years out of every four-year period.
Non-league clubs include Mangotsfield United, Bristol Manor Farm and Brislington.
Bristol is both a city and a county, since Edward III granted it a county charter in 1373.
Both are operated by Bristol Museums, Galleries and Archives, which also runs three historic housesthe Tudor Red Lodge, the Georgian House and Blaise Castle Houseand Bristol Record Office.
Bristol City council consists of 70 councillors representing 35 wards, with two per ward serving four-year terms.
Bristol City were promoted to the second tier of English football in 2007, losing to Hull City in the playoff for promotion to the Premier League that season.
The 1980 St. Pauls riot protested against racism and police harassment and showed mounting dissatisfaction with the social and economic circumstances of the city's Afro-Caribbean residents.
The ending of "Bristol" is another example of the Bristol ''l''.
The Watershed Media Centre and Arnolfini gallery (both in dockside warehouses) exhibit contemporary art, photography and cinema, and the city's oldest gallery is at the Royal West of England Academy in Clifton.
The Atlantic Ocean influences Bristol's weather, keeping its average temperature above freezing throughout the year, but winter frosts are frequent and snow occasionally falls from early November to late April.
The Lord Mayor of Bristol, not to be confused with the Mayor of Bristol, is a figurehead elected each May by the city council.
The aerospace industry remains a major sector of the local economy.
Bristol's road infrastructure changed dramatically during the 1960s and 1970s with the development of the M4 and M5 motorways, which meet at the Almondsbury Interchange just north of the city and link Bristol with London (M4 eastbound), Swansea (M4 westbound across the Severn Estuary), Exeter (M5 southbound) and Birmingham (M5 northbound).
Bristol's theatre scene features several companies as well as the Old Vic, including Show of Strength, Shakespeare at the Tobacco Factory and Travelling Light.
Bristol's March 2007 unemployment rate was 4.8%, compared with four percent for South West England and the national average of 5.5%.
Bristol received a royal charter in 1155 and was in Gloucestershire until 1373, when it became a county.
People from Bristol are known as Bristolians.
Another gorge, cut by the Hazel Brook (which flows into the River Trym), crosses the Blaise Castle estate in northern Bristol.
The city was associated with Victorian engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel, who designed the Great Western Railway between Bristol and London Paddington, two pioneering Bristol-built oceangoing steamships ( and ), and the Clifton Suspension Bridge.
In 2005 Bristol was named by the UK government one of England's six science cities.
The  Urban Enterprise Zone has streamlined planning procedures and reduced business rates.
The Diocese of Bristol had undergone several boundary changes by 1897 when it was "reconstituted" into the configuration which has lasted into the 21st century.
Tobacco importing and cigarette manufacturing have ceased, but the importation of wine and spirits continues.
The Bristol Flyers basketball team have competed in the British Basketball League, the UK's premier professional basketball league, since 2014.
By 1670 the city had 6,000tons of shipping (of which half was imported tobacco), and by the late 17th and early 18th centuries shipping played a significant role in the slave trade.
The city is divided into Bristol West, East, South and North West.
Major imports are motor vehicles, grain, timber, produce and petroleum products.
The runway, terminal and other facilities at Bristol Airport (BRS), Lulsgate, have been upgraded since 2001.
Bristol has a thriving current and historical arts scene.
The port developed in the 11th century around the confluence of the Rivers Frome and Avon, adjacent to Bristol Bridge just outside the town walls.
Bristol City, formed in 1897, were Division One runners-up in 1907 and lost the FA Cup final in 1909.
In 2014 ''The Sunday Times'' named it as the best city in Britain in which to live.
It was subsequently added to in Georgian times and restored in the early 20th century.
By the 14th century Bristol, York and Norwich were England's largest medieval towns after London.
The ONS has defined a Bristol Urban Area, which includes Kingswood, Mangotsfield, Stoke Gifford, Winterbourne, Frampton Cotterell, Almondsbury and Easton in Gordano.
The city has eleven mosques, several Buddhist meditation centres, a Hindu temple, Reform and Orthodox-Jewish synagogues and four Sikh temples.
Bristol has 51 Grade I, 500 Grade II* and over 3,800 Grade II listed buildings in a variety of architectural styles, from medieval to modern.
Bristol Aztecs play in Britain's premier American football competition, the BAFA National Leagues.
Secular buildings include The Red Lodge, built in 1580 for John Yonge as a lodge for a larger house that once stood on the site of the present Colston Hall.
The rebuilding of Bristol city centre was characterised by 1960s and 1970s skyscrapers, mid-century modern architecture and road improvements.
The original central market area, near the bridge and castle, is now a park containing two bombed churches and fragments of the castle.
The Bristol Mercury was published from 1716 and 1909.
The wider region has one of the biggest aerospace hubs in the UK, centred on Airbus, Rolls-Royce and GKN at Filton airfield.
By 1067 Brycgstow was a well-fortified ''burh'', and that year the townsmen beat off a raiding party from Ireland led by three of Harold Godwinson's sons.
Bristol was heavily damaged by Luftwaffe raids during World War II; about 1,300 people living or working in the city were killed and nearly 100,000 buildings were damaged, at least 3,000 beyond repair.
Bristol has two daily newspapers, the ''Western Daily Press'' and the ''Bristol Post''; a weekly free newspaper, the ''Bristol Observer''; and a Bristol edition of the free ''Metro'' newspaper.
The city's economy also relies on the aerospace, defence, media, information technology, financial services and tourism industries.
St Bartholomew's Hospital is a 12th-century town house which was incorporated into a monastery hospital founded in 1240 by Sir John la Warr, 2nd Baron De La Warr (), and became Bristol Grammar School from 1532 to 1767, and then Queen Elizabeth's Hospital 1767–1847.
An 1804–09 plan to improve the city's port with a floating harbour designed by William Jessop was a costly error, requiring high harbour fees.
Bristol is one of the eight largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group, and is ranked as a gamma world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, the fourth highest ranked English city.
Supported by new industry and growing commerce, Bristol's population (66,000 in 1801), quintupled during the 19th century, resulting in the creation of new suburbs such as Clifton and Cotham.
In 2008 the city was a finalist for the 2008 European Capital of Culture, although the title was awarded to Liverpool.
Three park and ride sites serve Bristol.
Cycling trips have increased by 21% from 2001 to 2005.
And if couldst, 'ouldn't, 'ouldst?"
Greater Bristol does not include Bath or Weston-super-Mare, which are included in the WEP area.
Southey (born on Wine Street in 1774) and his friend, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, married the Fricker sisters from the city.
Athletic clubs in Bristol include Bristol and West AC, Bitton Road Runners and Westbury Harriers.
The Bristol International Balloon Fiesta, a major UK hot-air ballooning event, is held each summer at Ashton Court.
The 18th-century Kings Weston House, in northern Bristol, was designed by John Vanbrugh and is the only Vanbrugh building in any UK city outside London.
The church was described by Queen Elizabeth I as "the fairest, goodliest, and most famous parish church in England."
Until recently Bristolese was characterised by retention of the second-person singular, as in the doggerel "Cassn't see what bist looking at?
Beginning in the early 1480s, the Bristol Society of Merchant Venturers sponsored exploration of the North Atlantic in search of trading opportunities.
Bristol Academy Women's Football Club is based at South Gloucestershire and Stroud College.
Since the late 1970s Bristol has been home to bands combining punk, funk, dub and political consciousness, and trip hop and Bristol Sound artists such as Tricky, Portishead and Massive Attack; the list of bands from Bristol is extensive.
The city is also home to Bristol Rugby, formed in 1888 as Bristol Football Club by the merger of the Carlton club with rival Redland Park.
Some household slaves were baptised in the hope this would mean their freedom in England.
Data collection at these locations ended in 2002 and 2001, respectively, and Filton Airfield is currently the nearest weather station to the city.
Public transport in the city consists primarily of a FirstGroup (formerly the Bristol Omnibus Company) bus network.
This music is part of the Bristol urban-culture scene which received international media attention during the 1990s.
'''Bristol''' () is a city, unitary authority area and county in South West England with an estimated population of 449,300 in 2016.
Bristol has two principal railway stations.
The club is arguably Bristol's most successful, achieving a period of success between 1999 and 2006 when it won nine trophies and became the most formidable one-day outfit in England, including winning a "double double" in 1999 and 2000 (both the Benson and Hedges Cup and the C&G Trophy), and the Sunday League in 2000.
Bristol Temple Meads (near the city centre) has First Great Western service which includes high-speed trains to London Paddington station  and local, regional and CrossCountry trains.
The M4 motorway connects the city on an east-west axis from London to West Wales, and the M5 is a north–south west axis from Birmingham to Exeter.
Under Norman rule, the town had one of the strongest castles in southern England.
All are owned by the Trinity Mirror Group.
Nevertheless, in 1961 John Betjeman called Bristol "the most beautiful, interesting and distinguished city in England".
In 1963 the Bristol Bus Boycott, following the Bristol Omnibus Company's refusal to hire black drivers and conductors, drove the passage of the UK's 1965 Race Relations Act.
On 3 May 2012, Bristol held a referendum on the question of a directly elected mayor replacing one elected by the council.
