The Government of Ireland does not recognise or use the term and its embassy in London discourages its use.
Much of Brittonic-controlled Britain was conquered by the Roman Empire from AD 43.
The region was re-inhabited after the last glacial period of Quaternary glaciation, by 12,000 BC when Great Britain was still a peninsula of the European continent.
The original records have been lost; however, later writings, e.g.
They exercise constitutional rights of self-government and judicial independence; responsibility for international representation rests largely upon the UK (in consultation with the respective governments); and responsibility for defence is reserved by the UK.
Wild boar have also been reintroduced to parts of southern England, following escapes from boar farms and illegal releases.
Another body established under the Good Friday Agreement, the British–Irish Council, is made up of all of the states and territories of the British Isles.
There are a number of major rivers within the British Isles.
Over 200 species of bird reside permanently and another 200 migrate.
The Crown Dependencies are not a part of the EU however do participate in certain aspects that were negotiated as a part of the UK's accession to the EU.
The largest of the other islands are to be found in the Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland to the north, Anglesey and the Isle of Man between Great Britain and Ireland, and the Channel Islands near the coast of France.
Many globally popular sports had modern rules codified in the British Isles, including golf, association football, cricket, rugby, snooker and darts, as well as many minor sports such as croquet, bowls, pitch and putt, water polo and handball.
Natural forests in Ireland are mainly oak, ash, wych elm, birch and pine.
These orogenic belts form a complex geology that records a huge and varied span of Earth's history.
Two sovereign states are located on the islands: Ireland (which covers roughly five-sixths of the island with the same name) and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Romans expanded their civilisation to control southern Great Britain but were impeded in advancing any further, building Hadrian's Wall to mark the northern frontier of their empire in 122 AD.
Mass migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the distribution of the islands' population and culture throughout the world and a rapid de-population of Ireland in the second half of the 19th century.
While this is organised separately in different national associations, leagues and national teams, even within the UK, it is a common passion in all parts of the islands.
Fish are abundant in the rivers and lakes, in particular salmon, trout, perch and pike.
During the Silurian period the north-western regions collided with the south-east, which had been part of a separate continental landmass.
A similar situation existed in the Principality of Wales, which was slowly being annexed into the Kingdom of England by a series of laws.
There are more than 21,000 species of insects.
The linguistic heritage of the British Isles is rich, with twelve languages from six groups across four branches of the Indo-European family.
A number of sports are popular throughout the British Isles, the most prominent of which is association football.
Although, the colonies of North America that would become the United States of America were lost by the start of the 19th century, the British Empire expanded rapidly elsewhere.
The population of England rose rapidly during the 19th and 20th centuries whereas the populations of Scotland and Wales have shown little increase during the 20th century, with the population of Scotland remaining unchanged since 1951.
By the Late Middle Ages, Great Britain was separated into the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.
This led to a landscape which was long dominated by temperate rainforest, although human activity has since cleared the vast majority of forest cover.
However, since the Great Irish Famine, the population of Ireland has fallen to less than one tenth of the population of the British Isles.
The British Isles also include three Crown Dependencies: the Isle of Man and, by tradition, the Bailiwick of Jersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey in the Channel Islands, although the latter are not physically a part of the archipelago.
The first Anglo-Saxons arrived as Roman power waned in the 5th century and eventually dominated the bulk of what is now England.
Ireland and the United Kingdom are both part of the European Union (EU).
In elsewhere on Great Britain and on Ireland, high density of population is limited to areas around, or close to, a few large cities.
Strabo used Βρεττανική (''Brettanike''), and Marcian of Heraclea, in his ''Periplus maris exteri'', used αἱ Πρεττανικαί νῆσοι (''the Prettanic Isles'') to refer to the islands.
Reports on its findings are presented to the Governments of Ireland and the United Kingdom.
Of particular note was the Caledonian Orogeny during the Ordovician Period, c. 488–444 Ma and early Silurian period, when the craton Baltica collided with the terrane Avalonia to form the mountains and hills in northern Britain and Ireland.
The islands enjoy a mild climate and varied soils, giving rise to a diverse pattern of vegetation.
All native flora and fauna in Ireland is made up of species that migrated from elsewhere in Europe, and Great Britain in particular.
The subsequent Norman conquest of England in 1066 and the later Angevin partial conquest of Ireland from 1169 led to the imposition of a new Norman ruling elite across much of Britain and parts of Ireland.
Clearing began around 6000 BC and accelerated in medieval times.
The term ''British Isles'' is controversial in Ireland, where there are objections to its usage due to the association of the word ''British'' with Ireland.
The British monarch is the head of state for the United Kingdom while in the Republic of Ireland the head of state is the President of Ireland.
Neither the United Kingdom or Ireland are part of the Schengen area, that allow passport-free travel between EU members states.
In addition to this, voters in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland return members to a parliament in Edinburgh and to assemblies in Cardiff and Belfast respectively.
This pattern is also true for birds and insects.
Few species of reptiles or amphibians are found in Great Britain or Ireland.
However, since the partition of Ireland, an informal free-travel area had existed across the region.
In the 1st century BC, Diodorus Siculus has ''Prettanikē nēsos'', "the British Island", and ''Prettanoi'', "the Britons".
Further collisions caused the Variscan orogeny in the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, forming the hills of Munster, southwest England, and southern Wales.
The '''British Isles''' are a group of islands off the north-western coast of continental Europe that consist of the islands of Great Britain, Ireland and over six thousand smaller isles.
Today, this name is seen by some as carrying imperialist overtones although it is still commonly used.
The expansion of the British Empire and migrations following the Irish Famine and Highland Clearances resulted in the distribution of the islands' population and culture throughout the world and a rapid de-population of Ireland in the second half of the 19th century.
The idea of building a tunnel under the Irish Sea has been raised since 1895, when it was first investigated.
Baltica formed roughly the northwestern half of Ireland and Scotland.
England however was slowly conquered around the turn of the first millennium AD, and eventually became a feudal possession of Denmark.
The North Atlantic Drift ("Gulf Stream") which flows from the Gulf of Mexico brings with it significant moisture and raises temperatures 11&nbsp;°C (20&nbsp;°F) above the global average for the islands' latitudes.
The Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining outside of the United Kingdom but with their ultimate good governance being the responsibility of the British Crown (effectively the British government).
As this ended, the central Irish Sea was deglaciated and the English Channel flooded, with sea levels rising to current levels some 4,000 to 5,000 years ago, leaving the British Isles in their current form.
Leading on from developments in the British–Irish Council, the chair of the British–Irish Inter-Parliamentary Assembly, Niall Blaney, has suggested that the body should shadow the British–Irish Council's work.
Northern Ireland is a part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, usually shortened to simply ''the United Kingdom'', which governs the remainder of the archipelago with the exception of the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands.
The largest freshwater body in Great Britain (by area) is Loch Lomond at , and Loch Ness, by volume whilst Loch Morar is the deepest freshwater body in the British Isles, with a maximum depth of .
Winters are cool and wet, with summers mild and also wet.
As a result, '''Britain and Ireland''' is used as an alternative description, and '''Atlantic Archipelago''' has had limited use among a minority in academia, while ''British Isles'' is still commonly employed.
(In the context of Northern Ireland, unionists are those who want Northern Ireland to remain a part of the United Kingdom and nationalists are those who want Northern Ireland join with the rest of Ireland.)
The Greco-Egyptian scientist Claudius Ptolemy referred to the larger island as ''great Britain'' (''μεγάλης Βρεττανίας - megális Brettanias'') and to Ireland as ''little Britain'' (''μικρής Βρεττανίας - mikris Brettanias'') in his work ''Almagest'' (147–148 AD).
Ireland is to the west and covers .
A cant, called Shelta, is spoken by Irish Travellers, often as a means to conceal meaning from those outside the group.
Hiberni (Ireland), Pictish (northern Britain) and Britons (southern Britain) tribes, all speaking Insular Celtic, inhabited the islands at the beginning of the 1st millennium AD.
The river Severn at  is the longest in Great Britain.
Farmland hosts a variety of semi-natural vegetation of grasses and flowering plants.
In general, Great Britain has slightly more variation and native wild life, with weasels, polecats, wildcats, most shrews, moles, water voles, roe deer and common toads also being absent from Ireland.
Ireland play as a united team, represented by players from both Northern Ireland and the Republic.
The earliest known use of the phrase ''Brytish Iles'' in the English language is dated 1577 in a work by John Dee.
Many rivers contain otters and seals are common on coasts.
However, some species such as red deer are protected.
The United Kingdom is made up of four constituent parts: England, Scotland and Wales, forming Great Britain, and Northern Ireland in the north-east of the island of Ireland.
From 14,000 to 10,000 years ago, as the ice melted, sea levels rose separating Ireland from Great Britain and also creating the Isle of Man.
As with most of Europe, prehistoric Britain and Ireland were covered with forest and swamp.
Irish newspapers are also available in the UK, and Irish state and private television is widely available in Northern Ireland.
By the 18th century, most of Britain's forests were consumed for shipbuilding or manufacturing charcoal and the nation was forced to import lumber from Scandinavia, North America, and the Baltic.
The Insular Celtic languages of the Goidelic sub-group (Irish, Manx and Scottish Gaelic) and the Brittonic sub-group (Cornish, Welsh and Breton, spoken in north-western France) are the only remaining Celtic languages—the last of their continental relations becoming extinct before the 7th century.
There are two sovereign states in the isles: Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Though initially intended to be kept as an independent kingdom, the failure of the Irish High King to ensure the terms of the Treaty of Windsor led Henry II, as King of England, to rule as effective monarch under the title of Lord of Ireland.
The Mercury Music Prize is handed out every year to the best album from a British or Irish musician or group.
A proposal in 2007, estimated the cost of building a bridge from County Antrim in Northern Ireland to Galloway in Scotland at £3.5bn (€5bn).
Great Britain is to the east and covers .
From 1979 onwards this was expanded to include the whole of Europe.
The United Kingdom and Ireland have separate media, although British television, newspapers and magazines are widely available in Ireland, giving people in Ireland a high level of familiarity with cultural matters in the United Kingdom.
Most of Ireland seceded from the United Kingdom after the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Anglo-Irish Treaty (1919–1922), with the six counties that formed Northern Ireland remaining as an autonomous region of the UK.
Nonetheless, British Isles is still the most widely accepted term for the archipelago.
All parts of the United Kingdom return members to parliament in London.
It is likely that Ireland became settled by sea after it had already become an island.
Other names used to describe the islands include the ''Anglo-Celtic Isles'', ''Atlantic archipelago'', ''British-Irish Isles'', ''Britain and Ireland'', ''UK and Ireland'', and ''British Isles and Ireland''.
Along these lines, the inhabitants of the islands were called the Πρεττανοί (''Priteni'' or ''Pretani'').
Viking invasions began in the 9th century, followed by more permanent settlements, particularly along the east coast of Ireland, the west coast of modern-day Scotland and the Isle of Man.
About two to four millennia later, Great Britain became separated from the mainland.
The only window when this could have occurred was between the end of the last Ice Age (about 12,000 years ago) and when the land bridge connecting the two islands was flooded by sea (about 8,000 years ago).
In 2008, a UK Ministry of Justice report investigating how to strengthen the British sense of citizenship proposed to end this arrangement arguing that, "the right to vote is one of the hallmarks of the political status of citizens; it is not a means of expressing closeness between countries."
The RNLI, the life boats service, is also organised throughout the islands as a whole, covering the waters of the United Kingdom, Ireland, the Isle of Man, and the Channel Islands.
The famine, which caused a century-long population decline, drastically reduced the Irish population and permanently altered the demographic make-up of the British Isles.
The Council does not have executive powers but meets biannually to discuss issues of mutual importance.
The Norn language of Orkney and Shetland became extinct around 1880.
Ireland, sometimes called ''the Republic of Ireland'', governs five sixths of the island of Ireland, with the remainder of the island forming Northern Ireland.
Most of Ireland seceded from the United Kingdom after the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Anglo-Irish Treaty (1919–1922), with six counties remaining in the UK as Northern Ireland.
Following an attempted republican revolution in Ireland in 1798, the Kingdoms of Ireland and Great Britain were unified in 1801, creating the United Kingdom.
The Man Booker Prize is awarded to authors from the Commonwealth of Nations and Ireland.
The west coasts of Ireland and Scotland that directly face the Atlantic Ocean are generally characterised by long peninsulas, and headlands and bays; the internal and eastern coasts are "smoother".
Domestic animals include the Connemara pony, Shetland pony, English Mastiff, Irish wolfhound and many varieties of cattle and sheep.
Most forest land in Ireland is maintained by state forestation programmes.
In his later work, ''Geography'' (c. 150 AD), he gave these islands the names ''Alwion'', ''Iwernia'', and ''Mona'' (the Isle of Man), suggesting these may have been names of the individual islands not known to him at the time of writing ''Almagest''.
The islands have been shaped by numerous glaciations during the Quaternary Period, the most recent being the Devensian.
For example, citizens of Northern Ireland are entitled to the choice of Irish or British citizenship or both and the Governments of Ireland and the United Kingdom consult on matters not devolved to the Northern Ireland Executive.
By the Late Middle Ages, Great Britain was separated into the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, while control in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms, Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland, soon restricted only to The Pale.
Since then the role and scope of the body has been expanded to include representatives from the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for Wales, the Northern Ireland Assembly, the States of Jersey, the States of Guernsey and the High Court of Tynwald (Isle of Man).
Great Britain became an island by 5600 BC.
There are about 136 permanently inhabited islands in the group, the largest two being Great Britain and Ireland.
For example, the Costa Book Awards are awarded to authors resident in the UK or Ireland.
A century later it would cover one third of the globe.
Other small mammals, such as rabbits, foxes, badgers, hares, hedgehogs, and stoats, are very common and the European beaver has been reintroduced in parts of Scotland.
Poverty in the United Kingdom remained desperate however and industrialisation in England led to terrible condition for the working class.
Power in Ireland fluxed between Gaelic kingdoms, Hiberno-Norman lords and the English-dominated Lordship of Ireland.
The demographics of the British Isles today are characterised by a generally high density of population in England, which accounts for almost 80% of the total population of the islands.
Other EU nationals may only vote in local and European Parliament elections while resident in either the UK or Ireland.
Ireland for most of its history comprised a population proportionate to its land area (about one third of the total population).
Reciprocal arrangements allow British and Irish citizens full voting rights in the two states.
A rail tunnel was proposed in 1997 on a different route, between Dublin and Holyhead, by British engineering firm Symonds.
These national rugby teams play each other each year for the Triple Crown as part of the Six Nations Championship.
The British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly () predates the British–Irish Council and was established in 1990.
s of a similar nature.
These arrangements were made following the 1998 Good Friday Agreement.
At the time of the Roman Empire, about two thousand years ago, various tribes, which spoke Celtic dialects of the Insular Celtic group, were inhabiting the islands.
Several potential Irish Sea tunnel projects have been proposed, most recently the ''Tusker Tunnel'' between the ports of Rosslare and Fishguard proposed by The Institute of Engineers of Ireland in 2004.
Most Atlantic depressions pass to the north of the islands, combined with the general westerly circulation and interactions with the landmass, this imposes an east-west variation in climate.
The name ''Albion'' appears to have fallen out of use sometime after the Roman conquest of Great Britain, after which ''Britain'' became the more commonplace name for the island called Great Britain.
Other major populations centres include Greater Manchester Urban Area (2.4&nbsp;million), West Midlands conurbation (2.4&nbsp;million), West Yorkshire Urban Area (1.6&nbsp;million) in England, Greater Glasgow (1.2&nbsp;million) in Scotland and Greater Dublin Area (1.1&nbsp;million) in Ireland.
The Isle of Man and the two states of the Channel Islands, Jersey and Guernsey, are known as the Crown Dependencies.
The oldest rocks in the group are in the north west of Scotland, Ireland and North Wales and are 2,700 million years old.
Governance in the norm is by majority rule, however, Northern Ireland uses a system of power sharing whereby unionists and nationalists share executive posts proportionately and where the assent of both groups are required for the Northern Ireland Assembly to make certain decisions.
Common types are the common chaffinch, common blackbird, house sparrow and common starling; all small birds.
A century later the marriage of the future Henry II of England to Eleanor of Aquitaine created the Angevin Empire, partially under the French Crown.
During the February 2008 meeting of the British–Irish Council, it was agreed to set up a standing secretariat that would serve as a permanent 'civil service' for the Council.
The islands are at relatively low altitudes, with central Ireland and southern Great Britain particularly low lying: the lowest point in the islands is Holme, Cambridgeshire at .
Ireland, which had been held by the King of England as Lord of Ireland, but which strictly speaking had been a feudal possession of the Pope since the Norman invasion was declared a separate kingdom in personal union with England.
This title was granted to his younger son but when Henry's heir unexpectedly died the title of King of England and Lord of Ireland became entwined in one person.
A few cultural events are organised for the island group as a whole.
Other mountainous areas include Wales and parts of Ireland, however only seven peaks in these areas reach above .
The Channel Tunnel, opened in 1994, links Great Britain to France and is the second-longest rail tunnel in the world.
The isles have a temperate marine climate.
Beech and lime, though not native to Ireland, are also common there.
For example the Samaritans, which is deliberately organised without regard to national boundaries on the basis that a service which is not political or religious should not recognise sectarian or political divisions.
Originally it comprised 25 members of the Oireachtas, the Irish parliament, and 25 members of the parliament of the United Kingdom, with the purpose of building mutual understanding between members of both legislatures.
Only three snakes are native to Great Britain: the common European adder, the grass snake and the smooth snake; none are native to Ireland.
In the United Kingdom, these pre-date European Union law, and in both jurisdictions go further than that required by European Union law.
Though the Vikings were eventually neutralised in Ireland, their influence remained in the cities of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Wexford.
The Kingdoms of England and Scotland were unified in 1707 creating the Kingdom of Great Britain.
In addition, some civil bodies are organised throughout the islands as a whole.
The topography of the islands is modest in scale by global standards.
The British Isles lie at the juncture of several regions with past episodes of tectonic mountain building.
The 1603 Union of the Crowns, Acts of Union 1707 and Acts of Union 1800 attempted to consolidate Britain and Ireland into a single political unit, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, with the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands remaining as Crown Dependencies.
Large birds are declining in number, except for those kept for game such as pheasant, partridge, and red grouse.
Many larger animals, such as wolf, bear and the European elk are today extinct.
At the invitation of a provincial king and under the authority of Pope Adrian IV (the only Englishman to be elected pope), the Angevins invaded Ireland in 1169.
The Ryder Cup in golf was originally played between a United States team and a team representing Great Britain and Ireland.
Animal and plant life is similar to that of the northwestern European continent.
The British and Irish Lions is a team chosen from each national team and undertakes tours of the southern hemisphere rugby playing nations every four years.
Exceptions to this are presidential elections and constitutional referendums in the Republic of Ireland, for which there is no comparable franchise in the other states.
Sea fish include dogfish, cod, sole, pollock and bass, as well as mussels, crab and oysters along the coast.
London Heathrow Airport is Europe's busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic and the Dublin-London route was once the busiest air route in Europe, and it remains the busiest route out of Heathrow.
The largest urban area by far is the Greater London Urban Area with 9 million inhabitants.
Viking invasions began in the 9th century, followed by more permanent settlements and political change—particularly in England.
The shift from the "P" of ''Pretannia'' to the "B" of ''Britannia'' by the Romans occurred during the time of Julius Caesar.
The North Atlantic Drift brings significant moisture and raises temperatures 11&nbsp;°C (20&nbsp;°F) above the global average for the latitude.
However, English, sometimes in the form of Scots, is the dominant language, with few monoglots remaining in the other languages of the region.
The longest is the Shannon in Ireland at .
Over the last 500&nbsp;million years the land that forms the islands has drifted northwest from around 30°S, crossing the equator around 370&nbsp;million years ago to reach its present northern latitude.
At that time, Ireland was populated by a people known as Hiberni, the northern third or so of Great Britain by a people known as Picts and the southern two thirds by Britons.
Avienus's ''Ora maritima'', that quoted from the Massaliote Periplus (6th century BC) and from Pytheas's ''On the Ocean'' (circa 325–320 BC) have survived.
In 1997, this area required formal recognition during the course of negotiations for the Amsterdam Treaty of the European Union and is now known as the Common Travel Area.
Ice covered almost all of what is now Scotland, most of Ireland and Wales, and the hills of northern England.
The climate is temperate marine, with mild winters and warm summers.
Owing to political and national associations with the word ''British'', the Government of Ireland does not use the term ''British Isles'' and in documents drawn up jointly between the British and Irish governments, the archipelago is referred to simply as "these islands".
Notable exceptions include the Kerry slug and certain species of wood lice native to Ireland but not Great Britain.
At the end of the last ice age, what are now the British Isles were joined to the European mainland as a mass of land extending north west from the modern-day northern coastline of France, Belgium and the Netherlands.
The earliest known references to the islands as a group appeared in the writings of sea-farers from the ancient Greek colony of Massalia.
There are however, fewer numbers of species, with Ireland having even less.
The remnants of the Duchy of Normandy, which conquered England, remain associated to the English Crown as the Channel Islands to this day.
Rugby union is also widely enjoyed across the islands with four national teams from England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
The Northern Ireland Peace Process has led to a number of unusual arrangements between the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and the United Kingdom.
Ireland, which became an island by 12,000 BC, was not inhabited until after 8000 BC.
In Scotland, pine and birch are most common.
The Scottish Highlands in the northern part of Great Britain are mountainous, with Ben Nevis being the highest point on the islands at .
Britain probably became repopulated with people before the ice age ended and certainly before it became separated from the mainland.
In 1534, King Henry VIII, at first having been a strong defender of Roman Catholicism in the face of the Reformation, separated from the Roman Church after failing to secure a divorce from the Pope.
Historians today, though not in absolute agreement, largely agree that these Greek and Latin names were probably drawn from native Celtic-language names for the archipelago.
During the course of the 15th century, the Crown of England would assert a claim to the Crown of France, thereby also releasing the King of England as from being vassal of the King of France.
Oak, elm, ash and beech are amongst the most common trees in England.
Woods, hedgerows, mountain slopes and marshes host heather, wild grasses, gorse and bracken.
Situated in the North Atlantic, the islands have a total area of approximately 315,159&nbsp;km2, and a combined population of just under 70 million.
His response was to place the King of England as "the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England", thereby removing the authority of the Pope from the affairs of the English Church.
The Norman languages of Guernésiais, Jèrriais and Sarkese spoken in the Channel Islands are similar to French.
