Forestry drew workers to the lush temperate rainforests of the coast, which was also the locus of a growing fishery.
In the post-war environment the government initiated a series of infrastructure projects, notably the completion of Highway 97 north of Prince George to the Peace River Block, a section called the John Hart Highway and also public hospital insurance.
Because of pressure from veterans, prohibition was quickly relaxed so that the "soldier and the working man" could enjoy a drink, but widespread unemployment among veterans was hardened by many of the available jobs being taken by European immigrants and disgruntled veterans organized a range of "soldier parties" to represent their interests, variously named Soldier-Farmer, Soldier-Labour, and Farmer-Labour Parties.
Theses indigenous populations evolved over the next 5,000 years across a large area, into many different groups with shared traditions and customs.
British Columbia has also been a significant destination for internal Canadian migrants.
The intent of the ballot, as campaigned for by Liberals and Conservatives, was that their supporters would list the rival party in lieu of the CCF, but this plan backfired when a large group of voters from all major parties, including the CCF, voted for the fringe British Columbia Social Credit Party (Socreds), who wound up with the largest number of seats in the House (19), only one seat ahead of the CCF, despite the CCF having 34.3% of the vote to Social Credit's 30.18%.
The six senators from BC constitute only one for every 775,000 people vs. one for every 75,000 in P.E.I.
In September 2014 there were 11,000 international students in B.C.
Under the younger Bennett's government, 85% of the province's land base was transferred from Government Reserve to management by the Ministry of Forests, reporting of deputy ministers was centralized to the Premier's Office, and NDP-instigated social programs were rolled back, with then-Human Resources Minister infamously demonstrating a golden shovel to highlight his welfare policy, although the new-era Socreds also reinforced and backed certain others instigated by the NDP—notably the creation of the Resort Municipality of Whistler, whose special status including Sunday drinking, then an anomaly in B.C.
His retirement being announced, a Social Credit convention was scheduled for the Whistler Resort, which came down to a three-way shooting match between Bud Smith, the Premier's right-hand man but an unelected official, Social Credit party grande dame Grace McCarthy, and the charismatic but eccentric Bill Vander Zalm.
The largest denominations by number of adherents according to the 2001 census were none (atheist, agnostic, and so on.)
In 1794, by the third of a series of agreements known as the Nootka Conventions, Spain conceded its claims of exclusivity in the Pacific.
While the coast of British Columbia and certain valleys in the south-central part of the province have mild weather, the majority of its land mass experiences a cold-winter-temperate climate similar to that of the rest of Canada.
The extended summer dryness often creates conditions that spark forest fires, from dry-lightning or man-made causes.
Travel from the rest of Canada before 1885 meant the difficulty of overland travel via the United States, around Cape Horn or overseas from Asia.
The CCF's popular vote was high enough in the 1945 election that they were likely to have won three-way contests and could have formed government.
As promised in his 2002 re-election campaign, Vancouver Mayor Larry Campbell staged a non-binding civic referendum regarding the hosting of the Olympics.
In February 2003, Vancouver's residents voted in a referendum accepting the responsibilities of the host city should it win its bid.
It was, by the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, under the "joint occupancy and use" of citizens of the United States and subjects of Britain (which is to say, the fur companies).
British Columbia has also been significantly affected by demographic changes within Canada and around the world.
However, this has often caused friction between cultures which have caused occasional displays of animosity toward Asian immigrants.
The building and maintenance of provincial highways is the responsibility of the British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure.
Vanderhoof is near the geographic centre of the province.
The coldest temperature in British Columbia was recorded in Smith River, where it dropped to , one of the coldest readings recorded anywhere in North America.
from other provinces has grown almost four times larger since 2012.
TransLink operates SkyTrain, an automated metro system serving the cities of Vancouver, Burnaby, New Westminster, North Surrey and Richmond.
As the province's economy blossomed, so did labour-management tensions.
Compounding the already dire local economic situation, tens of thousands of men from colder parts of Canada swarmed into Vancouver, creating huge hobo jungles around False Creek and the Burrard Inlet rail yards, including the old Canadian Pacific Railway mainline right-of-way through the heart of the city's downtown (at Hastings and Carrall).
Watching animals of various sorts, including a very wide range of birds, has also long been popular.
Housing affordability is of concern to British Columbians
Prior to 1979, surface public transit was administered by B.C.
During this phase, the jet stream is much further south across North America, therefore winters are milder and drier than normal.
The northeast corner of the province east of the Rockies, known as the Peace River Block, was attached to the much larger Athabasca District, headquartered in Fort Chipewyan, in present-day Alberta.
Bennett's son, Bill Bennett, was returned to office.
Johnson ended the coalition and dropped his Conservative cabinet ministers, including Deputy Premier and Finance Minister Herbert Anscomb, precipitating the general election of 1952.
The Social Credit Party, led by rebel former Conservative MLA W. A. C. Bennett, formed a minority government backed by the Liberals and Conservatives (with 6 and 4 seats respectively).
was Richard Clement Moody, who had previously served as the first Governor of the Falkland Islands.
There are 141 ecological Reserves, 35 provincial marine parks, 7 Provincial Heritage Sites, 6 National Historic Sites of Canada, 4 National Parks and 3 National Park Reserves.
In 1947 the reins of the Coalition were taken over by Byron Ingemar Johnson.
Smaller birds (robins, jays, grosbeaks, chickadees, and so on) also abound.
The annual mean temperature in the most populated areas of the province is up to , the mildest anywhere in Canada.
British Columbia's rugged coastline stretches for more than , and includes deep, mountainous fjords and about 6,000 islands, most of which are uninhabited.
During his tenure, major infrastructures continued to expand, such as the agreement with Alcan Aluminum to build the town of Kitimat with an aluminum smelter and the large Kemano Hydro Project.
His management style, the implementation of the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST) against election promises and the cancelling of the B.C.
Notable scandals in Social Credit years included the Robert Bonner Affair, the Fantasy Gardens scandal which forced Premier Bill Vander Zalm to resign and ended the Social Credit era, the Bingogate scandal which brought down NDP Premier Mike Harcourt, the alleged scandal named Casinogate which drove NDP Premier Glen Clark to resign.
The current southern border of British Columbia was established by the 1846 Oregon Treaty, although its history is tied with lands as far south as California.
, and “to found a second England on the shores of the Pacific”.
Winters are generally severe in the Northern Interior, but even there milder air can penetrate far inland.
There were some signs of economic life beginning to return to normal towards the end of the 1930s, but it was the onset of World War II which transformed the national economy and ended the hard times of the Depression.
By 1923, almost all Chinese immigration had been blocked except for merchants, professionals, students and investors.
The northern, mostly mountainous two-thirds of the province are largely unpopulated and undeveloped, except for the area east of the Rockies, where the Peace River District, in the northeast of the province, contains B.C.
Hydro, the provincially owned electricity utility.
The completion of the railway in 1885 was a huge boost to the province's economy, facilitating the transportation of the region's considerable resources to the east.
Among the plant foods used, berries, some roots (for example the Camas Lily – part of the Camassia family), cambium noodles (inner bark of hemlock), and seaweeds were (and to an extent still are) important.
As of 2006 there were 59 school districts.
In addition to these areas, over  of arable land are protected by the Agricultural Land Reserve.
British Columbia was the second Canadian jurisdiction (after Ontario) to legalize same-sex marriage.
Historically, there have commonly been third parties present in the legislature (including the Liberals themselves from 1952 to 1975); the BC Green Party are the current third party in British Columbia, with one seat in the legislature.
British Columbia is bordered by the Pacific Ocean on the west side, by the American state of Alaska to the northwest and parts of the west, on the north by Yukon and the Northwest Territories, on the east by the province of Alberta, and on the south by the states of Washington, Idaho, and Montana.
On April 1, 1983, Premier Bennett overstayed his constitutional limits of power by exceeding the legal tenure of a government, and the Lieutenant-Governor, Henry Pybus Bell-Irving, was forced to call Bennett to Government House to resolve the impasse, and an election was called for April 30, while in the meantime government cheques were covered by special emergency warrants as the Executive Council no longer had signing authority because of the constitutional crisis.
* Gulf Islands National Park Reserve
This devastating epidemic was the first in a series; the Great Smallpox Epidemic of 1862 killed 50% of the native population.
GDP per capita was $45,430.
The largest city is Vancouver, the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada, the largest in Western Canada, and the third-largest in the Pacific Northwest.
Campbell had previously led the largest landslide election in British Columbia history in 2001, with 77 of 79 seats, but the legislature has been more evenly divided between Liberals and NDP following the 2005 (46 of 79) and 2009 (49 of 85) provincial elections.
In 1793, Sir Alexander Mackenzie was the first European to journey across North America overland to the Pacific Ocean, inscribing a stone marking his accomplishment on the shoreline of Dean Channel near Bella Coola.
The programme included cuts to "motherhood" issues of the left, including the human rights branch, the offices of the Ombudsman and Rentalsman, women's programs, environmental and cultural programs, while still supplying mass capital infusions to corporate British Columbia.
However, the Coat of arms of British Columbia is protected by law, where no one may, "without the permission of the minister, assume, display or use the Coat of Arms of British Columbia or a design so closely resembling it as to be likely to deceive."
The bulk of the central and northern interior was organized into the New Caledonia district, administered from Fort St. James.
The province is currently governed by the BC Liberal Party, led by Premier Christy Clark, who became leader as a result of a leadership convention vote on February 26, 2011, and who led her party to an election victory on May 14, 2013.
The imbalance in representation in that House is apparent when considering population size.
In early 2011, Christy Clark, former Deputy Premier, would become leader of the Liberal Party.
There are more than 200 First Nations in BC.
The completion of the Port of Vancouver spurred rapid growth, and in less than fifty years the city surpassed Winnipeg, Manitoba, as the largest in Western Canada.
This was most manifest during the Second World War when many people of Japanese descent were relocated or interned in the Interior of the province.
The province's mainland away from the coastal regions is somewhat moderated by the Pacific Ocean.
* Mount Revelstoke National Park
Numerous traffic lights operate in place of interchanges on both arterials as long-term cost-cutting measures.
Another tier of parks in British Columbia are regional parks, which are maintained and run by regional districts.
Also during the "MiniWac" regime (a reference to his father's acronym, WAC) certain money-losing Crown-owned assets were "privatized" in a mass giveaway of shares in the British Columbia Resources Investment Corporation, "BCRIC", with the "Brick shares" soon becoming near-worthless.
Vancouver, Victoria, and Prince Rupert are also major ports of call for cruise ships.
Due to the blocking presence of successive mountain ranges, the climate of the interior of the province is semi-arid with certain locations receiving less than 250&nbsp;mm (10") in annual precipitation.
Despite the tension, Bennett's last few years in power were relatively peaceful as economic and political momentum grew on the megaprojects associated with Expo, and Bennett was to end his career by hosting Prince Charles and Lady Diana on their visit to open Expo 86.
In 1914, the last spike of a second transcontinental rail line, the Grand Trunk Pacific, linking north-central British Columbia from the Yellowhead Pass through Prince George to Prince Rupert was driven at Fort Fraser.
''Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique'', established in 1995, operates French-language public schools throughout the entire province.
Signalization along both these highways is heaviest through urban areas and along inter-urban sections where traffic volumes are similar to and sometimes higher than the freeways, but where funding is not available for upgrades to interchanges or construction of high-mobility alternative routes or bypasses.
Johnson achieved popularity for flood relief efforts during the 1948 flooding of the Fraser Valley, which was a major blow to that region and to the province's economy.
The Columbia District was broadly defined as being south of 54°40 north latitude, (the southern limit of Russian America), north of Mexican-controlled California, and west of the Rocky Mountains.
Port Moody is named after him.
British Columbia is known for having politically active labour unions who have traditionally supported the NDP or its predecessor, the CCF.
Much of the rest of the province, where traffic volumes are generally low, is accessible by well-maintained generally high-mobility two-lane arterial highways with additional passing lanes in mountainous areas and usually only a few stop-controlled intersections outside the main urban areas.
The Southern Interior cities of Kamloops and Penticton have some of the warmest and longest summer climates in Canada, although their temperatures can be exceeded north of the Fraser Canyon, close to the confluence of the Fraser and Thompson rivers, where the terrain is rugged and covered with desert-type flora.
Only a narrow strip of the Island, from Campbell River to Victoria, is significantly populated.
British Columbia's provincial parks system is the second largest parks system in Canada (the largest is Canada's National Parks system).
The inlets and valleys of the British Columbia Coast sheltered large, distinctive populations, such as the Haida, Kwakwaka'wakw and Nuu-chah-nulth, sustained by the region's abundant salmon and shellfish.
Bill Vander Zalm became the new Socred leader when Smith threw his support to him rather than see McCarthy win, and led the party to victory in the election later that year.
Cross-country bike touring has been popular since the ten-speed bike became available many years ago.
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick have much smaller populations than B.C.
These scandals forced Vander Zalm's resignation, and Rita Johnston became premier of the province.
There are also several highway crossings to the adjoining American states of Washington, Idaho, and Montana.
This co-occupancy was ended with the Oregon Treaty of 1846.
The largest section of this employment is in finance, insurance, real estate and corporate management.
Hours after that plan was unveiled in Ottawa on 3 December 2015, Clark issued a statement that it did "not address what’s been wrong with the Senate since the beginning".
Ferry service to Washington is offered by the Washington State Ferries (between Sidney and Anacortes) and Black Ball Transport (between Victoria and Port Angeles, Washington).
Vancouver International Airport is the 2nd busiest airport in the country and the second biggest International Gateway on the west coast (after Los Angeles) with an estimated 17.9 million travellers passing through in 2008.
The province's most populous city is Vancouver, which is located at the confluence of the Fraser River and Georgia Strait, in the southwest corner of the mainland (an area often called the Lower Mainland).
During World War II the mainstream BC Liberal and BC Conservative Parties of British Columbia united in a formal coalition government under new Liberal leader John Hart, who replaced Duff Pattullo when the latter failed to win a majority in the 1941 election.
All that was changed with the westward extension of American exploration and the concomitant overlapping claims of territorial sovereignty, especially in the southern Columbia basin (within present day Washington and Oregon).
Snowboarding has mushroomed in popularity since the early 1990s.
Fur trade routes were only marginally used for access to British Columbia through the mountains.
Bennett began a series of fiscal reforms, preaching a new variety of populism as well as waxing eloquent on progress and development, laying the ground for a second election in 1953 in which the new Bennett regime secured a majority of seats, with 38% of the vote.
Additionally, there are CNG-fueled buses being tested and used in Nanaimo and Kamloops systems.
Colonial officials deemed that colonists could make better use of the land than the First Nations people, and thus the land territory be owned by the colonists.
The borders of the province were not completely settled.
Population in British Columbia continued to expand as the province's mining, forestry, agriculture, and fishing sectors were developed.
Southern Interior valleys are hot in summer; for example in Osoyoos the July maximum temperature averages  the hottest month of any place in Canada, this hot weather sometimes spreads towards the coast or to the far north of the province.
Its climate encourages outdoor recreation and tourism, though its economic mainstay has long been resource extraction, principally logging, farming, and mining.
There are 14 designations of parks and protected areas in the province that reflects the different administration and creation of these areas in a modern context.
Highway 1 on Vancouver Island and Highway 97 through the Okanagan Valley are medium- to high-volume roadways with variable posted speeds that range from 50&nbsp;km/h to maximums just slightly lower than the principal grade-separated highways.
However, Campbell still managed to lead his party to victory in the 2005 general election, against a substantially strengthened NDP opposition.
In certain areas, there are businesses, non-profit societies, or municipal governments dedicated to promoting ecotourism in their region.
The result was a dramatic population collapse, culminating in the 1862 Smallpox outbreak in Victoria that spread throughout the coast.
Besides salmon and trout, sport-fishers in B.C.
Terrestrial mammals
A Christmas Eve raid on the Parliament Buildings in Victoria, including the Premier's Office, has resulted in charges only for ministerial aides, although key cabinet members from the time have since resigned.
Much of the province is wild or semi-wild, so that populations of many mammalian species that have become rare in much of the United States still flourish in British Columbia.
The pretext for continuing the coalition after the end of World War II was to prevent the CCF, which had won a surprise victory in Saskatchewan in 1944, from ever coming to power in British Columbia.
He named Burnaby Lake after his private secretary Robert Burnaby and named Port Coquitlam’s 400-foot "Mary Hill" after his wife, Mary.
British Columbia is under represented in the Senate of Canada, leading premier Clark to refuse to cooperate with the federal government's new reforms for senate appointments to be made based on the recommendations of a new advisory board that would use non-partisan criteria.
The Na-Dene language group is believed to be linked to the Yeniseian languages of Siberia.
By the end of the decade, with social tensions and dissatisfaction with the status quo rising, the Bennett government's achievements could not stave off its growing unpopularity.
Tensions emerged, also, from the counterculture movement of the late 1960s, of which Vancouver and Nanaimo were centres.
Semi-desert grassland is found in large areas of the Interior Plateau, with land uses ranging from ranching at lower altitudes to forestry at higher ones.
Much of Vancouver's prosperity and opulence in the 1920s results from this "pirate economy", although growth in forestry, fishing and mining continued.
In 1846, the Oregon Treaty divided the territory along the 49th parallel to the Strait of Georgia, with the area south of this boundary (excluding Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands) transferred to sole American sovereignty.
Winters are much wetter and cooler under the opposite phase, La Niña.
When the men returned from World War I, they discovered the recently enfranchised women of the province had helped vote in the prohibition of liquor in an effort to end the social problems associated with the hard-core drinking that Vancouver and the rest of the province was famous for until the war.
Moody selected the site for and founded the original capital of British Columbia, New Westminster and established the Cariboo Road and Stanley Park.
This sparked a backlash, with tens of thousands of people in the streets the next day after the budget speech, and through the course of a summer repeated large demonstrations of up to 100,000 people.
Several experimental buses are being tested such as hybrid buses that have both gasoline and electric engines.
Whitewater rafting and kayaking are popular on many inland rivers.
Among her early accomplishments she raised the minimum wage, created the new holiday of Family Day and pushed the development of BC's liquified natural gas.
European settlement did not bode well for the remaining native population of British Columbia.
The Vancouver Island colony was facing financial crises of its own, and pressure to merge the two eventually succeeded in 1866, when the colony of British Columbia was amalgamated with the Colony of Vancouver Island to form the Colony of British Columbia (1866–71), which was, in turn, succeeded by the present day state of British Columbia following the Canadian Confederation of 1871.
Major transmission deals were concluded, most notably the Columbia River Treaty between Canada and the United States.
The Peace River Canyon through the Rocky Mountains was the route that the earliest explorers and fur traders used.
Housing starts and an expanded service sector saw growth overall through the decade, despite political turmoil.
British Columbia's roads systems were notoriously poorly maintained and dangerous until a concentrated programme of improvement was initiated in the 1950s and 1960s.
The province is governed by the Liberal Party under Premier Christy Clark.
An allegation (never substantiated) that the Premier had received a favour in return for granting a gaming licence led to Clark's resignation as Premier.
However, after a breakthrough election in 2001 (12.39%), the party's vote share has declined (2005 – 9.17%, 2009 – 8.09%).
Public transit in British Columbia consists mainly of diesel buses, although Vancouver is also serviced by a fleet of trolleybuses.
In Vancouver and Victoria (as well as some other cities), opportunities for joggers and bicyclists have been developed.
The Treaty of Washington sent the Pig War San Juan Islands Border dispute to arbitration in 1871 and in 1903, the province's territory shrank again after the Alaska boundary dispute settled the vague boundary of the Alaska Panhandle.
The advent of prohibition in the United States created new opportunities, and many found employment or at least profit in cross-border liquor smuggling.
The CCF was invited to join the coalition but refused.
After the Olympic joy had faded, Campbell's popularity started to fall.
This included expropriation from First Nations people of their land, control over its resources, as well as the ability to trade in some resources (such as the fishery).
Annual sunshine hours vary from 2200 near Cranbrook and Victoria to less than 1300 in Prince Rupert, located on the North Coast, just south of the Alaska Panhandle.
British Columbia also has strong participation levels in many other sports, including golf, tennis, soccer, hockey, Canadian football, rugby union, lacrosse, baseball, softball, basketball, curling and figure skating.
There are now freeways in Greater Victoria, the Lower Mainland, and Central Interior of the province.
Other wine regions in British Columbia include the Cowichan Valley on Vancouver Island and the Fraser Valley.
was the largest net recipient of interprovincial migrants in Canada in the first quarter of 2016 with half of the 5,000 people coming from Alberta.
The brief three-year ("Thousand Days") period of NDP governance brought several lasting changes to the province, most notably the creation of the Agricultural Land Reserve, intended to protect farmland from redevelopment, and the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia, a crown corporation charged with a monopoly on providing single-payer basic automobile insurance.
Opportunities for trail riding, often into especially scenic areas, have been established for tourists in numerous areas of the province.
British Columbia has long taken advantage of its location on the Pacific Ocean to have close relations with East Asia.
Correcting this imbalance would require a constitutional amendment, but that is unlikely to be supported by the Atlantic Provinces.
public K-12 schools and about 3,000 international students in other B.C.
Notably, the Tsilhqot'in Nation has established Aboriginal title to a portion of their territory, as a result of the recent Supreme Court of Canada decision (William Tsilhqot'in Nation v. British Columbia).
Tens of thousands participated in protests and many felt that a general strike would be the inevitable result unless the government backed down from its policies they had claimed were only about restraint and not about recrimination against the NDP and the left.
The Dene of the western Arctic may represent a distinct wave of migration from Asia to North America.
Parks, under the aegis of the Ministry of Environment.
The economic history of British Columbia is replete with tales of dramatic upswings and downswings, and this boom and bust pattern has influenced the politics, culture and business climate of the province.
The Northern Interior region has a subarctic climate with very cold winters.
There were also concerns over Yu's application to the government for a bank licence, and lurid stories from flamboyant realtor Faye Leung of a party in the "Howard Hughes Suite" on the top two floors of the Bayshore Inn, where Tan Yu had been staying, with reports of a bag of money in a brown paper bag passed from Yu to Vander Zalm during the goings-on.
Trends of urbanization mean that the Greater Vancouver area now includes 51% of the Province's population, followed in second place by Greater Victoria with 8%.
Meanwhile, the province continued to grow.
About 6,225 men from the province died in combat.
Plant foods traditionally contributed only a part of the total food intake of coastal First Nations peoples of British Columbia, though they contributed to most of the material good produced.
A series of gold rushes in various parts of the province followed, the largest being the Cariboo Gold Rush in 1862, forcing the colonial administration into deeper debt as it struggled to meet the extensive infrastructure needs of far-flung boom communities like Barkerville and Lillooet, which sprang up overnight.
Seventy-five percent of the province is mountainous (more than  above sea level); 60% is forested; and only about 5% is arable.
To the northwest of the province are the peoples of the Na-Dene languages, which include the Athapaskan-speaking peoples and the Tlingit, who lived on the islands of southern Alaska and northern British Columbia.
Longboarding is also a popular activity because of the hilly geography of the region.
The Conservatives had wanted their new leader Herbert Anscomb to be premier, but the Liberals in the Coalition refused.
First Nations, the original inhabitants of the land, have a history of at least 10,000 years in the area.
's forests are varieties of pine, fir, cedar, birch, hemlock, maple, and spruce.
Nearly all travel and freight to and from the region occurred via the Pacific Ocean, primarily through the ports of Victoria and New Westminster.
While the Liberals won the most number of seats, they actually received fewer votes than the socialist Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF).
Many areas of the province are often covered by a blanket of heavy cloud and low fog during the winter months,in contast to abundant summer sunshine.
However, the economy continued to struggle against the backdrop of a weak resource economy.
Sailing and sailboarding are widely enjoyed.
The nomadic population lived in non-permanent structures foraging for nuts, berries and edible roots while hunting and trapping larger and small game for food and furs.
The previous election saw then Premier Gordon Campbell win a third straight majority government in May 2009, taking 49 seats to the opposition New Democratic Party's 35.
Water sports, both motorized and non-motorized, are enjoyed in many places.
British Columbia evolved from British possessions that were established in what is now British Columbia by 1871.
Vander Zalm was later involved in a conflict of interest scandal following the sale of Fantasy Gardens, a Christian and Dutch culture theme park built by the Premier, to Tan Yu, a Filipino Chinese gambling kingpin.
The conflict between hippies and Vancouver mayor Tom Campbell was particularly legendary, culminating in the so-called Gastown Riots of 1971.
Red-listed species in B.C.
The net number of people coming to B.C.
The 1950s and 1960s were also marked by development in the province's transportation infrastructure.
