His son Erispoe secured the independence of the new kingdom of Brittany and won the Battle of Jengland against Charles the Bald.
In 2012, the largest metropolitan areas were Nantes (897,713 inhabitants), Rennes (690,467 inhabitants), and Brest (314,844 inhabitants).
The kingdom lost its eastern territories, including Normandy and Anjou, and the county of Nantes was given to Fulk I of Anjou in 909.
The 19th-century composer Louis-Albert Bourgault-Ducoudray was one of the first western European composers to be influenced by what is now known as world music.
When it was an independent duchy, the Estates of Brittany, which can be compared to a parliament, met in various towns: Dinan, Ploërmel, Redon, Rennes, Vitré, Guérande, and, most of all, Vannes, where they met 19 times, and Nantes, 17 times.
The two towns had been virtually destroyed by Allied air raids, like Brest and Saint-Malo, and other towns, such as Nantes and Rennes, had also suffered.
Brittany lost 240,000 men during the First World War.
Breton can be divided into two main dialects: the ''KLT'' (Kerne-Leon-Tregor) and the dialect of Vannes.
Breton cider is traditionally served in a bowl or a cup.
**The ''Trégor'', around Tréguier, forming part of the Côtes-d'Armor ''département''.
In response, the Diwan schools were founded in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion.
Architecture from the 20th century can be seen in Saint-Nazaire, Brest and Lorient, three cities destroyed during the Second World War and rebuilt afterwards, and in the works of the Breton nationalist architects like James Bouillé and Olier Mordrel.
The Route nationale 164 crosses the centre of the peninsula and connects Rennes to Loudéac, Morlaix and Châteaulin, and the Route nationale 166 links Rennes to Vannes.
The new Brittany had four départements, and Loire-Atlantique formed the Pays de la Loire region together with parts of Anjou, Maine and Poitou.
Other notable early missionaries are Gildas and the Irish saint Columbanus.
A bilingual approach has also been implemented in some state schools after 1979, and some Catholic schools have done the same after 1990.
At the 2010 census, the population of historic Brittany was estimated to be 4,475,295.
Breton remained the language of the rural population, but since the Middle Ages the bourgeoisie, the nobility, and the higher clergy have been speaking French.
Gallo is also threatened by the Breton language revival, because Breton is gaining ground in territories that were not previously part of the main Breton-speaking area, and most of all because Breton appears as the national language of Brittany, thus leaving no place for Gallo.
Football, cycling and sailing are the three most popular sports in Brittany.
It is bordered by the English Channel to the north, the Celtic Sea and the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Bay of Biscay to the south.
The region around Rennes and the south are the more attractive areas, whereas the population is declining in the centre and in the westernmost parts.
The best soils were primitively covered by large forests which had been progressively replaced by bocage during the Middle Ages.
On one hand, the region, due to its long coastline, has a rich oceanic fauna, and some birds cannot be seen in other French regions.
These factors contributed to the decline of Breton.
However, most of the population remained rural.
Others smaller airport operates domestic flights in Quimper, and Lannion.
Clisson, the southernmost Breton town, was rebuilt in an Italian Romantic style around 1820.
The artists who settled in Pont-Aven wanted to break away from the Academic style of the École des Beaux-Arts and later from Impressionism when it began to decline.
The Gallo transmission from parents to children is extremely low and efforts to standardise and publish books in Gallo did not reverse the decline of the language and its lack of prestige.
The remaining area of old Brittany, the Loire-Atlantique department around Nantes, now forms part of the Pays de la Loire region.
Brittany is home to many megalithic monuments; the words ''menhir'' and ''dolmen'' come from the Breton language.
The Gallic deities continued to be worshiped, and were often assimilated to the Roman gods.
Brittany also has a long beer-brewing tradition, tracing its roots back to the 17th century.
The Saint-Brieuc – Armor airport serves flights between Brittany and the Channel Islands.
The Route nationale 137 provides connections between Saint-Malo, Rennes and Nantes and terminates in Bordeaux.
The Romans also built three major roads through the region.
According to popular traditions, Anne of Brittany was hunting with her court when she saw a white ermine who preferred to die than to cross a dirty marsh.
Gallic towns and villages were redeveloped according to Roman standards, and several cities were created.
Surrounded by the sea, Brittany offers a wide range of fresh seafood and fish, especially mussels and oysters.
Colloquial Breton emblems include the Celtic triskelion, the menhirs and dolmens, local dishes such as the galettes, the Bigouden headdress and the traditional black round hat, the fisherman and his yellow raincoat, etc.
They can be accompanied by Breton buttermilk called ''lait ribot''.
Its land area is 34,023&nbsp;km² .
It is called ''Gwenn ha Du'' ("white and black" in Breton) and it features eleven ermine spots (their number may vary) and nine stripes, the black ones represent the Breton speaking historical dioceses, and the white ones symbolise the gallo speaking dioceses.
The coat of arms of Brittany, ''ermine plain'', was adopted by John III in 1316.
The main road artery linking cities and other settlements along the north coast is the Route nationale 12 which connects the cities of Rennes, Saint-Brieuc, Morlaix and Brest.
At that time, local writers started to collect and publish local tales and legends and wrote original works.
More than 10,000&nbsp;km of motorways were built, permitting Breton road transport to multiply by four.
Today, fishing and agriculture remain important activities.
* Maloù, at Saint-Malo,
Their support for each nation became very important during the 14th century, because the English kings then started to claim the French throne.
The GDP of the Loire-Atlantique ''département'' is around 26 billion euros, and the GDP of the five historical Breton départements would be at around 108 billion euros.
The oral tradition entertained by medieval poets died out during the 15th century and books in Breton were very rare before 1850.
Regardless of the truth of this story, Brythonic (British Celtic) settlement probably increased during the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain in the 5th and 6th centuries.
The penitents form a procession and they walk together to a shrine, a church or any sacred place.
It also showed that Breton identity is stronger among people younger than 35.
They include numerous Romanesque and French Gothic churches, usually built in local sandstone and granit, castles and half-timbered houses visible in villages, towns and cities.
They traditionally replaced bread as basic food and they can be served with cheese, sausages, bacon, mushrooms or eggs.
It declined during the 18th century, mostly because Nantes was flourishing with the Atlantic slave trade and paid no attention to its cultural institutions.
The Seiz Breur movement, created in 1923, permitted a Breton artistic revival but its ties with Nazism and the collaborationism of the Breton National Party during World War II weakened Breton nationalism in the post-war period.
Among the authors writing in Breton are Auguste Brizeux, a Romantic poet, the neo-Druidic bard Erwan Berthou, Théodore Hersart de La Villemarqué, who collected the local legends about King Arthur, Roparz Hemon, founder of Gwalarn, Pêr-Jakez Helias, Glenmor, Pêr Denez and Meavenn.
It appeared later on numerous locations, including churches and castles.
In the same town, it is also possible to visit the Keroman Submarine Base built in 1942, and the ''Cité de la voile Éric Tabarly'', a museum dedicated to sailing.
The Breton lighthouses were mostly built during the 19th century.
Brittany had 3,2 million inhabitants in 1962 and the growth was mainly due to Loire-Atlantique and the steady growth of Nantes.
Only a small number of statues depicting Roman gods were found in Brittany, and most of the time they combine Celtic elements.
He granted several privileges to Brittany, such as exemption from the gabelle, a tax on salt which was very unpopular in France.
Brittany is on two major TGV lines, one linking Paris to Nantes and Le Croisic, on the south coast, and another linking Paris to Rennes and Brest.
Both historians describe Riothamus's losing battle against King Euric of the Visigoths at Déols around the year 470.
The last four peoples mentioned by J. Caesar were respectively located in Cotentin (Lower-Normandy), pays de Caux (Upper-Normandy), Limousin (Aquitany) and the location of the Ambibarii is unknown.
Without the Loire-Atlantique's figures, the Breton population only numbered 2,4 millions in 1962, and 2,3 in 1851.
After the battle was won, Aetius sent the Alans to Armorica and Galicia.
It advocates more autonomy for the region and its positions are very close to the Socialist parties.
In total, around 800 islands lie off the mainland; the largest being Belle Île, in the south.
TER Bretagne also manages coach lines and connections between Rennes and Nantes.
Most of these birds breed on isolated islands and rocks and thus are hard to observe.
There is a very old pilgrimage called the ''Tro Breizh'' (tour of Brittany), where the pilgrims walk around Brittany from the grave of one of the seven founder saints to another.
The transfer was interrupted by the French Revolution, and all the French universities were dissolved in 1793.
The unemployment rate in Brittany is lower than in other French regions and it is usually around 6 or 7% of the active population.
The present Breton landscape did not acquired its final shape before one million years ago.
Until the 1970s, the Breton road network was poor because maritime and rail transport prevailed.
Scholars such as Léon Fleuriot have suggested a two-wave model of migration from Britain which saw the emergence of an independent Breton people and established the dominance of the Brythonic Breton language in Armorica.
The oldest monuments, cairns, were followed by princely tombs and stone rows.
The official spelling is a compromise between both variants, with a ''z'' and an ''h'' together.
Most of the Breton castles were rebuilt between the 13th and the 15th century, such as the Château de Suscinio, the Château de Dinan, the Château de Combourg, the Château de Largoët, the Château de Tonquédec, the Josselin Castle and the Château de Trécesson.
The Breton culture is highlighted during the ''Fête de la Bretagne'', which occurs in many places around Saint-Yves's day (19 May), and during the Festival de Cornouaille in Quimper.
Neolithic Brittany is characterised by an important megalithic production, and it is sometimes designated as the "core area" of megalithic culture.
Instead, Brittany has become attractive, particularly for families, young retired persons and active people over 35 years old.
The Breton anthem, although not official, is ''Bro Gozh ma Zadoù'' - ("Old Land of My Fathers").
At the end of the 19th century, several seaside resorts were created along the coast and villas and hotels were built in historicist, Art Nouveau, and later in the Art Deco styles.
Together with Fanum Martis (Corseul), they were the capitals of the local civitates.
In the summer months, temperatures in the region can reach , yet the climate remains comfortable, especially when compared to the French regions located south of the Loire.
Three years later, the area became a centre of royalist and Catholic resistance to the Revolution during the Chouannerie.
The most famous are Ar Men, Phare d'Eckmühl, La Vieille and La Jument.
Under the Ancien Régime, Brittany and France were governed as separate countries under the same crown, so Breton aristocrats in the French royal court were classed as Princes étrangers (foreign princes).
The main companies are Brittany Ferries which operates lines between Plymouth and Roscoff, Portsmouth and Saint-Malo, and Roscoff and Cork.
Several towns also organise historical re-enactments and events celebrating local traditions, such as the Filets Bleus in Concarneau which celebrates fishing.
Tourism is particularly important for the seacoast and Brittany is one of the most visited regions in France.
The late 5th century the Brittonic leader Riothamus received correspondence from the eminent Roman jurist Sidonius Apollinaris and was called "King of the Britons" by Jordanes.
Brittany is closely associated with the Matter of Britain and King Arthur.
Later, authors like Geoffrey of Monmouth used the terms ''Britannia minor'' and ''Britannia major'' to distinguish Brittany from Britain.
The performers sing calls and responses while dancing.
During the 19th century, Brittany remained in economic recession, and many Bretons emigrated to other French regions, particularly to Paris.
He eventually married Anne of Brittany.
Sometimes he is on foot but mostly he travels with a cart, the ''Karrig an Ankou'', drawn by two oxen and a lean horse.
Agriculture was introduced during the 5th millennium BC by migrants who came from the South and the East.
**The ''Cornouaille'', around Quimper, divided between Finistère and Côtes-d'Armor.
A poll conducted in 2006 showed that Morbihan was the only ''département'' to have a strong Catholic population, around 70% of its inhabitants belonging to that religion.
The Armorican massif reaches its maximal elevation outside of Brittany, in neighbouring Mayenne, at 417 m, and slopes towards the west before straightening on its western extremity, with the Montagnes Noires and the Monts d'Arrée.
In Saint-Nazaire, where many transatlantic ships where built, including ''SS Normandie'' and ''SS France'', a museum showing transatlantic interiors was installed in a Second World War base.
Nantes is linked to Paris by the A11 autoroute, and Rennes is both on the A81 autoroute to Paris and the A84 autoroute to Caen.
Brittany has also been referred to as ''Less'', ''Lesser'' or ''Little'' Britain (as opposed to ''Great Britain'').
Brittany is the second-largest cider-producing region in France.
53% of them considering themselves to belong first to Brittany.
Another regional park encompasses the Monts d'Arrée and the Iroise seacoast.
As a result, a generation of native Breton speakers were made to feel ashamed of their language and avoided speaking it or teaching it to their children.
Brittany has been inhabited by humans since the Lower Paleolithic.
At the same time, the local economy collapsed and many rural exploitations were abandoned.
* The '''Veneti''', who lived in the present Morbihan ''département'' and gave their name to the city of Vannes.
They were often called "pays" or "bro" ("country" in French and Breton) and they also served as fiscal and military districts.
Catholic religion has started to decline after the Second World War, during the urbanisation of Brittany.
The Morbihan ''département'', on the southern coast, comprises a large share of these structures, including the Carnac stones and the Broken Menhir of Er Grah in Locmariaquer, the largest single stone erected by Neolithic people.
Wine, especially muscadet, is made in a small region south of Nantes.
It re-employs both the Welsh anthem's music and that of "Bro Goth agan Tasow" (the national anthem of Cornwall; its lyrics were written at the end of the 19th century.
The Breton peninsula appeared during the Cadomian Orogeny, which formed its northern coastline, between Guingamp and Fougères.
They were built with local materials: mostly granit in Lower Brittany and schist in Upper Brittany.
The free peasants lived in small huts, whereas the landowners and their employees lived in proper villae rusticae.
The Gallo speaking community is estimated between 28,300 and 200,000 locutors.
This word derives from a Greek word, Πρεττανικη (Prettanike) or Βρεττανίαι (Brettaniai), used by Pytheas, an explorer from Massalia who visited the British Islands around 320 BC.
Brittany is the largest French peninsula.
In 1956, Brittany was legally reconstituted as the Region of Brittany, although the region excluded the ducal capital of Nantes and the surrounding area.
The leading artists of that period were the designer René-Yves Creston, the illustrators Jeanne Malivel and Xavier Haas, and the sculptors Raffig Tullou, Francis Renaud, Georges Robin, Joseph Savina, Jules-Charles Le Bozec and Jean Fréour.
Brittany has a vibrant calendar of festivals and events.
The temperature difference between summer and winter is about fifteen degrees, but it varies depending on the proximity of the sea.
On its side, Gallo language has never had a widely accepted writing system and several ones coexist.
* The '''Osismii''', who lived in the western part of Brittany.
It is the only one that does not take part to the annual bagadoù competitions.
The Parliament was then transferred to Rennes, and the Chamber of Accounts to Nantes.
Gallo had never been written before the 20th century, and several writing systems were created.
The first settlers were Neanderthals.
Breton literature in French includes 19th-century historical novels by Émile Souvestre, travel journals by Anatole Le Braz, poems and novels by Charles Le Goffic, the works of the singer-songwriter Théodore Botrel and of the maritime writer Henri Queffélec.
Many villages still have their closes, they date from the 16th and 17th centuries and sometimes include an elaborately carved calvary sculpture.
Their petty kingdoms are now known by the names of the French counties that succeeded them&mdash;Domnonée (Devon), Cornouaille (Cornwall), Léon (Caerleon); but these names in Breton and Latin are in most cases identical to their British homelands.
Brittany lies within the north temperate zone.
Nowadays, however, pilgrims complete the circuit over the course of several years.
The potteries usually feature naïve Breton characters in traditional clothing and daily scenes.
Before them, Brittany had also been visited by Academic and Romantic painters like Jean Antoine Théodore de Gudin and Jules Achille Noël who were looking for dramatic seascapes and storms.
Brest and Douarnenez both organise large tall ship meetings.
In Brittany, it was forbidden for the pupils to speak Breton or Gallo, and the two were strongly depreciated.
On its side, Morbihan remains a right-wing stronghold.
The number of exploitations tends to diminish, but as a result, they are merged into very large estates.
When the Republic was re-established in 1871, there were rumours that Breton troops were mistrusted and mistreated at Camp Conlie during the Franco-Prussian War because of fears that they were a threat to the Republic.
Moreover, because of its similarities with Gallo, French imposed itself more easily as the main language in Upper Brittany than in Breton speaking areas.
The communes and the départements have a local council elected by their citizens, but arrondissements and cantons are not run by elected officials.
Brittany is the first producer in France for vegetables (green beans, onions, artichokes, potatoes, tomatoes...).
At that time, Brittany was populated by relatively large communities who started to change their lifestyles from a nomadic life of hunting and gathering, to become settled farmers.
The historical Breton dioceses were:
The region has a great number of baroque retables, made between the 17th and the 19th century.
It is stronger among employees than employers.
Polls show that 58% of the Bretons and 62% of the inhabitants in Loire-Atlantique favour the reunification.
It is around  and stretches towards the northwest and the Atlantic Ocean.
* Paol Aoreliann, at Saint-Pol-de-Léon,
After the last glacial period, the warmer climate allowed the area to become heavily wooded.
The dukes were crowned in Rennes and they had a large castle there; it was however destroyed during the 15th century.
These realms eventually merged into a single state during the 9th century.
Since reorganisation in 1956, the modern administrative region of Brittany comprises only four of the five Breton departments, or 80% of historical Brittany.
The dukes mostly lived in Nantes, Vannes, Redon, Rennes, Fougères, Dol-de-Bretagne, Dinan and Guérande.
File:W. Otway Cannell 8 Modern Brittany.jpg|Modern Brittany - Illustration from Legends & Romances of Brittany by Lewis Spence, illustrated by W. Otway Cannell.
Nantes and its ''département'', Loire-Atlantique, raised concerns because they were off-centered, more integrated with the Loire Valley than with the Breton peninsula.
It is followed by Rennes – Saint-Jacques, Lorient South Brittany and Dinard – Saint-Malo.
* Samsun of Dol, at Dol-de-Bretagne,
In 1941, efforts to unify the dialects led to the creation of the so-called "Breton zh", a standard which has never been widely accepted.
The Breton style had a strong revival between 1900 and the Second World War and it was used by the Seiz Breur movement.
He created new universities and invented two secondary education institutions: the "collèges" and the "lycées" which were opened in numerous towns to educate boys and form a new elite.
At the same time, an intense volcanic activity left large quantities of granite.
French, the only official language of the French Republic, is spoken today by everybody in Brittany, and it is the mother tongue of most people.
However, local innovations permitted some changes and the birth of a particular style.
Metamorphism is responsible for the distinctive local blue schist and for the rich subsoil of the Groix island, which comprises glaucophane and epidote.
The Breton forests, dunes, moorlands and marshes are home to several iconic plants, such as endemic cistus, aster and linaria varieties, the horseshoe vetch and the lotus maritimus.
Nowadays, Rennes is the only official capital of the region of Brittany.
They are known as the "Seven founder saints":
Since the 13th century, long before the union of Brittany and France, the main administrative language of the Duchy of Brittany had been French, which had replaced Latin.
In 1882, Jules Ferry succeeded in passing a law which made primary education in France free, non-clerical (laïque) and mandatory.
River fish of note include trout, Atlantic salmon, pikes, shades and lampreys.
It will be replaced around 2017 by the new Aéroport du Grand Ouest, located 30&nbsp;km to the north-west of Nantes.
Tristan and Iseult are also said to have lived in Brittany.
While most of the metropolitan areas are growing, the cities themselves tend to stagnate or regress, such as for Brest, Lorient, Saint-Brieuc and Saint-Malo.
The Breton bocage, with its small fields enclosed by thick hedgerows, has almost disappeared since the 1960s to fit the modern agricultural needs and methods, particularly mechanisation.
Because of this continuity, the Breton border with the rest of France is not marked by any strong geographical landmark, apart from the river Couesnon, which separates Brittany from Normandy.
It possibly means "wide and flat" or "to expand" and it gave the Welsh name for Brittany: ''Llydaw''.
Nonetheless, the region was also modernising, with new roads and railways being built, and some places being industrialised.
The largest cities in Region Brittany were Rennes, with 206,655, Brest, 142,097, Quimper, 63,929, Lorient, 58,148, Vannes, 52,983, Saint-Malo, 48,211, and Saint-Brieuc, 45,879.
During the French Revolution, Brittany was divided into five ''départements'', each made up of three or four ''arrondissements''.
Nantes, nicknamed "the city of the Dukes of Brittany", was also the permanent residence of the last dukes.
They gave their name to the city of Rennes (''Roazhon'' in Breton language, in the center of the département) and to the town of Redon (in the south of the ''département'', bordering the ''département'' of Loire-Atlantique in the administrative ''région'' of Pays de la Loire, where its suburb town of Saint-Nicolas-de-Redon is located; however the city of Redon was founded around AD 832 under the initial name of ''Riedones'', long after the ''Redones'' people were assimilated to Bretons ; the cultural link between ''Riedones'' and the former ''Redones'' people is highly probable but difficult to recover and the name of ''Riedones'' may have been written from a local usage preserving the name of the former people in the vernacular oral language from a reading of an ancient Greek othography).
The Festival Interceltique de Lorient welcomes each year participants all the Celtic nations and their diasporas.
The historical province of Brittany is now split among five French departments: Finistère in the west, Côtes-d'Armor in the north, Ille-et-Vilaine in the north east, Loire-Atlantique in the south east and Morbihan in the south on the Bay of Biscay.
Napoleon reorganised the French education system in 1808.
The region is notable for its biscuit factories, many towns having their own: Quimper, Lorient, Pont-Aven, Saint-Brieuc, BN and LU in Nantes, La Trinitaine in La Trinité-sur-Mer, and Galettes Saint-Michel in Saint-Michel-Chef-Chef.
On the other hand, the species found in the inland are usually common for France, and because Brittany is a peninsula, the number of species is lower in its western extremity than in the eastern part.
