The Brno Exhibition Centre is the city's premier attraction for international business visitors.
There are several legends connected with the City of Brno; one of the best known is the Legend of the Brno Dragon.
Annually, over one million visitors attend over 40 professional trade fairs and business conferences held here.
Next to the "dragon" at the Old Town Hall the town's second well-known emblem is displayed.
The Faculty of Law was transformed into the headquarters of the Gestapo and the university dormitory was used as a prison.
A "krokodýl" (in Czech language) is the local stuffed baguette, and the city radio station is known as Radio Krokodýl.
The city also became home to a number of institutions directly related to research and development, like the Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), or the International Clinical Research Center in Brno (ICRC).
For example, AVG Technologies (headquarters), IBM (Delivery Centre Central Europe Brno), AT&T (American Telephone and Telegraph) Honeywell (Honeywell Global Design Center Brno), Siemens, SGI (CZ headquarters), Red Hat (CZ headquarters), Motorola, etc.
In the 15th century Brno was besieged in 1428 and again in 1430 by the Hussites during the Hussite Wars.
Several sports clubs play the highest Czech league, respectively.
In 1839 the first train arrived in Brno from Vienna, this was the beginning of rail transport in what is now the Czech Republic.
This was done to dilute the German-speaking majority of close to 55,000 by addition of the Slavic communities of the city's neighborhood.
The Supreme Court is on Burešova Street, the Supreme Administrative Court is on Moravské náměstí (), and the Constitutional Court is on Joštova Street, and the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office of the Czech Republic is on Jezuitská street.
During the German occupation of the Czech lands between 1939 and 1945 all Czech universities including those of Brno were closed by the Nazis.
Meanwhile, Brno, as the only Moravian city which under the leadership of Jean-Louis Raduit de Souches managed to defend itself from the Swedes under General Lennart Torstenson, served as the sole capital of the state (Margraviate of Moravia).
Brno is the home to the highest courts in the Czech judiciary.
The city spends about 30 million euro every year on culture.
This castle is the site of a number of legends, as are many other places in Brno.
About 35,000 Czechs and some American and British prisoners of war were imprisoned and tortured there, about 800 civilians were executed or died.
The Labyrinth under Vegetable Market, a system of underground corridors and cellars dating back to Middle Ages, has been recently opened to the public.
The local public transport system is interconnected with regional public transport into one integrated system called IDS JMK and directly connects also several nearby municipalities with the city.
Today, the Moravian Land Tables are stored in the Moravian Regional Archive, and they are included among the national cultural sights of the Czech Republic.
One of the natural sights nearby is the Moravian Karst.
Brno and Olomouc were also the seats of the Land Court and the Land Tables, thus they were the two most important cities in Moravia.
The functionalist synagogue was built between 1934 and 1936.
Passenger traffic at this airport has experienced a large increase in recent years, regular flights fly from there to London, Eindhoven, Milan and Moscow, the airport also serves as one of two bases for police helicopters in the Czech Republic.
In 2007 a summit of 15 presidents of the EU Member States was held in Brno.
Majority of the main sights of Brno are situated in its historical centre.
Abbey of Saint Thomas is the place where Gregor Mendel established the new science of genetics.
After Terezín, many of them were sent to Auschwitz concentration camp, Minsk Ghetto, Rejowiec and other ghettos and concentration camps.
While there were 12,000 members of the Brno Jewish community in 1938, only 1,000 survived the Nazi persecution during Germany's occupation in World War II.
Church of Saint James is one of the most preserved and most spectacular Gothic churches in Brno.
There is a variety of smaller theatres in Brno, such as ''Divadlo Bolka Polívky'', ''Divadlo Husa na provázku'', ''HaDivadlo'', ''loutkové divadlo Radost'', ''Divadlo Polárka'', ''G Studio'', ''Divadlo v 7 a půl – Kabinet múz'', ''Divadlo Vaňkovka'' for children, etc.
Today's Brno is a railway junction of supranational importance, for passenger traffic there are nine stations and stops.
Compared to other cities in the country, Brno has a very high air quality, which is ensured by a good natural circulation of air; no severely violent storms or similar natural disasters have ever been recorded in the city.
The other large preserved castle near the city is Veveří Castle by the Brno Dam Lake.
Brno is the administrative center of the South Moravian Region in which it forms a separate district (Brno-City District).
Cycling is widespread in Brno also due to lowland nature of the landscape.
Lužánky is the oldest public park opened in the current Czech Republic, as a public park it was established in the late 18th century.
Between 1941 and 1942, transports from Brno deported 10,081 Jews to Theresienstadt (Terezín) concentration camp.
The city is also a significant administrative centre.
One of them is the public international airport Brno-Tuřany Airport.
In the 14th century, Brno became one of the centres for the Moravian regional assemblies, whose meetings alternated between Brno and Olomouc.
The era between the world wars brought a building boom to the city, leaving it with many modern and especially functionalist buildings, the most celebrated one being Villa Tugendhat, designed by architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe in the 1920s for the wealthy family of Fritz Tugendhat, and finished in 1930.
The Chief Executive is directly responsible to the Lord Mayor.
Its main operator is the  ''DPmB'' company (Brno City Transport Company) which also operates a ferry route serving mainly for recreational purposes at the Brno Dam Lake, and for interested also a tourist minibus providing a brief tour of the city.
Brno has hundreds of historical sights, including one designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO, and eight monuments listed among the national cultural heritage of the Czech Republic.
Trams (sometimes named ''Šaliny'' ) have a long tradition in Brno, they first went to the streets in 1869, it was the first operation of horse-drawn tram in the current Czech Republic.
Brno hosts motorbike and other races on the Masaryk Circuit, a tradition established in 1930, in which the Road Racing World Championship Grand Prix is one of the most prestigious races.
Basilica of the assumption of our Lady the final resting place also of its founder Queen Elisabeth Richeza.
The ''Theatre World Brno'' is another international festival annually held in the city where the Brno theatres and the city centre stages around one hundred performances by both national and foreign ensembles.
The other local airport is a small domestic airport serving mainly recreational activities such as flying hot air balloons, gliders or aircraft RC models.
Also, due to the congestion in private transport the city continues to strive to build more parking ramps including underground ones, but this effort has not always been successful.
Existing tracks for cycling and roller skating in 2011 measured in total approximately  and are gradually being expanded.
At least further 960 people mostly of mixed race origin followed in 1943 and 1944.
Brno is also an important centre of higher education, with 33&nbsp;faculties belonging to 13&nbsp;institutes of higher learning and about 89,000 students.
Brno is also a vibrant university city with about ninety thousand students, a number of festivals and other cultural events.
The Svratka River flows through the city for about , the Svitava River cuts a  path through the city.
Janáček Academy of Music and Performing Arts, named after Leoš Janáček, was founded in 1947 and is one of two academies of music and drama in the Czech Republic.
International film festival ''Cinema Mundi'' shows about 60 films competing for Oscar nomination in the category of Best Foreign Language Film.
In 1324 Queen Elisabeth Richeza of Poland founded the current Basilica of the Assumption of Our Lady which is now her final resting place.
In the mid 11th century, Moravia was divided into three separate territories; each one of them had its own ruler, coming from the Přemyslids dynasty, but independent of the other two, and subordinated only to the Bohemian ruler in Prague.
Road transport makes Brno an international crossroad of highways.
The etymology of the name ''Brno'' is disputed.
Over the past two decades Brno evolved into an important university city, the number of students of higher education institutions reached 89,000 in 2010.
In 1921 Brno became the capital of the Land of Moravia (Czech: ''země Moravská''); before that it was the capital of the Margraviate of Moravia.
Similarly important is the Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul.
Since the 1990s Brno has experienced a great cultural "rebirth", façades of historical monuments are being repaired and various exhibitions, shows, etc., are being established or extended.
And there is also one more interesting thing about the National Theatre Brno, the Mahen Theatre was the first theatre building which was illuminated by Thomas Edison's electric light bulbs in entire Europe, at that time it was a completely new invention and there were no power plants built in the city, so a small steam power plant was built nearby just to power the theatre, and Thomas Alva Edison came to Brno in 1911 to see this somewhat unique creation.
The school offers many foreign kids a great education full of fun and learning.
Today, the cemetery and synagogue are maintained by a Brno Jewish community once again.
usually attracts one or two hundred thousand visitors every day.
Špilberk Castle, originally a royal castle founded in the 13th century, was from the 17th century a fortress and feared prison (e.g.
At the beginning of the Communist Era in Czechoslovakia, in 1948, the government abolished Moravian autonomy and Brno hence ceased to be the capital of Moravia.
The city was also referred to as '''Brunn''' () in English, but this usage is not common today.
These assemblies made political, legal, and financial decisions.
Today it is one of the city's principal monuments.
In that year the Mozart family spent Christmas in Brno, this rare visit is commemorated by a statue of Mozart as a child in front of the Reduta Theatre and also the Reduta's ''Mozart Hall'' (cz: ''Mozartův sál'') was named after him.
It is part of a festival with a bold name "Brno - City in the Centre of Europe".
The National Theatre Brno is the leading scene of opera, drama and ballet in the city of Brno.
Brno Ossuary which is the second largest ossuary in Europe, after the Catacombs of Paris.
So the city has a long tradition in theatre productions, the first theatre plays in Brno took place probably in the 1660s in the ''City Tavern'', today's Reduta Theatre, however, the first "real theatre" with theatre boxes was built in 1733 in this complex.
For example, (football) FC Zbrojovka Brno, (ice hockey) HC Kometa Brno, (team handball) KP Brno, men and women basketball teams, four baseball teams (AVG Draci Brno, Hroši Brno, VSK Technika Brno, MZLU Express Brno), American football team (Brno Alligators), two rugby teams (RC Dragon Brno, RC Bystrc) and others.
By its area the largest one is Brno-Bystrc with  and the smallest is Brno-Nový Lískovec with .
A slight decrease in population after 1989 was caused by suburbanisation.
Ignis Brunensis is the biggest show of its kind held in Central Europe.
According to the 2011 census, Brno had 385,913 inhabitants.
Brno itself was not involved with the battle, but the French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte spent several nights here at that time and again in 1809.
In 1777 the bishopric of Brno was established; Mathias Franz Graf von Chorinsky Freiherr von Ledske was the first Bishop.
The city lies at the confluence of the Svitava and Svratka rivers and has about 400,000 inhabitants; its greater metropolitan area is home to more than 800,000 people while its larger urban zone had a population of about 730,000 in 2004.
Mendel University, named after the founder of genetics Gregor Mendel who created his revolutionary scientific theories in Brno, has roughly 10,000 students.
However, in last 20 years the temperature grows rapidly and summer days with temperature exceeding  are quite common.
http://www.isob.cz/en/
The city is gradually building the large city ring road (road I/42), several road tunnels were built (Tunnels Pisarky, Husovice, Hlinky and Královopolský) and more tunnels are planned.
This tool shows only cities with population over 300,000 in radius of .
In the years 1859-1864 the city fortification was almost completely removed.
In the so-called “Brünn death march”, beginning on 31 May 1945, about 27,000 German inhabitants of Brno were marched  to the Austrian border.
It is one of the most significant institutions for education and research in the Czech Republic and a respected Central European university.
Inside of the city limits there is the Brno Dam Lake, several ponds, and other standing bodies of water, for example reservoirs in the Marian Valley or the Žebětín Pond.
The weather box below shows data between years 1961 and 1990.
There are many other festivals regularly held in Brno, for instance the ''International Music Festival Brno'', the ''Spilberk International Music Festival'', the ''Summer Shakespeare Festival'', and many others...
Its urban agglomeration  has approximately 450 thousand residents.
Seats of these rulers and thus "capitals" of these territories were castles and towns of Brno, Olomouc, and Znojmo.
Not far from the city limits there is also one expressway, R52, leading to Vienna; another expressway, R43, which will connect Brno to northwestern Moravia, is planned.
The length of Brno is  measured from the east to the west and its overall area is .
Repertoire of this theatre consists primarily of musical and dramatical scene.
Finaly was initiated Central station referendum, the date of referendum is set on 7 and 8 October 2016, the same day as regional elections.
Another cultural tradition is an international fireworks competition, ''Ignis Brunensis'', that usually attracts tens of thousands of daily visitors.
12,000 Jewish inhabitants, including several of the city's better known personalities, who had a substantial contribution to the city's cultural life.
It perhaps comes from Old Czech ''brnie'' 'muddy, swampy.'
Today with over 20,000 students it ranks among the Czech republic's biggest technical universities.
The composer Leoš Janáček is also connected with the National Theatre Brno.
After the war only 1,033 people returned.
According to testimony collected by German sources, about 5,200 of them died during the march.
Brno is situated at the crossroads of ancient trade routes which have joined northern and southern European civilizations for centuries, and as a part of the Danube basin region.
The complex opened in 1928 and established the tradition of large exhibitions and trade fairs held in Brno.
Later estimates by Czech sources put the death toll at about 1,700, with most deaths due to an epidemic of shigellosis.
And there is also one long bikeway leading to Vienna, which is one of Brno's sister cities, the track is approximately  long.
From the mid 14th century to the early 15th century the Špilberk Castle had served as the permanent seat of the Margraves of Moravia (Moravian rulers); one of them was elected the King of the Romans.
The museum was founded in 1817 and its collections include over 6 million objects.
Since the whole achievement was considered impossible by normal human means, the man was later believed to have called on the devil for assistance, and he died in poverty as a result.
Denis Gardens were founded in the early 19th century and are the first public park in the present-day Czech Republic founded by public administration authorities, while Lužánky Park was founded by the emperor of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Since then Moravia has been divided into administrative regions and Brno is administrative centre of the South Moravian Region.
It is said that there was a terrible creature terrorizing the citizens of Brno.
Brno was first mentioned in Cosmas' ''Chronica Boëmorum'' dated to year 1091, when Bohemian king Vratislav II besieged his brother Conrad at Brno castle.
After the city's liberation by the Red Army on 26 April 1945 and the end of the war, ethnic German residents were forcibly expelled.
Brno is the seat of judicial authority of the Czech Republic – it is the seat of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Administrative Court, and the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office.
The Asteroid 2889 Brno was named after the city, as well as the Bren light machine gun ('''Br'''no + '''En'''field), one of the most famous weapons of World War II.
In 1243 Brno was granted the large and small city privileges by the King, and thus it was recognized as a royal city.
Alternative derivations are from a Slavic verb ''brniti'' (to armour or to fortify) or a Celtic language spoken in the area before it was overrun by Germanic peoples and later Slavic peoples (this theory would make it cognate with other Celtic words for hill, such as the Welsh word ''bryn'').
Theatres in Brno experienced a long development and the current seats of the theatres and their artistic ensembles might be considerably different from the original ones, for example the Mahen Theatre was originally called the City Theatre and until 1918 it performed exclusively in German and also it wasn't part of the National Theatre in Brno, there was similar situation regarding the Reduta Theatre.
Its larger urban zone had a population of about 730 thousand in 2004 while its greater metropolitan area is home to more than 800 thousand people.
The biggest public library in Brno is the Moravian Library, it's the second largest library in the Czech Republic with about 4 million volumes.
According to the Eurostat population estimate Brno had 367,729 inhabitants, which ranks it among the 100 largest cities of the EU.
Viktor Kaplan, inventor of the Kaplan turbine, spent nearly 30 years at German Technical University in Brno (which ceased to exist in 1945 and its property was transferred to Brno University of Technology).
In December 1805 the Battle of Austerlitz was fought near the city; the battle is also known as the "Battle of the Three Emperors".
Hantec is a unique dialect that originated in Brno.
After the end of the Thirty Years' War (1648), Brno retained its status as the sole capital.
Throughout its history, Brno's locals also referred to the town in other languages, including ''Brünn'' in German, ברין (''Brin'') in Yiddish and ''Bruna'' in Latin.
The city also plans to build a metro system (S-Bahn) because of locally overloaded trams and to lessen the congestion on the surface.
Brno is located in the southeastern part of the Czech Republic, at the confluence of the Svitava and Svratka rivers and there are also several brooks flowing through it including the Veverka, Ponávka, and Říčka.
During the 17th century Špilberk Castle was rebuilt as a huge baroque citadel.
In 1930, 200,000 inhabitants declared to be of Czech, and some 52,000 of German nationality, in both cases including the respective Jewish citizens.
Seven years later, Brno became the capital of the Land of Moravia-Silesia (Czech: ''země Moravskoslezská'').
The first permanent seat of the National Theatre Brno was established in 1884 and it was called ''Národní divadlo v Brně'' (en: ''the National Theatre in Brno''), today this institution owns the Mahen Theatre, built in 1882, Janáček Theatre built in 1965, and the Reduta Theatre which is Central Europe's oldest theatre.
Despite its urban character, some of the city districts still preserve traditional Moravian folklore, including folk festivals with traditional Moravian costumes (cz: ''kroje''), Moravian wines, folk music and dances.
Brno is home to a functionalist Synagogue and the largest Jewish cemetery in Moravia.
With over 40,000 students, Masaryk University is the largest university in Brno and the second biggest in the Czech republic.
According to the story, a local man wagered to fell the tree, to make a wheel out of it, and to roll the wheel to the city of Brno, all this within a single day.
Tennis player Lucie Šafářová comes from Brno as well as Lukáš Rosol, who managed to beat top-player Rafael Nadal in the second round of the 2012 Wimbledon Championships.
In 1919, after World War I, two neighbouring towns, Královo Pole and Husovice, and 21 other municipalities were annexed to Brno, creating Greater Brno ().
There is also a Technical Museum which is the largest in Moravia.
The Moravian Diet (cz: ''Moravský Zemský sněm''), the Moravian Land Tables (cz: ''Moravské Zemské desky''), and the Moravian Land Court (cz: ''Moravský Zemský soud'') were all seated in both cities at once.
The biggest gallery in Brno is the Moravian Gallery and again it is the second largest institution of its kind in the Czech Republic and the biggest in Moravia.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Brno has a borderline oceanic climate (''Cfb'') and a humid continental climate (''Dfb'') with cold winters and hot to warm summers.
The first documented professional Czech performance took place in 1767 again in the Reduta Theatre, the play was called ''Zamilovaný ponocný'' (en: ''Watchmen in Love'') performed by the Venice Theatre Company, the same year Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart performed in the theatre with his older sister Anna Maria (Nannerl).
There is also a horse-race course at Brno-Dvorska and an aeroclub airport in Medlánky.
Several hiking trails of the Czech Tourist Club also pass through Brno.
Despite the fact Terezín was not an extermination camp, 995 of people transported from Brno died there.
Another architectural monument of Brno is the functionalist Villa Tugendhat which has been included on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.
However, Brno was the official seat of the Moravian Margraves (rulers of Moravia), and later its geographical position closer to Vienna also became important.
File:Brno-Líšeň - Líšeňský zámek ve Staré Líšni focený od Kostelíčku (2).jpg|Líšeň Castle
Every September, Brno is home to a wine festival (''Slavnosti vína'') to celebrate the harvest in the surrounding wine-producing region.
It is the seat of a number of state authorities, including the Ombudsman, and the Office for the Protection of Competition.
The estimated population of the South Moravian Region is 1.2 million people.
'''Brno''' (; , German: ''Brünn'') is the second largest city in the Czech Republic by population and area, the largest Moravian city, and the historical capital city of the Margraviate of Moravia.
The city is historically connected with Vienna which lies a mere  to the south.
In 1642 Olomouc surrendered to the Swedish army which then stayed there for 8 years.
Its elevation above the sea level varies from  to , and the highest point in the area is the Kopeček Hill.
Executions were public.
Brno Exhibition Centre ranks among the largest exhibition centres in Europe (23rd in the world).
This was later confirmed by the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II in 1782, and again in 1849 by the Moravian constitution.
Brno has the oldest theatre building in Central Europe, it's the Reduta Theatre at Zelný trh (en: ''the Vegetable Market'').
The town has a long history of motor racing, among other events, the Masaryk Circuit hosts the prestigious Moto GP championship (since 1965).
Today, it consists of nine faculties, with more than 190 departments, institutes and clinics.
The current main station building is outdated and lacks sufficient operating capacity but the construction of the new station has been postponed several times for various reasons.
As a historic memento to victory over the Swedish army in 1645, the local Petrov Cathedral rings noon an hour earlier, at 11&nbsp;o'clock because the locals and Swedish army were in stalemate and the Swedish general said he would withdraw if his army had not won by noon; the bell ringer tricked him by ringing the bell an hour early.
The city districts of Brno significantly varies in their size by both population and area.
Another renowned architect who significantly shaped Brno was Arnošt Wiesner.
Gregor Mendel conducted his groundbreaking experiments in genetics while he was a monk at St. Thomas's Abbey in Brno.
The people had never seen such a beast before, so they called it a dragon.
Industrial facilities such as arms factory Československá zbrojovka and aircraft engine factory Zweigwerk (after the war it became Zbrojovka's subsidiary Zetor) and the city centre were targeted by several Allied bombardment campaigns between 1944 and 1945.
Railway transport first started to operate in the city in 1839 on line Brno–Vienna, this was the first operating railway line in the current Czech Republic.
In reality the dragon was a crocodile, the preserved body of which is now displayed at the entrance of the Old Town Hall.
Otherwise, until 1642 Olomouc was larger than Brno by population, and it was the seat of the only Roman Catholic diocese in Moravia.
The Brno basin has been inhabited since prehistoric times, but the town's direct predecessor was a fortified settlement of the Great Moravia Empire known as ''Staré Zámky'' which was inhabited from the Neolithic Age to the early 11th century.
Another ossuary is Capuchin crypt with mummies of Capuchin monks and some of the notable people of their era, like architect Mořic Grimm or the famous mercenary leader Baron Trenk.
Brno is surrounded by woody hills from three sides; a significant part of the area of the city is forest, about , i.e.
There are two motorways on the southern edge of the city, D1 leading to Ostrava and to Prague and D2 leading to Bratislava.
Keeping his word, the general and his army left.
The cathedral was built  during the 14th and 15th centuries in place of an 11th-century chapel.
This international school is based upon  a Cambridge curriculum which allows each student to get all the necessary credits to move on to college.
Between the years 1971 and 1978 some plays were performed at Brno Exhibition Centre due to reconstruction of the Mahen Theatre.
Crocodile motifs are common in Brno.
However, there is a considerable difference in the size of historical preservation zones of both cities.
Since 1968, Brno has been a permanent fixture on the European Touring Car Championship (ETCC) series.
The most populated city district of Brno is the Brno-Centre which has over 91 thousand of residents and the less populated are Brno-Ořešín and Brno-Útěchov with about 500 residents.
This is a wagon wheel made from a tree found and felled fifty miles away from the city.
It was designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2001.
In 1869 a horsecar service started to operate in Brno, it was the first tram service in the Czech lands.
