Black or African American
Brooklyn contains dozens of distinct neighborhoods representing many of the major culturally identified groups found within New York City.
Brooklyn is referred to as a twin city of New York in the 1883 poem, "The New Colossus" by Emma Lazarus, which appears on a plaque inside the Statue of Liberty.
In 1857 the state legislature merged the Brooklyn force with that of New York City.
The median income for households in Brooklyn was $32,135, and the median income for a family was $36,188.
In parallel development, the Town of Bushwick, a little farther up the river, saw the incorporation of the Village of Williamsburgh in 1827, which separated as the Town of Williamsburgh in 1840 and formed the short-lived City of Williamsburgh in 1851.
Brooklyn was an independent incorporated city (and previously an authorized village and town within the provisions of the New York State Constitution) until January 1, 1898 when, after a long political campaign and public relations battle during the 1890s, according to the new Municipal Charter of "Greater New York", Brooklyn was consolidated with the other cities, boroughs, and counties to form the modern "City of New York" surrounding the Upper New York Bay with five constituent boroughs.
On the other hand, the Brooklyn Public Library is an independent nonprofit organization partially funded by the government of New York City, but also by the government of New York State, the U.S. federal government, and private donors.
Major ethnic publications include the Brooklyn-Queens Catholic paper ''The Tablet'', ''Hamodia'', an Orthodox Jewish daily and ''The Jewish Press'', an Orthodox Jewish weekly.
Irish Americans can be found throughout Brooklyn, in low to moderate concentrations in the neighborhoods of Bay Ridge, Marine Park, Gerritsen Beach, and Vinegar Hill.
The city had a population of 25,000 in 1834, but the police department only comprised 12 men on the day shift and another 12 at night.
In the earliest days of organized baseball, Brooklyn teams dominated the new game.
New York's famous yellow cabs also provide transportation in Brooklyn, although they are less numerous in the borough.
The largest concentration is in Sunset Park along 8th Avenue, which is known for Chinese culture.
The ''Queen Mary 2'', one of the world's largest ocean liners, was designed specifically to fit under the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, the longest suspension bridge in the United States.
The New York University Tandon School of Engineering, the United States' second oldest private institute of technology, founded in 1854, has its main campus in Downtown's MetroTech Center, a commercial, civic and educational redevelopment project of which it was a key sponsor.
However, Kings County, coterminous with Brooklyn, is New York State's fourth-smallest county by land area and third-smallest by total area.
Given New York City's role as a crossroads for legal and illegal immigration from around the world, Brooklyn has evolved a globally cosmopolitan ambience of its own, demonstrating a robust and growing demographic and cultural diversity with respect to metrics including nationality, religion, race, and domiciliary partnership.
It also has books and periodicals in all the major languages spoken in Brooklyn, including English, Russian, Chinese, Spanish, Hebrew, and Haitian&nbsp;Kreyòl, as well as French, Yiddish, Hindi, Bengali, Polish, Italian, and Arabic.
Graduate programs include library and information science, architecture, and urban planning.
As nearly 80% of Bushwick's population is Hispanic, its residents having created many businesses to support their various national and distinct traditions in food and other items.
Brighton Beach features many Russian and Ukrainian businesses and has been nicknamed ''Little Russia'' and ''Little Odessa'', respectively.
Over 60 ethnic groups, writing in 42 languages, publish some 300 non-English language magazines and newspapers in New York City.
As both a seaport and a manufacturing center, Brooklyn was well prepared to contribute to the Union's strengths in shipping and manufacturing.
Brooklyn also has a storied sports history.
They fought from 1861 to 1864, wore red the entire war, and were the only regiment named after a city; President Lincoln called them into service personally, making them part of a handful of three-year enlisted soldiers in April 1861.
The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.41.
Brooklyn is also home to many banks and credit unions.
The College ranked in the top 10 nationally for the second consecutive year in Princeton Review’s 2006 guidebook, ''America’s Best Value Colleges''.
They are an affiliate of the New York Mets.
Our Time Press published weekly by DBG Media covers the Village of Brooklyn with a motto of "The Local paper with the Global View".
By 1841, with the appearance of the ''The Brooklyn Eagle, and Kings County Democrat'' published by Alfred G. Stevens, the growing city across the East River from Manhattan was producing its own prominent newspaper.
Italian Americans are mainly concentrated in the neighborhoods of Bensonhurst, Dyker Heights, Bay Ridge, Bath Beach, Cobble Hill, and Carroll Gardens where there are many Italian restaurants, bakeries, delicatessens, pizzerias, cafes, and social clubs.
Town and Village were combined to form the first, kernel incarnation of the City of Brooklyn in 1834.
Pratt Institute, in Clinton Hill, is a private college founded in 1887 with programs in engineering, architecture, and the arts.
The most controversial political issue is the proposed Atlantic Yards, a large housing and sports arena project.
The population density was 34,920/square&nbsp;mile (13,480/km²).
This high school was built from 1930 to 1933 at a cost of about $6,000,000 and is 12 stories high.
Brooklyn Tech is noted for its famous alumni (including two Nobel Laureates), its academics, and the large number of graduates attending prestigious universities.
A streetcar line connecting Brooklyn with Queens was proposed by the city in February 2016, with the planned timeline calling for service to begin around 2024.
It was built by the Dutch, and the foundation can be seen today.
Andrew Haskell Green and other progressives said Yes, and eventually they prevailed against the ''Daily Eagle'' and other conservative forces.
After a 43-year hiatus, professional baseball returned to the borough in 2001 with the Brooklyn Cyclones, a minor league team that plays in MCU Park in Coney Island.
Party platforms center on affordable housing, education and economic development.
The collections will include the subjects of art, theater, dance, music, film, photography and architecture.
Brooklyn once had a National Football League team named the Brooklyn Lions in the 1920s, who played at Ebbets Field.
In 1989, the Supreme Court of the United States declared the Board of Estimate unconstitutional because Brooklyn, the most populous borough, had no greater effective representation on the Board than Staten Island, the least populous borough; it was a violation of the high court's 1964 "one man, one vote" reading of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Over 600,000 Jews, particularly Orthodox Jews and Hasidic Jews, have become concentrated in Borough Park, Williamsburg, and Flatbush, where there are many yeshivas, synagogues, and kosher delicatessens, as well as many other Jewish businesses.
It is geographically adjacent to the borough of Queens at the southwestern end of Long Island.
Since 2010 it has evolved into a thriving hub of entrepreneurship and high technology startup firms, and of postmodern art and design.
Construction and services are the fastest growing sectors.
St. Francis is considered by the ''New York Times'' as one of the more diverse colleges, and was ranked one of the best baccalaureate colleges by both ''Forbes'' magazine and ''U.S.
Since the late 20th century, Brooklyn has benefited from a steady influx of financial back office operations from Manhattan, the rapid growth of a high-tech and entertainment economy in DUMBO, and strong growth in support services such as accounting, personal supply agencies, and computer services firms.
Both major institutions were lost in the 1950s: the paper closed in 1955 after unsuccessful attempts at a sale following a reporters' strike, and the baseball team decamped for Los Angeles in a realignment of major league baseball in 1957.
Pockets of majority Republican influence exist in Gravesend, Bensonhurst, Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights and Midwood by U.S. Representative Dan Donovan and New York State Senator Marty Golden.
Industrial access to the waterfront was improved by the Gowanus Canal and the canalized Newtown Creek.
Brooklyn's Greek Americans live throughout the borough, but their businesses today are concentrated in Downtown Brooklyn near Atlantic Avenue.
Brooklyn's most populous racial group, white, declined from 97.2% in 1930 to 46.9% by 1990.
It later became the most popular and highest circulation afternoon paper in America.
East of Dahill Road, lettered avenues (like Avenue M) run east and west, and numbered streets have the prefix "East".
However, rents and costs of living have since increased dramatically in these same neighborhoods, forcing artists to move to somewhat less expensive neighborhoods in Brooklyn or across Upper New York Bay to locales in New Jersey, such as Jersey City or Hoboken.
Kingsborough Community College is a junior college in the City University of New York system, located in Manhattan Beach.
, the borough's unemployment rate was 5.9%.
Lacking the patroon and tenant farmer system established along the Hudson River Valley, this agricultural county unusually came to have one of the highest percentages of slavery among the population in the "Original Thirteen Colonies" along the Atlantic Ocean eastern coast of North America.
The Nets and Islanders moved into the borough in 2012 and 2015, respectively, and both play their home games at Barclays Center in Prospect Heights.
Brooklyn has a thriving ethnic press.
Under the Köppen climate classification, using the  coldest month (January) isotherm, Brooklyn experiences a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), with partial shielding from the Appalachian Mountains and moderating influences from the Atlantic Ocean.
Coney Island Avenue is home to ''Little Pakistan'' as Church Avenue is to Bangladeshis.
NY Waterway offers commuter services from the western shore of Brooklyn to points in Lower Manhattan, Midtown, and Long Island City, as well as tours and charters.
However, the East River shore was growing too fast for the three-year-old infant City of Williamsburgh; it, along with its Town of Bushwick hinterland, was subsumed within a greater City of Brooklyn in 1854.
Brooklyn became a preferred site for artists and hipsters to set up live/work spaces after being priced out of the same types of living arrangements in Manhattan.
As of 2005, 69.7% of registered voters in Brooklyn were Democrats.
NYU-Tandon is one of the 18 schools and colleges that comprise New York University (NYU).
In 2000, 91% of the approximately 38,704 business establishments in Brooklyn had fewer than 20 employees.
Ferry Road to Jamaica Pass became Fulton Street to East New York.
Of the 880,727 households in Brooklyn, 38.6% were married couples living together, 22.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.7% were non-families.
Brooklyn has several local newspapers: The ''Brooklyn Daily Eagle'', ''Bay Currents'' (Oceanfront Brooklyn), ''Brooklyn View'', ''The Brooklyn Paper'', and Courier-Life Publications.
Originally these communities were mostly Jewish; however, the non-Jewish Russian and Ukrainian communities of Brighton Beach now also represent various aspects of Russian and Ukrainian culture.
In 1971, Voorhees was incorporated into City Tech.
Of these, most come from Chicago, Detroit, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, Boston, Cincinnati, and Seattle.
After the Civil War, trolley lines and other transport brought urban sprawl beyond Prospect Park and into the center of the county.
Brooklyn had reached its natural municipal boundaries at the ends of Kings County.
Many incidents and documents relating to this period are in Gabriel Furman's early (1824) compilation.
Brooklyn has 18 of the city's 59 community districts, each served by an unpaid Community Board with advisory powers under the city's Uniform Land Use Review Procedure.
In addition to its specialized Business Library in Brooklyn Heights, the Library is preparing to construct its new Visual & Performing Arts Library (VPA) in the BAM Cultural District, which will focus on the link between new and emerging arts and technology and house traditional and digital collections.
First established as a shipbuilding facility in 1801, the Brooklyn Navy Yard employed 70,000 people at its peak during World War II and was then the largest employer in the borough.
Along with gentrification, many of Brooklyn's neighborhoods are also becoming increasingly diverse, with an influx of immigrants integrating its neighborhoods.
Today, if each of the five boroughs were a separate city, Brooklyn would rank as the third-most populous city in the U.S., behind Los Angeles and Chicago.
As a twin city to New York, it played a role in national affairs that was later overshadowed by its century-old submergence into its old partner and rival.
Established in 1946, City Tech can trace its roots to 1881 when the Technical Schools of the Metropolitan Museum of Art were renamed the New York Trade School.
Eighteen New York City Subway services, including the Franklin Avenue Shuttle, traverse the borough.
The history of European settlement in Brooklyn spans more than 350 years.
From 1968–1979 Seatrain Shipbuilding was the major employer.
Most employers in Brooklyn are small businesses.
The terminal is located near the Atlantic Avenue&nbsp;– Barclays Center subway station, with ten connecting subway services.
Bedford-Stuyvesant is home to one of the most famous African American communities in the city, along with Brownsville, East New York, and Coney Island.
Brooklyn Technical High School has the second-largest auditorium in New York City (after Radio City Music Hall), with a seating capacity of over 3,000.
The current District Attorney of Kings County is Kenneth P. Thompson, a Democrat elected in 2013.
That institution—which became the Voorhees Technical Institute many decades later—was soon a model for the development of technical and vocational schools worldwide.
Since 1990 the Borough President has acted as an advocate for the borough at the mayoral agencies, the City Council, the New York state government, and corporations.
However, new light-manufacturing concerns packaging organic and high-end food have sprung up in the old plant.
Crown Heights and Flatbush are home to many of Brooklyn's West Indian restaurants and bakeries.
The Brooklyn Museum, opened in 1897, is New York City's second-largest public art museum.
Voters complained of inadequate protection and excessive costs.
SeaStreak also offers weekday ferry service between the Brooklyn Army Terminal and the Manhattan ferry slips at Pier 11 downtown and East 34th Street in midtown.
The Verrazano-Narrows Bridge links Brooklyn with the more suburban borough of Staten Island.
Started by natives of Trinidad and Tobago, the West Indian Labor Day Parade takes place every Labor Day on Eastern Parkway.
Brooklyn Law School was founded in 1901 and is notable for its diverse student body.
Strong international immigration to Brooklyn generates jobs in services, retailing and construction.
According to the 2010 United States Census, Brooklyn's population was 42.8% White, including 35.7% non-Hispanic White; 34.3% Black, including 31.9% non-Hispanic black; 10.5% Asian; 0.5% Native American; 0.0% (rounded) Pacific Islander; 3.0% Multiracial American; and 8.8% from Other races.
Brooklyn lies at the southwestern end of Long Island, and the borough's western border constitutes the island's western tip.
Brooklyn's most famous historical team, the Brooklyn Dodgers, named for "trolley dodgers" played at Ebbets Field.
Puerto Ricans and Dominicans are predominant in Bushwick, Williamsburg, and East New York, while Mexicans are predominant in Sunset Park and Panamanians in Crown Heights.
The great majority of limited-access expressways and parkways are located in the western and southern sections of Brooklyn.
* Coney Island&nbsp;– Stillwell Avenue
Toward the end of the 19th century, the City of Brooklyn experienced its final, explosive growth spurt.
''Brooklyn Magazine'' is one of the few glossy magazines about Brooklyn.
Major thoroughfares include Atlantic Avenue, Fourth Avenue, 86th Street, Kings Highway, Bay Parkway, Ocean Parkway, Eastern Parkway, Linden Boulevard, McGuinness Boulevard, Flatbush Avenue, Pennsylvania Avenue, and Nostrand Avenue.
Brooklyn's major professional sports teams are the NBA's Brooklyn Nets and the NHL's New York Islanders.
Brooklyn's current Borough President is Eric Adams, elected as a Democrat in November 2013 with 90.8% of the vote.
There are 58 library branches, placing one within a half mile of each Brooklyn resident.
Each of the city's five counties (coterminous with each borough) has its own criminal court system and District Attorney, the chief public prosecutor who is directly elected by popular vote.
Brooklyn's lesbian community is the largest out of all of the New York City boroughs.
A great victory arch was built at what was then the south end of town to celebrate the armed forces; this place is now called Grand Army Plaza.
Adams replaced popular Borough President Marty Markowitz, also a Democrat, who partially used his office to promote tourism and new development for Brooklyn.
Midwood during the early 20th century was filled with ethnic Irish, then filled with Jewish residents for nearly 50 years, and is slowly becoming a Pakistani enclave.
The borough is home to the bi-weekly cultural guide ''The L Magazine'' and the arts and politics monthly ''Brooklyn Rail'', as well as the arts and cultural quarterly ''Cabinet''.
There are three commuter rail stations in Brooklyn: East New York, Nostrand Avenue, and Atlantic Terminal, the terminus of the Atlantic Branch of the Long Island Rail Road.
Later tenants include industrial design firms, food processing businesses, artisans, and the film and television production industry.
Brooklyn's main Hispanic groups are Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, Dominicans, and Panamanians; they are spread out throughout the borough.
According to the Leiter Report, a compendium of law school rankings published by Brian Leiter, Brooklyn Law School places 31st nationally for quality of students.
It covers about half of a city block.
South of Avenue O, related numbered streets west of Dahill Road use the "West" designation.
To the east of Brooklyn lies the borough of Queens, which contains John F. Kennedy International Airport in that borough's Howard Beach neighborhood, approximately two miles from the border of the East New York neighborhood of Brooklyn.
Males had a median income of $34,317, which was higher than females, whose median income was $30,516.
In addition, many newspapers published abroad, such as ''The Daily Gleaner'' and ''The Star'' of Jamaica, are available in Brooklyn.
* Jay Street&nbsp;– MetroTech
CUNY's New York City College of Technology (City Tech) of The City University of New York (CUNY) (Downtown Brooklyn/Brooklyn Heights) is the largest public college of technology in New York State and a national model for technological education.
Sunset Park's population is 42% Hispanic, made up of these various ethnic groups.
Numbered streets prefixed by "North" and "South" in Williamsburg, and "Bay", "Beach", "Brighton", "Plumb", "Paerdegat" or "Flatlands" along the southern and southwestern waterfront are loosely based on the old grids of the original towns of Kings County that eventually consolidated to form Brooklyn.
A Cross-Harbor Rail Tunnel, originally proposed in the 1920s as a core project for the then new Port Authority of New York is again being studied and discussed as a way to ease freight movements across a large swath of the metropolitan area.
The merger was called the "Great Mistake of 1898" by many newspapers of the day, and the phrase still denotes Brooklyn pride among old-time Brooklynites.
The waterfront from Gowanus Bay to Greenpoint was developed with piers and factories.
In the first decades of the 21st century Brooklyn has experienced a renaissance as an avant garde destination for hipsters, with concomitant gentrification, dramatic house price increases, and a decrease in housing affordability.
Early in the next century, under their new name of Brooklyn Dodgers, they brought baseball to Ebbets Field, beyond Prospect Park.
The only such New York State institution accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, it is one of the few globally to have a permanent collectionover 30,000 cultural objects and natural history specimens.
Greek-owned diners are also found throughout the borough, but many Greeks have re-located off of Atlantic Avenue due to demographic shift.
Of all households 27.8% are made up of individuals and 9.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
News & World Report''.
As of 2010, 54.12% (1,240,416) of Brooklyn residents ages 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 17.16% (393,340) spoke Spanish, 6.46% (148,012) Chinese, 5.31% (121,607) Russian, 3.47% (79,469) Yiddish, 2.75% (63,019) French Creole, 1.35% (31,004) Italian, 1.20% (27,440) Hebrew, 1.01% (23,207) Polish, 0.99% (22,763) French, 0.95% (21,773) Arabic, 0.85% (19,388) various Indic languages, 0.70% (15,936) Urdu, and African languages were spoken as a main language by 0.54% (12,305) of the population over the age of five.
In 1894, residents of Brooklyn and the other counties voted by a slight majority to merge, effective in 1898.
The second recorded game of baseball was played near what is today Fort Greene Park on October 24, 1845.
Brooklyn's Polish are largely concentrated in Greenpoint, which is home to Little Poland.
Walter O'Malley, the team's owner at the time, is still vilified, even by Brooklynites too young to remember the Dodgers as Brooklyn's ball club.
Brooklyn Technical High School (commonly called Brooklyn Tech), a New York City public high school, is the largest specialized high school for science, mathematics, and technology in the United States.
The two combined in shipbuilding; the ironclad ''Monitor'' was built in Brooklyn.
Brooklyn has more women and girls, with 88.4 males for every 100 females.
The poem calls New York Harbor "the air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame".
Brooklyn's water borders are extensive and varied, including Jamaica Bay; the Atlantic Ocean; The Narrows, separating Brooklyn from the borough of Staten Island in New York City and crossed by the Verrazano–Narrows Bridge; Upper New York Bay, separating Brooklyn from Jersey City and Bayonne in the U.S. state of New Jersey; and the East River, separating Brooklyn from the borough of Manhattan in New York City and traversed by the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, the Brooklyn Bridge, the Manhattan Bridge, the Williamsburg Bridge, and numerous routes of the New York City Subway.
Since 1896, Brooklyn has had the same boundaries as '''Kings County''', the most populous county in the U.S. state of New York, and the second-most densely populated county in the United States, after the county of New York (which is coextensive with the borough of Manhattan).
Brooklyn was once served by an extensive network of streetcars, many of which were replaced by the public bus network that covers the entire borough.
The Brooklyn campus has strong science and medical technology programs, at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
Brooklyn's African American and Caribbean communities are spread throughout much of Brooklyn.
The Medical Center comprises the College of Medicine, College of Health Related Professions, College of Nursing, School of Public Health, School of Graduate Studies, and University Hospital of Brooklyn.
Many Brooklyn neighborhoods are ethnic enclaves.
Many Chinese restaurants can be found throughout Sunset Park, and the area hosts a popular Chinese New Year celebration.
The City of New York has an official television station, run by the NYC Media Group, which features programming based in Brooklyn.
Like other Hispanic neighborhoods in New York City, Bushwick has an established Puerto Rican presence, along with an influx of many Dominicans, South Americans, Central Americans, Mexicans, as well as a more recent influx of Puerto Ricans.
Brooklyn totals  in area, of which  is land (73%), and  is water (27%); the borough is the second-largest in land area among the boroughs of New York City.
Racetracks, amusement parks, and beach resorts opened in Brighton Beach, Coney Island, and elsewhere in the southern part of the county.
Since 2010, the population of Brooklyn was estimated by the United States Census Bureau to have increased 5.3% to 2,636,735, as of 2015 – Brooklyn's estimated population represented 30.8% of New York City's estimated population of 8,550,405; 33.6% of Long Island's population of 7,838,722; and 13.3% of New York State's population of 19,795,791.
Brooklyn is home to a large and growing of same-sex couples.
Brooklyn's neighborhoods are dynamic in ethnic composition.
Much of Brooklyn has only named streets, but Park Slope, Bay Ridge, Sunset Park, Bensonhurst, and Borough Park and the other western sections have numbered streets running approximately northwest to southeast, and numbered avenues going approximately northeast to southwest.
Brooklyn has an annual, celebrated Carnival in the tradition of pre-Lenten celebrations in the islands.
Brooklyn Community Access Television is the borough's public access channel.
After the war the Henry Ward Beecher Monument was built downtown to honor a famous local abolitionist.
Bushwick is the largest hub of Brooklyn's Hispanic American community.
Pratt has over 4700 students, with most at its Brooklyn campus.
Each borough president had a powerful administrative role derived from having a vote on the New York City Board of Estimate, which was responsible for creating and approving the city's budget and proposals for land use.
Each board has a paid district manager who acts as an interlocutor with city agencies.
According to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, there were 37 banks and 26 credit unions operating in the borough in 2010.
Just two years later, the Dodgers moved to Los Angeles.
Courier-Life Publications, owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, is Brooklyn's largest chain of newspapers.
Today, Arab Americans and Pakistani Americans along with other Muslim communities have moved into the southwest portion of Brooklyn, particularly to Bay Ridge, where there are many Middle Eastern restaurants, hookah lounges, halal shops, Islamic shops and mosques.
Among them the quarterly "L'Idea", a bilingual magazine printed in Italian and English since 1974.
Pakistani Independence Day is celebrated every year with parades and parties on Coney Island Avenue.
Hispanics and Latinos made up 19.8% of Brooklyn's population.
These names often reflect the bodies of water or beaches around them, such as Plumb Beach or Paerdegat Basin.
The only municipal change seen was the secession of the eastern section of the Town of Flatbush as the Town of New Lots in 1852.
Basketball legend Michael Jordan was born in Brooklyn though he grew up in Wilmington, North Carolina.
However, the area was not formally settled as a town.
Major stations, out of the 170 currently in Brooklyn, include:
Most container ship cargo operations have shifted to the New Jersey side of New York Harbor, while the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal in Red Hook is a focal point for New York's growing cruise industry.
The median age was 33 years.
In 1947 Jackie Robinson was hired by the Dodgers as the first African-American player in Major League Baseball in the modern era.
There is also daily express bus service into Manhattan.
Founded in 1970, Medgar Evers College is a senior college of the City University of New York, with a mission to develop and maintain high quality, professional, career-oriented undergraduate degree programs in the context of a liberal arts education.
The colony's capital, New Amsterdam across the East River, obtained its charter later than the village of Brooklyn did, in 1653.
Brooklyn Tech opened in 1922.
