About 95% of the brown bear population in the United States is in Alaska, though in the lower 48 states, they are repopulating gradually but steadily along the Rockies and the western Great Plains.
It may overlap with ''U.
A study of male-inherited Y chromosome DNA sequence found that brown bears, over the past few 10,000 years, have shown strong male-biased dispersal That study found surprisingly similar Y chromosomes in brown bear populations as far apart as Norway and coastal Alaska, indicating extensive gene flow across Eurasia and North America.
Copulation is vigorous and prolonged and can last up to an hour, although the mean time is about 23–24 minutes.
Adult shoulder height averaged  in Yellowstone (for any bear measured five or more years old) and a median of  (for adults only 10 or more years old) in Slovakia.
The smallest North American brown bear, formerly from northern Mexico, including Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Sonora, southwestern United States including southern ranges of Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico
If the mother does not gain enough weight to survive through the winter, the embryo does not implant and is reabsorbed into the body.
Brown bears have the broadest skull of any extant ursine bear, only the afforementioned most herbivorous living bears exceed them in relative breadth of the skull.
Most bears of this race are fairly dark but some are as pale as grizzly bears.
The Marsican brown bear in central Italy is believed to have a population of just 30 to 40 bears.
Adult male bears are particularly aggressive and are avoided by adolescent and subadult males both at concentrated feeding opportunities and chance encounters.
Older and larger females within a population tend to give birth to larger litters.
This subspecies is called "clade II" by Waits, and others, and is part of the former subspecies identified as ''U.
In the mid-19th century United States, the brown bear was termed "Old Ephraim" and sometimes as "Moccasin Joe".
Habitat while still extant was the Atlas Mountains and adjacent areas in North Africa, from Morocco to Libya.
They are told to look for grizzly scat in camping areas, and be careful to carry the bells and whistles in those areas.
However, as with many very large animals, many reported outsized wild brown bears are based on dated hunting reports with often only the skins, which can be stretched several feet beyond their natural dimensions in life, taken from the field.
In addition to the native Atlas bear the Romans apparently imported bears from Spain for spectacles with some escaping and founding a population in Africa, though it is doubtful that they still persist today.
As bears reclaim parts of their range, they may eat livestock as sheep and goat are relatively easy for a bear to kill.
The California golden bear is the state animal of California.
Due to their roughly corresponding body sizes, the two races and the species can both legitimately be considered the largest living member of the bear family Ursidae and largest extant terrestrial carnivores.
Roots and bulbs become critical in autumn for some inland bear populations if fruit crops are poor.
Northern Europe is home to a large bear population, with an estimated 2,500 (range 2,350–2,900) in Sweden, about 1,600 in Finland, about 700 in Estonia and 70 in Norway, totaling to nearly 5,000 individuals in the wild.
In its much longer history in Eurasia, brown bears diverged from the two species of cave bear, the giant (''U.
The populations in these countries are generally very small and fragmented, thus at high risk of genetic isolation, and they occupy only small segments of their former range here.
Due to their propensity for digging, brown bears are able to smell out active subterranean burrows of these small mammals and either wait quietly or furiously dig away until the animals are either displaced and lunged at or are cornered in their burrows.
Today, there is still a shrine at Rokusensawa (六線沢), where the event took place, in memory of the victims of the incident.
They’ve been allied with both the east Siberian brown bear, which is found in northern Mongolia somewhat north of the Gobi desert, and the Tibetan blue bear, with which it is most often considered synonymous is distributed hundreds of miles to the south.
These smallest brown bear races are characteristically found in “barren ground” type habitats, i.e.
In Eurasia, the size of bears roughly increases from the west to the east, with the largest bears there native to eastern Russia.
The largest populations are in Russia with 120,000, the United States with 32,500, and Canada with around 25,000.The brown bear currently occurs in the countries of Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra (recently reoccupied), Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan (possibly extinct), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic (possibly only vagrants), Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, India, Iran, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia (extinct before WWII; possibly vagrants from Estonia or Russia after WWII), Republic of Macedonia, Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, North Korea, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United States, and Uzbekistan.
The average weight of adult male bears from 19 populations, from around the world and various subspecies (including both large and small bodied subspecies), was found to  while adult females from 24 populations were found to average .
The polar bear is a recent offshoot of the brown bear.
Larger than most other grizzly bear populations, with male sizes approaching the great bears of coastal Alaska.
When bears come to associate human activity with a "food reward", they are likely to continue to become emboldened; the likelihood of human-bear encounters increases, as they may return to the same location despite relocation.
However, bears can easily lose their natural cautiousness upon being attracted to human-created food sources, such as garbage dumps, litter bins, and dumpsters.
The variety of fruits consumed is high, with most of the well-known, wild fruiting plants in temperate North America and Eurasia attracting brown bears in late summer and fall.
In direct confrontations, people who run are statistically more likely to be attacked than those who stand their ground.
*Whitaker (1996), of the National Audubon Society, and Nowak (1999) accepted cases of male Kodiaks weighing , respectively.
Interactions with these large cats were probably not highly disparate from those that continue today in brown bears with the Siberian tiger.
Transcaucasia, Iraq, Turkey (Asia Minor), Iran, western Afghanistan, Pakistan, western Himalayas and the Pamir-Alay and Tien Shan mountains, Despite historical presence in Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic (the races’ namesake), it is believed to extinct in these countries now.
Brown bears have difficulty digesting large quantities of tough, fibrous foods.
Although not typically able to capture a healthy grown bird, eggs, nestlings and fledglings of large bird species can be very attractive to brown bears.
While the brown bear's range has shrunk and it has faced local extinctions, it remains listed as a least concern species by the IUCN with a total population of approximately 200,000.
Yellowstone National Park, a reserve located in the western United States, contains prime habitat for the grizzly bear (''Ursus arctos horribilis''), and due to the enormous number of visitors, human-bear encounters are common.
In Russia, it estimated that one in a thousand on-foot encounters with brown bears results in attack.
The width of the zygomatic arches in males is , and  in females.
Males always wander further than females due to both increasing access to females and food sources while females are advantaged by smaller territories in part since it decreases the likelihood of encounters with male bears who may endanger their cubs.
In linear measurements and mean body mass, several subspecies may vie for the title of smallest race, although thus far their reported body masses broadly overlaps with those of the smaller-bodied populations of Eurasian brown and grizzly bears.
The tribe members who dealt the killing blow were highly esteemed among their compatriots.
Eurasian lynx (''Lynx lynx''), the largest type of lynx and the only to regularly take large prey, is similarly an habitual victim of kleptoparasitism to brown bears throughout Eurasia.
Honey bees and wasps are important supplemental foods in Eurasia from the furthest west of their range, in Spain, to the furthest east, in Hokkaido.
Brown bears of the compact Gobi Desert population, which is not usually listed as a distinct subspecies in recent decades, weigh around  between the sexes so are similar in weight to bears from the Himalayas and even heavier than grizzlies from Jasper National Park.
A very large bear with a broad muzzle.
This species may eat birds and their eggs, including almost entirely ground- or rock-nesting species.
A gradual diminishment in body size is noted in grizzly bears from the sub-Arctic zone, from the Brooks Range to the Mackenzie Mountains, presumably because food becomes much sparser in such regions, although perhaps the most northerly recorded grizzly bears ever, in the Northwest Territories, was a large and healthy male weighing , more than twice as much as an average male weighs near the Arctic Circle.
In Yellowstone National Park, home ranges for females are up to  and up to  for males.
Ten people a year on average are killed by brown bears in Russia, more than all the other parts of brown bear’s international range combined, although Russia also holds more brown bears than all other parts of the world combined.
North American brown bears have at times been so feared by the natives, that they were rarely hunted, especially alone.
a. arctos'' and ''U.
At birth, the cubs are blind, toothless, hairless, and may weigh from , again reportedly based on the age and condition of the mother.
Brown bears seldom attack humans on sight, and usually avoid people.
The delineation in Eurasia between areas where aggressiveness of bears tends to increase is the Ural Mountains, although the bears of eastern Europe are somewhat more aggressive than those of western Europe.
In Scandinavia, there are only four known cases since 1902 of bear encounters which have resulted in death.
The paws of the brown bear are quite large.
Though grizzly attacks were rare in the backcountry before 1970, the number of attacks increased to an average of approximately one per year during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.
and muskoxen (''Ovibos moschatus'').
In many inland portions of North America, the diet of grizzly bears is between 80 and 90% plant-based but animal meat can be much more important in some areas.
In comparison, the giant cave bear appeared to enter a genetic bottleneck that started a population decline some 25,000 years before the species’ extinction.
Similarly, in British Columbia, bears of the two sexes travel relatively compact home ranges of  and .
Campers are often told to wear bright colored red ribbons and bells, and carry whistles to ward off bears.
In summer through autumn, a brown bear can double its weight from the spring, gaining up to  of fat, on which it relies to make it through winter, when it becomes very lethargic.
13% of the total ungulates actively hunted and killed per that study in Yellowstone were elk calves, while 8% of the actively and successfully hunted prey there were adult cow elk.
The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem of northwest Wyoming is estimated to hold about about 674–839 grizzly bears, followed slightly the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem of northwest Montana with about 765 animals, the Cabinet-Yaak Ecosystem of northwest Montana and northeast Idaho with about 42-65 bears of the species, the Selkirk Ecosystem of northeast Washington and northwest Idaho with only about 40–50 animals and even less the North Cascades Ecosystem of northcentral Washington with about 5–10 grizzlies.
There have been cases of bears with as many as six cubs, although the average litter size is 1-3, with more than four being considered uncommon .
Fruit appears to become more secondary in the diet in areas where hard masts and animal protein are abundant in late summer and fall, as these more protein-rich foods appear to be more nutritious for bears than carbohydrate-rich fruits are, despite their fondness for fruit.
a. isabellinus'') is another rival for smallest subspecies, in Pakistan this race averages about  in females and  in males.
Locally heavy consumption of ants has been reported in North America as well, as in west-central Alberta, 49% of scat contained ants.
In Europe, a variety of species of ants have been found to factor heavily into the diet in some areas such as Scandinavia and eastern Europe.
This is a moderately sized subspecies with long and shaggy fur.
Ranges as far north as southwestern Taymyr Peninsula and Anabar River.
However, the Californian, North African (Atlas bear), and Mexican subspecies were hunted to extinction in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and many of the southern Asian subspecies are highly endangered.
Desolate parts of northern and eastern Europe, like large patches of Scandinavia and the Carpathian Mountains, have always been quite heavily forested and have maintained relatively stable populations of bears, indicating that the brown bears here are well-adapted to forest-dwelling, although they generally seek foraging opportunities in forest openings such as bogs.
The Alaska Science Center ranks the following as the most likely reasons for bear attacks:
Brown bears reach their western limits in Spain.
Much like the grizzly and Eurasian brown bear, populations of the Ussuri brown bear (''U.
Brown bears have very large and curved claws, those present on the forelimbs being longer than those on the hind limbs.
The last Mexican grizzly bear was shot in 1976.
using a barnacle-covered rock to scratch its neck), which requires advanced cognitive abilities.
They use their long, strong claws to dig out earth to reach the roots and their powerful jaws to bite through them.
They seem to have no altitudinal preferences and have been recorded from sea-level to an elevation of  (the latter in the Himalayas).
In spring, winter-provided carrion, grasses, shoots, sedges and forbs are the dietary mainstays for brown bears from almost every part of their distribution.
There are many methods used by scientists to define bear species and subspecies as no one method is always effective.
Guns remain a viable, last resort option to be used in defense of life from aggressive bears.
The largest subspecies are the Kodiak bear (''U.
Wild females have been known to be able to reproduce at as old as 28 years of age, the oldest known age for reproduction in the wild of any ursid.
2000), which is composed of two subgroups, one believed to originate from the Iberian Peninsula, including southern Scandinavian bears and the Pyreneean populations; and the other from the Italian–Balkan peninsulas (Taberlet et al.
"The Brown Bear of Norway" is a Scottish fairy tale telling the adventures of a girl who married a prince magically turned into a bear, and who managed to get him back into a human form by the force of her love and after many trials and difficulties.
Scientific evidence based on DNA studies would furthermore indicate the Eurasian brown bear can be divided into two distinct lineages.
The fur around the neck is light, and frequently forms a "collar" which no other brown bear possess in a mature state.
Due to their inhabitance of cooler temperate areas, reptiles and amphibians are rarely a food source and have been verified as prey only in a few cases: frogs in the Italian Alps, rat snakes in Hokkaido, grass lizards in the Amur territory and tortoises in Greece.
In North America, two types of the subspecies ''Ursus arctos horribilis'' are generally recognized—the coastal brown bear and the inland grizzly bear; these two types broadly define the range of sizes of all brown bear subspecies.
These may include hares (''Lepus'' ssp.
Brown bear claws are longer and straighter than those of American black bears (''Ursus americanus'').
– Dall Island brown bear
In addition, based on the subfossil record in northwestern Moldova and mitochondrial DNA data from modern populations, a Carpathian refuge has also been proposed (Sommer & Benecke 2005; Saarma et al.
As of 2015, this population was estimated at around 250 individuals, but only due it being a more extensive survey and their numbers may be declining rather than increasing.
These bears, taken by hunters without scientific staff on hand to verify, leave open the possibility of dubious claims, mistakes and exaggerations, and tend to be reported in modern writings with only fragmentary details.
Outside of Pacific-based salmonids, predatory relationships between brown bears and fish are uncommon.
Cattle are bitten on the neck, back or head and then the abdominal cavity is opened for eating.
It killed seven people and wounded three others (with possibly another three previous fatalities to its credit) before being gunned down after a large-scale beast-hunt.
Brown bears may even venture into human dwellings or barns in search of food as humans encroach into bear habitats.
Brown bears usually occur over vast home ranges, however they are not highly territorial.
Therefore, a bear may need to be weighed in both spring and fall to get an idea of its mean annual weight.
Admiralty Island, Baranof Island, and Chichagof Island the ABC Islands of Alaska.
Similarly, in Denali National Park, grizzly bears routinely rob wolf packs of their kills.
Most attacks on adult ungulate occur when the prey has some variety of physical disadvantage.
Even elsewhere in the Alberta province, weights averaging more than twice those of Jasper grizzlies have been recorded.
Canada has one of the most stable brown bear populations today.
The maximum size of Kodiak or brown bears in general is not certain.
Their rarity in this area has led biologists to release bears, mostly female, from Slovenia in spring 2006 to reduce the imbalance and preserve the species' presence in the area.
When an open garbage dump was kept in Yellowstone, brown bears were one of the most voracious and regular scavengers.
To pick out young or infirm individuals, bears will charge at herds so the slower-moving and more vulnerable individuals will be made apparent.
There has been a recent increase in interactions between brown bears and polar bears, theorized to be caused by climate change.
In Japan, a large brown bear nicknamed "''Kesagake''" (袈裟懸け, "kesa-style slasher") made history for causing the worst bear attack in Japanese history at Tomamae, Hokkaidō during numerous encounters during December 1915.
a. lasiotus'') and the East Siberian brown bear (''U.
The oldest wild brown bear on record was nearly 37 years old.
In non-Arctic areas, habitat loss is blamed as the leading cause of endangerment, followed by hunting.
a. beringianus'', with a proportionately larger skull than the nominate subspecies.
Brown bears were once native to much of Asia, some parts of the Atlas Mountains of Africa and perhaps most of Europe  and North America, but are now extinct in some areas, and their populations have greatly decreased in other areas.
A single fossil ulna some 70,000 years old found in Great Britain, deemed to come from an extremely large subadult Pleistocene polar bear (''Ursus maritimus tyrannus''), was projected to be the largest known form of the ''Ursus'' genus.
This name originated in the fable, ''History of Reynard the Fox'', translated by William Caxton, from Middle Dutch ''bruun'' or ''bruyn'', meaning ''brown'' (the color).
# Invaded personal space (this includes a mother bear protecting her young)
In this part of the world, the brown bear occurs from Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan southbound spottily through Turkey, northernmost Iraq, western and northern Iran, thence discontinuously in northeastern Kazakhstan, southeastern Uzbekistan and north to Kyrgyzstan.
Young adolescent males tend to be least aggressive, and have been observed in nonantagonistic interactions with each other.
), melons and any form of berries.
Until recently, this bear was considered a separate subspecies.
State of Alaska Defense of Life or Property (DLP) laws require one to report the kill to authorities, and salvage the hide, skull, and claws.
Mothers defending cubs are the most prone to attacking, being responsible for 70% of brown bear-caused human fatalities in North America.
This race tends to be an whitish blond color without less noticeable black-based hairs than grizzly bears have.
Brown bears are thought to have evolved from ''Ursus etruscus'' in Asia.
However, the Gobi bear has been reported to measure as small as  in head-and-body length, which if accurate would make them the smallest known brown bear in linear dimensions.
However, most of the bears who took adult moose in east-central Alaska and Scandinavia were large, mature males.
arctos arctos'' subspecies.
Most recorded avian prey have consisted of geese and sea ducks nesting in the lower Arctic Circle, followed by coveys of galliforms, as these birds place their nests in shallow water and on the ground as well as raise their chicks in such areas, so are relatively more vulnerable.
In some parts of eastern Europe and Russia, wild boar (''Sus scrofa'') may be taken in surprisingly large quantities considering the mostly herbivorous reputation of bears in these regions.
As far east ranging of all Eurasian brown bear races, it is found in Chukotka as far as the coast of the Bering Strait to the east and the coast of the Chukchi Sea in the north.
Exceptionally, salmon may come to inland rivers as early as June in the Brooks River when other coastal Alaskan bears are in their dietary “lean period” and provide food for bears sooner than normal.
This is the largest distinct subspecies of brown bear, though the coastal-living members of other brown bear subspecies potentially rivaling it in size.
The cubs are fully dependent on the mother and a close bond is formed.
Brown bears also co-exist with leopards (''Panthera pardus'') (in very small remnant wild parts of the Middle East, Jammu and Kashmir, northeastern China and Primorsky Krai) and snow leopards (''Panthera uncia''), in several areas of northern central Asia and the Tibetan Plateau).
It is usually lost at an early age, leaving no trace of the alveolus in the jaw.
A majority of Siberia from the Yenisei River to as far south as the Altai Mountains  in northern Mongolia, northermost Xinjiang and northeastern Kazakhstan.
Quite distinctive physically, as it possess a reddish-brown or sandy coat color and relatively large ears.
Hokkaido has the largest number of non-Russian brown bears in eastern Asia with about 2,000–3,000 animals, although, in 2015, the Biodiversity Division of the Hokkaido government estimated the population as being as high as 10,600.
Northern Nepal, Northern and Northeastern India, and Northern Pakistan, most continuous current range in Jammu and Kashmir.
The urine markings of a female in oestrus can attract several males via scent.
2000), which is composed of Russian, northern Scandinavian and eastern European populations, and those carrying a western lineage (clade I, Leonard et al.
Poorly described, possibly merely a coastal variation of other North American bears but any such alliance is genetically ambiguous.
– †Atlas bear (extinct)
This is indicated by brown bears in the Chukotka Peninsula on the Asian side of Bering Strait, which are the only Asian brown bears to live year-round in lowland tundra like their North American cousins.
In Yellowstone National Park, brown bears pirate wolf kills so often, Yellowstone's Wolf Project director Doug Smith wrote, "It's not a matter of if the bears will come calling after a kill, but when."
Under some definitions, the brown bear can be construed as the paraspecies for the polar bear.
They reach their current eastern limits of their distribution in North America in a majority of Nunavut, northeastern Saskatchewan and northern Manitoba, where they range as far east as the west coast of the Hudson Bay from around Rankin Inlet south to Southern Indian Lake.
and pine cones as well as mosses and fungi such as mushrooms.
Confrontation is mostly avoided due to the black bear's diurnal habits and preference for heavily forested areas, as opposed to the brown bear's largely nocturnal habits and preference for open spaces.
*Gary Brown, in his 1996 publication "The Great Bear Almanac", claimed that the heaviest recorded brown bear weighed over , without going into further detail beyond mentioning it was of the Kamchatka brown bear subspecies rather than the Kodiak.
The Russian bear is a common national personification for Russia (as well as the former Soviet Union) despite the country having no appointed national animal.
Based on known size of adult males, if a true subspecies, it may match or exceed the Kodiak bear in size.
These populations are divided into those carrying an eastern lineage (clade IIIa, Leonard et al.
In Slovenia, for example, up to 25% of the dry mass consumed by bears was comprised by ants.
There is also a smaller brown bear population in the Carpathian Mountains in Ukraine (estimated at about 200 in 2005), Slovakia and Poland (estimated at about 100 in 2009 in the latter country).
Where plateau pikas are absent, as in the Mustang region of Nepal, Himalayan marmots (''Marmota himalayana'') became the dietary stable of the bear, occurring in about half of nearly a thousand scats.
Skull dimensions from mainland Russia (i.e.
The bears were released despite protests from French farmers.
Tibetan plateau, some of the bears found in the Himalayas are reportedly actually wandering individuals from the more robustly populated Tibetan subspecies.
Around 13% to 44% of cubs die within their first year even in well-protected areas.
While they may eat almost all the parts of the fish, bears at the peak of spawning, when there is usually a glut of fish to feed on, may eat only the most nutritious parts of the salmon (including the eggs and head) and then indifferently leave the rest of the carcass to scavengers, which can include red foxes (''Vulpes vulpes''), bald eagles (''Haliaeetus leucocephalus''), common ravens (''Corvus corax'') and gulls.
The brown bear has lost 98% of its habitat in the lower 48 states.
Brown bears have very strong teeth: the incisors are relatively big and the canine teeth are large, the lower ones being strongly curved.
Predation on broad whitefish (''Coregonus nasus'') and longnose suckers (''Catostomus catostomus'') has been reported in sub-Arctic Canada and northern pike (''Esox lucius'') and grayling (''Thymallus thymallus'') in Siberia, plus other older records of brown bears hunting miscellaneous freshwater fish in Eurasia.
interior Alaska, with the heaviest weights recorded in Nelchina, Alaska, nearly three times heavier in males than the smallest grizzlies from Alberta, Canada’s Jasper National Park.
Due to the aforementioned vulnerability, examination of Norwegian sheep remains suggest many of the sheep consumed there are adults that were killed by the bears rather than merely scavenged, and thus some local farmers received partial compensation for their stock losses.
The stage at which independence is attained may generally be earlier in some parts of Eurasia, as the latest date which mother cubs were together was 2.3 years and most families separated in under two years in a study from Hokkaido and in Sweden most cubs on their own were still yearlings.
Genetics relay that two separate radiations led to today’s North American brown bears one a coastal form that lead to Kodiak bear (from ''U.
In some cases, the skulls, a more consistent, reliable method of estimating overall size, are occasionally taken however.
*The heaviest verified and well-documented wild Kodiak bear weighed about , as per the Gerard Wood's 1983 publication for the Guinness Book of World Records but, according to some sources, it was reportedly scaled after field-dressing (entrails and blood removed) and so was estimated in life to weigh “a little over a ton”.
Beyond the regular predation of salmon, most brown bears are not particularly active predators.
Brown bears living near coastal regions will regularly eat crabs and clams.
Bovids are mostly taken in random encounters when bears come across a vulnerable, usually young or sickly individuals, as smaller species are extremely agile (and often live in rocky environments) and larger varieties are potentially dangerous especially if aware of the bear’s presence.
The largest recorded grizzlies from Yellowstone and Washington state both weighed approximately  and eastern European bears have been weighed in Slovakia and Bulgaria of up to , about double the average weight for male bears in these regions.
Furthermore, the Smithsonian Institution accepted the same weight.
During winter dormancy, the fetus attaches to the uterine wall.
At least 20-30 were present in northern Iran as of 2015.
Sleeping Bear Dunes is named after a Native American legend, where a female bear and her cub swam across Lake Michigan.
Brown bears often feed on a variety of plant life, including berries, grasses, flowers, acorns (''Quercus'' ssp.)
Their jaw structure has evolved to fit their dietary habits.
Head-and-body length in grizzly bears averages from  while in Eurasian brown bears it similarly averages from .
The last known bear was shot in California in 1922.
savini'' persisted as a paraspecies for the brown bear before perishing.
