Code named La Bastille, the game used a personal computer running Linux, a radio-frequency video game controller, eleven circuit boards, a 12-story data network, and over 10,000 Christmas lights.
A grading option of Satisfactory/No Credit would be introduced to encourage students to try courses outside their grade-point comfort zone.
Established in 1887, the Graduate School has around 2,000 students studying over 50 disciplines.
In 2000 students from Brown's Technology House converted the south face of the Sciences Library into a Tetris game, the first high-rise-building Tetris ever attempted.
In 2013-14, the program awarded need-based scholarships worth $95 million.
In two particulars the Charter may be said to be a uniquely progressive document.
For families with total income below $100,000, the loan component of the financial aid award is replaced with additional scholarship."
It is now the repository of the University's archives, rare books and manuscripts, and special collections.
It is bordered by departmental buildings and the Granoff Center for the Creative Arts.
News'' ranked Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School the 5th most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 2.9 percent.
Many students report that the process is not thorough enough to judge one's own progress in mental health, thereby violating ADA rights; the denial letters are often short and generic, with one sentence changed at most for multiple denials.
In 1971, unaccountably, it voted the name Cammarian Club out of existence, thereby amputating its tradition and longevity.
Brown's faculty and alumni include seven Nobel Prize laureates, five National Humanities Medalists, and ten National Medal of Science laureates.
The Center also manages various collections, archives, and resources, including the Elizabeth Weed Feminist Theory Papers and the Christine Dunlap Farnham Archive.
Brown's men's soccer is consistently ranked in the top 20, and has won 18 Ivy League titles overall; recent soccer graduates play professionally in Major League Soccer and overseas.
Members of the Brown University Band famously flout the superstition by walking through the gate three times too many, as they annually play their role in the Commencement parade.
The JCB holdings comprise more than 50,000 early titles and about 16,000 modern books, as well as prints, manuscripts, maps, and other items in the library's specialty.
The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is an independent research institution established in 1882 at Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
Brown admission policy is stipulated need-blind for all domestic applicants.
In 1960 Brown's first computer building, designed by Philip Johnson, was opened on George Street and an IBM7070 computer installed the next year.
The Project comprises a team of economists, anthropologists, political scientists, legal experts, and physicians, and seeks to calculate the economic costs, human casualties, and impact on civil liberties of the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan since 2001.
One mentally disabled student alleges, after 5 semesters of mandatory leave, that: "One of the administrators Suarez, he claims, told him: "You should consider yourself lucky because Brown's better than other schools.
Master's degrees in acting and directing are pursued in conjunction with the Rep MFA program, which partners with one of the country's great regional theatres, Trinity Repertory Company, home of the last longstanding resident acting company in the country.
Program participants are noted for their creative and original approach to cross-disciplinary opportunities, combining, for example, industrial design with engineering, or anatomical illustration with human biology, or philosophy with sculpture, or architecture with urban studies.
A Brown superstition is that students who walk through the central gate a second time prematurely will not graduate, although walking backwards is said to cancel the hex.
The Philadelphia Association obtained such an acquaintance with our affairs, as to bring them to an apprehension that it was practicable and expedient to erect a college in the Colony of Rhode-Island, under the chief direction of the Baptists; ... Mr. James Manning, who took his first degree in New-Jersey college in September, 1762, was esteemed a suitable leader in this important work.
The Brown Bears are the third largest university sports program in the United States, sponsoring 38 varsity intercollegiate teams (Harvard sponsors 42 and Princeton 39).
In a letter written after the war, College president Manning said:
A revised Charter, written by Stiles and Ellery, was adopted by the Assembly on March 3, 1764.
Brown is 3rd in the country (tied with Stanford) in the number of students awarded Fulbright grants, according to the October 2010 ranking compiled by the ''Chronicle of Higher Education''.
As with Greek houses, the residents of program houses select their new members, usually at the start of the Spring semester.
It is reached from downtown principally by three extremely steep streets—College, Waterman, and Angell—which run through the Benefit Street historic district and the campus of the Rhode Island School of Design.
Since 2009 Brown has developed an Executive MBA program in conjunction with one of the leading Business Schools in Europe; IE Business School in Madrid.
Pembroke Campus now operates as a place for dorms and classrooms.
Of the 12 Fellows, eight should be Baptists—including the College president—"and the rest indifferently of any or all Denominations."
Her immediate predecessor as president was Ruth J. Simmons, the first African American president of an Ivy League institution.
The Men's Lacrosse team also has a long and storied history.
A tincture of political controversy sharpened their rivalry, the older society inclining to the aristocratic Federals, the younger to the Republicans, the democrats of that day.
News'' by putting research universities and liberal arts colleges in a single sequence—ranked Brown 8th overall.
Brown alumni who have distinguished themselves in the computer sciences and industry are listed in the Notable people section, below.
35 percent of undergraduates pursue graduate or professional study immediately, 60 percent within 5 years, and 80 percent within 10 years.
Its one million artifacts, available for research and educational purposes, are located at its Collections Research Center in Bristol, RI.
The School practices an innovative clustering of faculties in which engineers team with non-engineers to bring a convergence of ideas.
Brown is the largest institutional landowner in Providence, with properties on College Hill and in the Jewelry District.
Their application must then be approved by a third Brown/RISD joint committee.
The French troops were those of the Comte de Rochambeau.
On September 8, 1803, the Corporation voted, "That the donation of $5000 Dollars, if made to this College within one Year from the late Commencement, shall entitle the donor to name the College."
It is sometimes erroneously supposed that Brown University was "named after" John Brown, whose commercial activity included the transportation of African slaves.
* The introduction of interdisciplinary courses
First, where other colleges had curricular strictures against opposing doctrines, Brown's Charter asserted that "Sectarian differences of opinions, shall not make any Part of the Public and Classical Instruction."
Its key features included:
The Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program, among the most selective in the country, offered admission to 17 of the 512 applicants for the class entering in autumn 2015, an acceptance rate of 3.3 percent.
The eight-acre site, in two parcels, had been purchased by the Corporation for £219, mainly from Moses Brown and John Brown, the parcels having "formed a part of the original home lots of their ancestor, Chad Brown, and of George Rickard, who bought them from the Indians."
This was effectively a secret society with membership limited to 45.
Tourists, people-watchers, buskers, and students from Providence's six colleges make the scene.
The Philadelphia Association of Baptist Churches also had an eye on Rhode Island, home of the mother church of their denomination, the First Baptist Church in America, founded in Providence in 1638 by Roger Williams.
Restaurants, cafes, bistros, tavernas, pubs, bookstores, second-hand shops, and the like abound.
These groups have begun a number of campus-wide environmental initiatives—including promoting the reduction of supply and demand of bottled water and investigating a composting program.
The concentrations with the greatest number of students are Biology, History, and International Relations.
The laboratory is linked to 54 current or past Nobel Laureates who have been research or teaching faculty.
High-profile alumni of the football program include Houston Texans head coach Bill O'Brien;     former Penn State football coach Joe Paterno, Heisman Trophy namesake John W. Heisman, and Pollard Award namesake Fritz Pollard.
Although most centers are identity-focused, some provide academic support as well.
University Hall—known until 1823 as "The College Edifice"—was modelled on Nassau Hall at the College of New Jersey.
The Institute offers visiting teaching appointments and postdoctoral fellowships which have, in recent years, included Near Eastern Archaeology and Art, Classical Archaeology and Art, Islamic Archaeology and Art, and Archaeology and Media Studies.
The character of Brown's urban campus is, then, European organic rather than American landscaped.
The Pembroke campus is among the most pleasing spaces at Brown, with noteworthy examples of Victorian and Georgian architecture.
Stiles's first draft was read to the General Assembly in August 1763 and rejected by Baptist members who worried that the College Board of Fellows would underrepresent the Baptists.
As it had in 2007 and 2010, the 2011 Princeton Review email poll of college students ranked Brown 1st in the country for "Happiest Students."
This relationship has since strengthened resulting in both institutions offering a dual degree program.
Other nineteenth century clubs and societies, too numerous to treat here, are described in Bronson's history of the University.
This day the Committee for settling the spot for the College, met at the New-Brick School House, when it was determined it should be set on ye Hill opposite Mr. John Jenkes; up the Presbyterian Lane.
In fact, Brown University was named for Nicholas Brown, Jr—philanthropist, founder of the Providence Athenaeum, co-founder of Butler Hospital, and, crucially, an abolitionist.
It was given full Departmental status in 1979.
Writing at Brown—fiction, non-fiction, poetry, playwriting, screenwriting, electronic writing, mixed media, and the undergraduate writing proficiency requirement—is catered for by various centers and degree programs, and a faculty that has long included nationally and internationally known authors.
Undergraduates can also design an independent concentration if the existing programs do not align with their curricular focus.
'''John Hay Library'''
Societas Domi Pacificae, known colloquially as "Pacifica House," is a present-day, self-described secret society, which nonetheless publishes a website and an email address.
Brown Stadium, built in 1925 and home to the football team, is located approximately a mile to the northeast of the main campus.
The men's and women's crews have also won championship trophies at the Henley Royal Regatta and the Henley Women's Regatta.
In recent years, the most internationally cited product of the Watson Institute has been its Costs of War Project, first released in 2011 and continuously updated.
Brown's Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology Collection Research Center, particularly strong in Native American items, is located in the Mount Hope Grant.
The paper made concrete proposals for the new curriculum, including interdisciplinary freshman-year courses that would introduce "modes of thought," with instruction from faculty brought together from different disciplines.
The GISP was inspired by student-initiated experimental schools, especially San Francisco State College, and sought ways to "put students at the center of their education" and "teach students how to think rather than just teaching facts."
The Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women was established at Brown in 1981 by Joan Wallach Scott as a research center on gender.
Other notable alumni include 55 Rhodes Scholars, 14 MacArthur Genius Fellows, 19 Pulitzer Prize winners, eight billionaire graduates, a U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice, four U.S.
Graduate programs include the fiction and poetry MFA writing programs in the literary arts department, and the MFA playwriting program in the theatre arts and performance studies department.
The non-fiction writing program is offered in the English department.
They are overseen by the Greek Council.
Another year at each school ensues, with the fifth year spent according to the student's electives.
Brown's main campus is located in the College Hill Historic District in the city of Providence, the third largest city in New England.
The Institute was initially endowed by Thomas Watson, Jr., Brown class of 1937, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, and longtime president of IBM.
The ''Forbes'' analysis looked at the ratio of "alumni and students who have identified themselves as founders and business owners on LinkedIn" and the total number of alumni and students.
It met fortnightly to hear speeches and debate and thrived until the Civil War; in 1821 its library held 1594 volumes.
The center emphasizes intersectionality in its conversations on gender, encouraging people to see gender as present and relevant in various aspects of life.
The museum's goal is to inspire creative and critical thinking about culture by fostering interdisciplinary understanding of the material world.
At Convocation the gate opens inward to admit the procession of new students.
Van Dam's students were instrumental in the origin of the XML, XSLT, and related Web standards.
Since 2005 the MBL and Brown have collaborated in a Ph.D. program in biological and environmental sciences that combines faculty at both institutions, including the faculties of the Ecosystems Center, the Bay Paul Center, the Program in Cellular Dynamics, and the Marine Resources Center.
The curricular focus is on three principal areas: Egyptology (the study of the ancient languages, history, and culture of Egypt), Assyriology (the study of the ancient lands of present-day Iraq, Syria, and Turkey), and the history of the ancient exact sciences (astronomy, astrology, and mathematics).
The Charter was not, as is sometimes supposed, the grant of King George III, but rather an Act of the colonial General Assembly.
Alumni authors take their degrees across the spectrum of degree concentrations, but a gauge of the strength of writing at Brown is the number of major national writing prizes won.
The University's medical program started in 1811, but the school was suspended by President Wayland in 1827 after the program's faculty declined to live on campus (a new requirement under Wayland).
The week before last I sent you the Copy of Yale College Charter.
Brown's current president Christina Hull Paxson took office in 2012.
The undergraduate concentration (major) encompasses programs in theatre history, performance theory, playwriting, dramaturgy, acting, directing, dance, speech, and technical production.
The men's ultimate team, Brownian Motion, has twice won the national championship, in 2000 and 2005.
Students are admitted to the Dual Degree Program for a course lasting five years and culminating in both the Bachelor of Arts (A.B.)
News & World Report'' rankings' peer assessment portion gives the school a score of 4.4, tied with University of Pennsylvania, Dartmouth, Northwestern, and University of Michigan.
The core green spaces of the main campus are the Front (or "Quiet") Green, the College (or "Main") Green, and the Ruth J. Simmons Quadrangle (until 2012 called Lincoln Field).
Governor Stephen Hopkins was chosen chancellor, former and future governor Samuel Ward was vice chancellor, John Tillinghast treasurer, and Thomas Eyres secretary.
In the spring of 1969, following student rallies in support of reform, University president Ray Heffner appointed the Special Committee on Curricular Philosophy, tasked with developing specific reforms.
The Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program, offered in conjunction with the Rhode Island School of Design, is a five-year course that awards degrees from both institutions.
* The abandonment of "general education" distribution requirements
In 1971, Brown's coordinate women's institution, Pembroke College, was fully merged into the university.
In practice, this grading innovation of the New Curriculum—sometimes misunderstood and mischaracterized—has been its most successful component, responsible, in the decades since its adoption, for uncounted career-changing decisions—studio art swapped for neuroscience, biology swapped for anthropology, mathematics swapped for playwriting (and Pulitzer Prizes).
The psychological leave readmission process takes place once every 6 months, and requires only a student's statement and a psychiatrist's or psychologist's statement of well-being, with no interview.
Brown's theatre and playwriting programs are among the best-regarded in the country.
At least you're not getting kicked out of Brown."'
Brown's grade of A-minus was the top one issued in the 2009 report of the Sustainable Endowments Institute (no A-grade was issued).
Thayer Street runs through Brown's main campus, north to south, and is College Hill's reduced-scale counterpart to Harvard Square or Berkeley's Telegraph Avenue.
Additionally, the BCSC hopes to foster community among the students it serves by providing spaces for students to meet and study.
But the intermediary turns out to be, on closer inspection, the well-known Providence Franklin Society, a civic organization unconnected to Brown whose origins and activity are well-documented.
News & World Report'' top 20—the "College Sports Honor Roll"—based on breadth of program and athletes' graduation rates.
The students continuing to increase in number, they outran the constitutional limits of both societies, and a third, the Franklin Society, was established in 1824; it never had the vitality of the other two, however, and died after ten years."
In the fall of 1776, with British vessels patrolling Narragansett Bay, the College library was moved out of Providence for safekeeping.
The undergraduate concentration (major) in literary arts offers courses in fiction, poetry, screenwriting, literary hypermedia, and translation.
The center hosts programs and workshops in order to facilitate dialogue and provide resources for students, faculty, and staff.
Brown's near neighbor on College Hill is the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), America's top-ranked art college.
Many courses in the department are open to all Brown undergraduates without prerequisite, and include archaeology, languages, history, and Egyptian and Mesopotamian religions, literature, and science.
Teaching of computer science began at Brown in 1956 when an IBM machine was installed and computing courses were offered through the departments of Economics and Applied Mathematics.
The character "Andy" in the animated film ''Toy Story'' is taken to be an homage to Van Dam from his students employed at Pixar.
Completed concentrations of undergraduates by area are social sciences 42 percent, humanities 26 percent, life sciences 17 percent, and physical sciences 14 percent.
An alternative to Greek-letter organizations are the program houses organized by themes.
Brown's international programs are organized through the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs, and the university is academically affiliated with the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Rhode Island School of Design.
Facing the Joukowsky Institute, across the Front Green, is the Department of Egyptology and Assyriology, formed in 2006 by the merger of Brown's renowned departments of Egyptology and History of Mathematics.
This project is a virtual reality room used for everything from three-dimensional drawing classes to tours of the circulatory system for medical students.
In this partnership, Brown provides its traditional coursework while IE provides most of the business-related subjects making a differentiated alternative program to other Ivy League's EMBAs.
Since 1976, the Early Identification Program (EIP) has encouraged Rhode Island residents to pursue careers in medicine by recruiting sophomores from Providence College, Rhode Island College, the University of Rhode Island, and Tougaloo College.
The department today is home to The CAVE.
Brown's athletic program is one of the ''U.S.
It was opened in 1910 and named for John Hay (class of 1858, private secretary to Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State under two Presidents) at the request of his friend Andrew Carnegie, who contributed half of the $300,000 cost of the building.
The Charter stipulated that the Board of Trustees comprise 22 Baptists, five Quakers, five Episcopalians, and four Congregationalists.
The College Hill campus was built contemporarily with the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century precincts that surround it, so that University buildings blend with the architectural fabric of the city.
It supports the undergraduate concentration in Gender and Sexuality Studies, post-doctoral research fellowships, the annual Pembroke Seminar, and other academic programs.
The "Walk" connects Pembroke Campus to the main campus.
Brown has committed to "minimize its energy use, reduce negative environmental impacts and promote environmental stewardship."
For the Class of 1998, 75 percent of all graduates have since enrolled in a graduate or professional degree program.
“The support is there, but it is student-initiated.”' However, Suarez has been widely criticized within and outside the University as being non-compliant with American ADA laws, often denying students readmission for little to no reason.
The Pembroke campus is centered on a quadrangle that fronts on Meeting Street, where a garden and monument—with scale-model of the quadrangle in bronze—compose the formal entry to the campus.
Brown was one of the early doctoral granting U.S. institutions in the late 19th century, adding master and doctoral studies in 1887.Brown's New Curriculum—sometimes referred to in education theory as the Brown Curriculum—was adopted by faculty vote in 1969 after a period of student lobbying; the New Curriculum eliminated mandatory "general education" distribution requirements, made students "the architects of their own syllabus," and allowed them to take any course for a grade of satisfactory or unrecorded no-credit.
Examples of program houses are St. Anthony Hall (located in King House), Buxton International House, the Machado French/Hispanic House, Technology House, Harambee (African culture) House, Social Action House and Interfaith House.
Overall, admission to the Graduate School is most competitive with an acceptance rate of about 18 percent.
The centers often act as sources of support as well as safe spaces for students to explore certain aspects of their identity.
The Energy and Environmental Advisory Committee has developed a set of ambitious goals for the university to reduce its carbon emissions and eventually achieve carbon neutrality.
It was named for Pembroke College, the former women's coordinate college at Brown, and is affiliated with Brown's Sarah Doyle Women's Center.
Controversy arises within the college as to whether Brown follows the US Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, with Brown's own newspaper, The Brown Daily Herald, criticizing the University's policy behind readmission from psychological medical leave.
It houses a very large percentage of the titles published before that date about the discovery, settlement, history, and natural history of the New World.
In a letter dated September 6, 1804, that appeal was answered by College treasurer Nicholas Brown, Junior, and the Corporation honored its promise: "In gratitude to Mr. Brown, the Corporation at the same meeting voted, 'That this College be called and known in all future time by the Name of Brown University'."
Over the years, the benefactions of Nicholas Brown, Jr, would total nearly $160,000, an enormous sum for that period, and included the buildings Hope College and Manning Hall, built 1821-22 and 1834-35.
Brown is a member of the Ivy League athletic conference, which is categorized as a Division I (top level) conference of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).
She had previously been dean of the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University and a past-chair of Princeton's economics department.
On December 7, 1776, six thousand British and Hessian troops under the command of Sir Peter Parker sailed into Newport harbor.
Brown's financial aid basics website, in August 2014, stated: "For families (including both parents) with a total income below $60,000, and assets less than $100,000, no parent contribution is calculated towards the Expected Family Contribution (EFC).
News & World Report'' ranks Brown University 99th globally.
The University's neighborhood is a federally listed architectural district with a dense concentration of Colonial era buildings.
The Institute's curricular interest is organized into the principal themes of development, security, and governance—with further focuses on globalization, economic uncertainty, security threats, environmental degradation, and poverty.
The aim was to transform the traditional survey course—often experienced passively by first-year students—into a more engaging process, an investigation of the intellectual and philosophical connections between disciplines.
Adjacent to this older campus are, to the south, academic buildings and residential quadrangles, including Wriston, Keeney, and Gregorian quadrangles; to the east, Sciences Park occupying two city blocks; to the north, connected to Simmons Quadrangle by The Walk, academic and residential precincts, including the life sciences complex and the Pembroke Campus; and to the west, on the slope of College Hill, academic buildings, including List Art Center and the Hay and Rockefeller libraries.
The first intercollegiate ice hockey game in America was played between Brown and Harvard on January 19, 1898.
Typical of its noteworthy holdings is the best preserved of the eleven surviving copies of the Bay Psalm Book the earliest extant book printed in British North America and the most expensive printed book in the world.
Prospective students must apply to the two schools separately and be accepted by separate admissions committees.
The Women's College in Brown University, known as Pembroke College, was founded in October 1891.
Van Dam denies this, but a copy of his book (''Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice'') appears on Andy's bookshelf in the film.
According to a 2010 article in The Brown Daily Herald, even Dean of Student Life & Chair of the Medical Leave Readmission Committee, Maria Suarez, admits that'“I wish we had more resources to connect with students,” Suarez said.
The highest fields of employment for graduates of the College are business 36 percent, education 19 percent, health/medical 6 percent, arts 6 percent, government 6 percent, and communications/media 5 percent.
Since 2003 eight different Brown graduates have either won (four times) or been nominated for (six times) the Pulitzer Prize—including winners Lynn Nottage '86, Ayad Akhtar '93, Nilo Cruz '94, and Quiara Alegría Hudes '04; and nominees Sarah Ruhl '97 (twice), Gina Gionfriddo '97 (twice), Stephen Karam '02, and Jordan Harrison '03.
At Commencement the gate opens outward for the procession of graduates.
The Institute also offers Post Doctoral, professional development and global outreach programming.
In 1991, the school was officially renamed the Brown University School of Medicine, then renamed once more to Brown Medical School in October 2000.
In 2014 and 2015, Paxson presided over the year-long celebration of the 250th anniversary of Brown's founding.
The royal Army landed on Rhode Island & took possession of the same: This brought their Camp in plain View from the College with the naked Eye; upon which the Country flew to Arms & marched for Providence, there, unprovided with Barracks they marched into the College & dispossessed the Students, about 40 in Number.
In 1806 the United Brothers was formed as an egalitarian alternative to the Philermenian Society.
Secretaries of State and other Cabinet officials, 53 members of the United States Congress, members of royal families, as well as leaders and founders of major companies.
It is generally regarded as the world's leading collection of primary historical sources pertaining to the Americas before 1825.
James Manning was sworn in as the College's first president in 1765 and served until 1791.
... Should you make any Progress in the Affair of a Colledge, I should be glad to hear of it; I heartily wish you Success therein.
(The opposing attitudes to the slave trade within the Brown family—from John Brown's unapologetic participation, to Moses and Nicholas Brown's activist opposition—are described in Ricardo Howell, "Slavery, the Brown Family of Providence and Brown University" (2001, published online at Brown.edu), and in Charles Rappleye, ''Sons of Providence: The Brown Brothers, the Slave Trade, and the American Revolution'' (New York, 2006)).
But the first of these (Rhees 1859, see footnote ''infra'') is merely a sketch of the 1824 Brown organization; the second (Stockwell 1876) is a reference-book article on the Providence Franklin Society itself; and the third is the Providence Franklin Society's own publication, which the "Pacifica House" reference mis-ascribes to "Franklin Society," dropping the word "Providence."
When it merged with Brown in 1971, the Pembroke Campus was absorbed into the Brown campus.
It is one of only a handful of such departments in the United States.
The Modes of Thought course, a key component in the original conception of the New Curriculum, was early on discontinued, but all of the other elements are still in place.
The paper came out of a year-long Group Independent Study Project (GISP) involving 80 students and 15 professors.
News & World Report'' ranked Brown 14th in its 2016 edition.
(Brown football's reemergence is credited to its 1976 Ivy League championship team, "The Magnificent Andersons," so named for its coach, John Anderson.)
The Pronouncing Society is mentioned in the diary of Solomon Drowne, class of 1773, who was voted its president in 1771.
Its construction was managed by the firm of Nicholas Brown and Company, which spent £2844 in the first year building the College Edifice and the adjacent President's House.
In 2014, National Science Foundation ranked Brown University 66th in the United States by research.
In 1762 there is further documentary evidence that Stiles was making plans for a college.
The many performance spaces available to Brown students include the Chace and Dowling theaters at Trinity Rep; the McCormack Family, Lee Strasberg, Rites and Reason, Ashamu Dance, Stuart, and Leeds theatres in University departments; the Upstairs Space and Downstairs Space belonging to the wholly student-run Production Workshop; and Alumnae Hall, used by Brown University Gilbert & Sullivan and by Brown Opera Productions.
File:Alexander Meiklejohn Time magazine cover, October 1, 1928.jpg|right|Alexander Meiklejohn, class of 1893, philosopher, education reformer, president of Amherst College, his ideas are celebrated in the Meiklejohn Freedom Award of the AAUP
