At the time, two of Lee's martial arts students were Hollywood script writer Stirling Silliphant and actor James Coburn.
''Enter the Dragon'' would go on to become one of the year's highest-grossing films and cement Lee as a martial arts legend.
Lee attempted another punch, and Moore blocked it as well.
On July 20, 1973, Lee was in Hong Kong, to have dinner with James Bond star George Lazenby, with whom he intended to make a film.
Lee stood upright, his right foot forward with knees bent slightly, in front of a standing, stationary partner.
In 1970, he was responsible for fight choreography for ''A Walk in the Spring Rain'' starring Ingrid Bergman and Anthony Quinn, again written by Silliphant.
His parents confirmed the police's fear that this time Lee's opponent had an organised crime background, and there was the possibility that a contract was out for his life.
Taky Kimura became Lee's first Assistant Instructor and continued to teach his art and philosophy after Lee's death.
'''Lee Jun-fan''' (; November 27, 1940&nbsp;– July 20, 1973), known professionally as '''Bruce Lee''', was a Hong Kong American actor, martial artist, philosopher, filmmaker, and founder of the martial art Jeet Kune Do.
Lee also played Kato in three crossover episodes of ''Batman''.
Both Taky Kimura and Dan Inosanto were allowed to teach small classes thereafter, under the guideline "keep the numbers low, but the quality high".
From August to October 1972, Lee began work on his fourth Golden Harvest Film, ''Game of Death''.
They worked until 4&nbsp;p.m. and then drove together to the home of Lee's colleague Betty Ting Pei, a Taiwanese actress.
When Lee did not turn up for dinner, producer Raymond Chow came to the apartment, but was unable to wake Lee up.
When Moore nodded in affirmation, Lee glided towards him until he was within striking range.
The third punch, which Lee threw to Moore's face, did not come nearly within striking distance.
The mood in his poems show the side of the man that can be compared with other poets such as Robert Frost, one of many well-known poets expressing himself with dark poetic works.
His own books on martial arts and fighting philosophy are known for their philosophical assertions, both inside and outside of martial arts circles.
He soon followed up with ''Fist of Fury'' (1972) which broke the box office records set previously by ''The Big Boss''.
He was introduced to the film industry by his father and appeared in several films as a child actor.
He was well-read and had an extensive library.
Robert Clouse, the director of ''Enter the Dragon'' and Golden Harvest revived Lee's unfinished film ''Game of Death''.
Bruce was the fourth child of five children: Phoebe Lee (李秋源), Agnes Lee (李秋鳳), Peter Lee (李忠琛), and Robert Lee (李振輝).
Between the three of them, during their training with Bruce, they won every karate championship in the United States.
His eclectic philosophy often mirrored his fighting beliefs, though he was quick to claim that his martial arts were solely a metaphor for such teachings.
It was at the 1964 championships where Lee first met Taekwondo master Jhoon Goo Rhee.
Lee's right arm was partly extended and his right fist approximately  away from the partner's chest.
Lee refrained from using the drug again until that fateful evening of July 20, 1973, when he took Equagesic and later died of cerebral edema.
John Little being the major author (editor), for Bruce Lee's works.
Apart from ''Game of Death'', other future film projects were planned to feature Lee at the time.
He trained in the art of Wing Chun and later combined his other influences from various sources, in the spirit of his personal martial arts philosophy, which he dubbed Jeet Kune Do (The Way of the Intercepting Fist).
Another script had the title ''Green Bamboo Warrior'', set in San Francisco, planned to co-star Bolo Yeung and to be produced by Andrew Vajna who later went on to produce ''First Blood''.
In 1972, after the success of ''The Big Boss'' and ''Fist of Fury'', a third film was planned by Raymond Chow at Golden Harvest to be directed by Lo Wei, titled ''Yellow-Faced Tiger''.
Unaware that ''The Green Hornet'' had been played to success in Hong Kong and was unofficially referred to as "The Kato Show", he was surprised to be recognised on the street as the star of the show.
Together, they founded the second Jun Fan martial art studio in Oakland.
Lee also studied philosophy, psychology, and various other subjects.
Although many of his peers decided to stay in the US, Lee Hoi-chuen returned to Hong Kong after Bruce's birth.
Lee's iconic status and untimely demise fed many wild rumors and theories.
Lee's father Lee Hoi-chuen was a famous Cantonese opera star.
Photo shoot costume tests were also organized for some of these planned film projects.
By the time the ambulance reached the hospital he was dead.
After the war ended, Lee Hoi-chuen resumed his acting career and became a more popular actor during Hong Kong's rebuilding years.
The three went over the script at Ting's home, and then Chow left to attend a dinner meeting.
Dan Inosanto continued to teach and certify select students in Jeet Kune Do for over 30 years, making it possible for thousands of martial arts practitioners to trace their training lineage back to Bruce Lee.
He began filming some scenes including his fight sequence with  American Basketball star Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, a former student.
Lee's principal of self-expression was applied to his poetry as well.
After a year into his Wing Chun training, most of Yip Man's other students refused to train with Lee after they learned of his mixed ancestry, as the Chinese were generally against teaching their martial arts techniques to non-Asians.
The same year he also choreographed fight scenes for ''The Wrecking Crew'' starring Dean Martin, Sharon Tate, and featuring Chuck Norris in his first role.
Lee continued to train with Wong Shun Leung after later returning to Hong Kong from America.
Lee emphasised what he called "the style of no style".
He is often credited with helping to change the way Asians were presented in American films.
Lee later formed his own company, ''Concord Production Inc. (協和電影公司)'', with Chow.
Despite the advantage of his family's status, the neighborhood in which Lee grew up became overcrowded, dangerous, and full of gang rivalries due to an influx of refugees fleeing communist China for Hong Kong, at that time a British Crown colony.
His poetic works originally handwritten on paper, later on edited and published.
Lee felt the system he now called Jun Fan Gung Fu was even too restrictive, and eventually evolved into a philosophy and martial art he would come to call ''Jeet Kune Do'' or the ''Way of the Intercepting Fist.''
The film sparked a brief fad in martial arts, epitomised in songs such as "Kung Fu Fighting" and TV shows like ''Kung Fu''.
The role of the Shaolin monk in the Wild West, was eventually awarded to then-non-martial-artist David Carradine.
"When he punched me that last time, I had to stay home from work because the pain in my chest was unbearable".
James Lee was twenty years senior to Bruce Lee and a well known Chinese martial artist in the area.
Lee's sparring partner, Hawkins Cheung states, "Probably fewer than six people in the whole Wing Chun clan were personally taught, or even partly taught, by Yip Man".
Lee had three other Chinese names: '''Li Yuanxin''' (李源鑫), a family/clan name; '''Li Yuanjian''' (李元鑒), which he used as a student name while he was attending La Salle College, and his Chinese screen name '''Li Xiaolong''' (李小龍; ''Xiaolong'' means "little dragon").
The two developed a friendship&nbsp;– a relationship from which they benefited as martial artists.
Taky Kimura, to date, has certified only one person in Jun Fan Gung Fu: his son Andy Kimura.
She was the half-niece of Sir Robert Ho-tung, the Eurasian patriarch of the clan.
They were able to reduce the swelling through the administration of mannitol.
He believed that any knowledge ultimately led to self-knowledge, and said that his chosen method of self-expression was martial arts.
The show lasted just one season, from 1966 to 1967.
Brandon LeeJesse GloverDan InosantoYorinaga NakamuraTaky KimuraRichard BustilloJerry PoteetTed WongJames Yimm LeeRusty StevensChuck NorrisKareem Abdul-JabbarJames CoburnJoe LewisRoman PolanskiLee MarvinStirling SilliphantMike Stone
The paradox taken from the Yin and Yang symbol in martial arts, also integrated in his poetry.
When he refused to comply, he was challenged to a combat match with Wong.
A tape containing a recording of Lee narrating the basic storyline to a film tentatively titled ''Southern Fist/Northern Leg'' exists, showing some similarities with the canned script for ''The Silent Flute'' (''Circle of Iron'').
Lee allegedly told Moore that he was going to throw a straight punch to the face, and all he had to do was to try to block it.
Lee is best known as a martial artist, but he also studied drama and philosophy while a student at the University of Washington.
Most of Bruce Lee's poems are categorized as anti-poetry or fall into a paradox.
It was made for US$850,000 in 1973 (equivalent to $4&nbsp;million adjusted for inflation as of 2007).
In Japan, Junichi Okada is a certified Japanese instructor in Jeet Kune Do.
Lee appeared at the 1967 Long Beach International Karate Championships and performed various demonstrations, including the famous "unstoppable punch" against USKA world Karate champion Vic Moore.
In Oakland, California in 1964 at Chinatown, Lee had a controversial private match with Wong Jack Man, a direct student of Ma Kin Fung known for his mastery of Xingyiquan, Northern Shaolin, and T'ai chi ch'uan.
When asked in 1972 about his religious affiliation, he replied, "none whatsoever".
Lee also avoided baked goods and refined flour, describing them as providing calories which did nothing for his body.
The HBHOF is a combat sports voting body composed exclusively of current and former fighters and Martial Artists.
Lee was born in Chinatown, San Francisco on November 27, 1940 to parents from Hong Kong and was raised in Kowloon, Hong Kong with his family until his late teens.
According to these sources, the reason Lee was not cast was in part because of his ethnicity, but more so because he had a thick accent.
After filming one season of ''The Green Hornet'', Lee found himself out of work and opened The Jun Fan Institute of Gung Fu.
Lee had shot over 100 minutes of footage, including out-takes, for ''Game of Death'' before shooting was stopped to allow him to work on ''Enter the Dragon''.
On May 10, 1973, Lee collapsed during an ADR session for ''Enter the Dragon'' at Golden Harvest in Hong Kong.
The fight ended due to Lee's "unusually winded" condition, as opposed to a decisive blow by either fighter.
Without retracting his right arm, Lee then forcibly delivered the punch to his partner while largely maintaining his posture, sending the partner backwards and falling into a chair said to be placed behind the partner to prevent injury, though his partner's momentum soon caused him to fall to the floor.
His conclusion was "death by misadventure" caused by an acute cerebral edema due to a reaction to compounds present in the combination medication Equagesic.
After negotiating with both Shaw Brothers Studio and Golden Harvest, Lee signed a film contract to star in two films produced by Golden Harvest.
James Yimm Lee held a 3rd rank in Jun Fan Gung Fu.
On January 6, 2009, it was announced that Bruce's Hong Kong home (41 Cumberland Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong) will be preserved and transformed into a tourist site by philanthropist Yu Pang-lin.
A semi biographical film about him
On the other hand, Lee's philosophy was very much in opposition to the conservative worldview advocated by Confucianism.
At the 1975 San Diego Comic-Con convention, Bruce Lee's friend Chuck Norris attributed his death to a reaction between the muscle-relaxant medication he had been taking since 1968 for a ruptured disc in his back, and an "antibiotic" he was given for his headache on the night of his death.
When the doctors announced Lee's death officially, it was ruled a "death by misadventure".
In 1971, Lee appeared in four episodes of the television series ''Longstreet'', written by Silliphant.
Rhee taught Lee the side kick in detail, and Lee taught Rhee the "non-telegraphic" punch.
According to Lee, the Chinese community issued an ultimatum to him to stop teaching non-Chinese.
Until his late teens, Lee's street fights became more frequent and included beating the son of a feared triad family.
As such, the young Bruce Lee grew up in an affluent and privileged environment.
He died in Kowloon Tong on July 20, 1973 at the age of 32.
There was no visible external injury; however, according to autopsy reports, Lee's brain had swollen considerably, from 1,400 to 1,575 grams (a 13% increase).
Though Bruce Lee didn't appear in commercials during his lifetime Nokia launched an internet based campaign in 2008 with staged "documentary looking" footage of Bruce Lee playing ping-pong with his nunchaku and also igniting matches as they are thrown towards him.
Lee played the martial arts instructor of the title character Mike Longstreet (played by James Franciscus), and important aspects of his martial arts philosophy were written into the script.
At the same time in balance, Lee was careful to admonish that mental and spiritual preparation are fundamental to the success of physical training in martial arts skills.
Lee had also worked on several scripts himself.
Filming began in Hong Kong in January 1973.
Inosanto holds the 3rd rank (Instructor) directly from Bruce Lee in Jeet Kune Do, Jun Fan Gung Fu, and Bruce Lee's Tao of Chinese Gung Fu.
His Hong Kong and Hollywood-produced films elevated the traditional Hong Kong martial arts film to a new level of popularity and acclaim, sparking a surge of interest in Chinese martial arts in the West in the 1970s.
His volunteer was Bob Baker of Stockton, California.
Lee's first introduction to martial arts was through his father, from whom he learned the fundamentals of Wu-style t'ai chi ch'uan.
Lee's wife Linda returned to her hometown of Seattle, and had him buried at lot 276 of Lakeview Cemetery.
The unused footage Lee had filmed was recovered 22 years later and included in the documentary ''Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey''.
Lee's Cantonese birth name was ''Lee Jun-fan'' (李振藩).
He was 32 years old.
In 2010, producer Paul Maslansky was reported to plan and receive fundings for a film based on the original script for ''The Silent Flute''.
It was basically his approach to Wing Chun.
Around 7:30&nbsp;p.m., he went to lie down for a nap.
At  and , Lee was renowned for his physical fitness and vigor, achieved by using a dedicated fitness regimen to become as strong as possible.
This consisted of getting rid of the formalised approach which Lee claimed was indicative of traditional styles.
According to Linda Lee Cadwell, soon after he moved to the United States, Lee started to take nutrition seriously and developed an interest in health foods, high-protein drinks and vitamin and mineral supplements.
Lee began teaching martial arts in the United States in 1959.
Chow's husband was a co-worker and friend of Lee's father.
Producer Fred Weintraub had advised Lee to return to Hong Kong and make a feature film which he could showcase to executives in Hollywood.
In ''Tao of Jeet Kune Do'' he wrote,
Lee commented, "That paper had all the names of the sifu from Chinatown, but they don't scare me".
The largest influence on Lee's martial arts development was his study of Wing Chun.
Linda Lee Cadwell (Bruce Lee's wife) shared her husbands notes, poems and experiences with followers.
Lee took several steps back and asked if Moore was ready.
Later Lee complained of a headache, and Ting gave him an analgesic (painkiller), Equagesic, which contained both aspirin and the tranquilizer meprobamate.
Because of his mother's superstitious nature, she had originally named him ''Sai-fon'' (細鳳), which is a feminine name meaning "small phoenix".
By the time he was 18, he had appeared in twenty films.
He later concluded that in order to achieve a high-performance body, one could not fuel it with a diet of junk food, and with "the wrong fuel" one's body would perform sluggishly or sloppily.
Yip's regular classes generally consisted of the forms practice, ''chi sao'' (sticking hands) drills, wooden dummy techniques, and free-sparring.
The direction and tone of his films changed and influenced martial arts and martial arts films in the US, Hong Kong and the rest of the world.
In ''Way of the Dragon'' Lee introduced Norris to movie-goers as his opponent in the final death fight at the Colosseum in Rome, today considered one of Lee's most legendary fight scenes and one of the most memorable fight scenes in martial arts film history.
Lee played his first leading role in ''The Big Boss'' (1971) which proved to be an enormous box office success across Asia and catapulted him to stardom.
and the man said he gave up".
Eventually, Lee's father decided his son should leave Hong Kong to pursue a safer and healthier life in the United States.
Aside from martial arts and philosophy which focus on the physical aspect and self-consciousness for truths and principles, Lee also wrote poetry that reflected his emotion and a stage in his life collectively.
However, a martial arts exhibition on Long Beach in 1964 eventually led to the invitation by William Dozier for an audition for a part in the pilot for "Number One Son".
Wan Kam Leung, a student of Wong's, witnessed a sparring bout between Wong and Lee, and noted the speed and precision with which Lee was able to deliver his kicks.
While in the United States from 1959 to 1964, Lee abandoned thoughts of a film career in favour of pursuing martial arts.
If the situation were reversed, and an American star were to come to Hong Kong, and I was the man with the money, I would have my own concerns as to whether the acceptance would be there".
Wong and William Chen stated that the fight lasted an unusually long 20–25 minutes.
Lee felt that many martial artists of his time did not spend enough time on physical conditioning.
Having finished his initial two-year contract, Lee negotiated a new deal with Golden Harvest.
Lee taught friends he met in Seattle, starting with Judo practitioner Jesse Glover, who continued to teach some of Lee's early techniques.
A doctor was summoned, who spent ten minutes attempting to revive Lee before sending him by ambulance to Queen Elizabeth Hospital.
Bruce got this guy down to the ground and said 'Do you give up?'
There was no set pattern to the classes.
The headache and cerebral edema that occurred in his first collapse were later repeated on the day of his death.
Grace Ho was the adopted daughter of Ho Kom-tong (Ho Gumtong, 何甘棠) and the half-niece of Sir Robert Ho-tung, both notable Hong Kong businessmen and philanthropists, and was a reportedly a half-German Catholic.
John Little states that Lee was an atheist.
He is widely considered by commentators, critics, media, and other martial artists to be one of the most influential martial artists of all time, and a pop culture icon of the 20th century.
Lee did not respond to the invitation despite his reputation for violently responding to every provocation, and there were no further public announcements by either, though Lee continued to teach Caucasians.
Lee's mother, Grace Ho, was from one of the wealthiest and most powerful clans in Hong Kong, the Ho-tungs.
Lee and his parents returned to Hong Kong when he was three months old.
In ''The Pierre Berton Show'' interview, Lee stated he understood Warner Brothers' attitudes towards casting in the series: "They think that business wise it is a risk.
Many forms of art remain concordant with the artist creating them.
Forced to defend his life, he had nonetheless refrained from striking Lee with killing force when the opportunity presented itself because it could earn him a prison sentence.
Warner Brothers states that they had for some time been developing an identical concept, created by two writers and producers, Ed Spielman and Howard Friedlander.
Although Lee had formed a production company with Raymond Chow, a period film was also planned from September–November 1973 with the competing Shaw Brothers Studio, to be directed by either Chor Yuen or Cheng Kang, and written by Yi Kang and Chang Cheh, titled ''The Seven Sons of the Jade Dragon''.
In 1969, Lee made a brief appearance in the Silliphant-penned film ''Marlowe'' where he played a henchman hired to intimidate private detective Philip Marlowe, (played by James Garner), by smashing up his office with leaping kicks and flashing punches, only to later accidentally jump off a tall building while trying to kick Marlowe off.
According to Lee's wife Linda, Lee met producer Raymond Chow at 2&nbsp;p.m. at home to discuss the making of the film ''Game of Death''.
These included murder involving the Triads and a supposed curse on him and his family.
After Lee was involved in several street fights, his parents decided that he needed to be trained in the martial arts.
However, only a few months after the completion of ''Enter the Dragon'', and six days before its July 26, 1973 release, Lee died.
Within months, Hong Kong was invaded and the Lees lived for three years and eight months under Japanese occupation.
James Yimm Lee, a close friend of Lee, certified a few students including Gary Dill who studied Jeet Kune Do under James and received permission via a personal letter from him in 1972 to pass on his learning of Jun Fan Gung Fu to others.
Lee was the son of Cantonese opera star Lee Hoi-Chuen.
Lee had two children with Linda Emery, Brandon Lee (1965–93) and Shannon Lee (born 1969).
Wong claims that he had originally expected a serious but polite bout; however Lee had attacked him very aggressively with intent to kill, straight from the beginning of the bout when he had replied to Wong's traditional handshake offer by pretending to accept the handshake, but instead turning that hand into a spear aimed at Wong's eyes.
Bruce Lee personally certified only three instructors: Taky Kimura, James Yimm Lee, and Dan Inosanto.
However, Lee showed a keen interest in Wing Chun, and continued to train privately with Yip Man and Wong Shun Leung in 1955.
In eight attempts, Moore failed to block any of the punches.
While there was initial speculation that cannabis found in Lee's stomach may have contributed to his death, Teare refuted this, stating that it would "be both 'irresponsible and irrational' to say that cannabis might have triggered either the events of Bruce's collapse on May 10 or his death on July 20".
Wong denied this, stating that he requested to fight Lee after Lee boasted during one of his demonstrations at a Chinatown theatre that he could beat anyone in San Francisco, and that Wong himself did not discriminate against Caucasians or other non-Chinese.
Individuals known to have witnessed the match include Cadwell, James Lee (Bruce Lee's associate, no relation), and William Chen, a teacher of T'ai chi ch'uan.
In Cadwell's account, "The fight ensued, it was a no-holds-barred fight, it took three minutes.
In response, Wong published his own account of the fight in the Chinese ''Pacific Weekly'', a Chinese-language newspaper in San Francisco, with an invitation to a public rematch if Lee was not satisfied with the account.
"I told Bruce not to do this type of demonstration again", Baker recalled.
His martial arts, and philosophy contribute a great part to his poetry.
The arrangement was that if Lee lost, he would have to shut down his school; while if he won, then Lee would be free to teach Caucasians or anyone else.
After his match with Wong Jack Man in 1965, Lee changed his approach toward martial arts training.
According to Bruce Lee, Linda Lee Cadwell, and James Yimm Lee however, the fight lasted a mere 3 minutes with a decisive victory for Lee.
Donald Teare, a forensic scientist recommended by Scotland Yard who had overseen over 1,000 autopsies, was assigned to the Lee case.
He then threw a straight punch directly at Moore's face, and stopped before impact.
Lee began training in Wing Chun when he was 16 years old under the Wing Chun teacher Yip Man in 1957, after losing several fights with rival gang members.
Dr. R. R. Lycette, the clinical pathologist at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, reported at the coroner hearing that the death could not have been caused by cannabis.
Yip tried to keep his students from fighting in the street gangs of Hong Kong by encouraging them to fight in organized competitions.
Because of this, Lee was introduced into films at a very young age and appeared in several films as a child.
This was followed by guest appearances in three television series: ''Ironside'' (1967), ''Here Come the Brides'' (1969), and ''Blondie'' (1969).
Moore claims that Lee never successfully struck Moore but Moore was able to strike Lee after trying on his own; Moore further claims that Bruce Lee said he was the fastest American he's ever seen and that Lee's media crew repeatedly played the one punch towards Moore's face that did not come within striking range, allegedly in an attempt to preserve Lee's superstar image.
Around the time of Lee's death, numerous rumors appeared in the media.
Bruce Lee was voted as the Greatest Movie Fighter Ever in 2014 by the Houston Boxing Hall Of Fame.
Lee became an iconic figure known throughout the world, particularly among the Chinese, as he portrayed Chinese nationalism in his films.
Lee had his first role as a baby who was carried onto the stage in the film ''Golden Gate Girl''.
The role was originally offered to American Karate champion Joe Lewis.
