As one of its first initiatives toward improved regional relations, Brunei joined ASEAN on 7 January 1984, becoming the sixth member.
The law prohibits sexual harassment and stipulates that whoever assaults or uses criminal force, intending thereby to outrage or knowing it is likely to outrage the modesty of a person, shall be punished with imprisonment for as much as five years and caning.
As of August 2015, there were no cases within the Sharia Penal Code that would entail the death penalty without four qualified witnesses.
During the later part of the occupation, he resided at Tantuya, Limbang and had little to do with the Japanese.
Their colour is whiter than that of the other sort....in this island justice is well administered...
The rate of urbanisation is estimated at 2.13% per year from 2010 to 2015.
The campaign was one of many, which also included action in Mindanao and Sulu.
The airline also has services to major Asian destinations including Shanghai, Bangkok, Singapore and Manila.
The penalty for breaching a protection order is a fine not exceeding BN$2,000 ($1,538) or imprisonment not exceeding six months.
Brunei is one of many nations to lay claim to some of the disputed Spratly Islands.
Other major towns are the port town of Muara, the oil-producing town of Seria and its neighbouring town, Kuala Belait.
Most of Brunei is within the Borneo lowland rain forests ecoregion, which covers most of the island.
Non-Muslims are allowed to bring in a limited amount of alcohol from their point of embarkation overseas for their own private consumption.
In 1944 the Allies began a bombing campaign against the occupying Japanese, which destroyed much of the town and Kuala Belait, but missed Kampong Ayer.
As an Islamic country, Brunei became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) in January 1984 at the Fourth Islamic Summit held in Morocco.
In 1954, survey and exploration work were undertaken by the Brunei Shell Petroleum on both offshore and onshore fields.
According to legend, Brunei was founded by Awang Alak Betatar, later to be Sultan Muhammad Shah.
The culture of Brunei is predominantly Malay (reflecting its ethnicity), with heavy influences from Islam, but is seen as much more conservative than Indonesia and Malaysia.
What was called the Castilian War was seen as a heroic episode, with the Spaniards being driven out by Bendahara Sakam, purportedly a brother of the ruling sultan, and a thousand native warriors.
The average life expectancy is 77.7 years.
Pengiran Seri Lela died in August or September 1578, probably from the same illness suffered by his Spanish allies.
The British Military Administration took over from the Japanese and remained until July 1946.
But, when the Kingdom of Sarawak annexed Brunei's Pandaruan District in 1890, the British did not take any action to stop it.
The government allowed a printing and publishing company, Brunei Press PLC, to form in 1953.
The Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports supports for a lingual movement aimed at the increased use of the language in Brunei.
The intent of the law is to protect girls from exploitation through prostitution and "other immoral purposes" including pornography.
The government of Brunei has also promoted food self-sufficiency, especially in rice.
In May 1983, it was announced by the UK that the date of independence of Brunei would be 1 January 1984.
Freethinkers, mostly Chinese, form about 7% of the population.
Allied attacks on shipping eventually caused trade to cease.
The law does not criminalise spousal rape; it explicitly states that sexual intercourse by a man with his wife, as long as she is not under 13 years of age, is not rape.
British residents were introduced in Brunei under the Supplementary Protectorate Agreement in 1906.
The official language of Brunei is Malay.
European influence gradually brought an end to the regional power, as Brunei entered a period of decline compounded by internal strife over royal succession.
This paper began as a weekly community paper and became a daily in 1990 Apart from The ''Borneo Bulletin'', there is also the ''Media Permata'' and Pelita Brunei, the local Malay newspapers which are circulated daily.
Other languages and dialects spoken include Arabic, Kedayan Malay dialect, Tutong Malay dialect, Murut and Dusun.
The move attracted international criticism, the United Nations expressing "deep concern".
In October 2013, Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah announced his intention to impose Sharia law on the country's Muslims, which take up roughly two thirds of the country's population.
The cause of the accident has yet to be ascertained.
It has  of territorial waters, and a  exclusive economic zone.
In 1962, a small armed rebellion against the monarchy was ended with the help of the British.
Islam had a very strong influence, and was adopted as Brunei's ideology and philosophy.
The plan also aided the development of public education.
Royal Brunei Airlines is the national carrier.
The expedition consisted of 400 Spanish, 1,500 Filipino natives and 300 Borneans.
* The post of Resident was abolished and replaced by a British High Commissioner.
They informed a geophysicist, who conducted a survey there.
The maritime state was visited by Spain's Magellan Expedition in 1521 and fought against Spain in the 1578 Castille War.
Ibrahim hid numerous significant government documents from the Japanese during the occupation.
Fourteen kilometres (9&nbsp;mi) of this roadway would be crossing the Brunei Bay.
The sultan granted land (now Sarawak) to James Brooke, who had helped him quell a rebellion and allowed him to establish the Kingdom of Sarawak.
By law sexual intercourse with a female under 14 years of age constitutes rape and is punishable by imprisonment for not less than eight years and not more than thirty years and not less than twelve strokes of the cane.
Crude oil and natural gas production account for about 90% of its GDP.
In 1959, a new constitution was written declaring Brunei a self-governing state, while its foreign affairs, security, and defence remained the responsibility of the United Kingdom.
This agreement granted Brunei to take over international responsibilities as an independent nation.
They agreed to authorise the drafting of a constitution.
Seri Lela's daughter, a Bruneian princess had left with the Spanish, she married a Christian Tagalog, named Agustín de Legazpi de Tondo.
Brunei’s Legislative Council proposed an increase of the defence budget for the 2016-17 fiscal year of about five per cent to 564 million Brunei dollars ($408 million).
* The maintenance of friendly relations among nations;
The party intended to "preserve the sovereignty of the Sultan and the country, and to defend the rights of the Malays".
In the country's full name, '''', '''' () means "abode of peace", while '''' means "country" in Malay.
Brunei has a parliament but there are no elections; the last election was held in 1962.
Cochrane, smelled oil near the Seria river in late 1926.
Seria Well Number 2 was drilled on 19 August 1929, and, , continues to produce oil.
Brunei has 2.8 hospital beds per 1000 people.
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Brunei is ranked fifth in the world by gross domestic product per capita at purchasing power parity.
rice, food products, livestock, etc.
Brunei is a southeast Asian country consisting of two unconnected parts with a total area of  on the island of Borneo.
The government provides for all medical services, and subsidises rice and housing.
Since the Spanish regarded Brunei the center of Islamic preaching in the Philippines Spain declared war in 1578, planning  to attack and capture Kota Batu, Brunei's capital at the time.
Brunei's leaders are very concerned that steadily increased integration in the world economy will undermine internal social cohesion.
The ferry terminal at Muara services regular connections to Labuan (Malaysia).
Many buildings were destroyed, including the Mosque.
Economic growth during the 1990s and 2000s, with the GDP increasing 56% from 1999 to 2008, transformed Brunei into an industrialised country.
* Mutual respect of others' territorial sovereignty, integrity and independence;
There was suspicion he could have been poisoned by the ruling sultan.
In July 1953, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III formed a seven-member committee named ''Tujuh Serangkai'', to find out the citizens' views regarding a written constitution for Brunei.
The British Malayan Petroleum Company (now Brunei Shell Petroleum Company) was formed on 22 July 1922.
It has a legal system based on English common law, although Islamic shariah law supersedes this in some cases.
This amounts to about ten per cent of the state’s total national yearly expenditure and represents around 2.5 per cent of GDP.
The Brunei State Council was also revived that year.
A major oil and gas field was discovered in 1963, with this discovery, Liquefied Natural Gas became important.
Suffering high fatalities due to a cholera or dysentery outbreak, the Spanish decided to abandon Brunei and returned to Manila on 26 June 1578, after 72 days.
Brunei gained its independence from the United Kingdom on 1 January 1984.
To achieve recognition of its sovereignty and independence,  it joined the United Nations as a full member on 21 September of that same year.
Brunei's revised penal code came into force on April 22, 2014, stipulating the death penalty for numerous offences, and insult or defamation of the Prophet Mohammed, insulting any verses of the Quran and Hadith, blasphemy, declaring oneself a prophet or non-Muslim, robbery, rape, adultery, sodomy, extramarital sexual relations for Muslims and murder.
The first was introduced in 1953.
The law stipulates imprisonment of up to 30 years, and caning with not fewer than 12 strokes for rape.
HSBC, which had entered in 1947, is currently in the process of closing its operations in the country.
They landed 10,000 troops of the Kawaguchi Detachment from Cam Ranh Bay at Kuala Belait.
Protections against sexual assault by a spouse are provided under the amended Islamic Family Law Order 2010 and Married Women Act Order 2010.
In 1578, Alonso Beltrán, a Spanish traveller, described it as being five stories tall and built on the water.
The three components of MIB cover Malay culture, Islamic religion, and the political framework under the monarchy.
Upon adopting sharia, the Sultan banned Christmas decorations in public places such as shopping malls, believing that it might interfere with the practise of Islam.
There is currently no medical school in Brunei, and Bruneians wishing to study to become doctors must attend university overseas.
This project is slated to add  of new floorspace and includes a new terminal and arrival hall.
The building, including research lab facilities, was completed in 2009.
Seria Well Number One (S-1) was drilled on 12 July 1928.
It has been acknowledged as a crime in Brunei with the introduction of the Sharia law.
* Brunei was responsible for its internal administration.
The airport in Brunei is currently being extensively upgraded.
We arrived at the island of Bornei'' (Brunei or Borneo), ''which is distant from the ''Maluch'' about two hundred miles, and we found that it was somewhat larger than the aforesaid and much lower.
In Jerudong, they made plans to chase the conquering army away from Brunei.
It has developed wealth from extensive petroleum and natural gas fields.
The earliest recorded documentation by the West about Brunei is by an Italian known as Ludovico di Varthema, who also said the "Bruneian people have fairer skin tone than the peoples he met in Maluku Islands".
The Japanese had proposed that Pengilly retain his position under their administration, but he declined.
However, the Institute of Medicines had been introduced at the Universiti Brunei Darussalam and a new building has been built for the faculty.
It consisted mainly of Australian officers and servicemen.
About 97% of the population lives in the larger western part (Belait, Tutong, and Brunei-Muara), while only about 10,000 people live in the mountainous eastern part (Temburong District).
In 1369, the Sulus attacked Po-ni, looting it of treasure and gold.
It was signed with Lord Goronwy-Roberts being the representative of the UK.
It holds a daily slot at the highly capacity-controlled airport, which it serves from Bandar Seri Begawan via Dubai.
Leaders plan to upgrade the labour force, reduce unemployment, which was at 6.9% in 2014; strengthen the banking and tourism sectors, and, in general, broaden the economic base.
The Army is currently acquiring new equipment, including UAVs and S-70i Black Hawks.
with four trusted, impartial, and truthful witnesses in attendance).
With the completion of this project, the annual passenger capacity of the airport is expected to double from 1.5 to 3 million.
A $US14 million Gas Plant was built under the plan.
Brunei Malay is rather divergent from standard Malay and the rest of the Malay dialects, being about 84% cognate with standard Malay, and is mostly mutually unintelligible with it.
The former had travelled to Manila, then the centre of the Spanish colony, Manila itself was captured from Brunei and Christianized, Pengiran Seri Lela came to offer Brunei as a tributary to Spain for help to recover the throne usurped by his brother, Saiful Rijal.
Infectious disease has been prevented by public sanitation and improvement of drainage, and the provision of piped pure water to the population.
This would be implemented in three phases, culminating in 2016, and making Brunei the first and only country in East Asia to introduce Sharia law into its penal code.
Petroleum was discovered in 1929 after several fruitless attempts.
The first offshore well was drilled in 1957.
Five councils were set up:
Stoning to death was the specified "method of execution for crimes of a sexual nature."
Although most of them practise some form of religion with elements of Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism, they prefer to present themselves as having practised no religion officially, hence labelled as atheists in official censuses.
After the Japanese occupation during World War II, in 1959 a new constitution was written.
Brunei's small, wealthy economy is a mixture of foreign and domestic entrepreneurship, government regulation, welfare measures, and village tradition.
This final annexation by Sarawak left Brunei with its current small land mass and separation into two parts.
Developments in the oil and gas sector have continued, and oil production has steadily increased since then.
It also has an online campus radio station, ''UBD FM'' that streams from its first university, ''Universiti Brunei Darussalam'
Communications were improved, as new roads were built and reconstruction at Berakas Airport was completed in 1954.
Brunei renamed its Brunei Darussalam Rice 1 as Laila Rice during the launch of the "Padi Planting Towards Achieving Self-Sufficiency of Rice Production in Brunei Darussalam" ceremony at the Wasan padi fields in April 2009.
The first British High Commissioner for Brunei was the Governor of Sarawak, Sir Charles Ardon Clarke.
Other faiths practised are Buddhism (13%, mainly by the Chinese) and Christianity (10%).
The principal spoken language is ''Melayu Brunei'' (Brunei Malay).
Followers of indigenous religions are about 2% of the population.
The remaining equipment and installations were destroyed when the Japanese invaded Malaya.
In 1940, oil production was at more than six million barrels.
"To be quite honest there has been no change for us this year; no new restrictions have been laid down, although we fully respect and adhere to the existing regulations that our celebrations and worship be confined to the compounds of the church and private residences," according to Bishop Cornelius Sim, head of the Catholic Church in Brunei.
Brunei has one main sea port located at Muara.
Hassanal Bolkiah also serves as the state's Prime Minister, Finance Minister and Defence Minister.
The naval base was destroyed by Allied bombing, but the airport runway survived.
After six days fighting, they occupied the entire country.
In March 1959 Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III led a delegation to London to discuss the proposed Constitution.
But, it has become a more prominent player by serving as chairman for the 2000 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
Also, studies by the Ministry of Health show that at least 20% of schoolchildren in Brunei are either overweight or obese.
A Gurkha battalion consisting of 1,500 personnel is stationed there.
Parents with stateless status are required to apply for a special pass for a child born in the country; failure to register a child may make it difficult to enroll the child in school.
Brunei's official main language is the Malay language but the English language is also widely spoken as it is considered a compulsory subject in the majority of the schools.
A Bell 212 operated by the air force crashed in Kuala Belait on 20 July 2012 with the loss of 12 of the 14 crew on board.
Efforts were made to eradicate malaria, an endemic disease in the region, with the help of the World Health Organisation.
The prevalence of HIV/AIDS is currently at 0.1%, and numerous AIDS awareness campaigns are currently being held.
Pengiran Yusuf (later YAM Pengiran Setia Negara Pengiran Haji Mohd Yusuf), along with other Bruneians, was sent to Japan for training.
* The State Religious Council
Brunei depends heavily on imports such as agricultural products (e.g.
Most of these investments are made by the Brunei Investment Agency, an arm of the Ministry of Finance.
On 29 September 1959, the Constitution Agreement was signed in Bandar Seri Begawan.
Brunei is the only sovereign state completely on the island of Borneo; the remainder of the island's territory is divided between the nations of Malaysia and Indonesia.
The Brunei navy has several "Ijtihad"-class patrol boats purchased from a German manufacturer.
Over time, the resident assumed more executive control than the sultan.
Rupert Colville, spokesperson for the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) declared that, "Application of the death penalty for such a broad range of offences contravenes international law."
It also hosted the ASEAN summit on that same year.
By the end of the war, 16 wells at Miri and Seria had been restarted, with production reaching about half the pre-war level.
The largest hospital in Brunei is Raja Isteri Pengiran Anak Saleha Hospital (RIPAS) hospital, which had 550 beds in year 1992, is situated in the country's capital Bandar Seri Begawan.
As a Sharia country, the sale and public consumption of alcohol is banned.
Sultan Hashim Jalilul Alam Aqamaddin appealed to the British to stop further encroachment by the Brookes.
Selling other rare animals, such as pangolins and endangered birds, are considered serious crimes; however, Brunei lacks animal rights enforcers.
For medical assistance not available in the country, citizens are sent overseas at the government's expense.
In April 2009, Brunei and the Philippines signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that seeks to strengthen the bilateral co-operation of the two countries in the fields of agriculture and farm-related trade and investments.
However, scholars claim that the power of the Sultanate of Brunei was at its peak between the 15th and 17th centuries, with its power extending from northern Borneo to the southern Philippines.
In the period of 2011–12, 327 patients were treated in Malaysia and Singapore at the cost to the government of $12 million.
During the occupation, the Japanese had their language taught in schools, and Government officers were required to learn Japanese.
Malaria cases were reduced from 300 cases in 1953 to only 66 cases in 1959.
The Royal family retains a venerated status within Brunei.
The Brunei government owns and operates six television channels with the introduction of digital TV using DVB-T (RTB 1, RTB 2, RTB 3 (HD), RTB 4, RTB 5 and RTB New Media (Game portal)) and five radio stations (National FM, Pilihan FM, Nur Islam FM, Harmony FM and Pelangi FM).
Brunei maintains three infantry battalions stationed around the country.
The Sultan Saiful Rijal and Paduka Seri Begawan Sultan Abdul Kahar were forced to flee to Meragang then to Jerudong.
Although in the area the day of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, Yusuf survived.
On 10 June 1945, the Australian 9th Division landed at Muara under Operation Oboe Six to recapture Borneo from the Japanese.
The country has been given "Not Free" status by Freedom House; press criticism of the government and monarchy is rare.
The residential system ended in 1959.
Brunei's population was 408,786 in July 2012.
The crash is the worst aviation incident in the history of Brunei.
The issue was reportedly settled in 2009, with Brunei agreeing to accept the border in exchange for Malaysia giving up claims to oil fields in Bruneian waters.
Once the Japanese occupied Brunei, they made an agreement with Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin over governing the country.
Media in Brunei are said to be ''pro-government''.
Before 1941, the Governor of the Straits Settlements, based in Singapore, was responsible for the duties of British High Commissioner for Brunei, Sarawak, and North Borneo (now Sabah).
Most of the Malay government officers were retained by the Japanese.
By 1958, expenditure on education totalled at $4 million.
The only Allied troops in the area were the 2nd Battalion of the 15th Punjab Regiment based at Kuching, Sarawak.
A health centre run by Brunei Shell Petroleum is located in Panaga.
After that, they were handled by the Brunei Diplomatic Service.
It included the following provisions:
Food and medicine fell into short supply, and the population suffered famine and disease.
The Health Promotion Centre opened in November 2008 and serves to educate the public on the importance of having a healthy lifestyle.
Brunei shares a close relationship with Singapore and the Philippines.
However, local and foreign Christians are still allowed to celebrate Christmas as usual.
There has been a School of Nursing since 1951.
), motorcars and electrical products from other countries.
