On the eastern side of the city, the ''R21'' (French: ''grande ceinture'', ''grote ring'' in Dutch) is formed by a string of boulevards that curves round from Laeken to Uccle.
Michael and Gudula Cathedral'', the ''Royal Palace'' and the ''Palace of Justice''.
Its GDP per capita is nearly double that of Belgium as a whole, and it has the highest GDP per capita of any NUTS 1 region in the European Union at €62,000 in 2011.
The architect A. Waterkeyn devoted the building to science.
In 2014, the Union hosted a G7 summit in the city.
The official founding of Brussels is usually situated around 979, when Duke Charles of Lower Lotharingia transferred the relics of Saint Gudula from Moorsel to the Saint Gaugericus chapel.
The French Community Commission has also another capacity: some legislative powers of the French Community have been devolved to the Walloon Region (for the French language area of Belgium) and to the French Community Commission (for the bilingual language area).
The Brussels Cycling Classic is one of the oldest semi classic bicycle races on the international calendar.
'''Brussels''' (, ; , ), officially the '''Brussels-Capital Region''' (, ), is a region of Belgium comprising 19 municipalities, including the City of Brussels which is the ''de jure'' capital of Belgium.
This is also the place where the Council of Ministers holds its meetings.
Today the majority language is French, and the Brussels-Capital Region is an officially bilingual enclave within the Flemish Region.
Metro line 2 runs under much of these.
In the 13th century, the city got its first walls.
The city centre, sometimes known as "the pentagon", is surrounded by an inner ring road, the "small ring" (French: ''petite ceinture'', Dutch: ''kleine ring'' ), a sequence of boulevards formally numbered ''R20'' or N0.
The famous Belgian surrealist René Magritte, for instance, studied and lived in Brussels, as did the avant-garde dramatist Michel de Ghelderode.
In recent decades, owing to migration and the city's international role, Brussels is home to a growing number of foreign language speakers.
In Brussels there are often violent thunderstorms.
Following independence, the city underwent many more changes.
The migrant communities, as well as rapidly growing communities of EU-nationals from other EU-member states, speak many languages like French, Turkish, Arabic, Berber, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Polish, German, and (increasingly) English.
The French Community and the Flemish Community exercise their powers in Brussels through two community-specific public authorities: the French Community Commission (French: ''Commission communautaire française'' or ''COCOF'') and the Flemish Community Commission (Dutch: ''Vlaamse Gemeenschapscommissie'' or ''VGC'').
That being said, the GDP is boosted by a massive inflow of commuters from neighbouring regions; over half of those who work in Brussels live in Flanders or Wallonia, with 230,000 and 130,000 commuters per day respectively.
Brussels is the ''de facto'' capital of the European Union as it hosts a number of principal EU institutions (the other administrative centres are Luxembourg and Strasbourg).
Even though some people want English to be used as an unofficial compromise language between Dutch and French, French remains the lingua franca.
However the presence has contributed significantly to the importance of Brussels as an international centre.
The two main universities are the Université Libre de Bruxelles, a French-speaking university with about 20,000 students in three campuses in the city (and two others outside), and the Vrije Universiteit Brussel, a Dutch-speaking university with about 10,000 students.
Failing such a majority, a new vote can be held, where a majority of at least one third in each linguistic group is sufficient.
It can give subsidies and enact by-laws.
Thus reduce the overall running costs.
However, several municipalities outside of the Brussels-Capital Region have been merged with the City of Brussels throughout its history including Laeken, Haren, and Neder-Over-Heembeek, which were merged into the City of Brussels in 1921.
The ''Royal Palace'', where the King of Belgium exercises his prerogatives as head of state, is situated alongside the ''Brussels Park''.
Brussels has a robust economy.
Unlike most of the municipalities in Belgium, the ones located in the Brussels-Capital Region were not merged with others during mergers occurring in 1964, 1970, and 1975.
Its status is roughly akin to that of a federal district.
Regions of Belgium (1 January 2005)
Given its Dutch-speaking origins and the role that Brussels plays as the capital city in a bilingual country, the administration of the entire Brussels-Capital Region is fully bilingual, including its subdivisions and public services.
In 2009, there were an estimated 286 lobbying consultancies known to work in Brussels.
In the Brussels Region there are also railways stations at Berchem-Sainte-Agathe, Boitsfort, Boondael, Bordet (Evere), Etterbeek, Evere, Forest-East, Forest-South, Jette, Meiser (Schaarbeek), Moensberg (Uccle), Saint-Job (Uccle), Schaarbeek, Uccle-Calevoet, Uccle-Stalle, Vivier d'Oie-Diesdelle (Uccle), Merode and Watermael.
Despite being the smallest municipality, Saint-Josse-ten-Noode has the highest population density of the 19 with .
In reflection of its multicultural makeup, it hosts a variety of religious communities, as well as large numbers of atheists and agnostics.
The ''Brussels Agglomeration'' was an administrative division that was established in 1971.
The most common theory of the origin of Brussels' name is that it derives from the Old Dutch ''Broekzele'' or ''Broeksel'', meaning marsh (''broek'') and home (''zele'' / ''sel'') or "home in the marsh".
French-speaking immigration contributed to the Frenchification of Brussels; both Walloons and expatriates from other countries, mainly France, came to Brussels in great numbers.
Because of its location on the shores of the Senne on an important trade route between Bruges and Ghent, and Cologne, Brussels grew quite quickly; it became a commercial centre that rapidly extended towards the upper town (St. Michael and Gudula Cathedral, Coudenberg, Sablon area), where there was a smaller risk of floods.
In 1830, the Belgian revolution took place in Brussels after a performance of Auber's opera ''La Muette de Portici'' at the La Monnaie theatre.
These were built upon the site of the second set of city walls following their demolition.
The original Dutch dialect of Brussels (''Brussels'') is a form of Brabantic (the variant of Dutch spoken in the ancient Duchy of Brabant) with a significant number of loanwords from French, and still survives among a minority of inhabitants called ''Brusseleers'', many of them quite bi- and multilingual, or educated in French and not writing in Dutch.
'''Brussels-Capital Region
However, there have been numerous individual or familial migrations towards Brussels since the end of the 18th century, including political refugees (Karl Marx, Victor Hugo, Pierre Joseph Proudhon, Léon Daudet for example), from neighbouring or more distant countries as well as labour migrants, former foreign students or expatriates, and many Belgian families in Brussels can claim at least one foreign grandparent.
In another capacity it can also enact ordinances, which have equal status as a national legislative act, in the field of the welfare powers of the communities: in the Brussels-Capital Region, both the French Community and the Flemish Community can exercise powers in the field of welfare, but only in regard to institutions that are unilingual (for example, a private French-speaking retirement home or the Dutch-speaking hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel).
The European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) have their main institutions in the city, along with many other international organisations such as the World Customs Organization and EUROCONTROL as well as international corporations.
The Senne had become a serious health hazard, and from 1867 to 1871 its entire course through the urban area was completely covered over.
This is related to different conceptions in the two communities, one focusing more on the Communities and the other more on the Regions, causing an asymmetrical federalism.
This Commission has two capacities: it is a decentralised administrative public body, responsible for implementing cultural policies of common interest.
The Brussels Airport dates to the occupation.
Flemish political parties demanded for decades that the Flemish part of Brussels-Halle-Vilvoorde arrondissement be separated from the Brussels Region (which made Halle-Vilvoorde a monolingual Flemish arrondissement).
Brussels is increasingly becoming multilingual with increasing numbers of migrants, expatriates and minority groups speaking their own languages.
A little further out, a stretch numbered R22 leads from Zaventem to Saint-Job.
Now, people voting for a Flemish party have to vote separately for 6 directly elected members of the Flemish Parliament.
Starting from the early 1960s, Brussels became the ''de facto'' capital of what would become the European Union, and many modern buildings were built.
19 of the 72 French-speaking members of the Brussels Parliament are also members of the Parliament of the French Community of Belgium, and until 2004 this was also the case for six Dutch-speaking members, who were at the same time members of the Flemish Parliament.
The current municipalities could be transformed into districts with limited responsibilities, similar to the current structure of Antwerp or to structures of other capitals like the boroughs  in London or arrondissements in Paris, to keep politics close enough to the citizen.
Saint Vindicianus, the bishop of Cambrai made the first recorded reference to the place "Brosella" in 695 when it was still a hamlet.
The "international community" in Brussels numbers at least 70,000 people.
BHV was divided mid 2012.
Some politicians mock the '19 baronies' and want to merge the municipalities under one city council and one mayor.
The main reason for this was the political, administrative and social pressure, partly based on the low social prestige of the Dutch language in Belgium at the time; this made French the only language of administration, law, politics and education in Belgium and thus necessary for social mobility.
This decentralised administrative public body also assumed jurisdiction over areas that elsewhere in Belgium were exercised by municipalities or provinces.
Since June 2015, a number of central boulevards inside the pentagon have become car-free, limiting transit traffic through the old city.
Some of Brussels' districts were developed during the heyday of Art Nouveau, and many buildings are in this style.
The least populous is Koekelberg with 18,541 inhabitants, while the smallest in area is Saint-Josse-ten-Noode, which is only .
Since 2015, its reincarnation is back playing in the fourth division.
The commuter services operated by De Lijn, TEC and NMBS/SNCB will in the next few years be augmented by the Brussels RER/GEN network which will connect the capital and surrounding towns.
The secretariat of the Benelux and the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are also located in Brussels.
The City of Brussels is the location of many national institutions.
The city is a stronghold of chocolate and pralines manufacturers with renowned companies like Neuhaus, Leonidas and Godiva.
It was in the Palace complex at Coudenberg that Charles V abdicated in 1555.
Brussels has, since World War II, become the administrative centre of many international organizations.
Several European club finals have been held at the ground, including the 1985 European Cup Final which saw 39 deaths due to hooliganism and structural collapse.
Belgium does not collect statistics by ethnic background, so exact figures are unknown.
Development was allowed to proceed with little regard to the aesthetics of newer buildings, and many architectural landmarks were demolished to make way for newer buildings that often clashed with their surroundings, giving name to the process of ''Brusselization''.
Also widespread are ''brasseries'', which usually offer a large number of beers and typical national dishes.
In 2013, figures cited in the Marnix Plan show that 63.2% of Brussels inhabitants are native speakers of French, while less than 20% are native Dutch speakers.
Brussels and its suburbs have evolved from a Dutch-dialect–speaking town to a mainly French-speaking town.
The degree of linguistic integration varies widely within each migrant group.
However, a more important cause for the Frenchification was the language change over several generations from Dutch to French that was performed in Brussels by the Flemish people themselves.
The combined student population of the four European Schools in Brussels is currently around 10,000.
Also particularly striking are the buildings in the Art Nouveau style by the Brussels architect Victor Horta.
Brussels remained with Austria until 1795, when the Southern Netherlands was captured and annexed by France.
The ''Manneken Pis'', a fountain containing a bronze sculpture of a urinating youth, is a tourist attraction and symbol of the city.
Also, the interiors of some Metro stations are designed by artists.
Minority faiths include Islam, Anglicanism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Judaism, and Buddhism.
Its ordinances have to be enacted with a majority in both linguistic groups.
Brussels also has its own harbour, the port of Brussels, on the Brussels-Scheldt Maritime Canal located in the northwest of the city.
Other universities include the Université Saint-Louis Bruxelles with 2,000 students, a campus of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, (offering bachelor & master's degrees in economics & business, law, arts, and architecture, and counting a faculty in the city centre) the Royal Military Academy, a military college established in 1834 by a French colonel and two drama schools founded in 1982: the French-speaking Conservatoire Royal and the Dutch-speaking Koninklijk Conservatorium.
The commune of Molenbeek has gained a reputation as a safe haven for Jihadists in relation to the support shown by some residents towards the bombers who carried out the Paris and Brussels attacks.
There are several universities in Brussels.
The gastronomic offer includes approximately 1,800 restaurants, and a number of high quality bars.
It was estimated that in 2005 people of Muslim background living in the Brussels Region numbered 256,220 and accounted for 25.5% of the city's population, a much higher concentration than those of the other regions of Belgium.
The origin of the settlement that was to become Brussels lies in Saint Gaugericus' construction of a chapel on an island in the river Senne around 580.
Not all of the wealth generated in Brussels remains in Brussels itself, and as of December 2013 the unemployment among residents of Brussels is 20.4%.
It has bilingual status and it is one of the three federal regions of Belgium, along with Flanders and Wallonia.
Throughout the city, walls are painted with large motifs of comic book characters; these murals taken together are known as the Brussels' Comic Book Route.
The region has a population of 1.2&nbsp;million and a metropolitan area with a population of over 1.8&nbsp;million, the largest in Belgium.
It has also won the most major European tournaments for a Belgian side.
The Royal Museums of Fine Arts has an extensive collection of various painters, such as Flemish painters like Bruegel, Rogier van der Weyden, Robert Campin, Anthony van Dyck, and Jacob Jordaens.
Good examples include Schaerbeek, Etterbeek, Ixelles, and Saint-Gilles.
The French-speaking population regards the language border as artificial and demands the extension of the bilingual region to at least all six municipalities with language facilities in the surroundings of Brussels.
Although historically majority Roman Catholic, especially since the expulsion of Protestants in the 16th century, most residents of Brussels are nonreligious, with only about 10% of Catholics regularly attending church services.
The cafés are similar to bars, and offer beer and light dishes; coffee houses are called the Salons de Thé.
Today, traces of it can still be seen, mostly because the "small ring", a series of roadways in downtown Brussels bounding the historic city centre, follows its former course.
The Brussels Region is the only one that is not subdivided into provinces, nor is it a province itself.
Brussels has a large concentration of immigrants and their children from other countries, including many of Turkish and Moroccan ancestry, together with French-speaking black Africans from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi.
And laws still require Dutch and French translations in most cases.
They also have a board composed of the ministers and secretaries of state of each linguistic group in the Government of the Brussels-Capital Region.
The stadium now known as the King Baudouin Stadium is the largest in the country and home to the national teams in football and rugby union.
The city has had a renowned artist scene for many years.
Located outside the centre in a more green environment are the ''Cinquantenaire park'' with its triumphal arch and nearby museums, the ''Royal Palace of Laeken'' with its large greenhouses, and the ''Basilica of the Sacred Heart''.
On 22 March 2016, three coordinated nail bombings were detonated by ISIL in Brussels - two at Brussels Airport in Zaventem, and one at Maalbeek/Maelbeek metro station, - resulting in 32 victims and three suicide bombers killed, and 330 people were injured.
Furthermore, the Bozar (Center for Fine Arts) is home to the National Orchestra of Belgium and the Flagey cultural centre hosts the Brussels Philharmonic.
This would lower the number of politicians needed to govern Brussels, and centralise the power over the city to make decisions easier.
Among all major migrant groups from outside the EU, a majority of the permanent residents have acquired Belgian nationality.
The corporation was founded in 1960 which is tasked to monitor the European aviation by flight, Eurocontrol coordinates and plans air traffic control for all European airspace, the headquarters are located in Haren.
The city was captured by France in 1746 during the War of the Austrian Succession but was handed back to Austria three years later.
Between 2002 and 2004, the European Council also fixed its seat in the city.
Some ''premetro'' stations (see Brussels Metro) were built on that route.
The Brussels-Charleroi Canal connects Brussels with the industrial areas of Wallonia.
This phenomenon is, together with the future of Brussels, one of the most controversial topics in all of Belgian politics.
During the 20th century the city has hosted various fairs and conferences, including the Solvay Conference on Physics and on Chemistry, and two world fairs: the Brussels International Exposition of 1935 and the Expo '58.
The ''Atomium'' is a symbolic  tall structure that was built for the 1958 World's Fair.
Since 2003 Brussels has had a car-sharing service operated by the Bremen company Cambio in partnership with the MIVB/STIB and local ridesharing company Taxi Stop.
Through immigration, a further number of formerly Dutch-speaking municipalities in surrounding Brussels became majority French-speaking in the second half of the 20th century.
The square is dominated by the Flamboyant ''Town Hall'', the Neo-Gothic ''Breadhouse'' and the Baroque guildhalls.
The concentration and density has caused concern that the presence of the institutions has caused a "ghetto effect" in that part of the city.
The first language of roughly half of the inhabitants is not an official one of the Capital Region.
The Flemish Parliament and Flemish Government have their seats in Brussels, as do the Parliament of the French Community and the Government of the French Community.
It is pear-shaped as the southern side was never built as originally conceived, owing to residents' objections.
About 32% of city residents are of non-Belgian European origin, and 36% are of another background, mostly from Morocco, Turkey and Sub-Saharan Africa.
Charles would construct the first permanent fortification in the city, doing so on that same island.
The ethnic and national self-identification of the inhabitants is quite different along ethnic lines.
Historically a Dutch-speaking city, it has seen a language shift to French from the late 19th century onwards.
It remained a part of France until 1815, when it joined the United Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The Counts of Leuven became Dukes of Brabant at about this time (1183/1184).
The presence of the EU and the other international bodies has, for example, led to there being more ambassadors and journalists in Brussels than in Washington D.C. International schools have also been established to serve this presence.
Brussels, along with Luxembourg and Strasbourg, began to host institutions in 1957, soon becoming the centre of activities as the Commission and Council based their activities in what has become the "European Quarter".
Remaining is only the governor of Brussels-Capital and some aides.
Notable specialities include Brussels waffles (gaufres) and mussels (usually as "moules frites", served with fries).
In World War II the city was again occupied, and was spared major damage during its occupation by German forces before it was liberated by the British Guards Armoured Division.
Lambert I of Leuven, Count of Leuven gained the County of Brussels around 1000 by marrying Charles' daughter.
The Flemish Community, however, did the opposite; it merged the Flemish Region into the Flemish Community.
The Treaty of Brussels was a prelude to the establishment of this military alliance, which was probably put on 17 March 1948 between Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, and was a preview of the western European defense against communism.
For the ''Brusseleers'', many simply consider themselves as belonging to Brussels.
Both universities originate from a single ancestor university founded in 1834, namely the Free University of Brussels, which was split in 1970 at about the same time the Flemish and French Communities gained legislative power over the organization of higher education.
Under the Köppen climate classification, Brussels experiences an oceanic climate (Cfb).
The former Dyle department became the province of South Brabant, with Brussels as its capital.
Only since the 1960s, after the fixation of the Belgian language border, and after the socio-economic development of Flanders was in full effect, could Dutch stem the tide of increasing French use.
After the creation of the Brussels-Capital Region, the ''Brussels Agglomeration'' was never formally abolished, although it no longer has a purpose.
Brussels is also home to Union Saint-Gilloise, the most successful Belgian club before World War II with 11 titles The club was founded in Saint-Gilles but is based in the nearby Forest municipality and currently plays in Second Division.
In the 15th century, by means of the wedding of heiress Margaret III of Flanders with Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, a new Duke of Brabant emerged from the House of Valois (namely Antoine, their son), with another line of descent from the Habsburgs (Maximilian of Austria, later Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, married Mary of Burgundy, who was born in Brussels).
Three quarters of Parliament now takes place at its Brussels hemicycle.
The Brussels-Capital Region is one of the three federated regions of Belgium, alongside Wallonia and the Flemish Region.
After the construction of the city walls in the early 13th century, Brussels grew significantly.
Together with the resulting fire, it was the most destructive event in the entire history of Brussels.
At the last Belgian census in 1991, 63.7% of inhabitants in Brussels-Capital Region answered that they were Belgian citizens, born as such in Belgium.
Brussels became the capital and seat of government of the new nation.
Nevertheless, about three out of four residents are Belgian nationals.
These two bodies each have an assembly composed of the members of each linguistic group of the Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region.
The Belgian Comic Strip Center combines two artistic leitmotifs of Brussels, being a museum devoted to Belgian comic strips, housed in the former Waucquez department store, designed by Victor Horta in the Art Nouveau style.
Kriek is available in almost every bar or restaurant.
The EU has not declared a capital formally, though the Treaty of Amsterdam formally gives Brussels the seat of the European Commission (the executive/government branch) and the Council of the European Union (a legislative institution made up from executives of member states).
South Brabant was renamed simply Brabant, with Brussels as its capital.
Regions are one component of Belgium's institutions, the three communities being the other component: Brussels' inhabitants deal with either the French Community or the Flemish Community for matters such as culture and education.
To let the city expand, a second set of walls was erected between 1356 and 1383.
In addition to the traditional restaurants, there are a large number of cafés, bistros, and the usual range of international fast food chains.
The Brussels-Capital Region is governed by a parliament of 89 members (72 French-speaking, 17 Dutch-speaking, parties are organised on a linguistic basis) and an eight-member regional cabinet consisting of a minister-president, four ministers and three state secretaries.
Brussels has an orbital motorway, numbered ''R0'' (R-zero) and commonly referred to as the "ring" (French: ''ring'' Dutch: ''ring'').
The ''Palace of the Nation'' is located on the opposite side of this park, and is the seat of the Belgian Federal Parliament.
Geographically and linguistically, it is a bilingual enclave in the unilingual Flemish Region.
The Grand Place was destroyed, along with 4000 buildings, a third of those in the city.
The King Baudouin Stadium is a concert and competition facility with a 50,000 seat capacity, the largest in Belgium.
Other landmarks in the centre include the ''St.
On average (based on measurements over the last 100 years), there are approximately 200 days of rain per year in the Brussels-Capital Region, the highest amount of any European capital.
Its assembly is composed of the members of the regional parliament, and its board are the ministers—not the secretaries of state—of the region, with the minister-president not having the right to vote.
People of foreign origin make up nearly 70% of the population of Brussels, most of whom have been naturalized following the great 1991 reform of the naturalization process.
The Common Community Commission is responsible for policies aiming directly at private persons or at bilingual institutions (for example, the centra for social welfare of the 19 municipalities).
In 1695, King Louis XIV of France sent troops to bombard Brussels with artillery.
For their French-speaking ''Bruxellois'', it can vary from Belgian, Francophone Belgian, ''Bruxellois'' (like the Memellanders in interwar ethnic censuses in Memel), Walloon (for people who migrated from the Wallonia Region at an adult age); for Flemings living in Brussels it is mainly either Flemish or ''Brusselaar'' (Dutch for an inhabitant) and often both.
From 1880 on, faced with the necessity of using French in dealing with such institutions, more and more Dutch-speakers became bilingual, and a rise in the number of monolingual French-speakers was seen after 1910.
Brussels is served by Brussels Airport, located in the nearby Flemish municipality of Zaventem, and by the smaller Brussels South Charleroi Airport, located near Charleroi (Wallonia), some  from Brussels.
Early building in Brussels was sporadic and uncontrolled with little planning, the current major buildings are the Berlaymont building of the Commission, symbolic of the quarter as a whole, the Justus Lipsius building of the Council and the Espace Léopold of Parliament.
Brussels serves as capital of the European Union, hosting the major political institutions of the Union.
Upon the death of his grandfather, Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor in 1519, Charles became the new ruler of the Habsburg Empire and was subsequently elected the Holy Roman Emperor.
A bi-communitarian public authority, the Common Community Commission (French: ''Commission communautaire commune, COCOM'', Dutch: ''Gemeenschappelijke Gemeenschapscommissie, GGC'') also exists.
Brussels is third in the number of international conferences it hosts also becoming one of the largest convention centres in the world.
Other important institutions in the City of Brussels are the Constitutional Court, the Council of State, the Court of Audit, the Royal Belgian Mint and the National Bank of Belgium.
Nearby wetlands also ensure a maritime temperate climate.
The King Baudouin Stadium is also home of the annual Memorial Van Damme athletics event, which is part of the IAAF Diamond League.
The Grand Place is the main attraction in the city centre and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1998.
Brussels contains over 80 museums.
A single journey can include multiple stages across the different modes of transport.
The office of the Prime Minister of Belgium, colloquially called ''Law Street 16'' (Dutch: ''Wetstraat 16'', French: ''16, rue de la Loi''), is located adjacent to this building.
