The presence of tooth wear only indicates that it has occurred at some point in the past, and does not necessarily indicate that the loss of tooth substance is ongoing.
Awake bruxism is thought to have different causes from sleep bruxism, and is more common in females, whereas males and females are affected in equal proportions by sleep bruxism.
Tooth wear caused by tooth-to-tooth contact is termed attrition.
* Hypersensitive teeth, (e.g.
Biofeedback refers to a process (or device that enables such a process) that allows an individual to become aware of, and alter physiological activity with the aim of improving health.
Malocclusion of some sort is so common that the concept of an "ideal occlusion" is called into question, and it can be considered "normal to be abnormal".
Bruxism has also been reported to occur commonly comorbid with drug addiction.
Secondary bruxism includes iatrogenic causes, such as the side effect of prescribed medications.
Among people who have taken ecstasy, while dancing it is common to use pacifiers, lollipops or chewing gum in an attempt to reduce the damage to the teeth and to prevent jaw pain.
Mastication (chewing) is a complex neuromuscular activity that can be controlled either by subconscious processes or by conscious processes.
In some reported cases where bruxism is thought to have been initiated by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, decreasing the dose resolved the side effect.
Some have even suggested that sleep bruxism is an entirely different disorder and is not associated with awake bruxism.
The overall prevalence in adults is reported to be 8%, and people over the age of 60 are less likely to be affected, with the prevalence dropping to about 3% in this group.
When tooth-to-tooth contact is possible through the holes in a splint, it is offering no protection against tooth wear and needs to be replaced.
Occlusal splints (also termed dental guards) are commonly prescribed, mainly by dentists and dental specialists, as a treatment for bruxism.
Offspring of people who have sleep bruxism are more likely to also have sleep bruxism than children of people who do not have bruxism, or people with awake bruxism rather than sleep bruxism.
The ICSD-R states that sleep bruxism may occur in over 50% of normal infants.
Stressful periods such as examinations, family bereavement, marriage or relocation have been suggested to intensify bruxism.
The relative importance of the various identified possible causative factors is also debated.
"A movement disorder of the masticatory system characterized by teeth-grinding and clenching during sleep as well as wakefulness."
The review also concluded that overall, bruxism affects males and females equally, and affects elderly people less commonly.
The pain may be felt over the angle of the jaw (masseter) or in the temple (temporalis), and may be described as a headache or an aching jaw.
* Excessive tooth wear, particularly attrition, which flattens the occlusal (biting) surface, but also possibly other types of tooth wear such as abfraction, where notches form around the neck of the teeth at the gumline.
In the 1960s, a periodontist named Sigurd Peder Ramfjord championed the theory that occlusal factors were responsible for bruxism.
The muscles of mastication (the temporalis, masseter, medial and lateral pterygoid muscles) are paired on either side and work together to move the mandible, which hinges and slides around its dual articulation with the skull at the temporomandibular joints.
The intent is for the brain to interpret the nerve sensations as undesirable, automatically and subconsciously reducing clenching force.
A common example of a deflective is an over-erupted upper wisdom tooth, often because the lower wisdom tooth has been removed or is impacted.
The symptoms of sleep bruxism are usually most intense immediately after waking, and then slowly get better, and the symptoms of a grinding habit which occurs mainly while awake tend to slowly get worse throughout the day, and may not be present upon waking.
A dental guard is typically worn during every night's sleep on a long-term basis.
Bruxism is usually detected because of the effects of the process (most commonly tooth wear and pain), rather than the process itself.
The pain in the muscles of mastication caused by bruxism can be likened to muscle pain that occurs after exercise.
There is also little information available about the safety and long term followup of this treatment for bruxism.
The relationship of bruxism with temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD, or temporomandibular pain dysfunction syndrome) is debated.
It is also generally accepted that periodontal disease is a far more common cause of tooth mobility and pathological tooth migration than any influence of bruxism, although bruxism may much less commonly be involved in both.
The difference between a premature contact and a deflective interference is that the latter implies a dynamic abnormality in the bite.
The Individual (personal) Tooth-Wear Index was developed to objectively quantify the degree of tooth wear in an individual, without being affected by the number of missing teeth.
Examples may include dopamine agonists, dopamine antagonists, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, alcohol, cocaine, and amphetamines (including those taken for medical reasons).
containing strontium chloride) can be applied initially inside the splint so the material is in contact with the teeth all night.
Some bruxism activity is rhythmic with bite force pulses of tenths of a second (like chewing), and some have longer bite force pulses of 1 to 30 seconds (clenching).
A premature contact is a term that refers to one part of the bite meeting sooner than other parts, meaning that the rest of the teeth meet later or are held open, e.g., a new dental restoration on a tooth (e.g., a crown) which has a slightly different shape or position to the original tooth may contact too soon in the bite.
Several symptoms are commonly associated with bruxism, including hypersensitive teeth, aching jaw muscles, headaches, tooth wear, damage to dental restorations (e.g.
There is no evidence for the long term use and safety of biofeedback in the management of bruxism.
Tooth wear may be brought to the person's attention during routine dental examination.
Behavioral approaches in research declined from over 60% of publications in the period 1966–86 to about 10% in the period 1997–2007.
However, a meta-analysis of occlusal splints (dental guards) used for this purpose concluded "There is not enough evidence to state that the occlusal splint is effective for treating sleep bruxism."
Indeed, the symptoms of TMD overlap with those of bruxism.
This is the most widely used classification since sleep bruxism generally has different causes to awake bruxism, although the effects on the condition on the teeth may be the same.
* Trismus (restricted mouth opening).
Polysomnography may involve electroencephalography, electromyography, electrocardiography, air flow monitoring and audio–video recording.
acrylic) and can be hard or soft.
People who clench and perform minimal grinding will also not show much tooth wear.
Since bruxism is not life-threatening, and there is little evidence of the efficacy of any treatment, it has been recommended that only conservative treatment which is reversible and that carries low risk of morbidity should be used.
To grind the front teeth, most people need to posture their mandible forwards, unless there is an existing edge to edge, class III incisal relationship.
The ICSD-R states that 85–90% of the general population grind their teeth to a degree at some point during their life, although only 5% will develop a clinical condition.
Bruxism is a parafunctional activity, but it is debated whether this represents a subconscious habit or is entirely involuntary.
Many different medications have been used to treat bruxism, including benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, beta blockers, dopamine agents, antidepressants, muscle relaxants, and others.
The view that occlusal trauma (as may occur during bruxism) is a causative factor in gingivitis and periodontitis is not widely accepted.
A 2013 systematic review of the epidemiologic reports of bruxism concluded a prevalence of about 22.1–31% for awake bruxism, 9.7–15.9% for sleep bruxism, and an overall prevalence of about 8–31.4% of bruxism generally.
* Pain or tenderness of the temporomandibular joints, which may manifest as preauricular pain (in front of the ear), or pain referred to the ear (otalgia).
Most people with bruxism will not experience any pain.
In sleep bruxism especially, there is no evidence that removal of occlusal interferences has any impact on the condition.
* Other parafunctional activity which may occur together with bruxism: cheek biting (which may manifest as morsicatio buccarum and/or linea alba), and/or lip biting.
Hence, ongoing follow-ups are recommended.
"La bruxomanie" (a French term, translates to ''bruxomania'') was suggested by Marie Pietkiewics in 1907.
This typically involves the masseter muscle and the anterior portion of the temporalis (the large outer muscles that clench), and the lateral pterygoids, relatively small bilateral muscles that act together to perform sideways grinding.
One study reported that sleep arousals which were experimentally induced with sensory stimulation in sleeping bruxists triggered episodes of sleep bruxism.
Another problem with wearing a splint can be stimulation of salivary flow, and for this reason some advise to start wearing the splint about 30 mins before going to bed so this does not lead to difficulty falling asleep.
Specific examples include levodopa (when used in the long term, as in Parkinson's disease), fluoxetine, metoclopramide, lithium, cocaine, venlafaxine, citalopram, fluvoxamine, methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), methylphenidate (used in attention deficit hyperactive disorder), and gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) and similar gamma-aminobutyric acid-inducing analogues such as phenibut.
Most people who brux are unaware of the problem, either because there are no symptoms, or because the symptoms are not understood to be associated with a clenching and grinding problem.
People aged 50 with bruxism are more likely to be single and have a high level of education.
the "BiteStrip", and the "Grindcare").
The diagnosis of sleep bruxism is usually straightforward, and involves the exclusion of dental diseases, temporomandibular disorders, and the rhythmic jaw movements that occur with seizure disorders (e.g.
A deflective interference refers to an interference with the bite that changes the normal path of the bite.
Underlying these factors may be psychosocial factors including daytime stress which is disrupting peaceful sleep.
Often sleep bruxism develops during adolescence, and the prevalence in 18- to 29-year-olds is about 13%.
The phrase "to grit one's teeth" refers to grinding or clenching of the teeth in anger, or to accept a difficult or unpleasant situation and deal with it in a determined way.
Alternatively, bruxism can be divided into ''primary bruxism'' (also termed "idiopathic bruxism"), where the disorder is not related to any other medical condition, or ''secondary bruxism'', where the disorder is associated with other medical conditions.
Generations of dentists were educated by this ideology in the prominent textbook on occlusion of the time, however therapy centered around removal of occlusal interference remained unsatisfactory.
Work-related stress and irregular work shifts may also be involved.
The belief among dentists that occlusion and bruxism are strongly related is still widespread, however the majority of researchers now disfavor malocclusion as the main etiologic factor in favor of a more multifactorial, biopsychosocial model of bruxism.
Normally during sleep, the voluntary muscles are inactive due to physiologic motor paralysis, and the jaw is usually open.
Many publications list tooth wear as a consequence of bruxism, but some report a lack of a positive relationship between tooth wear and bruxism.
Some of the muscles work to elevate the mandible (close the mouth), and others also are involved in lateral (side to side), protrusive or retractive movements.
In a minority of cases, sleep bruxism may be made worse by an occlusal splint.
* Indentations of the teeth in the tongue ("crenated tongue" or "scalloped tongue").
* Clicking of the temporomandibular joints.
Abfraction is another type of tooth wear that is postulated to occur with bruxism, although some still argue whether this type of tooth wear is a reality.
Bruxism can also be regarded as a disorder of repetitive, unconscious contraction of muscles.
to observe the presence or absence of wear on the splint after a certain period of wearing it at night.
This treatment typically involves five or six injections into the masseter and temporalis muscles, and less often into the lateral pterygoids (given the possible risk of decreasing the ability to swallow) taking a few minutes per side.
'''Bruxism''' is excessive teeth grinding or jaw clenching.
This scientific study was based on thirty people with bruxism who received Botox injections into the muscles of mastication and a control group of people with bruxism who received placebo injections.
Children are reported to brux as commonly as adults.
It is unclear whether people with bruxism tend to notice problems with the bite because of their clenching and grinding habit, or whether these act as a causative factor in the development of the condition.
A ''repositioning splint'' is designed to change the patient's occlusion, or bite.
Another report suggested a link between episodes of sleep bruxism and a supine sleeping position (lying face up).
Tooth wear in people who take ecstasy is also frequently much more severe than in people with bruxism not associated with ecstasy.
In 1931, Frohman first coined the term bruxism.
Treatment for bruxism revolves around repairing the damage to teeth that has already occurred, and also often, via one or more of several available methods, attempting to prevent further damage and manage symptoms, but there is no widely accepted, best treatment.
* A burning sensation on the tongue (see: glossodynia), possibly related to a coexistent "tongue thrusting" parafunctional activity.
Many studies have reported significant psychosocial risk factors for bruxism, particularly a stressful lifestyle, and this evidence is growing, but still not conclusive.
If enough of the tooth is worn away or decayed, the tooth will effectively be weakened, and may fracture under the increased forces that occur in bruxism.
Early diagnosis of bruxism is advantageous, due to the possible damage that may be incurred and the detrimental effect on quality of life.
Bruxism may cause a variety of signs and symptoms, including:
Disturbance of the dopaminergic system in the central nervous system has also been suggested to be involved in the etiology of bruxism.
It is possible for sleep bruxism to occur as early as the first year of life – after the first teeth (deciduous incisors) erupt into the mouth, and the overall prevalence in children is about 14–20%.
Animal studies have also suggested a link between bruxism and psychosocial factors.
Questionnaires can be used to screen for bruxism in both the clinical and research settings.
The World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases 10th revision does not have an entry called bruxism, instead listing "tooth grinding" under somatoform disorders.
In the case of crowns, the strength of the restoration becomes more important, sometimes at the cost of esthetic considerations.
They are typically made of plastic (e.g.
Treatment goals include: constraining the bruxing pattern to avoid damage to the temporomandibular joints; stabilizing the occlusion by minimizing gradual changes to the positions of the teeth, preventing tooth damage and revealing the extent and patterns of bruxism through examination of the markings on the splint's surface.
The cause of bruxism is largely unknown, but it is generally accepted to have multiple possible causes.
"Periodic repetitive clenching or rhythmic forceful grinding of the teeth."
In individuals without bruxism or other parafunctional activities, during wakefulness the jaw is generally at rest and the teeth are not in contact, except while speaking, swallowing or chewing.
crowns and fillings) and damage to teeth.
The forces exerted on the teeth are more than the periodontal ligament is biologically designed to handle, and so inflammation may result.
The term does not imply any disease.
Personality traits are also commonly discussed in publications concerning the causes of bruxism, e.g.
Some writers propose that irreversible complications can result from the long-term use of mouthguards and repositioning splints.
However it may cause minimal symptoms, and therefore people may not be aware of the condition.
Botulinum toxin causes muscle paralysis/atrophy by inhibition of acetylcholine release at neuromuscular junctions.
Occlusal splints are divided into partial or full-coverage splints according to whether they fit over some or all of the teeth.
The exact location and pattern of attrition depends on how the bruxism occurs, e.g., when the canines and incisors of the opposing arches are moved against each other laterally, by the action of the medial pterygoid muscles, this can lead to the wearing down of the incisal edges of the teeth.
Bruxism has two distinct circadian manifestations: it can occur during sleep (indicated as sleep bruxism) or during wakefulness (indicated as awake bruxism)"All forms of bruxism entail forceful contact between the biting surfaces of the upper and lower teeth.
Clenching (or clamping), on the other hand, involves inaudible, sustained, forceful tooth contact unaccompanied by mandibular movements.
A mandibular advancement device (normally used for treatment of obstructive sleep apnea) may reduce sleep bruxism, although its use may be associated with discomfort.
Occasionally recent medical publications will use the word bruxomania with bruxism, to denote specifically bruxism that occurs while awake; however, this term can be considered historical and the modern equivalent would be awake bruxism or diurnal bruxism.
dental pain when drinking a cold liquid) caused by wearing away of the thickness of insulating layers of dentin and enamel around the dental pulp.
aggressive, competitive or hyperactive personality types.
The effects may be noticeable by the next day, and they may last for about three months.
Another possible cause of tooth wear is acid erosion, which may occur in people who drink a lot of acidic liquids such as concentrated fruit juice, or in people who frequently vomit or regurgitate stomach acid, which itself can occur for various reasons.
Dental damage may be similar in both types, but the symptoms of sleep bruxism tend to be worse on waking and improve during the course of the day, and the symptoms of awake bruxism may not be present at all on waking, and then worsen over the day.
Dental implants and complex bridgework for example are relatively contraindicated in bruxists.
* Inflammation of the periodontal ligament of teeth, which may make them sore to bite on, and possibly also a degree of loosening of the teeth.
This usually involves a dental examination, and possibly electroencephalography if a seizure disorder is suspected.
To describe bruxism as a purely somatoform disorder does not reflect the mainstream, modern view of this condition (see causes).
However, there is little, if any, evidence for their respective and comparative efficacies with each other and when compared to a placebo.
Once tooth wear progresses through the enamel layer, the exposed dentin layer is softer and more vulnerable to wear and tooth decay.
However, there may be potential for the NTI-TSS device to act as a Dahl appliance, holding the posterior teeth out of occlusion and leading to their over-eruption, deranging the occlusion (i.e.
A lower appliance can be worn alone, or in combination with an upper appliance.
The findings of one study, which used self-reported tooth grinding rather than clinical examination to detect bruxism, suggested that there may be more of a relationship between occlusal factors and bruxism in children.
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy) has been reported to be associated with bruxism, which occurs immediately after taking the drug and for several days afterwards.
When bruxism is related to the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in depression, adding buspirone has been reported to resolve the side effect.
Malocclusion is a medical term referring to less than ideal positioning of the upper teeth relative to the lower teeth, which can occur both when the upper jaw is ideally proportioned to the lower jaw, or where there is a discrepancy between the size of the upper jaw relative to the lower jaw.
In the 2005 film ''Beowulf & Grendel'', a modern reworking of the Anglo-Saxon poem ''Beowulf'', Selma the witch tells Beowulf that the troll's name Grendel means "grinder of teeth", stating that "he has bad dreams", a possible allusion to Grendel traumatically witnessing the death of his father as a child, at the hands of King Hrothgar.
Sleep arousals are a sudden change in the depth of the sleep stage, and may also be accompanied by increased heart rate, respiratory changes and muscular activity, such as leg movements.
Abfraction cavities are said to occur usually on the facial aspect of teeth, in the cervical region as V-shaped defects caused by flexing of the tooth under occlusal forces.
Other sources state that reports of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors causing bruxism are rare, and it only happens with long-term use.
However, children with sleep bruxism have been shown to have greater levels of anxiety than other children.
electrocuted lab rats, and then observed high levels of bruxism-like muscular activity in rats that were allowed to watch this treatment compared to rats that did not see it.
Bruxism is not the only cause of tooth wear.
It is thought that in humans, clenching the teeth may be an evolutionary instinct to display teeth as weapons, thereby threatening a rival or a predator.
Often, the person may re-attend soon after the first visit and report that they have now become aware of such a habit.
Some suggest that in children, bruxism may occasionally represent a response to earache or teething.
The treatment is also often dependent upon whether the bruxism happens during sleep or while awake, e.g., an occlusal splint worn during sleep in a person who only bruxes when awake will probably have no benefit.
Botox injections are used in bruxism on the theory that a dilute solution of the toxin will partially paralyze the muscles and lessen their ability to forcefully clench and grind the jaw, while aiming to retain enough muscular function to enable normal activities such as talking and eating.
Sleep bruxism is sometimes abbreviated to SB, and is also termed "sleep-related bruxism", "nocturnal bruxism", or "nocturnal tooth grinding".
Botulinum toxin (Botox) is used as a treatment for bruxism, however there is only one randomized control trial which has reported that Botox reduces the myofascial pain symptoms.
Stress has a stronger relationship to awake bruxism, but the role of stress in sleep bruxism is less clear, with some stating that there is no evidence for a relationship with sleep bruxism.
* Tenderness, pain or fatigue of the muscles of mastication, which may get worse during chewing or other jaw movement.
Awake bruxism is thought to be usually semivoluntary, and often associated with stress caused by family responsibilities or work pressures.
With the temporary and partial muscle paralysis, atrophy of disuse may occur, meaning that the future required dose may be smaller or the length of time the effects last may be increased.
Specific drugs that have been studied in sleep bruxism are clonazepam, levodopa, amitriptyline,  bromocriptine,   pergolide, clonidine, propranolol, and l-tryptophan, with some showing no effect and others appear to have promising initial results; however, it has been suggested that further safety testing is required before any evidence-based clinical recommendations can be made.
It may be useful to help exclude other sleep disorders; however, due to the expense of the use of a sleep lab, polysomnography is mostly of relevance to research rather than routine clinical diagnosis of bruxism.
Polysomnography shows increased masseter and temporalis muscular activity during sleep.
In addition to attrition, erosion is said to synergistically contribute to tooth wear in some bruxists, according to some sources.
A systematic review investigating the possible relationship concluded that when self-reported bruxism is used to diagnose bruxism, there is a positive association with TMD pain, and when stricter diagnostic criteria for bruxism are used, the association with TMD symptoms is much lower.
Bruxism can be subdivided into two types based upon when the parafunctional activity occurs – during sleep ("sleep bruxism"), or while awake ("awake bruxism").
it may cause the teeth to move position).
This can be continued until there is only a normal level of sensitivity from the teeth, although it should be remembered that sensitivity to thermal stimuli is also a symptom of pulpitis, and may indicate the presence of tooth decay rather than merely hypersensitive teeth.
Awake bruxism usually involves clenching (sometimes the term "awake clenching" is used instead of awake bruxism), but also possibly grinding, and is often associated with other semivoluntary oral habits such as cheek biting, nail biting, chewing on a pen or pencil absent mindedly, or tongue thrusting (where the tongue is pushed against the front teeth forcefully).
In rave culture, recreational use of ecstasy causes many health problems, and bruxism is often reported by users.
It is argued that similar lesions can be caused by long-term forceful toothbrushing.
Electromyographic monitoring of the muscles with automatic alerting during periods of clenching and grinding has been described for awake bruxism.
The temporomandibular joints themselves may also become painful, which is usually felt just in front of the ear, or inside the ear itself.
The large forces that can be generated during bruxism can have detrimental effects on the components of masticatory system, namely the teeth, the periodontium and the articulation of the mandible with the skull (the temporomandibular joints).
The ICDS-R defined sleep bruxism as "a stereotyped movement disorder characterized by grinding or clenching of the teeth during sleep", classifying it as a parasomnia.
"Parafunctional grinding of teeth or an oral habit consisting of involuntary rhythmic or spasmodic non-functional gnashing, grinding or clenching of teeth in other than chewing movements of the mandible which may lead to occlusal trauma."
Some individuals clench without significant lateral movements.
a full coverage gold crown, which has a degree of flexibility and also involves less removal (and therefore less weakening) of the underlying natural tooth may be more appropriate than other types of crown which are primarily designed for esthetics rather than durability.
A diagnosis of bruxism is usually made clinically, and is mainly based on the person's history (e.g.
It is estimated that the teeth are in contact for less than 20 minutes per day, mostly during chewing and swallowing.
Other interventions include relaxation techniques, stress management, behavioural modification, habit reversal and hypnosis (self hypnosis or with a hypnotherapist).
Occlusal splints are usually employed as a treatment for bruxism, but they can also be of diagnostic use, e.g.
In the 2000 film ''Requiem for a Dream'', the character of Sara Goldfarb (Ellen Burstyn) begins taking an amphetamine-based diet pill and develops bruxism.
Evidence for this comes from observations of the modifying effect of medications which alter dopamine release on bruxing activity, such as levodopa, amphetamines or nicotine.
Examples include the "Bruxcore Bruxism-Monitoring Device" (BBMD, "Bruxcore Plate"), the "intra-splint force detector" (ISFD), and electromyographic devices to measure masseter or temporalis muscle activity (e.g.
Bruxism can cause significant tooth wear if it is severe, and sometimes dental restorations (crowns, fillings etc.)
Some consider emotional stress to be the main triggering factor.
Random controlled trials with these type devices generally show no benefit over other therapies.
Tricyclic antidepressants have also been suggested to be preferable to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in people with bruxism, and may help with the pain.
It is thought that the periodontal ligament may respond to increased occlusal (biting) forces by resorbing some of the bone of the alveolar crest, which may result in increased tooth mobility, however these changes are reversible if the occlusal force is reduced.
People with no teeth at all who wear dentures can still suffer from bruxism, although dentures also often change the original bite.
People who suffer from bruxism are called ''bruxists'' or ''bruxers'' and the verb itself is "to brux".
In George R. R. Martin's ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series, King Stannis Baratheon grinds his teeth regularly, so loudly it can be heard "half a castle away".
As an added measure for hypersensitive teeth in bruxism, desensitizing toothpastes (e.g.
It has been reported that persons with bruxism respond differently to depression, hostility and stress compared to people without bruxism.
The efficacy of such devices is debated.
With awake bruxism, most people will often initially deny clenching and grinding because they are unaware of the habit.
