Most of these sediments come from two distinct groups of colonies: domal, delicate branching, robust branching and palmate; and fenestrate.
In all species the ovaries develop on the inside of the body wall, and the testes on the funiculus connecting the stomach to the body wall.
Eggs and sperm are released into the coelom, and sperm exit into the water through pores in the tips of some of the tentacles, and then are captured by the feeding currents of zooids that are producing eggs.
+ Summary of distinguishing features
canaliculata'' also preys on a common freshwater gymnolaemate, but with less devastating effect.
In temperate waters, the skeletons of dead colonies form a significant component of shell gravels, and live ones are abundant in these areas.
Typically about  long, they are filter feeders that sieve food particles out of the water using a retractable lophophore, a "crown" of tentacles lined with cilia.
Nearly all post- bryozoan sediments are made up of growth forms, with the addition to free-living colonies which include significant numbers of various colonies.
Despite their apparently similar methods of feeding, they differed markedly anatomically; in addition to the different positions of the anus, ectoprocts have hollow tentacles and a coelom, while entoprocts have solid tentacles and no coelom.
However, no participants had been recruited by the end of December 2008, when the study was scheduled for completion.
dilatans'', using this modern method of low vacuum scanning, with which it has been inaccurately synonymized with in the past.
''Microeciella suborbicularus'' has also been recently distinguished from ''O.
The freshwater species ''Plumatella emarginata'' feeds on diatoms, green algae, cyanobacteria, non-photosynthetic bacteria, dinoflagellates, rotifers, protozoa, small nematodes, and microscopic crustaceans.
Stenolaemates produce specialized zooids to serve as brood chambers, and their eggs divide within this to produce up to 100&nbsp;identical embryos.
However the coelom of ectoproct larvae shows no sign of division into three sections, and that of adult ectoprocts is different from that of other coelomate phyla as it is built anew from epidermis and mesoderm after metamorphosis has destroyed the larval coelom.
The other main part of the bryozoan body, known as the ''polypide'' and situated almost entirely within the cystid, contains the nervous system, digestive system, some specialized muscles and the feeding apparatus or other specialized organs that take the place of the feeding apparatus.
Others look like small corals, producing heavy lime skeletons.
Bryozoans form colonies consisting of clones called zooids that are typically about  long.
However, there are species which have chemical compounds that can be used for medicine.
By 1891 bryozoans (ectoprocts) were grouped with phoronids in a super-phylum called "Tentaculata".
Some freshwater species secrete a mass of gelatinous material, up to  in diameter, to which the zooids stick.
Other freshwater species have plant-like shapes with "trunks" and "branches", which may stand erect or spread over the surface.
Unwanted particles may be flicked away by tentacles or shut out by closing the mouth.
Brachiopods, generally thought to be closely related to bryozoans and phoronids, are distinguished by having shells rather like those of bivalves.
By the Arenigian stage of the Early Ordovician period, about , all the modern orders of stenolaemates were present, and the ctenostome order of gymnolaemates had appeared by the Middle Ordovician, about .
In the Banc d'Arguin offshore Mauritania the species ''Acanthodesia commensale'', which is generally growing attached to gravel and hard-substrate, has formed a non-obligate symbiotic relationship with hermit crabs of the species ''Pseudopagurus cf.
This has led researchers to suspect that bryozoans had arisen earlier but were initially unmineralized, and may have differed significantly from fossilized and modern forms.
A series of molecular phylogeny studies from 1996 to 2006 have also concluded that bryozoans (ectoprocts) and entoprocts are not sister groups.
All colonies contain feeding zooids, known as autozooids, and those of some groups also contain non-feeding specialist heterozooids; colony members are genetically identical and co-operate, rather like the organs of larger animals.
Inside base of lophophore-like organ
Once a Bryozoa settles on a hard substance, after its larval phase, it is physically capable of reproducing asexually through budding.
Similar-looking phyla
The shapes of colonies vary widely, depend on the pattern of budding by which they grow, the variety of zooids present and the type and amount of skeletal material they secrete.
Although those of many marine species are protandric, in other words function first as males and then as females, their colonies contain a combination of zooids that are in their male and female stages.
Ctenostomes with phosphatized soft tissue are known from the Devonian.
Outside base of lophophore
Research from the 1970s onwards suggested they were deuterostomes, because of some features that were thought characteristic of deuterostomes: a three-part coelom; radial rather than spiral cleavage in the development of the embryo; and formation of the coelom by enterocoely.
The phylum was originally called "Polyzoa", but this term was superseded by "Bryozoa" in 1831.
Round, unlike normal zooids
The analysis also concluded that the classes Phylactolaemata, Stenolaemata and Gymnolaemata are also monophyletic, but could not determine whether Stenolaemata are more closely related to Phylactolaemata or Gymnolaemata.
&nbsp;– and are among the most abundant sessile freshwater animals.
However, in 2005 a molecular phylogeny study that focused on phylactolaemates concluded that these are more closely related to the phylum Phoronida, and especially to the only phoronid species that is colonial, than they are to the other ectoproct classes.
As they grow, statoblasts develop protective bivalve-like shells made of chitin.
In some cases this response is more belligerent if the opposition is smaller, which suggests that zooids on the edge of a colony can somehow sense the size of the opponent.
Same as other zooids
From tips to bases of tentacles
The most common marine form, however, is encrusting, in which a one-layer sheet of zooids spreads over a hard surface or over seaweed.
In general marine echinoderms and molluscs eat masses of zooids by gouging pieces of colonies, breaking their mineralized "houses", while most arthropod predators on bryozoans eat individual zooids.
All three of these phyla have a coelom, an internal cavity lined by mesothelium.
Fellow Oncousoeciid ''Eurystrotos'' is now believed to be not conspecific with ''O.
Bryozoan's tentacles bear cells with multiple cilia, while the corresponding cells of phoronids', brachiopods' and pterobranchs' lophophores have one cilium per cell; and bryozoan tentacles have no hemal canal ("blood vessel"), which those of the other three phyla have.
Stalked avicularia are placed upside-down on their stalks.
Bivalve-like shells
The class Cheilostomata have the largest number of species, possibly because they have the widest range of specialist zooids.
Bryozoa accomplish diffusion through the use of either a thin membrane (in the case of anascans and some polyzoa) or through psudopores located on the outer dermis of the zooid.
Mineralized exoskeletons
Many species form colonies which consist of sheets of autozooids.
These larvae have triangular shells of chitin, with one corner at the top and the base open, forming a hood round the downward-facing mouth.
In freshwater, bryozoans are among the most important filter feeders, along with sponges and mussels.
GPC Biotech canceled development in 2003, saying that Bryostatin 1 showed little effectiveness and some toxic side-effects.
New chimneys appear near the edges of expanding colonies, at points where the speed of the outflow is already high, and do not change position if the water flow changes.
They are formed by patches of non-feeding heterozooids.
''Membranipora membranacea'', whose colonies feed and grow exceptionally fast in a wide range of current speeds, was first noticed in the Gulf of Maine in 1987 and quickly became the most abundant organism living on kelps.
The basic shape of the "crown" is a full circle.
A group of chemicals called bryostatins can be extracted from the marine bryozoan ''Bugula neritina''.
The ''cystid'' consists of the body wall and whatever type of exoskeleton is secreted by the epidermis.
Varies, none in some species
The theory of "induced defenses" suggests that production of defenses is expensive and that colonies which defend themselves too early or too heavily will have reduced growth rates and lifespans.
Large colonies of encrusting species often have "chimneys", gaps in the canopy of lophophores, through which they swiftly expel water that has been sieved, and thus avoid re-filtering water that is already exhausted.
This "last minute" approach to defense is feasible because the loss of zooids to a single attack is unlikely to be significant.
Colonies of some encrusting species also produce special heterozooids to limit the expansion of other encrusting organisms, especially other bryozoans.
Freshwater bryozoans are attacked by many predators, including snails, insects, and fish.
Some species with rigid exoskeletons have a flexible membrane that replaces part of the exoskeleton, and transverse muscles anchored on the far side of the exoskeleton increase the fluid pressure by pulling the membrane inwards.
Some authorities use the term ''avicularia'' (pl.
This invasion reduced the kelp population by breaking their fronds, so that its place as the dominant "vegetation" in some areas was taken by another invader, the large alga ''Codium fragile tomentosoides''.
Bryozoans are among the three dominant groups of Paleozoic fossils.
One common species of the bryozoan is used for a serious anti cancer drug that is currently being used for testing.
Bryozoans have spread diseases to fish farms and fishermen.
In both types the modified operculum is opened by other muscles that attach to it, or by internal muscles that raise the fluid pressure by pulling on a flexible membrane.
The moss-like appearance of encrusting colonies is responsible for the phylum's name (Ancient Greek words βρυος ''bryos'' meaning "moss" and ζωον ''zoon'' meaning "animal").
The body wall consists of the epidermis, basal lamina (a mat of non-cellular material), connective tissue, muscles, and the mesothelium which lines the coelom (main body cavity)&nbsp;– except that in one class, the mesothelium is split into two separate layers, the inner one forming a membranous sac that floats freely and contains the coelom, and the outer one attached to the body wall and enclosing the membranous sac in a pseudocoelom.
This method is also used by phoronids, brachiopods and pterobranchs.
Marine fossils from the Paleozoic era, which ended , are mainly of erect forms, those from the Mesozoic are fairly equally divided by erect and encrusting forms, and more recent ones are predominantly encrusting.
The traditional view is that the Bryozoa are a monophyletic group, in which the class Phylactolaemata is most closely related to Stenolaemata and Ctenostomata, the classes that appear earliest in the fossil record.
The great majority are sessile.
Three-part, if the cavity of the epistome is included
However, a few have been found in deep-sea trenches, especially around cold seeps, and others near the poles.
When entoprocts were discovered in the 19th century, they and bryozoans (ectoprocts) were regarded as classes within the phylum Bryozoa, because both groups were sessile animals that filter-fed by means of a crown of tentacles that bore cilia.
This method permits data to be obtained that would be difficult to recognize with an optical microscope.
While whelk shells encrusted by the bryozoans are stronger than those without this reinforcement, chemical defenses produced by the bryozoans are probably the more significant deterrent.
Scientists' knowledge of freshwater bryozoan populations in many parts of the world is incomplete, even in some parts of Europe.
They are native to all five oceans making them a more cosmopolitan species.
Marine species are common on coral reefs, but seldom a significant proportion of the total biomass.
The final section of the stomach is lined with cilia (minute hairs) that compress undigested solids, which then pass through the intestine and out through the anus.
Modifications appear in the shapes of some these hydroids, for example smaller tentacles or encrustation of the roots by bryozoans.
They may function as defenses against predators and invaders, or as cleaners.
granulimanus'' resulting in egg-size structures known as bryoliths.
Despite this, only a small number of basic growth forms have been found and have commonly reappeared throughout the history of the bryozoa.
A network of strands of mesothelium called "funiculi" ("little ropes") connects the mesothelium covering the gut with that lining the body wall.
After the discovery of the Entoprocta, in which the anus lies within a "crown" of tentacles (based on the Ancient Greek prefix ἐντο meaning "inside" and word πρωκτος meaning "anus"), the name "Bryozoa" was used at phylum level to include the two classes Ectoprocta and Entoprocta.
Mineralized skeletons of bryozoans first appear in rocks from Early Ordovician period, making it the last major phylum to appear in the fossil record.
A molecular phylogeny study in 2007 also supported this old idea, while its conclusions about other phyla agreed with those of several other analyses.
Others more probably were spread by humans, for example on imported water plants or as stowaways on ships.
Others' are fertilized internally, in the intertentacular organ or in the coelom.
Colonies of these types are generally unmineralized but may have exoskeletons made of chitin.
A study of the mitochondrial DNA sequence suggests that the Bryozoa may be related to the Chaetognatha.
Fenestrate colonies generate rough particles both as sediment and components of stomatoporiods coral reefs.
Some encrusting bryozoan colonies with mineralized exoskeletons look very like small corals.
The different species can come together to form a colony that can attach to different kind of rock surfaces as well as shells and algae.
A few marine species can move, and an Antarctic species forms floating colonies.
Attempts to reconstruct the family tree of animals have largely ignored ectoprocts and other "minor phyla", which have received little scientific study because they are generally tiny, have relatively simple body plans, and have little impact on human economies&nbsp;– despite the fact that the "minor phyla" include most of the variety in the evolutionary history of animals.
Some also release ova into the water, while others capture sperm via their tentacles to fertilize their ova internally.
In 2006 it was reported that the cilia of cyphonautes larvae use the same range of techniques as those of adults to capture food.
However, the shortage of genetic data about "minor phyla" such as bryozoans and entoprocts has left their relationships to other groups unclear.
In all marine species the larvae produce cocoons in which they metamorphose completely after settling: the larva's epidermis becomes the lining of the coelom, and the internal tissues are converted to a food reserve that nourishes the developing zooid until it is ready to feed.
When colonies grow too large, however, they can split in two.
Some may have been transported naturally as statoblasts.
These sheets may form leaves, tufts or, in the genus ''Thalmoporella'', structures that resemble an open head of lettuce.
Most colonies are stationary.
A study estimated that one group of colonies in a patch measuring  produced 800,000&nbsp;statoblasts.
Fossils of cheilostomates, another order of gymnolaemates, first appear in the Mid Jurassic, about , and these have been the most abundant and diverse bryozoans from the Cretaceous to the present.
Colony lifespans range from one to about 12&nbsp;years, and the short-lived species pass though several generations in one season.
Brachiopods were also assigned to the "Tentaculata", which were renamed Lophophorata as they all use a lophophore for filter feeding.
They are colonies of modular units known as zooids.
Other types of filter feeders appeared around the same time, which suggests that some change made the environment more favorable for this lifestyle.
(Taylor, Zaton 2008) Modern research and experiments have been done using low-vacuum scanning electron microscopy of uncoated type material to critically examine and perhaps revise the taxonomy of three genera belonging to this family, including ''Oncousoecia'', ''Microeciella'', and ''Eurystrotos''.
All bryozoans are colonial except for one genus, ''Monobryozoon''.
Nerves run from the ring and ganglion to the tentacles and to the rest of the body.
Zooids have no special excretory organs, and the polypides of autozooids are scrapped when the polypides become overloaded by waste products; usually the body wall then grows a replacement polypide.
Although zooids are microscopic, colonies range in size from  to over .
Others produce larvae that have little yolk but swim and feed for a few days before settling.
The Gymnolaemata are traditionally divided into the soft-bodied Ctenostomata and mineralized Cheilostomata, but the 2009 analysis considered it more likely that neither of these orders is monophyletic and that mineralized skeletons probably evolved more than once within the early Gymnolaemata.
The phylogenetic position of the ectoproct bryozoans remains uncertain, but it remains certain that they belong to the Protostomia and more specifically to the Lophoctrochozoa.
In one class, a hollow lobe called the "epistome" overhands the mouth.
Individuals in bryozoan (ectoproct) colonies are called zooids, since they are not fully independent animals.
lobulata'', as previously suggested, but shows enough similarities to be considered a junior synonym of ''Oncousoecia''.
Bryozoans are an immobile species typically residing on hard natural stone including, but not limited to: grains, shells, and rocks.
The actions of these snapping zooids are controlled by small, highly modified polypides that are located inside the "mouth" and bear tufts of short sensory cilia.
Marine bryozoans are often responsible for biofouling on ships' hulls, on docks and marinas, and on offshore structures.
Bryozoans are generally associated with the term colonies.
Bryozoa(Ectoprocta)
The sides of the tentacles bear fine hairs called cilia, whose beating drives a water current from the tips of the tentacles to their bases, where it exits.
Food particles that collide with the tentacles are trapped by mucus, and further cilia on the inner surfaces of the tentacles convey the particles towards the mouth, which lies in the center of the base of the "crown".
Bryozoans have contributed to carbonate sedimentation in marine life since the Ordovician period.
It is uncertain whether the phylum is monophyletic.
Bryozoan larvae vary in form, but all have a band of cilia round the body which enables them to swim, a tuft of cilia at the top, and an adhesive sac that everts and anchors them when they settle on a surface.
In others there is no gap in the protective skeleton, and the transverse muscles pull on a flexible sac which is connected to the water outside by a small pore; the expansion of the sac increases the pressure inside the body and pushes the invert and lophophore out.
There are no nephridia ("little kidneys") or other excretory organs in bryozoa, and it is thought that ammonia diffuses out through the body wall and lophophore.
Gonozooids act as brood chambers for fertilized eggs.
The lophophore and mouth are mounted on a flexible tube, called the "invert" because it can be turned inside-out and withdrawn into the polypide, rather like the finger of a rubber glove; in this position the lophophore lies inside the invert and is folded like the spokes of an umbrella.
If the grouping of bryozoans with phoronids and brachiopods into Lophophorata is correct, the next issue is whether the Lophophorata are protostomes, along with most invertebrate phyla, or deuterostomes, along with chordates, hemichordates and echinoderms.
These colonies can grow thousands of individual zooids in a relatively short period of time.
Freshwater species are occasional nuisances in water pipes, drinking water purification equipment, sewage treatment facilities, and the cooling pipes of power stations.
These species are thought to be nuisance to boaters because they slow down the ship if they are attached to the bottom of the hull.
Sessile species often form clumps, but with no active co-operation
Molecular phylogeny, which attempts to work out the evolutionary family tree of organisms by comparing their biochemistry and especially their genes, has done much to clarify the relationships between the better-known invertebrate phyla.
More complex waste products are not excreted but accumulate in the polypide, which degenerates after a few weeks.
Throughout summer and autumn they produce disc-shaped statoblasts, masses of cells that function as "survival pods" rather like the gemmules of sponges.
Formation of coelom
In 2009 another molecular phylogeny study, using a combination of genes from mitochondria and the cell nucleus, concluded that Bryozoa is a monophyletic phylum, in other words includes all the descendants of a common ancestor that is itself a bryozoan.
As a result, synthetic equivalents have been developed that are simpler to produce and apparently at least as effective.
The solitary individuals of ''Monobryozoon'' are autozooids with pear-shaped bodies.
Global warming has increased the rate of scouring by icebergs, and this species is particularly adept at recolonizing scoured areas.
lobulata'' and ''O.
A study in 2008, using a larger set of genes, concluded that the lophophorates were closer to the Lophotrochozoa than to deuterostomes, but also that the lophophorates were not monophyletic.
"Total evidence" analyses, which used both morphological features and a relatively small set of genes, came to various conclusions, mostly favoring a close relationship between lophophorates and Lophotrochozoa.
Most marine species live in tropical waters, but a few occur in oceanic trenches, and others are found in polar waters.
The different forms of reproduction in cupuladriids are achieved through a variety of methods depending on the morphology and classification of the zooid.
The valid type species of ''Oncousoecia'' was found to be ''Oncousoecia lobulata''.
Although the majority of scientists accept this, Claus Nielsen thinks these similarities are superficial.
Cupuladriid Bryozoa are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction.
Colonies of some classes have various types of non-feeding specialist zooids, some of which are hatcheries for fertilized eggs, and some classes also have special zooids for defense of the colony.
Bryozoans, phoronids and brachiopods strain food out of the water by means of a lophophore, a "crown" of hollow tentacles.
From bases to tips of tentacles
In some species that form mobile colonies, vibracula around the edges are used as legs for burrowing and walking.
Even though colonies of zooids grow through asexual reproduction, Bryozoans are hermaphrodites and colonies are started through sexual reproduction.
The oldest species with a mineralized skeleton occurs in the Lower Ordovician.
Some gymnolaemate species produce cyphonautes larvae which have little yolk but a well-developed mouth and gut, and live as plankton for a considerable time before settling.
In 2014 it was reported that the bryozoan ''Fenestrulina rugula'' had become a dominant species in parts of Antarctica.
However, in bryozoans the blastopore closes, and a new opening develops to create the mouth.
These species generally have exoskeletons reinforced with calcium carbonate, and the openings through which the lophophores protrude are on the top or outer surface.
Bryozoans' evolutionary relationships to other phyla are also unclear, partly because scientists' view of the family tree of animals is mainly influenced by better-known phyla.
It is likely that the first bryozoans appeared much earlier and were entirely soft-bodied, and the Ordovician fossils record the appearance of mineralized skeletons in this phylum.
This has remained the majority view ever since, although most publications have preferred the name "Bryozoa" rather than "Ectoprocta".
In many animals the blastopore, an opening in the surface of the early embryo, tunnels through to form the gut.
The ambiguity about the scope of the name "Bryozoa" led to proposals in the 1960s and 1970s that it should be avoided and the unambiguous term "Ectoprocta" should be used.
In some species the larvae have large yolks, go to feed, and quickly settle on a surface.
The Bryozoa, known as "moss animals", currently contain about 5,000 known species.
In ectoprocts, all of the larva's internal organs are destroyed during the metamorphosis to the adult form and the adult's organs are built from the larva's epidermis and mesoderm, while in other bilaterians some organs including the gut are built from endoderm.
In 2001 pharmaceutical company GPC Biotech licensed Bryostatin 1 from Arizona State University for commercial development as a treatment for cancer.
In the opinion of Ruth Dewel, Judith Winston and Frank McKinney, "Our standard interpretation of bryozoan morphology and embryology is a construct resulting from over 100&nbsp;years of attempts to synthesize a single framework for all invertebrates," and takes little account of some peculiar features of ectoprocts.
In the 1970s comparisons between phoronid larvae and the cyphonautes larva of some gymnolaete bryozoans produced suggestions that the bryozoans, most of which are colonial, evolved from a semi-colonial species of phoronid.
In some species the retracted invert and lophophore are protected by an operculum ("lid"), which is closed by muscles and opened by fluid pressure.
Some have used more than one approach in the same work.
In all species the founder zooids then grow the new colonies by budding clones of themselves.
Hence the two groups are now widely regarded as separate phyla, and the name "Bryozoa" is now synonymous with "Ectoprocta".
The ectoproct coelom is formed by neither of the processes used by other bilaterians, enterocoely, in which pouches that form on the wall of the gut become separate cavities, nor schizocoely, in which the tissue between the gut and the body wall splits, forming paired cavities.
The name "Bryozoa" was originally applied only to the animals also known as "Ectoprocta", in which the anus lies outside the "crown" of tentacles (based on the Ancient Greek prefix ἐκτο meaning "outside" and word πρωκτος meaning "anus").
In species with calcareous exoskeletons, these do not mineralize until the zooids are fully grown.
Shape of founder zooid
