The city has a roughly round shape, with the centre situated in the cross-way of the main north-south/east-west axes at University Square.
The redevelopment deal failed, and over the following years, the green space grew into a unique habitat.
Levels of crime are higher in the southern districts of the city, particularly in Ferentari, a socially disadvantaged area.
The life expectancy of residents of Bucharest in 2003–2005 was 74.14 years, around two years higher than the Romanian average.
Bucharest is also Romania's largest centre for information technology and communications and is home to several software companies operating offshore delivery centres.
The Botanical Garden, located in the Cotroceni neighborhood a bit west of the city centre, is the largest of its kind in Romania and contains over 10,000 species of plants (many of them exotic); it originated as the pleasure park of the royal family.
In May 2016, the lake was declared a national park, the Văcărești Nature Park.
in the city centre, and at precincts throughout the city.
File:Palatul Casei de Depuneri, Consemnațiuni și Economie Bucuresti.jpg|Eclectic style – CEC Palace
File:Bucuresti, Romania, Pasajul Macca-Vilacrosse (3); B-II-a-A-19837.JPG|Macca-Vilacrosse, glass covered arcaded street
Other etymologies are given by early scholars, including the one of an Ottoman traveler, Evliya Çelebi, who said that Bucharest was named after a certain "Abu-Kariș", from the tribe of "Bani-Kureiș".
Adding the satellite towns around the urban area, the proposed metropolitan area of Bucharest would have a population of 2.27&nbsp;million people.
A newer landmark of the city is the Memorial of Rebirth, a stylized marble pillar unveiled in 2005 to commemorate the victims of the Romanian Revolution of 1989, which overthrew Communism.
Other significant ethnic groups are Roma Gypsies, Hungarians, Jews, Turks, Chinese, and Germans.
Starting in 2007, Bucharest has hosted annual races along a temporary urban track surrounding the Palace of the Parliament, called Bucharest Ring.
Although buildings and districts in the historic city centre were heavily damaged or destroyed by war, earthquakes, and above all Nicolae Ceaușescu's program of systematization, many survived.
Works on the canal were suspended in 1989, but proposals have been made to resume construction as part of the European Strategy for the Danube Region.
The lake is surrounded by buildings of flats and is an odd result of human intervention and nature taking its course.
The city has big convention facilities, educational institutes, cultural venues, traditional "shopping arcades", and recreational areas.
The Museum of the Romanian Peasant was declared the European Museum of the Year in 1996.
Bucharest is situated on the banks of the Dâmbovița River, which flows into the Argeș River, a tributary of the Danube.
In 2013, the number of cars registered in Bucharest amounted to 1,125,591.
Despite the classical art galleries and museums in the city, a contemporary arts scene also exists.
Each of the six sectors has its own local first-instance court (''judecătorie''), while more serious cases are directed to the Bucharest Tribunal (''Tribunalul Bucureşti''), the city's municipal court.
Unlike other parts of Romania, such as the Black Sea coast or Transylvania, Bucharest's cultural scene has no defined style, and instead incorporates elements of Romanian and international culture.
Some medieval and renaissance edifices remain, the most notable are in the Lipscani area.
The city proper is administratively known as the "Municipality of Bucharest" (''Municipiul București''), and has the same administrative level as that of a national county, being further subdivided into six sectors, each governed by a local mayor.
In 1862, after Wallachia and Moldavia were united to form the Principality of Romania, Bucharest became the new nation's capital city.
Bucharest's seven hills are: Mihai Vodă, Dealul Mitropoliei, Radu Vodă, Cotroceni, Spirei, Văcărești, and Sf.
For nearly two decades, the area shifted from being an abandoned green space where children could play and sunbathe, to being contested by previous owners of the land there, to being closed for redevelopment into a sports centre.
On 4 March 1977, an earthquake centered in Vrancea, about  away, claimed 1,500 lives and caused further damage to the historic centre.
After relative stagnation in the 1990s, the city's strong economic growth has revitalized infrastructure and led to the development of shopping malls, residential estates, and high-rise office buildings.
In 1781, Austrian historian Franz Sulzer claimed that it was related to ''bucurie'' (joy), ''bucuros'' (joyful), or ''a se bucura'' (to become joyful), while an early 19th-century book published in Vienna assumed its name has been derived from "Bukovie", a beech forest.
The city government is headed by a general mayor (''Primar General'').
Some other notable venues are Gaia, Bamboo, Fratelli, Kulturhaus, and Fabrica.
The MNAC also manages the Kalinderu MediaLab, which caters to multimedia and experimental art.
During this period, gas lighting, horse-drawn trams, and limited electrification were introduced.
The Art Nouveau movement finds expression through new architectural style initiated by Ion Mincu and taken over by other prestigious architects who capitalize important references of Romanian laic and medieval ecclesiastical architecture (for example the Mogoșoaia Palace, the Stavropoleos Church or the disappeared church of Văcărești Monastery) and Romanian folk motifs.
In the period between the two World Wars, the city's elegant architecture and the sophistication of its elite earned Bucharest the nickname of "Little Paris" (''Micul Paris'').
It specializes in oncological and cardiac disorders.
An estimated 1,000 street children still inhabit the city, some of whom engage in petty crime and begging.
As the capital of an Axis country and a major transit point for Axis troops en route to the Eastern Front, Bucharest suffered heavy damage during World War II due to Allied bombings.
Spyridon the New – the largest church in Bucharest
Aside from buildings used for business and institutions, residential developments are underway, many of which consist of high-rise office buildings and suburban residential communities.
Although the presence of street children was a problem in Bucharest in the 1990s, their numbers have declined in recent years, now lying at or below the average of major European capital cities.
Every year, Bucharest hosts the BRD Năstase Țiriac Trophy international tennis tournament, which is included in the ATP Tour.
Its architecture is a mix of historical (neo-classical), interbellum (Bauhaus and art deco), communist-era and modern.
The city has an area of .
In 2013, the Bucharest skyline enriched with a 137-m-high office building (SkyTower of Floreasca City Center), currently the tallest building in Romania.
Sport clubs have formed for ice hockey, rugby union, basketball, handball, water polo, and volleyball.
The city centre is a mixture of medieval, neoclassical, and art nouveau buildings, as well as 'neo-Romanian' buildings dating from the beginning of the 20th century and a collection of modern buildings from the 1920s and 1930s.
Bucharest hosts luxury brands such as Louis Vuitton, Hermes, Gucci, Armani, Hugo Boss, Prada, Calvin Klein, Rolex, Burberry, and many others.
Bucharest is home to Romania's largest recording labels, and is often the residence of Romanian musicians.
Lake Văcărești is located in the southern part of the city.
File:Scoala centrala de fete imagine din curtea interioara.jpg|Neo-Romanian style – Central School for Girls
These gardens have a rich history, having been frequented by poets and writers.
The prefect of Bucharest () is Paul Nicolae Petrovan.
*'''Sector 2''' (population 357,338): Pantelimon, Colentina, Iancului, Tei, Floreasca, Moșilor, Obor, Vatra Luminoasă, Fundeni, Plumbuita, Ștefan cel Mare, Baicului
Bucharest GP, owned by the controversial businessman Nicolae Șerbu, won the lawsuit that it initiated and will host city races around the Parliament starting 2011 with the Auto GP.
The Romanian name ''București'' has an uncertain origin.
The city's population, according to the 2002 census, was 1,926,334 inhabitants, or 8.9% of the total population of Romania.
Bucharest is the sixth-largest city in the European Union by population within city limits, after London, Berlin, Madrid, Rome, and Paris.
Bucharest has landmark buildings and monuments.
In January 1941, the city was the scene of the Legionnaires' rebellion and Bucharest pogrom.
About 96.6% of the population of Bucharest is Romanian.
The milestone for Romania's Kilometre Zero is placed just south of University Square in front of the New St. George Church (Sfântul Gheorghe Nou) at St. George Square (Piața Sfântul Gheorghe).
Bucharest's crime rate is rather low in comparison to other European capital cities, with the number of total offenses declining by 51% between 2000 and 2004, and by 7% between 2012 and 2013.
The project will be funded by the Turkish Government and from various donations.
Dissatisfied with the postrevolutionary leadership of the National Salvation Front, some student leagues and opposition groups organized large-scale protests in 1990 (the "Golaniad"), which were violently suppressed by the miners of Valea Jiului called in by the authorities (the "Mineriad").
Nicholas Russian Church
Besides Cișmigiu, Bucharest parks and gardens include Herăstrău Park and the Botanical Garden.
Romanian rock bands of the 1970s and 1980s, such as Iris and Holograf, continue to be popular, particularly with the middle-aged, while since the beginning of the 1990s, the hip hop/rap scene has developed.
Under subsequent rulers, Bucharest was established as the summer residence of the royal court.
Patronized by the Ministry of Culture, the museum preserves and exhibits numerous collections of objects and monuments of material and spiritual culture.
In 2005, the Lipscani area was pedestrianised and is undergoing restoration.
Despite this development on vertical, Romanian architects avoid designing tall buildings due to vulnerability to earthquakes.
Other, smaller, museums contain specialised collections.
Additionally, Bucharest has a prefect, who is appointed by Romania's national government.
File:Flickr - fusion-of-horizons - Biserica Curtea Veche (2).jpg|Inside the Church of Saint Anthony, the city's oldest extant church
Using the  isotherm, instead, the climate is crossover between continental and the extreme varieties of warm oceanic and cool subtropical.
A significant number of people commute to the city every day, mostly from the surrounding Ilfov County, but official statistics regarding their numbers do not exist.
The overpass took five years to build and is the longest cable-stayed bridge in Romania and the widest such bridge in Europe; upon completion, traffic on the Grant Bridge and in the Gara de Nord area became noticeably more fluid.
Public telephones are located in many places and are operated by Telekom Romania, a subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom and successor of the former monopoly Romtelecom.
The outdoor tournament is hosted by the tennis complex BNR Arenas.
While many neighbourhood discos play ''manele'', an Oriental- and Roma-influenced genre of music that is particularly popular in Bucharest's working-class districts, the city has a rich jazz and blues scene, and to an even larger extent, house music/trance and heavy metal/punk scenes.
A number of newspapers and media publications are based in Casa Presei Libere (The House of the Free Press), a landmark of northern Bucharest, originally named Casa Scânteii after the Communist Romania-era official newspaper ''Scînteia''.
, several office buildings are under construction, particularly in the northern and eastern parts of the city.
Since the fall of Communism in 1989, several Communist-era buildings have been refurbished, modernized, and used for other purposes.
The Fortifications of Bucharest were built.
Caragiale National Theatre.
The majority of Romanian track and field athletes and most gymnasts are affiliated with clubs in Bucharest.
The largest Parliament building in the world, the palace houses the Romanian Parliament (the Chamber of Deputies, and the Senate), as well as the National Museum of Contemporary Art.
Also, some of the city's main landmarks were built in this period, including Arcul de Triumf and Palatul Telefoanelor.
File:St. Nicholas Russian Church, Bucharest.jpg|St.
Romania's largest stock exchange, the Bucharest Stock Exchange, which was merged in December 2005 with the Bucharest-based electronic stock exchange Rasdaq, plays a major role in the city's economy.
After World War I, Bucharest became the capital of Greater Romania.
Bucharest's economy is centered on industry and services, with services particularly growing in importance in the last 10 years.
The Museum of Art Collections contains the collections of Romanian art aficionados, including Krikor Zambaccian and Theodor Pallady.
Mercer collects data worldwide, in 215 cities.
Mercer Human Resource Consulting issues yearly a global ranking of the world's most livable cities based on 39 key quality-of-life issues.
Other hospitals or clinics are Bucharest Emergency Hospital, Floreasca Emergency Clinic Hospital, Bucharest University Emergency Hospital, and Fundeni Clinical Institute or Biomedica International and Euroclinic, which are private.
On 17 June 2011, the Basarab Overpass was inaugurated and opened to traffic, thus completing the inner city traffic ring.
The city is home to the intellectual journal ''Dilema veche'' and the satire magazine ''Academia Cațavencu''.
Offices of Poșta Română, the national postal operator, are spread throughout the city, with the central post office () located at 12 Matei Millo Street.
The prefect is acting as a liaison official facilitating the implementation of national development plans and governing programs at local level.
File:Flickr - fusion-of-horizons - Catedrala Patriarhală.jpg|Romanian Patriarchal Cathedral and Palace of the Patriarchate
In Romanian, the word stem ''bucurie'' means "joy" ("happiness"), and it is believed to be of Dacian origin.
In recent years, the city has been experiencing an economic and cultural boom.
Although it is situated on the banks of a river, Bucharest has never functioned as a port city, with other Romanian cities such as Constanța and Galați acting as the country's main ports.
Casa Presei Libere is not the only Bucharest landmark that grew out of the media and communications industry.
The city centre has retained architecture from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly the interwar period, which is often seen as the "golden age" of Bucharest architecture.
Perhaps the best example of this is the conversion of obsolete retail complexes into shopping malls and commercial centres.
During Nicolae Ceaușescu's leadership (1965–89), much of the historic part of the city was demolished and replaced by "Socialist realism" style development: (1) the Centrul Civic (the Civic Centre) and (2) the Palace of the Parliament, for which an entire historic quarter was razed to make way for Ceaușescu's megalomaniac plans.
Petty crime, however, is more common, particularly in the form of pickpocketing, which occurs mainly on the city's public transport network.
The city's roads are usually very crowded during rush hours, due to an increase in car ownership in recent years.
Between 6 December 1916 and November 1918, the city was occupied by German forces as a result of the Battle of Bucharest, with the official capital temporarily moved to Iași, in the Moldavia region.
The competition is called the Bucharest City Challenge, and has hosted FIA GT, FIA GT3, British F3, and Logan Cup races in 2007 and 2008.
One of the most modern hospitals in the capital is Colțea that has been re-equipped after a 90-million-euro investment in 2011.
Partly destroyed by natural disasters and rebuilt several times during the following 200 years, and hit by Caragea's plague in 1813–14, the city was wrested from Ottoman control and occupied at several intervals by the Habsburg Monarchy (1716, 1737, 1789) and Imperial Russia (three times between 1768 and 1806).
File:Sf Spiridon Nou 01.jpg|St.
The headquarters of 186,000 firms, including nearly all large Romanian companies, are located in Bucharest.
Many large-scale constructions such as Gara de Nord, the busiest railway station in the city, National Bank of Romania's headquarters, and the Telephone Palace date from these times.
A few of the busiest national roads and motorways link the city to all of Romania's major cities, as well as to neighbouring countries such as Hungary, Bulgaria and Ukraine.
According to the 2011 census, 1,883,425 inhabitants live within the city limits, a decrease from the 2002 census.
Bucharest is a major intersection of Romania's national road network.
The Romanian Revolution of 1989 began with massive anti-Ceaușescu protests in Timișoara in December 1989 and continued in Bucharest, leading to the overthrow of the Communist regime.
The violent crime rate in Bucharest remains very low, with 11 murders and 983 other violent offenses taking place in 2007.
Bucharest's public transport system is the largest in Romania and one of the largest in Europe.
Bucharest's radius, from University Square to the city limits in all directions, varies from  .
The largest daily newspapers in Bucharest include ''Evenimentul Zilei'', ''Jurnalul Național'', ''Cotidianul'', ''România Liberă'', and ''Adevărul'', while the biggest news websites are Hotnews.ro (with an English and Spanish version), Ziare.com, and ''Gândul''.
Bucharest is headquarters of most of the national television networks and national newspapers, radio stations and online news websites.
They are numbered clockwise and are further divided into sectoral quarters (''cartiere'') which are not part of the official administrative division:
Recently built contemporary structures such as skyscrapers and office buildings complete the landscape.
The 2009 and 2010 edition have not been held in Bucharest due to a lawsuit.
The two daily English-language newspapers are the ''Bucharest Daily News'' and ''Nine O' Clock''; several magazines and publications in other languages are available, such as the Hungarian-language daily ''Új Magyar Szó''.
The Athletics and many Gymnastics National Championships are held in Bucharest at the Polyvalent Hall, which is also used for other indoor sports such as volleyball and handball.
During the years to come, it competed with Târgoviște on the status of capital city after an increase in the importance of southern Muntenia brought about by the demands of the ''suzerain'' power – the Ottoman Empire.
Private art galleries are scattered throughout the city centre.
Compared to it, Vienna occupied number one  worldwide in 2011 and 2009.
Perhaps the most prominent of these is the Palace of the Parliament, built in the 1980s during the reign of Communist dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu.
Bucharest was the host city of the fourth edition of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest in 2006.
During spring and autumn, daytime temperatures vary between , and precipitation during spring tends to be higher than in summer, with more frequent yet milder periods of rain.
The difficult situation of the quality of life in Bucharest is confirmed also by a vast urbanism study, done by the Ion Mincu University of Architecture and Urbanism.
The Bucharest-Ilfov development region is not, however, an administrative entity yet.
In a study published by the United Nations, Bucharest placed 19th in among 28 cities that recorded sharp declines in population from 1990 to the mid-2010s.
Using the milder isotherm of  for the coldest month, Bucharest has a humid continental climate ''Dfa''.
Other cultural venues include the National Museum of Art of Romania, Museum of Natural History ''Grigore Antipa'', Museum of the Romanian Peasant (''Muzeul țăranului Român''), National History Museum, and the Military Museum.
As with many cities, Bucharest is traditionally considered to be built upon seven hills, similar to the seven hills of Rome.
File:Flickr - fusion-of-horizons - stavropoleos (226).jpg|The ceiling of Stavropoleos Church
The A1 to Pitești, the A2 Sun Motorway to the Dobrogea region and Constanta and the A3 to Ploieşti all start from Bucharest.
Another example is the conversion of a large utilitarian construction in Centrul Civic into a Marriott Hotel.
The mostly utilitarian Communist-era architecture dominates most southern boroughs.
The pop-rock band Taxi have been gaining international respect, as has Spitalul de Urgență's raucous updating of traditional Romanian music.
InterContinental Bucharest is a high-rise five-star hotel situated near University Square and is also a landmark of the city.
This precinct contains notable buildings such as Manuc's Inn (''Hanul lui Manuc'') and the ruins of the Old Court (''Curtea Veche''); during the late Middle Ages, this area was the heart of commerce in Bucharest.
The unfinished Danube-Bucharest Canal, which is  long and around 70% completed, could link Bucharest to the Danube River, and via the Danube-Black Sea Canal, to the Black Sea.
The Dâmbovița River was also massively channelled in 1883, thus putting a stop to previously endemic floods like the 1865 flooding of Bucharest.
A documentary called ''Children Underground'' depicted the life of Romanian street kids in 2001.
The National Museum of Art of Romania is perhaps the best-known of Bucharest museums.
The National Museum of Contemporary Art (MNAC), situated in a wing of the Palace of the Parliament, was opened in 2004 and contains Romanian and international contemporary art.
However, the Great Depression took its toll on Bucharest's citizens, culminating in the Grivița Strike of 1933.
Mafia, Paraziții, and La Familia enjoy national and international recognition.
Although average precipitation and humidity during summer are low, occasional heavy storms occur.
Bucharest's jazz profile has especially risen since 2002, with the presence of two venues, Green Hours and Art Jazz, as well as an American presence alongside established Romanians.
In summer, the average temperature is  (the average for July and August).
The prefect is not allowed to be a member of a political party and his role is to represent the national government at the municipal level.
The general rule is that the main capital municipality is responsible for citywide utilities such as the water and sewage system, the overall transport system, and the main boulevards, while sectoral town halls manage the contact between individuals and the local government, secondary streets and parks maintenance, schools administration, and cleaning services.
Herăstrău Park is located in the northern part of the city, around Lake Herăstrău, and includes the site the Village Museum.
In addition, in the centre of the capital is a small artificial lakeLake Cișmigiusurrounded by the Cișmigiu Gardens.
Bucharest is home to the Romanian National Opera and the I.L.
Additionally, a trend to add modern wings and façades to historic buildings has occurred, the most prominent example of which is the Bucharest Architects' Association Building, which is a modern glass-and-steel construction built inside a historic stone façade.
These giant, circular halls, which were unofficially called hunger circuses due to the food shortages experienced in the 1980s, were constructed during the Ceaușescu era to act as produce markets and refectories, although most were left unfinished at the time of the revolution.
The building boasts one of the largest convention centres in the world.
These are in the process of being integrated into a commuter railway serving Bucharest and the surrounding Ilfov County.
Female life expectancy was 77.41 years, in comparison to 70.57 years for males.
The Bucharest Court of Appeal (''Curtea de Apel Bucureşti'') judges appeals against decisions taken by first-instance courts and tribunals in Bucharest and in five surrounding counties (Teleorman, Ialomița, Giurgiu, Călărași, and Ilfov).
International supermarket chains such as Carrefour, Cora, and METRO are operating in Bucharest.
Confidence tricks were common in the 1990s, especially in regards to tourists, but the frequency of these incidents has since declined.
In addition,  a private minibus system operates there.
Later, an Austrian garrison took possession after the Russian departure (remaining in the city until March 1857).
Of the city's medieval architecture, most of what survived into modern times was destroyed by Communist systematization, fire, and military incursions.
According to Eurostat, Bucharest has a larger urban zone of 2,183,091 residents.
One of the most prominent buildings is the neoclassical Romanian Athenaeum, which was founded in 1852, and hosts classical music concerts, the George Enescu Festival, and is home to the George Enescu Philharmonic Orchestra.
From the 1970s onwards, the area went through urban decline, and many historical buildings fell into disrepair.
This decrease is due to low natural increase, but also to a shift in population from the city itself to neighboring small towns such as Voluntari, Buftea, and Otopeni.
Traditional retail arcades and markets include the one at Obor.
The Zambaccian Museum, which is situated in the former home of art collector Krikor H. Zambaccian, contains works by well-known Romanian artists and international artists such as Paul Cézanne, Eugène Delacroix, Henri Matisse, Camille Pissarro, and Pablo Picasso.
As stated by the Mercer international surveys for quality of life in cities around the world, Bucharest occupied the 94th place in 2001 and slipped lower, to the 108th place in 2009 and the 107th place in 2010.
The building was constructed between 1884 and 1890.
Since 2005, Bucharest has its own contemporary art biennale, the Bucharest Biennale.
In January 2013, Bucharest had an unemployment rate of 2.1%, significantly lower than the national unemployment rate of 5.8%.
Although violent crimes fell by 13% in 2013 compared to 2012, 19 murders (18 of which the suspects were arrested) were recorded.
New districts were constructed, most of them dominated by tower blocks.
Communist-era architecture can also be found in Bucharest's residential districts, mainly in ''blocuri'', which are high-density apartment blocks that house the majority of the city's population.
As per the 2011 census, 1,883,425 inhabitants lived within the city limits, a decrease from the figure recorded at the 2002 census.
*'''Sector 6''' (population 371,060): Giulești, Crângași, Drumul Taberei, Militari, Grozăvești (also known as Regie), Ghencea
A relatively small number of Bucharesters are of Greek, North American, French, Armenian, Lippovan, and Italian descent.
Bucharest also houses the general inspectorates of the ''Gendarmerie'' and the national police.
Residential and commercial developments are underway, particularly in the northern districts; Bucharest's old historic centre is being restored.
The Romanian Athenaeum building is considered to be a symbol of Romanian culture and since 2007 is on the list of the Label of European Heritage sites.
