During the autumn of 1927, Fuller contemplated suicide, so that his family could benefit from a life insurance payment.
However, he preferred to be addressed as simply "Bucky".
The grandson of Unitarian minister Arthur Buckminster Fuller, R. Buckminster Fuller was also Unitarian.
Fuller also helped to popularize the concept of Spaceship Earth: "The most important fact about Spaceship Earth: an instruction manual didn't come with it."
Fuller was born on July 12, 1895, in Milton, Massachusetts, the son of Richard Buckminster Fuller and Caroline Wolcott Andrews, and also the grand-nephew of the American Transcendentalist Margaret Fuller.
The form was then draped with layers of ¼-inch wire mesh attached by twist ties.
He also served in the U.S. Navy in World War I, as a shipboard radio operator, as an editor of a publication, and as a crash rescue boat commander.
Featured were concepts, inventions and designs for creating "free energy" from natural forces, and for sequestering carbon from the atmosphere.
For half of a century, Fuller developed many ideas, designs and inventions, particularly regarding practical, inexpensive shelter and transportation.
Fuller began working with architect Shoji Sadao in 1954, and in 1964 they co-founded the architectural firm Fuller & Sadao Inc., whose first project was to design the large geodesic dome for the U.S. Pavilion at Expo 67 in Montreal.
Despite only practising true polyphasic sleep for a period during the 1920s, Fuller was known for his stamina throughout his life.
In his youth, Fuller experimented with several ways of presenting himself: R. B. Fuller, Buckminster Fuller, but as an adult finally settled on R. Buckminster Fuller, and signed his letters as such.
Fuller had previously experimented with unconventional clothing immediately after his 1927 epiphany.
"Tensegrity describes a structural-relationship principle in which structural shape is guaranteed by the finitely closed, comprehensively continuous, tensional behaviors of the system and not by the discontinuous and exclusively local compressional member behaviors.
From this point of view, its use as a transportation fuel by people commuting to work represents a huge net loss compared to their earnings.
He collaborated at SIU with the designer John McHale.
The ability to build large complex load bearing concrete spanning structures in free space would open many possibilities in architecture, and is considered as one of Fuller's greatest contributions.
The other car was driven by a local politician and was illegally removed from the accident scene, leaving reporters who arrived subsequently to blame the Dymaxion's unconventional design &mdash; though investigations exonerated the prototype.
Shortly after launch, a prototype crashed after being hit by another car, killing the Dymaxion's driver.
Fuller was drinking heavily and reflecting upon the solution to his family's struggles on long walks around Chicago.
He was expelled from Harvard twice: first for spending all his money partying with a vaudeville troupe, and then, after having been readmitted, for his "irresponsibility and lack of interest."
This was designed to show Earth's continents with minimum distortion when projected or printed on a flat surface.
In his 1970 book ''I Seem To Be a Verb'', he wrote: "I live on Earth at present, and I don't know what I am.
The project developed and demonstrated concrete spray technology used in conjunction with mesh covered wireforms as a viable means of producing large scale, load bearing spanning structures built on site without the use of pouring molds, other adjacent surfaces or hoisting.
He then stood up, suffered a heart attack, and died an hour later, at age 87.
At first that sounds strange to them; They all laugh about it.
But if they try saying in and out for a few days in fun, they find themselves beginning to realize that they are indeed going inward and outward in respect to the center of Earth, which is our Spaceship Earth.
Tensegrity provides the ability to yield increasingly without ultimately breaking or coming asunder."
Designed and developed during the mid-1940s, this prototype is a round structure (not a dome), shaped something like the flattened "bell" of certain jellyfish.
Fuller was awarded 28 United States patents and many honorary doctorates.
During the early 1920s, he and his father-in-law developed the Stockade Building System for producing light-weight, weatherproof, and fireproof housing—although the company would ultimately fail in 1927.
Korzybski is mentioned in the Introduction of his book ''Synergetics''.
Fuller referred to himself as "the property of universe" and during one radio interview he gave later in life, declared himself and his work "the property of all humanity".
Spending much of his youth on Bear Island, in Penobscot Bay off the coast of Maine, he had trouble with geometry, being unable to understand the abstraction necessary to imagine that a chalk dot on the blackboard represented a mathematical point, or that an imperfectly drawn line with an arrow on the end was meant to stretch off to infinity.
Fuller lectured at NC State University in Raleigh in 1949, where he met James Fitzgibbon, who would become a close friend and colleague.
According to Fuller biographer Steve Crooks, the house was designed to be delivered in two cylindrical packages, with interior color panels available at local dealers.
"Selfishness," he declared, "is unnecessary and hence-forth unrationalizable.... War is obsolete."
The team made constant improvements and refinements to the platform, and Fuller noted the Dymaxion "was an invention that could not be made available to the general public without considerable improvements."
Fuller was concerned about sustainability and about human survival under the existing socio-economic system, yet remained optimistic about humanity's future.
Domes up to three stories tall built with this method proved to be remarkably strong.
I am not a thing—a noun.
He is credited for popularizing this type of structure.
Fuller accepted a job decorating the interior of the café in exchange for meals, giving informal lectures several times a week, and models of the Dymaxion house were exhibited at the café.
And for the first time they begin to feel real 'reality.'"
In 1968 he was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member, and became a full Academician in 1970.
Despite no longer personally partaking in the habit, in 1943 Fuller suggested Dymaxion sleep as a strategy that the United States could adopt to win World War II.
The tubular frame form proved too problematic when it came to setting windows and doors, and was abandoned.
This allowed him "twenty-two thinking hours a day", which aided his work productivity.
The second method used iron rebar set vertically in the concrete footing and then bent inward and welded in place to create the dome's wireform structure and performed satisfactorily.
There, with the support of a group of professors and students, he began reinventing a project that would make him famous: the geodesic dome.
In 1927 Fuller resolved to think independently which included a commitment to "the search for the principles governing the universe and help advance the evolution of humanity in accordance with them... finding ways of ''doing more with less'' to the end that all people everywhere can have more and more."
An encapsulation quotation of his views might be, "There is no energy crisis, only a crisis of ignorance."
He developed this in several ways, from the close-packing of spheres and the number of compressive or tensile members required to stabilize an object in space.
Speaking to audiences later in life, Fuller would regularly recount the story of his Lake Michigan experience, and its transformative impact on his life.
Inspired by the sleep habits of animals such as dogs and cats, Fuller worked until he was tired, and then slept short naps.
He was convinced that the accumulation of relevant knowledge, combined with the quantities of major recyclable resources that had already been extracted from the earth, had attained a critical level, such that competition for necessities was not necessary anymore.
Fuller said that he had experienced a profound incident which would provide direction and purpose for his life.
He was described as "tireless" by Barry Farrell in ''Life'' magazine, who noted that Fuller stayed up all night replying to mail during Farrell's 1970 trip to Bear Island.
In the 1970s, Fuller was only in 'homely' locations (his personal home in Carbondale, Illinois; his holiday retreat in Bear Island, Maine; his daughter's home in Pacific Palisades, California) roughly 65 nights per year—the other 300 nights were spent in hotel beds in the locations he visited on his lecturing and consulting circuits.
The object of the simulation game is, in Fuller's words, to “make the world work, for 100% of humanity, in the shortest possible time, through spontaneous cooperation, without ecological offense or the disadvantage of anyone.”
This building is now the "Montreal Biosphère".
The Fuller family had no savings to fall back upon, and the birth of their daughter Allegra in 1927 added to the financial challenges.
Fuller believed human societies would soon rely mainly on renewable sources of energy, such as solar- and wind-derived electricity.
It was  in diameter and constructed of aluminium aircraft tubing and a vinyl-plastic skin, in the form of an icosahedron.
When he was aged in his seventies, Fuller generally slept for 5–8 hours per night.
For his lifetime of work, the American Humanist Association named him the 1969 Humanist of the Year.
Fuller referred to these buildings as monolithic ferroconcrete geodesic domes.
During the period leading up to his death, his wife had been lying comatose in a Los Angeles hospital, dying of cancer.
Later in life Fuller took exception to the term "invention".
The geodesic dome was a result of Fuller's exploration of nature's constructing principles to find design solutions.
It presented a combination of models, sketches, and other artifacts, representing six decades of the artist's integrated approach to housing, transportation, communication, and cartography.
Historians have been unable to identify direct evidence for this experience within the 1927 papers of Fuller's Chronofile archives, housed at Stanford University.
This provided motivation for Fuller's involvement in Stockade Building Systems, a business which aimed to provide affordable, efficient housing.
I know that I am not a category.
In the 1960s, Fuller developed the World Game, a collaborative simulation game played on a 70-by-35-foot Dymaxion map, in which players attempt to solve world problems.
Fuller died on July 1, 1983, 11 days before his 88th birthday.
It was invented about 1929 by two admen at Marshall Field's department store in Chicago to describe Fuller's concept house, which was shown as part of a house of the future store display.
Despite courting the interest of important figures from the auto industry, Fuller used his family inheritance to finish the second and third prototypes &mdash; eventually selling all three, dissolving ''Dymaxion Corporation'' and maintaining the Dymaxion was never intended as a commercial venture.
I decided to make myself a good case history of such a human being and it meant that I could not be judge of what was valid to put in or not.
Fuller's last filmed interview took place on April 3, 1983, in which he presented his analysis of Simon Rodia's Watts Towers as a unique embodiment of the structural principles found in nature.
If somebody kept a very accurate record of a human being, going through the era from the Gay 90s, from a very different kind of world through the turn of the century—as far into the twentieth century as you might live.
The project was enabled by a grant underwritten by Syracuse University and sponsored by US Steel (rebar), the Johnson Wire Corp, (mesh) and Portland Cement Company (concrete).
All the songs within the album are based upon his life and works.
After experimenting with bullhorns as hearing aids during the mid-1960s, Fuller adopted electronic hearing aids from the 1970s onward
The U.S. government recognized the importance of his work, and employed his firm Geodesics, Inc. in Raleigh, North Carolina to make small domes for the Marines.
It was to be inexpensive to produce and purchase, and assembled easily.
In 1976, Fuller was a key participant at UN Habitat I, the first UN forum on human settlements.
In 1917, he married Anne Hewlett.
Fuller was the second World President of Mensa from 1974 to 1983.
He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1968.
The words "down" and "up", according to Fuller, are awkward in that they refer to a planar concept of direction inconsistent with human experience.
He criticized previous utopian schemes as too exclusive, and thought this was a major source of their failure.
The two shared a remarkable amount of similarity in their formulations of general semantics.
He attended Froebelian Kindergarten.
One confirming result was that the strongest possible homogeneous truss is cyclically tetrahedral.
The words "in" and "out" should be used instead, he argued, because they better describe an object's relation to a gravitational center, the Earth.
Fuller also introduced synergetics, an encompassing term which he used broadly as a metaphoric language for communicating experiences using geometric concepts and, more specifically, to reference the empirical study of systems in transformation, with an emphasis on total system behavior unpredicted by the behavior of any isolated components.
It has several innovative features, including revolving dresser drawers, and a fine-mist shower that reduces water consumption.
"I suggest to audiences that they say, 'I'm going "outstairs" and "instairs."'
Thus able to steer in a tight circle, the Dymaxion often caused a sensation,  bringing nearby traffic to a halt.
A circular structure at the top of the house was designed to rotate around a central mast to use natural winds for cooling and air circulation.
Portions of this interview appear in ''I Build the Tower,'' a documentary film on Rodia's architectural masterpiece.
He often made items from materials he brought home from the woods, and sometimes made his own tools.
A voice spoke directly to Fuller, and declared:
The initial construction method used a circular concrete footing in which anchor posts were set.
Fuller learned the importance of physical appearance as part of one's credibility, and decided to become "the invisible man" by dressing in clothes that would not draw attention to himself.
In 1949, he erected his first geodesic dome building that could sustain its own weight with no practical limits.
He documented his life, philosophy and ideas scrupulously by a daily diary (later called the ''Dymaxion Chronofile''), and by twenty-eight publications.
Fuller documented his life copiously from 1915 to 1983, approximately  of papers in a collection called the Dymaxion Chronofile.
Fuller coined this term long before the term synergy became popular.
An allotrope of carbon, fullerene—and a particular molecule of that allotrope C60 (buckminsterfullerene or buckyball) has been named after him.
He hoped for an age of "omni-successful education and sustenance of all humanity."
The indie band Driftless Pony Club named their 2011 album, ''Buckminister'', after him.
In 1960, he was awarded the Frank P. Brown Medal from The Franklin Institute.
On July 12, 2004, the United States Post Office released a new commemorative stamp honoring R. Buckminster Fuller on the 50th anniversary of his patent for the geodesic dome and by the occasion of his 109th birthday.
In June 2008, the Whitney Museum of American Art presented "Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe", the most comprehensive retrospective to date of his work and ideas.
Fuller was the subject of two documentary films: ''The World of Buckminster Fuller'' (1971) and ''Buckminster Fuller: Thinking Out Loud'' (1996).
From 1959 to 1970, Fuller taught at Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIU).
It was ultramodern-looking at the time, built of metal, and sheathed in polished aluminum.
Fuller published more than 30 books, coining or popularizing terms such as "Spaceship Earth", ephemeralization, and synergetic.
Fuller held that unthinking use of obsolete scientific ideas detracts from and misleads intuition.
Concrete was then sprayed onto the structure, building up a solid layer which, when cured, would support additional concrete to be added by a variety of traditional means.
Fuller was influenced by Alfred Korzybski's idea of general semantics.
Beginning as an assistant professor, he gained full professorship in 1968, in the School of Art and Design.
The Fuller Dome is referenced in the Hugo Award-winning novel ''Stand on Zanzibar'' by John Brunner, in which a geodesic dome is said to cover the entire island of Manhattan, and it floats on air due to the hot-air balloon effect of the large air-mass under the dome (and perhaps its construction of lightweight materials).
His wife of 66 years died 36 hours later.
In 1970 he received the Gold Medal award from the American Institute of Architects.
The vehicle was steered via the third wheel at the rear, capable of 90° steering lock.
Fitzgibbon was director of Geodesics, Inc. and Synergetics, Inc. the first licensees to design geodesic domes.
Isamu Noguchi arrived during 1929—Constantin Brâncuși, an old friend of Marie's, had directed him there—and Noguchi and Fuller were soon collaborating on several projects, including the modeling of the Dymaxion car based on recent work by Aurel Persu.
Working as a designer, scientist, developer, and writer, he lectured for many years around the world.
His daughter Alexandra had died in 1922 of complications from polio and spinal meningitis just prior to her fourth birthday.
The enormous Fuller Collection is currently housed at Stanford University.
Fuller dwelled on her death, suspecting that it was connected with the Fullers' damp and drafty living conditions.
One of the three original prototypes survives.
Following his global prominence from the 1960s onward, Fuller became a frequent flier, often crossing time zones to lecture in international cities.
In 1965, Fuller inaugurated the World Design Science Decade (1965 to 1975) at the meeting of the International Union of Architects in Paris, which was, in his own words, devoted to "applying the principles of science to solving the problems of humanity."
Buckminster Fuller wore thick-lensed spectacles to correct his extreme hyperopia, a condition that went undiagnosed for the first five years of his life.
The Buckminsterfullerene molecule, which consists of 60 carbon atoms, very closely resembles a spherical version of Fuller's geodesic dome.
In 1976, he received the St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates.
He also developed numerous inventions, mainly architectural designs, and popularized the widely known geodesic dome.
By his own appraisal, he was a non-conforming misfit in the fraternity environment.
Fuller would himself later crash another prototype with his young daughter aboard.
After discharge, he worked again in the meat packing industry, acquiring management experience.
He also kept copies of all incoming and outgoing correspondence.
He had become a guru of the design, architecture, and 'alternative' communities, such as Drop City, the community of experimental artists to whom he awarded the 1966 "Dymaxion Award" for "poetically economic" domed living structures.
Carbon molecules known as fullerenes were later named by scientists for their structural and mathematical resemblance to geodesic spheres.
Buckminster Fuller exclusively dressed in dark-colored suits during his public appearances, appearing like "an alert little clergyman".
I must put everything in, so I started a very rigorous record.
Resources and waste material from cruder products could be recycled into making more valuable products, increasing the efficiency of the entire process.
Fuller attended Milton Academy in Massachusetts, and after that began studying at Harvard University, where he was affiliated with Adams House.
He ultimately chose to embark on "an experiment, to find what a single individual could contribute to changing the world and benefiting all humanity."
Due to publicity, there were many orders during the early Post-War years, but the company that Fuller and others had formed to produce the houses failed due to management problems.
The basic model enclosed  of floor area.
By 1928, Fuller was living in Greenwich Village and spending much of his time at the popular café Romany Marie's, where he had spent an evening in conversation with Marie and Eugene O'Neill several years earlier.
Fuller wrote that the natural analytic geometry of the universe was based on arrays of tetrahedra.
He experimented with designing a new apparatus for human propulsion of small boats.
The bodywork was aerodynamically designed for increased fuel efficiency and speed as well as light weight, and its platform featured a lightweight cromoly-steel hinged chassis, rear-mounted V8 engine, front-drive and three-wheels.
The general belief in a flat Earth died out in classical antiquity, so using "wide" is an anachronism when referring to the surface of the Earth—a spheroidal surface has area and encloses a volume but has no width.
Thomas C. Howard was lead designer, architect and engineer for both companies.
Within a few years there were thousands of these domes around the world.
To work, he thought that a utopia needed to include everyone.
It also featured the extensive connections with Chicago from his years spent living, teaching, and working in the city.
"Dymaxion" is a portmanteau of "'''dy'''namic '''max'''imum tens'''ion'''".
Here the term "Dymaxion" is used in effect to signify a "radically strong and light tensegrity structure".
Fuller was elected as an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa in 1967, on the occasion of the 50th year reunion of his Harvard class of 1917 (from which he was expelled in his first year).
The 1996 Nobel prize in chemistry was given to Kroto, Curl, and Smalley for their discovery of the fullerene.
However, he found that breaking social fashion customs made others devalue or dismiss his ideas.
Fuller was a pioneer in thinking globally, and he explored principles of energy and material efficiency in the fields of architecture, engineering and design.
In 1969, Fuller began the Otisco Project, named after its location in Otisco, New York.
Defining wealth in terms of knowledge, as the "technological ability to protect, nurture, support, and accommodate all growth needs of life," his analysis of the condition of "Spaceship Earth" caused him to conclude that at a certain time during the 1970s, humanity had attained an unprecedented state.
Fuller reportedly kept this Dymaxion sleep habit for two years, before quitting the routine because it conflicted with his business associates' sleep habits.
The exhibition traveled to the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago in 2009.
Robert Kiyosaki,'s 2015 book "Second Chance" is largely about Kiyosaki's interactions with Fuller, and Fuller's unusual final book "Grunch of Giants".
Stanford historian Barry Katz suggests that the suicide story may be a myth which Fuller constructed later in life, to summarize this formative period of his career.
I seem to be a verb, an evolutionary process—an integral function of the universe."
Their construction is based on extending some basic principles to build simple "tensegrity" structures (tetrahedron, octahedron, and the closest packing of spheres), making them lightweight and stable.
By the age of 12 he had "invented" a 'push pull' system for propelling a row boat through the use of an inverted umbrella connected to the transom with a simple oar lock which allowed the user to face forward to point the boat toward its destination.
Other shapes such as cones, pyramids and arches proved equally adaptable.
Tubes cut to length and with ends flattened were then bolted together to form a duodeca-rhombicahedron (22-sided hemisphere) geodesic structure with spans ranging to .
In the 1950s, Fuller attended seminars and workshops organized by the Institute of General Semantics, and he delivered the annual Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture in 1955.
To prove his design, Fuller suspended from the structure's framework several students who had helped him build it.
As well as contributing significantly to the development of tensegrity technology, Fuller invented the term "tensegrity" from ''tensional integrity''.
One of Fuller's Dymaxion Houses is on display as a permanent exhibit at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan.
The stamp's design replicated the January 10, 1964 cover of ''Time Magazine''.
These continuous tension – discontinuous compression structures featured single force compression members (no flexure or bending moments) that did not touch each other and were 'suspended' by the tensional members.
Between his sessions at Harvard, Fuller worked in Canada as a mechanic in a textile mill, and later as a laborer in the meat-packing industry.
Models of the city aroused the interest of President Lyndon B. Johnson who, after leaving office, had them placed in the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum.
Fuller's hearing was damaged during his Naval service in World War I and deteriorated during the 1960s.
With self-deprecating humor, Fuller described this black-suited appearance as resembling a "second-rate bank clerk".
It was to be produced using factories, workers, and technologies that had produced World War II aircraft.
In the 1960s and 70s, he wore three watches simultaneously; one for the time zone of his office in Carbondale, one for the time zone of the location he would next visit, and one for the time zone he was currently in.
Fuller also designed an alternative projection map, called the Dymaxion map.
Fuller financed some of his experiments with inherited funds, sometimes augmented by funds invested by his collaborators, one example being the Dymaxion car project.
They are buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Additionally, filmmaker Sam Green and the band Yo La Tengo collaborated on a 2012 "live documentary" about Fuller, ''The Love Song of R. Buckminster Fuller''.
Cooperation had become the optimum survival strategy.
He cited François de Chardenedes' opinion that petroleum, from the standpoint of its replacement cost out of our current energy "budget" (essentially, the net incoming solar flux), had cost nature "over a million dollars" per U.S. gallon (US$300,000 per litre) to produce.
It was while visiting her there that he exclaimed, at a certain point: "She is squeezing my hand!"
The show ran January through July.
