Other important sectors include also, as natural science research, information technology and medical research, non-profit institutions, and universities.
In 1944, about one year before the end of World War II, Budapest was partly destroyed by British and American air raids (first attack 4 April 1944).
By ethnicity there were 1,397,851 (80.8%) Hungarians, 19,530 (1.1%) Romani, 18,278 (1.0%) Germans, 6,189 (0.4%) Romanians, 4,692 (0.3%) Chinese and 2,581 (0.1%) Slovaks.
In 2014, the 65% of the passenger traffic in Budapest was by public transport and 35% by car.
To their surprise, the central committee of the "Hungarian Working People's Party" did so that same evening.
The cultural role of Buda was particularly significant during the reign of King Matthias Corvinus.
Budapest's current urban landscape is one of the modern and contemporary architecture.
All bridges were destroyed by the Germans.
Outdoor festivals, concerts and lectures enrich the cultural offer of summer, which are often held in historical buildings.
Game design also highly represented through headquarters of domestic Digital Reality, Black Hole and studio of Crytek or Gameloft.
The proportion of Jews peaked in 1900 with 23.6%.
The style appeared following the marriage of King Matthias Corvinus and Beatrice of Naples in 1476.
The National Assembly is seated in the Hungarian Parliament, which also located in the District V. The President of the National Assembly, the third-highest public official in Hungary, is also seated in the largest building in the country, in the Hungarian Parliament.
István Tarlós, the current Mayor was re-elected mayor for another 5-year term on the 2014 local elections, he received 49.06% of the votes.
Considered a financial hub in Central Europe, the city ranked third on Mastercard's Emerging Markets Index, and ranked as the most liveable Central or Eastern European city on EIU's quality of life index.
In the summer months, a scheduled hydrofoil service operates on the Danube connecting the city to Vienna.
The third island Csepel Island is the largest of the Budapest Danube islands, however only its northernmost tip is within city limits.
It is the highest ranked Central/Eastern European city on Innovation Cities' Top 100 index.
Sudden heavy showers also occur, particularly in May and June.
31 Úri Street, which has a Gothic façade that dates back to the 15th century.
To decrease the use of cars and greenhouse gas emissions, the city has worked to improve public transportation, and nowadays the city has one of the highest mass transit usage in Europe.
The seven-hundred-year-old Matthias Church is one of the jewels of Budapest, it is in neo-Gothic style, decorated with coloured shingles and elegant pinnacles.
District I is a small area in central Buda, including the historic Buda Castle.
Further high-tech industries, such as software development, engineering notable as well, the Nokia, Ericcson, Bosch, Microsoft, IBM employs thousands of engineers in research and development in the city.
There are also several theories about the origin of the name ''Pest''.
In 1920 the Treaty of Trianon partitioned the country, and as a result, Hungary lost over two-thirds of its territory, and about two-thirds of its inhabitants, including 3.3 million out of 15 million ethnic Hungarians.
District XXI is the extension of the above route over a branch of the Danube, the northern tip of a long island south from Budapest.
Wallenberg was abducted by the Russians on 17 January 1945 and never regained freedom.
More than 38,000 civilians lost their lives during the conflict.
In the early 1970s, Budapest Metro's East-West M2 line was first opened, followed by the M3 line in 1976.
However, the organised crime is associated with the city, the Institute of Defence in a UN study named Budapest as the "global epicentres" of illegal pornography, money laundering and contraband tobacco, and also the negotiation center for international crime group leaders.
The LOW Festival was a multidisciplinary contemporary cultural festival held in Hungary in the cities Budapest and Pécs from February till March.
The new baths that were constructed during the Turkish period (1541–1686) served both bathing and medicinal purposes, and some of these are still in use to this day.
Moreover, the global aspect of the city's research activity is shown through the establishment of the European Chinese Research Institute in the city.
The real-time information of trams, buses and trolleybuses are available for both the operators in the control room and for all the passengers in all stops on smartphone and on city street displays.
One of the theories states that the word "Pest" comes from the Roman times, since there was a fortress ("Contra-Aquincum") in this region that was referred to as "Pession" ("Πέσσιον", iii.7.§&nbsp;2) by Ptolemaios.
According to the census, in 2011 Budapest had 1.74 million inhabitants, down from its 1989 peak of 2.1 million due to suburbanisation.
The deployment of 300 new digital contactless ticket vending machine will be finished by the end of 2014 in harmonization with the e-ticket system.
The spring months (March and April) see variable conditions, with a rapid increase in the average temperature.
Today, many of the original renaissance buildings disappeared during the varied history of Buda, but Budapest is still rich in renaissance and neo-renaissance buildings, like the famous Hungarian State Opera House, the St. Stephen's Basilica and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
Public spaces attract heavy investment by business and government also, so that the city has gained entirely new (or renovated and redesigned) squares, parks and monuments, for example the city central Kossuth Lajos square, Deák Ferenc square and Liberty Square.
Budapest has many municipal parks and most have playgrounds for children and seasonal activities like skating in the winter and boating in the summer.
The Danube was and is still an important water-way and this region in the centre of the Carpathian Basin lies at the cross-roads of trade routes.
By 1547 the number of Christians was down to about a thousand, and by 1647 it had fallen to only about seventy.
Although only 1.7% of the population of Hungary in 2009 were foreigners, 43% of them lived in Budapest, making them 4.4% of the city's population (up from 2% in 2001).
The city glories in 223 museums and galleries, which presents several memories, not only the Hungarian historical, art and science ones, but also the memories of universal and European culture and science.
The Hungarian cuisine and café culture: for example, Gerbeaud Café, and the Százéves, Biarritz, Fortuna, Alabárdos, Arany Szarvas, Kárpátia and the world-famous Mátyás Pince Restaurants.
Budapest is also rich in green areas.
In Budapest there are currently 837 different monuments, which represent the most of the European artistic style.
No more districts remaining in Buda in this circle, we must turn our steps to Pest again to find Districts XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX and XX (mostly external city parts), almost regularly in a semicircle, going southwards again.
Most buildings in Budapest are relatively low: in the early 2010s there were around 100 buildings higher than .
With its own budget and its judges being elected by Parliament it does not constitute a part of the ordinary judicial system.
Hungarian models, like Barbara Palvin, Enikő Mihalik, Diána Mészáros, Viktória Vámosi usually appearing at these events along international participants.
From the 1960s to the late 1980s Hungary was often satirically referred to as "the happiest barrack" within the Eastern bloc, and much of the wartime damage to the city was finally repaired.
Eighteen universities are situated in Budapest, including the Central European University, Eötvös Loránd University and the Budapest University of Technology and Economics.
The food of Hungary can be considered a melting pot of the continent, with a culinary base formed from its own, original Magyar cuisine.
Another building with Gothic remains is the Inner City Parish Church in Pest, built in the 12th century.
The synagogue is located in the Jewish district taking up several blocks in central Budapest bordered by Király utca, Wesselényi utca, Grand Boulevard and Bajcsy Zsilinszky road.
In the 2015–16 UEFA Europa League, Hungary's most popular soccer club, Ferencvárosi TC dropped out in the second qualifying round.
Hungarian cuisine was influenced by Austrian cuisine under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, dishes and methods of food preparation have often been borrowed from Austrian cuisine, and vice versa.
Some of these waters have medicinal effects due to their medically valuable mineral contents.
Hungarians have always been avid sports people: during the history of the Summer Olympic Games, Hungarians have brought home 476 medals, of which 167 are gold.
Budapest is the headquarters of the Hungarian LGBT community.
The city covers an area of .
There are three main railway station in Budapest, the Budapest Eastern railway station, the Budapest Western railway station and Budapest Southern railway station, operating both domestic and international rail services.
He is an independent (but supported by Fidesz) who assumed the office first on 3 October 2010.
Riding on bike paths is one of the best ways to see Budapest – there are currently about  of bicycle paths in the city, fitting into the EuroVelo system.
Budapest is among the 25 most visited cities in the world, the city welcoming more than 4.4 million international visitors each year, therefore the traditional and the congress tourism industry also deserve a mention, it contributes greatly to the city's economy.
Public transit in Budapest is provided by the Centre for Budapest Transport (BKK, ''Budapesti Közlekedési Központ''), one of the largest transportation authorities in Europe.
The three outdoor pools (one of which is a fun pool) are open all year, including winter.
The Ottomans pillaged Buda in 1526, besieged it in 1529, and finally occupied it in 1541.
The track was completely resurfaced for the first time in early 2016, and it was announced the Grand Prix's deal was extended for a further 5 years, until 2026.
The river is easily navigable and so Budapest historically has a major commercial port at Csepel District and at New Pest District also.
Some other diplomats also abandoned diplomatic protocol and rescued Jews.
The Széchenyi Baths are one of the largest bathing complexes in all Europe, and the only "old" medicinal baths to be found in the Pest side of the city.
There are Roman remains at the Aquincum Museum, and historic furniture at the Nagytétény Castle Museum, just 2 out of 223 museums in Budapest.
In the 1980s, the city's population reached 2.1 million.
The few remaining ones can be found in the Castle District.
The Tatar invasion in the 13th century quickly proved that it is difficult to mount a defence on a plain.
The road system in the city is designed in a similar manner to that of Paris, with several ring roads, and avenues radiating out from the center.
The city centre itself in a broader sense comprises the District '''V, VI, VII, VIII, IX''' and '''XIII''' on the Pest side,  and the '''I, II, XI''' and '''XII''' on the Buda side of the city.
The 19th century was dominated by the Hungarian struggle for independence and modernisation.
Adjacent to it is a sculpture reproducing a weeping willow tree in steel to commemorate the Hungarian victims of the Holocaust.
In 1361 it became the capital of Hungary.
The Castle District is another place to visit where the best-known landmark Buda Royal Palace and many other buildings were built in the Baroque style.
But Budapest is planning to ease rules for the construction of skyscrapers and in the near future would like to build skyscrapers around the city's historic core.
The culture of Budapest is reflected by Budapest's size and variety.
Snowfall is fairly frequent in most years, and nighttime temperatures of  are not uncommon between mid-December and mid-February.
The city is also well known for its ruin bars both day and night.
The leading business schools and universities in Budapest, the Budapest Business School, the CEU Business School and Corvinus University of Budapest offers a whole range of courses in economics, finance and management in English, French, German and Hungarian.
The Rudas Baths are centrally placed – in the narrow strip of land between Gellért Hill and the River Danube – and also an outstanding example of architecture dating from the Turkish period.
Budapest Wine Festival and Budapest Pálinka Festival occurs each May and gastronomy festivals focus on culinary pleasures.
The most iconic and widely known Classicist-style attraction in Budapest is the Chain Bridge.
In the last decades of the 20th century the political changes of 1989–90 (Fall of the Iron Curtain) concealed changes in civil society and along the streets of Budapest.
On average, there are 78 days with precipitation and 1988 hours of sunshine (of a possible 4383) each year.
For the executive, the two chief officers each have their own official residences, which also serve as their offices.
''The Grand Budapest Hotel'' (2014) is a Wes Anderson film.
''Environmental issues'' have a high priority among Budapest's politics.
Most Hungarian cultural movements first emerged in the city.
Of the  occupied by the city,  is green area, park and forest.
Hungarians arrived in the territory in the 9th century.
Water quality in Budapest harbours improved dramatically in the recent years, treatment facilities processed 100% of generated sewage in 2010.
The Curia guarantees the uniform application of law.
Budapest is one of the main stops of the  on its Central and Eastern European route.
Currently the beltway is  in length, and once finished it will be  of highway in length.
The Constitutional Court of Hungary is one of the highest level actors independent of the politics in the country.
Budapest is home to a fashion week twice a year, where the city's fashion designers and houses present their collections and provide a meeting place for the fashion industry representatives.
Start with the Roman City of Aquincum represents the ancient architecture.
The number of high-rise buildings is kept low by building legislation, which is aimed at preserving the historic cityscape and to meet the requirements of the World Heritage Site.
BKK (through the operator BKV) also provides public transport with boat service within the borders of the city.
It was later occupied by the Romans.
Budapest is the fourth most "dynamically growing city" by population in Europe, and the Euromonitor predicts a population increase of almost 10% between 2005 and 2030.
Budapesters regularly kayak, canoe, jet-ski and sail on the Danube, which has continuously become a major recreational site for the city.
According to the same census, 1,600,585 people (92.6%) were born in Hungary, 126,036 people (7.3%) outside Hungary while the birthplace of 2,419 people (0.1%) was unknown.
In the modern age, Budapest developed its own peculiar cuisine, based on products of the nearby region, as lamb, pork and vegetables special in the region.
The Gellért Baths and Hotel were built in 1918, although there had once been Turkish baths on the site, and in the Middle Ages a hospital.
The Classical architecture and Neoclassical architecture are the next in the timeline.
Since 1986, the race has been a round of the FIA Formula One World Championship.
Another historical museum is the House of Terror, hosted in the building that was the venue of the Nazi Headquarters.
Indoors there are over ten separate pools, and a whole host of medical treatments is also available.
As part of a strategic development plan, €561 million have spent to expanding and modernising the airport infrastructure until December 2012.
The Dohány Street Synagogue is the largest synagogue in Europe, and the second largest active synagogue in the world.
Budapest is the most important Hungarian road terminus, all of the major highways and railways ends within the city limits.
Hungarians led by Árpád settled in the territory at the end of the 9th century, and a century later officially founded the Kingdom of Hungary.
The Metropolitan Szabó Ervin Library plays an important role in the general education of the capital's population.
Due to the prosperity and the large Jewish community of the city at the start of the 20th century, Budapest was often called the "Jewish Mecca" or "Judapest".
In Pest, arguably the most important sight is Andrássy út.
At the 2013 Hungarian Grand Prix, it was confirmed that Hungary will continue to host a Formula 1 race until 2021.
In 2014, the city had a population density of 3,314 people per square kilometre (8,580/sq mi), rendering it the most densely populated of all municipalities in Hungary.
The city has marked topographical contrasts: Buda is built on the higher river terraces and hills of the western side, while the considerably larger Pest spreads out on a flat and featureless sand plain on the river's opposite bank.
The organiser of public transport in Budapest is the municipal corporation ''Centre for Budapest Transport'' (Budapesti Közlekedési Központ – BKK), that is responsible for planning and organising network and services, planning and developing tariff concepts, attending to public service procurer duties, managing public service contracts, operating controlling and monitoring systems, setting and monitoring service level agreements related to public transport, attending to customer service duties, selling and monitoring tickets and passes, attending to integrated passenger information duties, unified Budapest-centric traffic control within public transport, attending to duties related to river navigation, plus the management of Budapest roads, operating taxi stations, unified control of bicycle traffic development in the capital, preparing parking strategy and developing an operational concept, preparation of road traffic management, developing an optimal traffic management system, organising and co-ordinating road reconstruction and even more, in short, everything which is related to transport in the city.
File:Budapest four seasons.jpg|Gresham Palace
and there were 2.3 million subscriptions for mobile broadband,
A popular place frequented by locals is Normafa, offering activities for all seasons.
The city is a vital traffic hub because all major European roads and European railway lines lead to Budapest.
According to chronicles from the Middle Ages, the name ''Buda'' comes from the name of its founder, Bleda (Buda), brother of the Hunnic ruler Attila.
Also support the financial industry of Budapest, the firms of international banks and financial service providers, such as Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, GE Capital, Deutsche Bank, Sberbank, ING Group, Allianz, KBC Group, UniCredit and MSCI among others.
The nearby Sándor Palace contains the offices and official residence of the President of Hungary.
The new Communist government considered the buildings like the Buda Castle symbols of the former regime, and during the 1950s the palace was gutted and all the interiors were destroyed (also see Stalin era).
There are many symphony orchestras in Budapest with the Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra being the preeminent one.
Ethnic Hungarians overtook Germans in the second half of the 19th century due to mass migration from the overpopulated rural Transdanubia and Great Hungarian Plain.
Budapest is a prominent location for the Hungarian entertainment industry, with many films, television series, books, and other media set there.
It is the country's principal political, cultural, commercial, industrial, and transportation centre, sometimes described as the primate city of Hungary.
The Roman settlement – Aquincum – became the main city of Pannonia Inferior in 106&nbsp;AD.
Buildings to look for are no.
Major luxury fashion brands such as Roberto Cavalli, Dolce & Gabbana, Gucci, Versace, Ferragamo, Moschino, Prada and Hugo Boss, can be found among the city's most prestigious shopping streets, the Fashion Street, Váci Street and Andrássy Avenue in Budapest's main upscale fashion district, the Leopoldtown, District V. Budapest's newest fashion and design mall, the ''il Bacio di Stile'', opened in 2013 and houses most major fashion houses and brands from around the world including Bottega Veneta, Giorgio Armani, Saint Laurent, Lanvin, Valentino, Oscar de la Renta.
1867 was the year of Reconciliation that brought about the birth of Austria-Hungary.
Hungary's highest courts are located in Budapest.
There is still something of an atmosphere of fin-de-siècle about the place, and all around the inner courtyard there are marble tablets recalling the thanks of patrons who were cured there.
Other festivals include the Budapest Fringe Festival, which brings more than 500 artists in about 50 shows to produce a wide range of interesting works in alternative theatre, dance, music and comedy outside the mainstream.
As Hungary's busiest airport, handles nearly all of the country's air passenger traffic.
Budapest has notable innovation capabilities as a technology and start-up hub, many start-ups are headquartered and begin its business in the city, for instance deserve to mention the most well-known Prezi, LogMeIn or Nav N Go.
The autumn in Budapest (mid-September until late October) is characterised by little rain and long sunny days with moderate temperatures.
To the sides are the Museum of Fine Arts and the Kunsthalle Budapest, and behind City Park opens out, with Vajdahunyad Castle.
Special vehicles in Budapest, besides metros, include suburban rails, trams and boats.
The world's largest panorama photograph was created in (and of) Budapest in 2010.
Each department has various chambers.
Art Nouveau came into fashion in Budapest by the exhibitions which were held in and around 1896 and organised in connection with the Hungarian Millennium celebrations.
The wide Danube was always fordable at this point because of a small number of islands in the middle of the river.
Budapest Jewish Summer Festival, in late August, is also one of the largest in Europe.
Budapest hosts the main and regional headquarters of many international organizations as well, including United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, European Institute of Innovation and Technology, European Police Academy, International Centre for Democratic Transition, Institute of International Education, International Labour Organization, International Organization for Migration, International Red Cross, Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe, Danube Commission and even others.
The city lies on the boundary between Zone 6 and Zone 7 in terms of the hardiness zone.
The night service has a reputation for being excellent.
The highest point of the hills and of Budapest is János hill, at  above sea level.
In 2015 the Assembly of the Hungarian Olympic Committee and the Assembly of Budapest decided to bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics.
Budapest restaurants reflect diversity, with menus carrying traditional regional cuisine, fusions of various culinary influences, or innovating in the leading edge of new techniques.
The river Danube flows through Budapest on its way from Germany to the Black Sea.
But there are still large opportunities in real estate development in the city.
Elements of ancient Turkish cuisine were adopted during the Ottoman era, in the form of sweets (for example different nougats, like white nougat called ''törökméz'', quince (''birsalma''), Turkish delight, Turkish coffee or rice dishes like pilaf, meat and vegetable dishes like the eggplant, used in eggplant salads and appetizers, stuffed peppers and stuffed cabbage called ''töltött káposzta''.
Following the Battle of Mohács and nearly 150 years of Ottoman rule, the region entered a new age of prosperity in the 18th and 19th centuries, and Budapest became a global city after its unification in 1873.
According to the 2011 census, 1,712,153 people (99.0%) speak Hungarian, of whom 1,692,815 people (97.9%) speak it as a first language, while 19,338 people (1.1%) speak it as a second language.
Today this area corresponds to the Óbuda district within Budapest.
The population density of District VII (Elisabethtown) is 30,989/km² (80,260/sq mi), which is the highest population density figure in Hungary and one of the highest in the world (for comparison the density in Manhattan is 25,846/km²).''
Art Nouveau in Hungary (''Szecesszió'' in Hungarian) is a blend of several architectural styles, with a focus on Hungary's specialities.
Pest lies on the flat terrain of the Great Plain while Buda is rather hilly.
The unemployment rate is far the lowest in Budapest within Hungary, it was 2.7%, besides the many thousands of employed foreign citizens.
Numerous landmarks are created in the last decade in Budapest, like the National Theatre, Palace of Arts, Rákóczi Bridge, Megyeri Bridge, Budapest Airport Sky Court among others, and millions of square meters of new office buildings and apartments.
The Buda hills consist mainly of limestone and dolomite, the water created speleothems, the most famous ones being the Pálvölgyi cave (total length 7200&nbsp;m) and the Szemlőhegyi cave (total length 2200&nbsp;m).
Budapest Liszt Ferenc handled around 250 scheduled flights daily in 2013, and an ever rising number of charters.
This uprising was an anti-Soviet revolt that lasted from 23 October until 11 November.
The 1906 novel ''The Paul Street Boys'', the 1937 novel ''Journey by Moonlight'', the 1957 book ''The Bridge at Andau'', the 1975 novel ''Fateless'', the 1977 novel ''The End of a Family Story'', the 1986 book ''Between the Woods and the Water'', the 1992 novel ''Under the Frog'', the 1987 novel ''The Door'', the 2002 novel ''Prague'', the 2003 book ''Budapeste'', the 2004 novel ''Ballad of the Whisky Robber'', the 2005 novels ''Parallel Stories'' and ''The Historian'', the 2012 novel ''Budapest Noir'' are set, amongst others, partly or entirely in Budapest.
An alternative explanation suggests that ''Buda'' derives from the Slavic word вода, ''voda'' ("water"), a translation of the Latin name Aquincum, which was the main Roman settlement in the region.
The re-established town became one of the centres of Renaissance humanist culture by the 15th century.
Budapest is packed with museums and galleries, and there are plenty of temporary exhibitions in the most unlikely of settings, particularly in summer.
The Hungarian Grand Prix in Formula One has been held at the Hungaroring just outside the city, which circuit has FIA Grade 1 license.
A good indicator of the city's potential for innovation and research also, is that the European Institute of Innovation and Technology chose Budapest for its headquarters, along with the UN, which Regional Representation for Central Europe office is in the city, responsible for UN operations in seven countries.
Saint Stephen's Basilica, where the Holy Right Hand of the founder of Hungary, King Saint Stephen is on display.
Temperatures often turn abruptly colder in late October.
The decisions of the Curia on uniform jurisdiction are binding for other courts.
The composition of the 33 seats in the Budapest General Assembly after the 2014 elections is in the table.
A lot of libraries have unique collections in Budapest, such as the National Széchenyi Library, which keeps historical relics from the age before the printing of books.
This amounts to about 34% of Hungary's population.
The Castle Hill, the River Danube embankments and the whole of Andrássy út have been officially recognized as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
In 1949, Hungary was declared a communist People's Republic (People's Republic of Hungary).
In the chronological order of architectural styles Budapest represents on the entire timeline.
The Turks constructed many fine bathing facilities within the city.
It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Large Hungarian multinational corporations headquartered in Budapest are listed on BSE, for instance the Fortune Global 500 firm MOL Group, the OTP Bank, FHB Bank, Gedeon Richter, Magyar Telekom, CIG Pannonia, Zwack Unicum and more.
Statue Park, a theme park with striking statues of the Communist era, is located just outside the main city and is accessible by public transport.
Another particularly strong industry in the capital city is biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry, these are also traditionally strong in Budapest, through domestic companies, as Egis, Gedeon Richter, Chinoin and through international biotechnology corporations, like Pfizer, Teva, Novartis, Sanofi, who are also has R&D and production division here.
