"Buenos aires" can be translated as "fair winds" or "good airs", but the first one was the meaning intended by the founders in the XVI century, by the use of the original name "Real de Nuestra Señora Santa María del Buen Ayre".
Construction activity in Buenos Aires has historically been among the most accurate indicators of national economic fortunes (''see table at right''), and since 2006 around  of construction has been authorized annually.
The short form "Buenos Aires" became the common usage during the 17th century.
Most are of Northern, Western, Central, and Eastern European Ashkenazi origin, primarily Swedish, Dutch, Polish, German, and Russian Jews, with a significant Sephardic minority, mostly made up of Syrian Jews and Lebanese Jews.
The financial and real-estate services sector is the largest, however, and contributes to 31% of the city's economy.
Most primary schools in the city still adhere to the traditional seven-year primary school, but kids can do grades 1–6 if their high schools lasts 6 years, such as ORT Argentina.
Buenos Aires architecture is characterized by its eclectic nature, with elements resembling Barcelona, Paris and Madrid.
in 1933, the first integral sound production in the country.
In the 2007 elections, Mauricio Macri of the Republican Proposal (PRO) party won the second-round of voting over Daniel Filmus of the Frente para la Victoria (FPV) party, taking office on 9 December 2007.
Other leading industries are automobile manufacturing, oil refining, metalworking, machine building and the production of textiles, chemicals, clothing and beverages.
The exchange rate today has hampered tourism and shopping in particular.
Tango music experienced a period of splendor during the 1940s, while in the 1960s and 1970s nuevo tango appeared, incorporating elements of classical and jazz music.
The first rugby union match in Argentina was played in 1873 in the Buenos Aires Cricket Club Ground, located in Palermo neighbourhood, where the Galileo Galilei planetarium is located today.
Most days peak reach  and drop to  at night.
The Buenos Aires Metropolitan Police is the police force under the authority of the Autonomous City (or Federal District) of Buenos Aires.
Villas miserias range from small groups of precarious houses to larger, more organised communities with thousands of residents.
It is the most visited city in South America (ahead of Rio de Janeiro) and the second most visited city of Latin America (behind Mexico City).
Cacciatore likewise had financial district streets (roughly one square km in area) closed to private cars during daytime.
The act of writing serious and artistics songs in Spanish was unprecedented, and established a rock identity in the country.
Other revenues include user fees, fines and gambling duties.
The city is home to hundreds of bookstores, public libraries and cultural associations (it is sometimes called "the city of books"), as well as the largest concentration of active theatres in Latin America.
Despite its short urban history, Buenos Aires has an abundant literary production; its mythical-literary network "has grown at the same rate at which the streets of the city earned its shores to the pampas and buildings stretched its shadow on the curb."
Heat waves from Brazil can push temperatures above , yet the city is subject to cold fronts that bring short periods of pleasant weather and crisp nights.
In addition to the wealth generated by the Buenos Aires Customs and the fertile pampas, railroad development in the second half of the 19th century increased the economic power of Buenos Aires as raw materials flowed into its factories.
The Río de la Plata is known for being the birthplace of tango, which is considered an emblem of Buenos Aires.
Korean Immigration occurred after the division of Korea; they mainly settled in Flores and Once.
Opened in 1913, it is the oldest underground system in the Southern Hemisphere and oldest in the Spanish-speaking world.
The movement was dubbed "progressive music" by the specialized press, and included Almendra, Los Gatos and Manal.
More than 2.2&nbsp;million people per year travel between Argentina and Uruguay with Buquebus.
Other popular institutions are the Buenos Aires Museum of Modern Art, the Quinquela Martín Museum, the Evita Museum, the Fernández Blanco Museum, the José Hernández Museum, and the Palais de Glace, among others.
A recent phenomenon is the appearance of "cumbia cheta" (''cheto'' meaning "posh"), a derivative performed and listened by the middle and upper class, which distances itself from the political protest of the 1990s and 2000s.
In 1908 many creeks were channelled and rectified, as floods were damaging the city's infrastructure.
* Investigations and Research
The villas draw people from several backgrounds.
The PreMetro or Line E2 is a  light rail line that connects with Underground Line E at Plaza de los Virreyes station and runs to General Savio and Centro Cívico.
Murals and graffiti are so common that they are considered "an everyday occurrence," and have become part of the urban landscape of ''barrios'' such as Palermo, Urquiza, Coghlan and San Telmo.
Sensing these feelings, Charles III of Spain progressively eased the trade restrictions and finally declared Buenos Aires an open port in the late 18th century.
In 1806 the British successfully invaded Buenos Aires, but an army from Montevideo led by Santiago de Liniers defeated them.
This is because in the last 150 years the city, and the country in general, has been a major recipient of millions of immigrants from all over the world, making it a melting pot where several ethnic groups live together and being considered as one of the most diverse cities in Latin America.
The city's resident labor force of 1.2&nbsp;million in 2001 was mostly employed in the services sector, particularly social services (25%), commerce and tourism (20%) and business and financial services (17%); despite the city's role as Argentina's capital, public administration employed only 6%.
Strongly influenced by European culture, Buenos Aires is sometimes referred to as the "Paris of South America".
The city also plays host to musical festivals, some of the largest of which are Quilmes Rock, Creamfields BA, Ultra Music Festival (Buenos Aires) and the Buenos Aires Jazz Festival.
Buenos Aires is based on a square, rectangular grid pattern, save for natural barriers or the relatively rare developments explicitly designed otherwise (notably, the neighbourhood of Parque Chas).
Nevertheless, in Buenos Aires, secondary education consists of 5 years, called from 1st year to 5th year, as opposed to primary education's 1st to 7th grade.
A second (and permanent) settlement was established in 11 June 1580 by Juan de Garay, who arrived by sailing down the Paraná River from Asunción (now the capital of Paraguay).
Buenos Aires is represented in the Argentine Senate by three senators (, Federico Pinedo, Marta Varela and Pino Solanas).
Argentina has been the home of world champions in professional boxing.
However, by 1810 it would be those same armies who would support a new revolutionary attempt, successfully removing the new viceroy Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros.
Rain can be expected at any time of year and hailstorms are not unusual.
The Buenos Aires Underground (locally known as ''subte'', from ''"subterráneo"'' meaning underground or subway), is a high-yield system providing access to various parts of the city.
These included Manuel Antín, Lautaro Murúa and René Mugica, among others.
The Colón Theater became one of the world's top opera venues, and the city became the regional capital of radio, television, cinema, and theatre.
Buenos Aires has also become "a Latin American gay-tourism."
However, not all of its street art concerns politics, it is also used as a symbol of democracy and freedom of expression.
Buenos Aires bid to host the 2018 Summer Youth Olympics.
The last two do have a specific orientation.
Spring (September to middle December) and autumn (middle March to middle June) are generally mild and volatile, with averages temperatures of around  and frequent thunderstorms, especially during the spring.
The second round was held on 19 July 2015 and Larreta obtained 51.6% of the vote, followed closely by Lousteau with 48.4%, thus PRO won the elections for a third term with Larreta as mayor and Diego Santilli as deputy.
Buenos Aires also attracted migrants from Argentina's provinces and neighboring countries.
Lunfardo employs humorous tricks such as inverting the syllables within a word (vesre).
Fares remain relatively cheap, although the city government raised fares by over 125% in January 2012.
Located in Buenos Aires is the Pablo Ducrós Hicken Museum of Cinema, the only one in the country dedicated to Argentine cinema and a pioneer of its kind in Latin America.
The city government claims the new force is based on the model of the British London Metropolitan Police and the New York Police Department.
The city's turbulent modern political history has "bred an intense sense of expression in ''porteños''," and urban art has been used to depict these stories and as a means of protest.
A new generation of musicians from the legendary bar "la Cueva" in Avenida Pueyrredón, were trying to reflect an everyday reality absent in popular music since tango.
The city has at least 734 bookstores, more per person than any other city in the world.
Recoleta, on the other hand, is the quintessential neighbourhood for exclusive and upscale fashion houses.
Relative humidity is 64–70% in the summer, so the heat index is higher than the true air temperature.
In the city, 15,764 people identified themselves as Afro-Argentine in the 2010 Census.
Other popular sports in Buenos Aires are golf, basketball, rugby and field hockey.
They started the dry cleaning business in Argentina, an activity that is considered idiosyncratic to the Japanese immigrants in Buenos Aires.
On 17 July 2010, in the midst of another cold winter, flurries struck the southern reaches of Buenos Aires, but not the central parts as occurred in 2007 or 1918.
The government vowed to put the law in effect gradually, starting in 2007.
Southerly winds may keep temperatures below  for a few days, whereas northerly winds may bring temperatures above  for a few days; these variations are normal.
''The Guardian'' ranked it second in its list of "The world's 10 best bookshops" in 2008.
One of the most major projects under way is the electrification of the remaining segments of the Roca Line – the most widely used in the network – and also moving the entire section of the Sarmiento Line which runs through the centre of the city underground to allow for better frequencies on the line and reduce congestion above ground.
The most important exponent of the genre is Carlos Gardel, followed by Aníbal Troilo; other important composers include Alfredo Gobbi, Ástor Piazzolla, Osvaldo Pugliese, Mariano Mores, Juan D'Arienzo and Juan Carlos Cobián.
Since 2015, the Buenos Aires International Fashion Film Festival Buenos Aires (BAIFFF) takes place, sponsored by the city and Mercedes-Benz.
The police are headed by a Chief and a Deputy Chief.
The building was equipped with 9 elevators, plus a 20-metre high lobby hall with paintings in the ceiling and Latin phrases embossed in golden bronze letters.
The hill was known to them as ''Buen Ayre'' (or "Bonaria" in Sardinian language), as it was free of the foul smell prevalent in the old city (the castle area), which is adjacent to swampland.
A phonetic study conducted by the Laboratory for Sensory Investigations of CONICET and the University of Toronto showed that the prosody of ''porteño'' is closer to the Neapolitan language of Italy than to any other spoken language.
Public-health physicians and politicians typically blamed both the poor themselves and their ramshackle tenement houses (conventillos) for the spread of the dreaded disease.
The city's principal avenues include the -wide July 9 Avenue, the over--long Rivadavia Avenue, and Corrientes Avenue, the main thoroughfare of culture and entertainment.
Buenos Aires has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen ''Cfa''), with very hot and humid summers and mild winters.
Most schools don't require students to choose their orientation, as they study the basic such as maths, biology, art, history and technology, but there are schools that do, whether they are orientated to a certain profession or they have orientations to choose from when they reach a specific year.
The Port of Buenos Aires handles over 11 million revenue tons annually, and Dock Sud, just south of the city proper, handles another 17 million metric tons.
Legally, the city has less autonomy than the Provinces.
During the British invasions of the Río de la Plata, British forces attacked Buenos Aires twice.
From its earliest days, Buenos Aires depended primarily on trade.
An expansion program is underway to extend existing lines into the outer neighborhoods and add a new north-south line.
An optimal amount would sit between 10 and  per person.
Most avenues running into and out of the city centre are one-way and feature six or more lanes, with computer-controlled green waves to speed up traffic outside of peak times.
The city hosts the National Library of the Argentine Republic, the largest library in the country.
Because of its characteristics, cumbia villera has been compared to gangsta rap, protest song, punk rock and narcocorrido, among other styles.
The region was formerly crossed by different creeks and lagoons, some of which were refilled and others tubed.
Japanese immigrants are mostly from the Okinawa Prefecture.
Radio-link companies provide reliable and safe service; many such companies provide incentives for frequent users.
During the mid-1960s, Buenos Aires was also the birthplace of Argentine rock, one of the most important non-English language forms of this music in the world.
Buenos Aires is the site of the Teatro Colón, an internationally rated opera house.
However, Buenos Aires hosted the first Pan American Games (1951) and was also host city to several World Championship events: the 1950 and 1990 Basketball World Championships, the 1982 and 2002 Men's Volleyball World Championships and, most remembered, the 1978 FIFA World Cup, won by Argentina on 25 June 1978, when it defeated the Netherlands at the Estadio Monumental 3–1.
Elections use the D'Hondt method of proportional representation.
Diego Maradona, born in Lanús Partido (county) south of Buenos Aires, is widely hailed as one of the greatest football players of all time.
Health conditions in poor areas were negative, with high rates of tuberculosis.
The neighbourhood of Palermo, mainly the area known as Soho, is where the latest fashion and design trends are presented.
Attempts at renovation took place during the second half of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, when European influences penetrated into the country, reflected by several buildings of Buenos Aires such as the Iglesia Santa Felicitas by Ernesto Bunge; the Palace of Justice, the National Congress, all of them by Vittorio Meano, and the Teatro Colón, by Francesco Tamburini and Vittorio Meano.
Taxi drivers are known for trying to take advantage of tourists.
The newly founded Argentina Sono Film released ''¡Tango!''
An important factor was Argentina's 2001 financial crisis, with the subsequent favorable exchange rate attracting more foreign tourists.
Buenos Aires also hosts various other festivals and film cycles, like the Buenos Aires Rojo Sangre, devoted to horror.
Shanty towns (''villas miseria'') started growing around the city's industrial areas during the 1930s, leading to pervasive social problems and social contrasts with the largely upwardly mobile Buenos Aires population.
During most of the 17th and 18th centuries, Spanish ships were menaced by pirates, so they developed a complex system where ships with military protection were dispatched to Central America, cross the land, from there to Lima, Peru and from it to the inner cities of the viceroyalty.
The silent marches of their mothers (Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo) are a well-known image of Argentines suffering during those times.
People ignored public-health campaigns to limit the spread of contagious diseases, such as the prohibition of spitting on the streets, the strict guidelines to care for infants and young children, and quarantines that separated families from ill loved ones.
Colectivos in Buenos Aires do not have a fixed timetable, but run from four to several per hour, depending on the bus line and time of the day.
Winters are temperate, though suburban areas often experience frost from May to August, as opposed to downtown Buenos Aires, which experiences the phenomenon only some times per season.
Buenos Aires maintains low debt levels and its service requires less than 3% of the budget.
It is common as well to refer to it as "B.A."
It has a world-famous zoo and botanical garden, a large number of landscaped parks and squares, as well as churches and places of worship of many denominations, many of which are architecturally noteworthy.
Resident aliens enjoy this same right, with its corresponding obligations, on equal terms with Argentine citizens registered in the district, under the terms established by law''."
Located in mostly central areas, there are 31 rental stations throughout the city providing over 850 bicycles to be picked up and dropped off at any station within an hour.
Buenos Aires' quality of life was ranked 81st in the world and one of the best in Latin America in 2012, with its per capita income among the three highest in the region.
In the brief period of British rule, the viceroy Rafael Sobremonte managed to escape to Córdoba and designated this city as capital.
The city is home to the largest mosque in South America.
Argentines' love for horses can be experienced in several ways: horse racing at the ''Hipódromo Argentino de Palermo'' racetrack, polo in the ''Campo Argentino de Polo'' (located just across Libertador Avenue from the ''Hipódromo''), and pato, a kind of basketball played on horseback that was declared the national game in 1953.
But Eduardo Madero, in 1882 after conducting extensive research in Spanish archives, ultimately concluded that the name was indeed closely linked with the devotion of the sailors to Our Lady of Buen Ayre.
In September 2013, the city hosted the 125th IOC Session, Tokyo was elected the host city of the 2020 Summer Olympics and Thomas Bach was new IOC President.
In a survey by the travel and tourism publication Travel + Leisure Magazine in 2008, travellers voted Buenos Aires the second most desirable city to visit after Florence, Italy.
There are Protestant, Orthodox Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormon, and Buddhist minorities.
LGBT tourism remains a sector in the city, and points to its nightlife, cultural and artistic diversity, and Argentina's 2010 legalization of same-sex marriage (the first country in Latin America).
The Greater Buenos Aires conurbation, which also includes several Buenos Aires Province districts, constitutes the fourth-most populous metropolitan area in the Americas, with a population of around seventeen million.
At that time, the country was under a military dictatorship after the coup d'état known as Argentine Revolution.
With inexpensive tickets and extensive routes, usually no further than four blocks from commuters' residences, the colectivo is the most popular mode of transport around the city.
July is the coolest month, with an average temperature of .
Other major clubs include San Lorenzo de Almagro, Club Atlético Huracán, Vélez Sársfield, Asociación Atlética Argentinos Juniors and Club Ferro Carril Oeste.
It originated during the late 1990s, in the midst of an economic and social decline in Argentina.
New tourist circuits have recently evolved, devoted to famous Argentines such as Carlos Gardel, Eva Perón or Jorge Luis Borges.
On 17 March 1992 a bomb exploded in the Israeli Embassy, killing 29 and injuring 242.
There are a several subdivisions of these districts, some with a long history and others that are the product of a real estate invention.
National designers display their collections annually at the Buenos Aires Fashion Week (BAFWEEK) and related events.
It is ranked 22nd in the 2010 ranking of global cities by the American journal ''Foreign Policy'', in conjunction with consulting firm A.T. Kearney and the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.
The population density in Buenos Aires proper was 13,680 inhabitants per square kilometer (34,800 per mi2), but only about 2,400 per km2 (6,100 per mi2) in the suburbs.
Polimodal is usually 3 years of schooling, although some schools have a fourth year.
Secondary education in Argentina is called ''Polimodal'' ("polymodal", that is, having multiple modes), since it allows the student to choose his/her orientation.
Before entering the first year of polimodal, students choose an orientation, among these five: ''Humanities and Social Sciences'', ''Economics and Management of Organizations'','' Art and Design'', ''Health and Sport'' and ''Biology and Natural Sciences''.
Omar Narvaez, Lucas Matthysse, Carolina Duer, and Marcos Maidana are five modern-day world champions as well.
During the 1930s and the 1940s (commonly referred as the "Golden Age" of Argentine ciema), many films revolved around the city of Buenos Aires and tango culture, reflected in titles such as ''La vida es un tango'', ''El alma del bandoneón'', ''Adiós Buenos Aires'', ''El Cantor de Buenos Aires'' and ''Buenos Aires canta''.
Many Spanish immigrants were from Galicia, and Spaniards are still generically referred to in Argentina as ''gallegos'' (Galicians).
Buenos Aires is a multicultural city, being home to multiple ethnic and religious groups.
The city received this title once again in 2007.
If these two projects are completed, then the Belgrano Norte Line would be the only diesel line to run through the city.
Relative humidity averages in the upper 70s%, which means the city is noted for its moderate to heavy fogs during autumn and winter.
The government was held first by two Juntas of many members, then by two triumvirates, and finally by a unipersonal office, the Supreme Director.
* Scientific and Technical
Amongst the 186,640 persons who are of indigenous origin, 21.2% are Guaraní, 19% are Toba, 11.3% are Mapuche, 10.5% are Quechua and 7.6% are Diaguita.
The Article 61 of the 1996 Constitution of the City of Buenos Aires states that "''Suffrage is free, equal, secret, universal, compulsory and non-accumulative.
The number of cultural festivals with more than 10 sites and 5 years of existence also places the city as 2nd worldwide, after Edinburgh.
In the , 2.1% of the population or 61,876 persons declared to be Amerindian or first-generation descendants of Amerindians in Buenos Aires (not including the 24 adjacent Partidos that make up Greater Buenos Aires).
Buenos Aires managed to endure the whole Spanish American wars of independence without falling again under royalist rule.
In the early 20th century, Argentina absorbed millions of immigrants, many of them Italians, who spoke mostly in their local dialects (mainly Neapolitan, Sicilian and Genoese).
A second construction boom from 1945 to 1980 reshaped downtown and much of the city.
Historically, Buenos Aires has been Argentina's main venue for liberal, free-trade and foreign ideas, while many of the provinces, especially to the north-west, advocated a more nationalistic and Catholic approach to political and social issues.
The city is home to the Argentine Super Rugby franchise, the Jaguares.
Most days see temperatures in the  with nights between .
Buenos Aires has a thriving arts culture, with "a huge inventory of museums, ranging from obscure to world-class."
Primary education comprise grades 1–7.
The city was visited by Pope John Paul II twice: in 1982, and a second visit in 1987, which gathered some of the largest crowds in the city's history.
The capture of Porto Bello by British forces also fueled the need to foster commerce via the Atlantic route, to the detriment of Lima-based trade.
These suburban trains operate between 4&nbsp;am and 1&nbsp;am.
During the period of democracy between 1973 and 1975, the local cinema experienced critical and commercial success, with titles including ''Juan Moreira'' (1973), ''La Patagonia rebelde'' (1974), ''La Raulito'' (1975), and ''La tregua'' (1974) - which became the first Argentine film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.
Buenos Aires is the financial, industrial, and commercial hub of Argentina.
In 1912 the Basilica del Santisimo Sacramento was opened to the public.
With extremely high-grade decorations in its interior, the magnificent Mutin-Cavaillé coll organ (the biggest ever installed in an Argentine church with more than four-thousand tubes and four manuals) presided the nave.
The abundance of places for urban artists to create their work, and the relatively lax rules for street art, have attracted international artists such as Blu, Jef Aérosol, Aryz, ROA, and Ron English.
Italian music was very influential during the 19th century and the early 20th century, in part because of immigration, but operas and salon music were also composed by Argentines, including Francisco Hargreaves and Juan Gutiérrez.
The city's services sector is diversified and well-developed by international standards, and accounts for 76% of its economy (compared to 59% for all of Argentina's).
This was South America's tallest building at the time, and was the first Argentine skyscraper built with concrete (1919–1923).
Most East Asian immigration in Buenos Aires comes from China.
The Buenos Aires Human Development Index (0.879 in 2015) is likewise high by international standards.
Other well-known events include the Buenos Aires Jazz Festival, Personal Fest, Quilmes Rock and Pepsi Music.
Nearly 300 hotels and another 300 hostels and bed & breakfasts are licensed for Tourism in Buenos Aires, and nearly half the rooms available were in four-star establishments or higher.
Jorge Telerman, who had been the acting mayor, was invested with the office.
The economy in the city proper alone, measured by Gross Domestic Product (adjusted for purchasing power), totaled US$409.8&nbsp;billion (US$38,900 per capita) in 2016 and amounts to nearly a quarter of Argentina's as a whole.
The "''sub-barrio''" of Palermo Viejo is also a popular port of call for fashion in the city.
Juan Manuel Fangio won five Formula One World Driver's Championships, and was only outstripped by Michael Schumacher, with seven Championships.
Daily ridership on weekdays is 1.7&nbsp;million and on the increase.
Important Lebanese, Georgians, Syrian and Armenian communities have had a significant presence in commerce and civic life since the beginning of the 20th century.
Among the most important creeks are Maldonado, Vega, Medrano, Cildañez and White.
The construction of skyscrapers proliferated in Buenos Aires until the 1950s.
During the second half of the decade, films of social protest were presented in clandestine exhibitions, the work of Grupo Cine Liberación and Grupo Cine de la Base, who advocated what they called "Third Cinema".
On average it has below  of green space per person, ten times less than New York, seven times less than Madrid and five times less than Paris.
These high schools are ILSE, CNBA, Escuela Superior de Comercio Carlos Pellegrini and Escuela de Educación Técnica Profesional en Producción Agropecuaria y Agroalimentaria (School of Professional Technique Education in Agricultural and Agri-food Production).
Buenos Aires will host the 2018 Summer Youth Olympics and the 2018 G20 summit.
The warmest month is January, with a daily average of .
The city devotes 26% of its budget to education, 22% for health, 17% for public services and infrastructure, 16% for social welfare and culture, 12% in administrative costs and 4% for law enforcement.
His predecessor, Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio, was elected to the Papacy as Pope Francis on 13 March 2013.
, the city has constructed  of protected bicycle lanes and has plans to construct another .
The city considers itself the Tango World Capital, and as such hosts many related events, the most important being an annual festival and world tournament.
A nationalist trend that drew from Argentine traditions, literature and folk music was an important force during the 19th century, including composers Alberto Williams, Julián Aguirre, Arturo Berutti and Felipe Boero.
The official inauguration took place on 27 August 1987.
