In his spacious ranch house, he entertained notable guests from Europe and America.
The finale was typically a portrayal of an Indian attack on a settler's cabin.
Later he served as a civilian scout for the US Army during the Indian Wars.
But other family members joined the people of Cody to say he should be buried in the town he founded.
On March 8, 1890, a competition took place.
He was baptized in the Catholic Church the day before his death by Father Christopher Walsh, of the Denver Cathedral.
He envisioned a growing number of tourists coming to Cody on the recently opened Burlington rail line.
In 1948 the Cody chapter of the American Legion offered a reward for the return of the body, so the Denver chapter mounted a guard over the grave until a deeper shaft could be blasted into the rock.
Comstock, part Cheyenne and a noted hunter, scout, and interpreter, used a fast-shooting Henry repeating rifle, while Cody competed with a larger-caliber Springfield Model 1866, which he called Lucretia Borgia, after the notorious beautiful, ruthless Italian noblewoman, the subject of a popular contemporary Victor Hugo play of the same name.
His antislavery speech so angered the crowd that they threatened to kill him if he didn't step down.
A man jumped up and stabbed him twice with a Bowie knife.
''Buffalo Bill’s Wild West'' returned to Europe in May 1889 as part of the Exposition Universelle in Paris, an event that commemorated the 100th anniversary of the Storming of the Bastille and featured the debut of the Eiffel Tower.
In his shows, the Indians were usually depicted attacking stagecoaches and wagon trains and were driven off by cowboys and soldiers.
Cody died on January 10, 1917, surrounded by family and friends at his sister's house, in Denver.
As a frontier scout, Cody respected Native Americans and supported their civil rights.
Royalty from all over Europe attended, including the future Kaiser Wilhelm II and the future King George V. These royal encounters provided ''Buffalo Bill’s Wild West'' an endorsement and publicity that ensured its success.
They and a third child are buried in Mount Hope Cemetery, in Rochester.
Buffalo Bill has been portrayed in many literary, musical, and theatrical works, movies, and television shows, especially during the 1950s and 1960s, when Westerns were most popular.
In 1893, Cody changed the title to ''Buffalo Bill's Wild West and Congress of Rough Riders of the World''.
The tour moved to the South of France and Barcelona, Spain, then on to Italy.
In 1847 the couple moved to Ontario, having their son baptized in 1847, as William Cody, at the Dixie Union Chapel in Peel County (present-day Peel Region, of which Mississauga is part), not far from the farm of his father's family.
Mark Twain commented, "It is often said on the other side of the water that none of the exhibitions which we send to England are purely and distinctly American.
The Queen enjoyed the show and meeting the performers, setting the stage for another command performance on June 20, 1887, for her Jubilee guests.
This furthered Cody's determination to get Frederici to agree to a "quiet legal separation," in order to avoid "war and publicity."
Cody is purported to have killed 4,282 American bison (commonly known as buffalo) in eighteen months in 1867 and 1868.
In Lewis and Clark County, Montana, 1867 records show that there were more divorces in that year than marriages.
In 1895, Cody was instrumental in the founding of the town of Cody, the seat of Park County, in northwestern Wyoming.
Cody first passed through the region in the 1870s.
With his show, Cody traveled throughout the United States and Europe and made many contacts.
In January 1872, Cody was a scout for the highly publicized hunting expedition of the Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich of Russia.
Railroads crossed the plains, barbed wire and other types of fences divided the land for farmers and ranchers, and the once-threatening Indian tribes were confined to reservations.
The Shoshone Project became one of the first federal water development projects undertaken by the newly formed Reclamation Service, later known as the Bureau of Reclamation.
After the witnesses had testified, Cody changed his mind about the divorce.
They lived in Ontario for several years.
On horseback he would ride up and down the length of a wagon train and deliver messages between the drivers and workmen.
Cody and his associates were unable to raise sufficient capital to complete their plan.
Buffalo Bill was disappointed that the condition of the Colosseum did not allow it to be a venue; however, at Verona, the ''Wild West'' did perform in the ancient Roman amphitheater.
In 1869, Cody met Ned Buntline, who later published a story based on Cody's adventures (largely invented by the writer) in Street and Smith's New York Weekly and then published a highly successful novel, ''Buffalo Bill, King of the Bordermen''.
However, in 1989 the Army Board for Correction of Military Records ruled that Cody and the four other scouts were nonetheless deserving of the honor and restored their names to the Medal of Honor roll.
He received a full Masonic funeral.
He left his burial arrangements to his wife.
Cody decided to continue pursuing the divorce, adding to his complaint that Frederici would not sign mortgages and that she had subjected him to "extreme cruelty" in blaming him for the death of Arta.
Visitors would see main events, feats of skill, staged races, and sideshows.
Audiences were enthusiastic about seeing a piece of the American West.
'Little Billy's killed an Indian all by himself!'
Some examples are listed below.
She was a descendant of Josiah Bunting, a Quaker who had settled in Pennsylvania.
His remains were exhumed in March 1999 and transported to the Rosebud Indian Reservation, in South Dakota, by his grandchildren Moses and Lucy Eagle Star II.
He received his second and third degrees on April 2, 1870, and January 10, 1871, respectively.
The freight train's engineer had thought that the entire show train had passed, not realizing it was three units, and returned to the tracks; 110 horses were killed in the crash or had to be killed later, including Old Pap and Old Eagle.
His funeral service was held at the Elks Lodge Hall in Denver.
*Paul Eagle Star (1864 – August 24, 1891), of the Brulé Lakota band, died in Sheffield, of tetanus and complications from injuries caused when his horse fell on him, breaking his leg.
This rhetoric became pushed more and more in his explanations for marriage as the relationship between him and his wife began to decline.
They had four children.
Turks, gauchos, Arabs, Mongols and Georgians displayed their distinctive horses and colorful costumes.
It contained a number of errors, in part because it was completed after Cody's death in January 1917.
The ''butteri'' easily won the competition.
Rively, the store's owner, rushed Cody to get treatment, but he never fully recovered from his injuries.
It vexed the promoters of the fair, who had rejected his request to participate..
called McCarthy, as he hurried back.
Cody claimed to have had many other jobs, including trapper, bullwhacker, "Fifty-Niner" in Colorado, Pony Express rider in 1860, wagonmaster, stagecoach driver, and a hotel manager, but historians have had difficulty documenting them.
Bison herds, which had once numbered in the millions, were threatened with extinction.
He was one of five scouts whose medals were rescinded in 1917.
She claimed that she had never attempted to poison him and that she wished to remain married.
Cody returned to Paris to continue with the ''Wild West'' show and attempted to maintain a hospitable, but distant, relationship with his wife.
Cody received the nickname "Buffalo Bill" after the American Civil War, when he had a contract to supply Kansas Pacific Railroad workers with buffalo meat.
She claimed that Frederici acted inhospitably towards Cody's guests and that, when Cody was not at the ranch, she would "feed the men too much and talk in a violent manner about Cody and his alleged sweethearts...and that she was seen putting something into his coffee."
He was buried in Brompton Cemetery.
With his profits, Cody purchased a 4,000-acre (16-km²) ranch near North Platte, Nebraska, in 1886.
Another autobiography, ''The Great West That Was: "Buffalo Bill's" Life Story'', was serialized in ''Hearst's International Magazine'' from August 1916 to July 1917. and ghostwritten by James J. Montague.
During the American Civil War, he served the Union from 1863 to the end of the war in 1865.
In 1908, Pawnee Bill and Buffalo Bill joined forces and created the ''Two Bills'' show.
He was befriended by the mayor and state representative, a frontier scout, rancher, and hunter named Charles "Buffalo" Jones.
Cody hoped to keep the divorce quiet, so as to not disrupt his show or his stage persona, but Frederici had other ideas.
Cody's ''Autobiography'' barely mentioned the courtship to Frederici but declared, "I now adored her above any other young lady I had ever seen."
In November 1902, Cody opened the Irma Hotel, named after his daughter.
He wore this war-bonnet of the Sioux, at his shoulder was a rifle pointed at someone in the river-bottom 30 feet 9 meters below; in another second he would drop one of my friends.
Congress stated that only military personnel could receive the award.
Annie Oakley and her husband, Frank Butler, were sharpshooters, together with the likes of Gabriel Dumont and Lillian Smith.
When it was completed in 1910, it was the tallest dam in the world.
Not only did townspeople feel the need to take sides in the divorce, but headlines rang out with information about Cody's alleged infidelities or Federici's excesses.
Part of the time, he scouted for Indians and fought in 16 battles; at other times, he hunted and killed bison to supply the Army and the Kansas Pacific Railroad.
During his return trip he caught a respiratory infection which, compounded by the lingering effects of his stabbing and complications from kidney disease, led to his death in April 1857.
There is no evidence to indicate Buffalo Bill was raised as a Quaker.
He stayed, for instance, in Garden City, Kansas, in the presidential suite of the former Windsor Hotel.
Cody published his autobiography, ''The Life and Adventures of Buffalo Bill'', in 1879.
''Buffalo Bill’s Wild West'' closed its successful London run in October 1887 after more than 300 performances, with more than 2.5 million tickets sold.
Cody established the TE Ranch, located on the south fork of the Shoshone River about thirty-five miles from Cody.
In 1863, at age 17, he enlisted as a teamster with the rank of private in Company H, 7th Kansas Cavalry, and served until discharged in 1865.
If she gets cranky, just laugh at it, she can't help it."
With this weighing heavily on him, Cody sent a telegram to Frederici hoping to put aside "personal differences" for the funeral.
Even though he was an Army veteran he had been awarded the medal for service as a civilian scout.
He described them as "the former foe, present friend, the American" and once said that "every Indian outbreak that I have ever known has resulted from broken promises and broken treaties by the government."
At the age of 14, in 1860, Cody was struck by gold fever, with news of gold at Fort Collins, Colorado, and the Holcomb Valley Gold Rush in California, but on his way to the gold fields, he met an agent for the Pony Express.
In Kansas, the family was frequently persecuted by pro-slavery supporters.
Part of the appeal of the frontier was that "a man cannot keep his wife here."
The show was said to end with a re-enactment of Custer's Last Stand, in which Cody portrayed General Custer, but this is more legend than fact.
The governor of Wyoming, John B. Kendrick, a friend of Cody's, led the funeral procession to the cemetery.
One of the most colorful figures of the American Old West, Buffalo Bill started performing in shows that displayed cowboy themes and episodes from the frontier and Indian Wars.
After Congolese independence some of the "Bills" went on to careers in the music industry.
The couple met when Cody had traveled to St. Louis under his command during the Civil War.
Cody suggested in letters and in his autobiography that Frederici had pestered him into marriage, but he was aware that it was "very smart to be engaged."
Cody was active in the concordant bodies of Freemasonry, the fraternal organization, having been initiated in Platte Valley Lodge No.
Desertion was the main grounds for divorce, but in some jurisdictions, such as Kansas, divorce could be granted if a spouse was "intolerable."
The Victorian ideal of marriage did not allow for divorce in any case, but the move westward forced a change in the expectations of husbands and wives and the ability to remain married.
A group of Buffalo Bill's men challenged nine ''butteri'', led by Augusto Imperiali, at Prati di Castello neighbourhood  in Rome.
His father, Isaac Cody, was born on September 5, 1811, in Toronto Township, Upper Canada, now part of Mississauga, Ontario, directly west of Toronto.
When the trial proceeded a year later, in 1905, both their tempers were still hot.
He was invited to speak at Rively's store, a local trading post where pro-slavery men often held meetings.
The press picked up on the story immediately, creating a battle between Cody and Frederici's teams of lawyers, both of which seemed to be the better authority on Nebraska divorce law.
*Long Wolf (1833 – June 11, 1892), of the Oglala Lakota band, died of pneumonia and was buried in Brompton Cemetery.
''Buffalo Bill’s Wild West'' returned to Europe in December 1902 with a fourteen-week run in London, capped by a visit from King Edward VII and the future King George V. The ''Wild West'' traveled throughout Great Britain in a tour in 1902 and 1903 and a tour in 1904, performing in nearly every city large enough to support it.
Today the Old Trail Town museum is at the center of the community and commemorates the traditions of Western life.
In 1897 and 1899 Cody and his associates acquired from the State of Wyoming the right to take water from the Shoshone River to irrigate about  of land in the Big Horn Basin.
The battle in court continued, with testimony from three witnesses, Mary Hoover, George Hoover and M.&nbsp;E. Vroman.
Almost three decades after its construction, the name of the dam and reservoir was changed to Buffalo Bill Dam by an act of Congress.
Cody mentions in his autobiography that he was "embarrassed by the throng of beautiful ladies" who surrounded him both in the cast and in the audiences, and this trend continued as he became involved with more and more actresses who were not afraid to show their attraction to him in front of an audience.
Cody would ride in with an entourage of cowboys to defend a settler and his family.
The ''Wild West'' brought an exotic foreign world to life for its European audiences, allowing a last glimpse at the fading American frontier.
He may have fabricated some for publicity.
The incident put the show out of business for a while, and this disruption may have led to its eventual demise.
She said that he had always said he wanted to be buried on Lookout Mountain, which was corroborated by their daughter Irma, Cody's sisters, and family friends.
Buffalo Bill had met some Italian ''butteri'' (a less-well-known sort of Italian equivalent of cowboys) and said his men were more skilled at roping calves and performing other similar actions.
He eventually held around 8,000 acres (32&nbsp;km²) of private land for grazing operations and ran about 1,000 head of cattle.
He founded ''Buffalo Bill's Wild West'' in 1883, taking his large company on tours in the United States and, beginning in 1887, in Great Britain and Europe.
Bill, despite his youth and being ill at the time, rode 30&nbsp;miles&nbsp;(48&nbsp;km) to warn his father.
That show was foreclosed on when it was playing in Denver, Colorado.
Movies about Cody inspired a youth subculture in the Belgian Congo in the 1950s, with young men and women dressing like him and forming neighborhood gangs.
Another celebrity appearing on the show was Calamity Jane, as a storyteller as of 1893.
The Scout's Rest Ranch included an eighteen-room mansion and a large barn for winter storage of the show's livestock.
He began working with a freight caravan that delivered supplies to Fort Laramie, in present-day Wyoming.
Two died young, while the family was living in Rochester, New York.
Other witnesses mentioned Cody's comment that in order to handle his wife he had to "get drunk and stay drunk."
Early in 1903 they joined with the Wyoming Board of Land Commissioners in urging the federal government to step in and help with irrigation in the valley.
The show's 1892 tour was confined to Great Britain; it featured another command performance for Queen Victoria.
He was so impressed by the development possibilities from irrigation, rich soil, grand scenery, hunting, and proximity to Yellowstone Park that he returned in the mid-1890s to start a town.
Cody explained that while his formidable opponent, Comstock, chased after his buffalo, engaging from the rear of the herd and leaving a trail of killed buffalo "scattered over a distance of three miles", Cody—likening his strategy to a billiards player "nursing" his billiard balls during "a big run"—first rode his horse to the front of the herd to target the leaders, forcing the followers to one side, eventually causing them to circle and create an easy target, and dropping them close together.
Cody married Louisa Frederici in 1866, just a few days after his twentieth birthday.
To accommodate travelers, Cody completed construction of the Wapiti Inn and Pahaska Tepee in 1905 along Cody Road  with the assistance of the artist and rancher Abraham Archibald Anderson.
The Prince of Wales, later King Edward VII, requested a private preview of the ''Wild West'' performance; he was impressed enough to arrange a command performance for Queen Victoria.
Cody's two main allegations against his wife were that she attempted to poison him on multiple occasions (this allegation was later proved false) and that she made living in North Platte "unbearable and intolerable" for Cody and his guests.
:Presently the moon rose, dead ahead of me; and painted boldly across its face was the figure of an Indian.
He operated a dude ranch, pack-horse camping trips, and big-game hunting business at and from the TE Ranch.
Wyoming's coal, oil and natural gas were beginning to be exploited toward the end of his life.
She did recover and continued performing later.
The town was incorporated in 1901.
He became a Knight Templar in 1889 and received his 32nd degree in the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry in 1894.
He employed many Native Americans, as he thought his show offered them good pay with a chance to improve their lives.
After Cody's announcement that he was suing for divorce, Frederici began to fight back.
It was revoked in 1917, along with medals of 910 other recipients, when Congress retroactively changed the rules for the honor.
He said, "What we want to do is give women even more liberty than they have.
No people were killed, but Annie Oakley's injuries were so severe that she was told she would never walk again.
On October 29, 1901, outside Lexington, North Carolina, a freight train crashed into one unit of the train carrying Buffalo Bill's show from Charlotte, North Carolina, to Danville, Virginia.
The tour finished with a six-month run in London before leaving Europe for nearly a decade.
His remains were exhumed and transported to South Dakota's Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in September 1997 by his descendants, including his great-grandson, John Black Feather.
The judge and the public sided with Frederici, the judge deciding that her husband's alleged affairs and his sisters' meddling in his marriage had caused his unhappiness, not his wife.
Cody was born on February 26, 1846, on a farm just outside Le Claire, Iowa.
She moved to Cincinnati to teach school, and there she met and married Isaac.
In the years before the Civil War, Kansas was overtaken by political and physical conflict over the slavery question.
He received the Medal of Honor in 1872.
Cody was awarded the Medal of Honor in 1872 for gallantry as an Army scout in the Indian Wars.
Frederici was furious and refused any temporary reconciliation.
The two reconciled in 1910, after which Frederici often traveled with her husband until his death in 1917.
The ''Wild West'' first went to London in 1887 as part of the American Exhibition, which coincided with the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria.
He signed with them, and after building several stations and corrals, Cody was given a job as a rider.
The remains were reburied in the Lakota cemetery in Rosebud two months later.
Many other sequels followed, by Buntline, Prentiss Ingraham and others from the 1870s through the early part of the twentieth century.
The chapel was built with Cody money, and the land was donated by Philip Cody of Toronto Township.
The remains were reburied at Saint Ann's Cemetery, in Denby.
Mary Ann Bonsell Laycock, Bill's mother, was born about 1817 in New Jersey, near Philadelphia.
At the time of his death, Cody's once-great fortune had dwindled to less than $100,000.
In 1891 the show toured cities in Belgium and the Netherlands before returning to Great Britain to close the season.
Cody's change of mind was not due to any improvement in his relationship with Frederici but rather was due to the death of their daughter, Arta Louise, in 1904 from "organic trouble."
The new herd carried the TE brand.
The show was enormously successful in Europe, making Cody an international celebrity and an American icon.
His remains were buried at Brompton Cemetery in London.
The final ruling was that "incompatibility was not grounds for divorce," so that the couple was to stay legally married.
The Shoshone River was dammed for hydroelectric power and irrigation.
His burial site was selected by his sister Mary Decker.
Many historical western figures participated in the show.
His private life had not been open to the public before, and the application for divorce brought unwanted attention to the matter.
The 1905 tour began in April with a two-month run in Paris, after which the show traveled around France, performing mostly one-night stands, concluding in December.
They began developing a canal to carry water diverted from the river, but their plans did not include a water storage reservoir.
The controversy continued.
The tour finished with stops in Austria-Hungary and Germany.
Wilson, asserted that at the turn of the 20th century, Cody was the most recognizable celebrity on Earth.
I raised my old muzzle-loader and fired.
Cody was known as a conservationist who spoke out against hide-hunting and advocated the establishment of a hunting season.
He worked at this until he was called home to his sick mother's bedside.
Cody filed for divorce in 1904, after 38 years of marriage.
Filing for divorce was scandalous in the early 20th century, when marital unions were seen as binding for life.
On June 3, 1917, Cody was buried on Lookout Mountain, in Golden, Colorado, west of Denver, on the edge of the Rocky Mountains, overlooking the Great Plains.
As Cody began to travel more frequently and to places farther from home, problems over infidelity, real or imagined, began to arise.
By 1891, Cody had instructed his brother-in-law to handle Frederici's affairs and property, stating "I often feel sorry for her.
Construction of the Shoshone Dam started in 1905, a year after the Shoshone Project was authorized.
These concerns grew so great that in 1893, Frederici showed up at his hotel room in Chicago unannounced and was led to "Mr. and Mrs. Cody's suite."
Cody and another hunter, William Comstock, competed in an eight-hour buffalo-shooting match over the exclusive right to use the name, which Cody won by killing 68 bison to Comstock's 48.
Isaac Cody was against slavery.
In 1853, Isaac Cody sold his land in rural Scott County, Iowa, for $2000, and the family moved to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas Territory.
At age 11, Bill took a job with a freight carrier as a "boy extra".
