Two Thracian remains from Bulgaria are defined by major Y-DNA haplogroups present on modern Bulgarians, namely E-Z1919(the parent of E-V13) and J-M410 (J2a).
Also, international MENSA IQ testing completed in 2004 identified as the world's smartest woman (and one of the smartest people in the world) Daniela Simidchieva of Bulgaria, who has an IQ of 200.
This surname ending also gets an ''–a'' when the bearer of the name is female (''Smirnenski'' becomes ''Smirnenska'').
Fish and chicken are widely eaten and while beef is less common as most cattle are bred for milk production rather than meat, veal is a natural byproduct of this process and it is found in many popular recipes.
Medieval historians claimed that the Triballi are the largest tribe and that they subsequently changed their name to Bulgarians or Serbs.
The president of Bulgaria Zhelyu Zhelev, declined to recognize Macedonian as a separate language when the Republic of Macedonia became a new independent state.
The white thread represents peace and tranquility, while the red one stands for the cycles of life.
During Ottoman rule, a substantial number of Bulgarians converted to Islam, forming the community of the Pomaks or Muslim Bulgarians.
Many legends exist regarding the birth of this custom, some of them dating back to the 7th-century times of Khan Kubrat, the ruler of Old Great Bulgaria.
It represents a crowned rampant golden lion on a dark red background with the shape of a shield.
In the late 7th century, some Bulgar tribes, led by Asparukh and others, led by Kouber, permanently settled in the Balkans.
However, that in a later period the Bulgarians replaced long-established Greek/Latin toponyms with Thracian toponyms might suggest that Thracian had not been completely obliterated then.
Hristo Stoichkov was one of the best football (soccer) players in the second half of the 20th century, having played with the national team and FC Barcelona.
Discontent with the supremacy of the Greek Orthodox clergy, the struggle started to flare up in several Bulgarian dioceses in the 1820s.
After the adoption of Orthodox Christianity in 864 it became one of the cultural centres of Slavic Europe.
Despite various invasions of Altaic peoples in Europe, no significant impact from such Asian descent is recorded throughout southern and central Europe.
Under the Ottoman system, Christians were considered an inferior class of people.
Scholars often suggest that their ultimate origins can be traced to the Central Asian nomadic confederations, specifically as part of loosely related Oghuric tribes which spanned from the Pontic steppe to central Asia.
This movement restored the distinct Bulgarian national consciousness among the common people and led to the recognition of the Bulgarian Millet in 1870 by the Ottomans.
In the beginning of the 20th century Bulgaria was famous for two of the best wrestlers in the world – Dan Kolov and Nikola Petroff.
Bulgarian citizenship shall further be acquirable through naturalization.
Russia worked to convince them to settle in areas recently conquered by it, especially in Bessarabia.
American scientists and inventors of Bulgarian descent include John Atanasoff, Peter Petroff, and Assen Jordanoff.
Bulgarian linguists consider the officialized Macedonian language (since 1944) a local variation of Bulgarian, just as most ethnographers and linguists until the early 20th century considered the local Slavic speech in the Macedonian region.
During the second half of the 18th century, the Enlightenment in Western Europe provided influence for the initiation of the National awakening of Bulgaria in 1762.
The Bulgars are not thought to have been numerous and became a ruling elite in the areas they controlled.
He regained the world No.
Most Bulgarian dishes are oven baked, steamed, or in the form of stew.
Scythia Minor and Moesia Inferior appear to have been Romanized, although the region became a focus of barbarian re-settlements (various Goths and Huns) during the 4th and early 5th centuries AD, before a further "Romanization" episode during the early 6th.
Bulgarians may also refer to the holiday of 1 March as Baba Marta (Баба Марта), meaning ''Grandmother March''.
During the  Russo-Turkish Wars (1806–1812) and (1828–1829) Bulgarian emigrants formed the Bulgarian Countrymen's Army and joined the Russian army, hoping Russia would bring Bulgarian liberation, but its imperial interests were focused then on Greece and Valachia.
Bulgarians in the diaspora have also been active.
Migrations to the West have been quite steady even in the late 1990s and early 21st century, as people continue moving to countries like the US, Canada and Australia.
1 in the world from April 2006 to January 2007, and had the second highest Elo rating of all time (2813).
A very popular ingredient in Bulgarian cuisine is the Bulgarian white brine cheese called "sirene" (сирене).
It is the main ingredient in many salads, as well as in a variety of pastries.
Eastern Rumelia was annexed to Bulgaria in 1885 through bloodless revolution.
The Bulgarians wanted to have their own schools and liturgy in Bulgarian, and they needed an independent ecclesiastical organisation.
This ancient custom involves dancing into fire or over live embers.
As the Greek clerics were ousted from most Bulgarian bishoprics at the end of the decade, significant areas had been seceded from the Patriarchate's control.
Women dance into the fire with their bare feet without suffering any injury or pain.
Family-members and friends in Bulgaria customarily exchange martenitsas, which they regard as symbols of health and longevity.
According to the Art.25 (1) of Constitution of Republic of Bulgaria, a Bulgarian citizen shall be anyone born of at least one parent holding a Bulgarian citizenship, or born on the territory of the Republic of Bulgaria, should they not be entitled to any other citizenship by virtue of origin.
The struggle between the Bulgarians and the Greek Phanariotes intensified throughout the 1860s.
At that time, a process of partial hellenisation occurred among the intelligentsia and the urban population, as a result of the higher status of the Greek culture and the Greek Orthodox Church among the Balkan Christians.
At the mtDNA plot the Bulgarians share their most proximal position with Macedonians, Czechs, Romanians and Hungarians.
The band is placed across the ends of the branches and the phrase "Unity Makes Strength" is inscribed on it.
Аs a consequence, the Bulgarian national movement proclaimed as its aim the inclusion of most of Macedonia, Thrace and Moesia under Greater Bulgaria.
As a consequence, many Bulgarian colonists settled there, and later they formed two military regiments, as part of the Russian military colonization of the area in 1759–1763.
It preserves an ancient pagan tradition.
The Roman Catholic Bulgarians of the Banat are also descendants of Paulicians who fled there at the end of the 17th century after an unsuccessful uprising against the Ottomans.
Bulgarian cuisine features also a variety of hot and cold soups, an example of a cold soup being tarator.
Some Bulgarian scholars suggest that the Antes became one of the ancestors of the modern Bulgarians.
Until 1878 Bulgarian was influenced lexically by medieval and modern Greek, and to a much lesser extent, by Turkish.
The colour fields are of same form and equal size.
During the early 1890s, two pro-Bulgarian revolutionary organizations were founded: the Internal Macedonian-Adrianople Revolutionary Organization and the Supreme Macedonian-Adrianople Committee.
It was not until the 1850s when the Bulgarians initiated a purposeful struggle against the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
Most Bulgarians living in Canada can be found in Toronto, Ontario, and the provinces with the most Bulgarians in Canada are Ontario and Quebec.
The two literary schools of Preslav and Ohrid developed a rich literary and cultural activity with authors of the rank of Constantine of Preslav, John Exarch, Chernorizets Hrabar, Clement and Naum of Ohrid.
The vast majority of them have either Christian (names like Lazar, Ivan, Anna, Maria, Ekaterina) or Slavic origin (Vladimir, Svetoslav, Velislava).
The costumes, made of animal furs and fleeces, cover the whole of the body.
Asparukh's Bulgars made a tribal union with the Severians and the "Seven clans", who were re-settled to protect the flanks of the Bulgar settlements in Scythia Minor, and the capital Pliska was built on the site of a former Slavic settlement.
However, the public-spirited clergy in some isolated monasteries still kept the distinct Bulgarian identity alive, and this helped it to survive predominantly in  rural, remote areas.
Famous for its rich salads required at every meal, Bulgarian cuisine is also noted for the diversity and quality of dairy products and the variety of local wines and alcoholic beverages such as rakia, mastika and menta.
Dozens of medieval Slavic mtDNA samples from Poland and Slovakia were compared to most European populations, as a result modern Bulgarians and Czech came out closest to the Polish samples, while Portuguese and Bulgarians came out closest to the Slovak samples, anyway modern Slovak and Polish populations are distant from these.
The issue of Bulgarian nationalism gained greater significance, following the Congress of Berlin which took back the regions of Macedonia and Adrianople area, returning them under the control of the Ottoman Empire.
The old Bulgar name Boris has spread from Bulgaria to a number of countries in the world.
The plural form of the surname suffix ''-ski'' is still ''-ski'', e.g.
This is sometimes transcribed as ''-off'' or "-of" (John Atanasov—John Atanasoff), but more often as ''-ov'' (e.g.
Another characteristic custom called nestinarstvo (нестинарство), or ''firedancing'', distinguishes the Strandzha region.
The '''Bulgarians''' (, ''Bǎlgari'', ) are a South Slavic ethnic group who are native to Bulgaria and neighbouring regions.
Most Bulgarians are at least nominally members of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church founded in 870 AD (autocephalous since 927 AD).
and formerly in Manchester United, Tottenham Hotspur, Bayer Leverkusen and others, the national team and two domestic clubs, is still the most popular Bulgarian football player of the 21st century.
While the Bulgarians share significantly fewer IBD segments for length classes with Greeks than with the group of East-West Slavs, most of the East-West Slavs share as much as IBD segments with the Bulgarians as with the inter-Slavic populations Romanians and Hungarians.
The development of Old Church Slavonic literacy in the country had the effect of preventing the assimilation of the South Slavs into neighbouring cultures and it also stimulated the development of a distinct ethnic identity.
The national flag of Bulgaria is a rectangle with three colours: white, green, and red, positioned horizontally top to bottom.
However, one of the plots of the largest-scale Bulgarian mtDNA study itself, determined Bulgarians at shortest distance to Poles, followed by other Slavs such as Croats, Ukrainians and Czechs, while the other plot of the Bulgarian study determined Bulgarians nearest to Hungarians, Croats, Ukrainians and Slovaks, both showing neighbouring populations distant in favour of central Europeans.
Both the Bulgarian flag and the Coat of Arms are also used as symbols of various Bulgarian organisations, political parties and institutions.
As result, two armed struggle movements started to develop as late as the beginning of the 1870s: the Internal Revolutionary Organisation and the Bulgarian Revolutionary Central Committee.
The Bulgars are first mentioned in the 4th century in the vicinity of the North Caucasian steppe.
The artist Christo is among the most famous representatives of environmental art with projects such as the Wrapped Reichstag.
Bulgarians have made valuable contributions to world culture in modern times as well.
Its leading cultural position was consolidated with the invention of the Cyrillic script in its capital Preslav at the eve of the 10th century.
In 1861 the Vatican and the Ottoman government recognized a separate Bulgarian Uniat Church.
The female surname in this case would have the ''-eva'' surname suffix (Cyrillic: ''-ева''), for example: ''Galina Stoeva''.
Alternatively, one can take off the martenitsa earlier if one sees a stork (considered a harbinger of spring).
From the indigenous Thracian people cultural and ethnic elements were taken, Other pre-Slavic Indo-European peoples, including Dacians(if distinct from Thracians), Celts, Goths, Romans, Greeks, Sarmatians, Paeonians and Illyrians have also settled into the later Bulgarian land.
CERN employed more than 90 Bulgarian scientists, and about 30 of them will actively participate in the Large Hadron Collider experiments.
The ancient ritual of kukeri (кукери), performed by costumed men, seeks to scare away evil spirits and bring good harvest and health to the community.
Protestantism was introduced in Bulgaria by missionaries from the United States in 1857.
4,240,000 of these pointed out the Bulgarian ethnic group.
According to MENSA International, Bulgaria ranks 2nd in the world in Mensa IQ test-scores and its students rate second in the world in SAT scores.
Medieval Bulgaria was the most important cultural centre of the Slavic peoples at the end of the 9th and throughout the 10th century.
The surname ending ''–ich'' does not get an additional ''–a'' if the bearer of the name is female.
The rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire led to a struggle for cultural and religious autonomy of the Bulgarian people.
The ending ''–in'' (female ''-ina'') also appears rarely.
One can then tie the martenitsa to the blossoming branch of a tree.
Several mitochondrial studies considered different positions, ranging from conclusions that Bulgarians are most related to Central Europeans to conclusions implying people from the Apennines or Iberia as the most related.
The ''-ov'' suffix is the Slavic gender-agreeing suffix, thus ''Ivanov'' () literally means "Ivan's".
The old emigration was made up of some 2,470,000  economic and several tens of thousands of political emigrants, and was directed for the most part to the U.S., Canada, Argentina, Brazil and Germany.
Thus, Bulgarians, like other Christians, were subjected to heavy taxes and a small portion of the Bulgarian populace experienced partial or complete Islamisation.
The ritual consists of dancing, jumping and shouting in an attempt to banish all evil from the village.
It is generally known that the white represents – the sky, the green – the forest and nature and the red – the blood of the people, referencing the strong bond of the nation through all the wars and revolutions that have shaken the country in the past.
Like most Europeans, H1 is the prevailing subclade among Bulgarians.
Nevertheless, at the end of the 14th century, the Ottomans conquered the whole of Bulgaria.
The Bulgarian language is written in the Cyrillic script.
A mask, adorned with horns and decoration, covers the head of each ''kuker'', who also must have bells attached to his waist.
Two crowned rampant golden lions hold the shield from both sides, facing it.
By the 4th century the major city of Serdica had predominantly Thracian populace based on epigraphic evidence, which shows prevailing Latino-Thracian given names, but thereafter the names were completely replaced by Christian ones.
More recently, the language has borrowed many words from Russian, German, French and English.
The Bulgarian language is spoken by the majority of the Bulgarian diaspora, but less so by the descendants of earlier emigrants to the U.S., Canada, Argentina and Brazil).
Under the shield, there is a white band lined with the three national colours.
Bulgarian cultural influence was especially strong in Wallachia and Moldova where the Cyrillic script was used until 1860, while Church Slavonic was the official language of the princely chancellery and of the church until the end of the 17th century.
According to a triple autosomal, mitochondrial and paternal analysis of available data from large-scale studies on Balto-Slavs and their proximal populations, the whole genome SNP data situates Bulgarians in a cluster with Romanians and Macedonians, and they are at similar proximity to Gagauzes, Montenegrins and Serbs who are not part of another cluster but are described as 'in between' clusters.
The new emigration is estimated at some 970,000 people and can be divided into two major subcategories: permanent emigration at the beginning of the 1990s, directed mostly to the U.S., Canada, Austria, and Germany and labour emigration at the end of the 1990s, directed for the most part to Greece, Italy, the UK and Spain.
In the early 20th century the control over Macedonia became a key point of contention between Bulgaria, Greece, and Serbia, who fought the First Balkan War of (1912–1913) and the Second Balkan War of (1913).
Stefka Kostadinova is the best female high jumper, still holding the world record from 1987, one of the oldest unbroken world records for all kind of athletics.
The establishment of a new state molded the various Slav, Bulgar and earlier or later populations into the "Bulgarian people" of the First Bulgarian Empire speaking a South Slav language.
The subclades of Haplogroup H may have not been studied but subclusters H1b and H2a are more common in eastern than in western Europeans.
Bulgarian middle names are patronymic and use the gender-agreeing suffix as well, thus the middle name of Nikola's son becomes ''Nikolov'', and the middle name of Ivan's son becomes ''Ivanov''.
The largest-scale Bulgarian Y-DNA study (n=808) itself determines the Romanians as closest to Bulgarians, however the phylogenetic analysis did not involve Serbians and Macedonians.
Other common Bulgarian male surnames have the ''-ev'' surname suffix (Cyrillic: ''-ев''), for example ''Stoev'', ''Ganchev'', ''Peev'', and so on.
Bulgaria shows a very similar mtDNA profile to other European countries – dominated by mitochondrial haplogroups Hg H (~42%), Hg U (~18%), Hg J/Hg T (~18%),  and Hg K (~6%).
1 ranking again in October 2008.
The largest-scale Y-DNA analysis of the Hungarians (n=219) determined that the closest Europeans to them are the Bulgarians, furthermore the same study determines the "Jugoslavs" (Serbs and Montenegrins) as the nearest population to Bulgarians.
Some pre-Slavic linguistic and cultural traces might have been preserved in modern Bulgarians (and Macedonians).
Above the shield there is a crown modeled after the crowns of the emperors of the Second Bulgarian Empire, with five crosses and an additional cross on top.
In the first half of the 10th century, the Cyrillic script was devised in the Preslav Literary School, Bulgaria, based on the Glagolitic, the Greek and Latin alphabets.
Orthodox Christians were included in a specific ethno-religious community called ''Rum Millet''.
After the Liberation in 1878, the names of historical Bulgar rulers like Asparuh, Krum, Kubrat and Tervel were resurrected.
Autosomal studies detect a connection between modern Bulgarians and North Slavs that is a result of migrations no earlier than 1,500 years ago.
The last name of the entire family then would have the plural form of ''-evi'' (Cyrillic: ''-еви''), for example: the ''Stoevi'' family ().
Dimitar Berbatov, currently in PAOK F.C.
In 1018 Bulgaria lost its independence and remained a Byzantine subject until 1185, when the Second Bulgarian Empire was created.
Kaloyan Mahlyanov has been the first European sumo wrestler to win the Emperor's Cup in Japan.
It was concluded that the contributions to the Bulgarian gene pool from the pre-Slavic indigenous population definitely outnumber that of the Slavic settlers who spread their language in the Balkans mainly by assimilation.
Genetic distance calculated by SNP data of the multiple autosomes, ranked most proximal to Bulgarians the Serbs, followed by Macedonians, Montenegrins, Romanians, Gagauzes, Macedonian Greeks apart from Thessaloniki, the rest of the South Slavs, Hungarians, Slovaks, Czechs, and then by Greeks from Thessaloniki, Central Greece and Peloponese.
The greater part of these people were also considered Bulgarians by most ethnographers until the early 20th century and beyond.
Himerius claimed that contemporary Thracian aristocrats traced their descent to the Odrysian kings.
Nowadays there are some 25,000 Protestant Bulgarians in Bulgaria.
Deep-frying is not very typical, but grilling – especially different kinds of meats – is very common.
The Coat of Arms of Bulgaria is a state symbol of the sovereignty and independence of the Bulgarian people and state.
Since names in Bulgarian are gender-based, Bulgarian women have the ''-ova'' surname suffix (Cyrillic: ''-овa''), for example, ''Maria Ivanova''.
The church was abolished once, during the period of Ottoman rule (1396—1878), in 1873 it was revived as Bulgarian Exarchate and soon after raised again to Bulgarian Patriarchate.
These are shared with Romanian, Albanian and Greek (see Balkan language area) with which it is not at all mutually intelligible.
It was still spoken in the 6th century, probably becoming extinct afterwards.
It used to be given to the child of an unmarried woman (for example the son of ''Kuna'' will get the surname ''Kunin'' and the son of ''Gana'' – ''Ganin'').
According to the 2001 census there were 1,124,240 Bulgarian citizens in the city of Sofia, 302,858 in Plovdiv, 300,000 in Varna and about 200,000 in Burgas.
The surname suffix ''-ich'' can be found only occasionally, primarily among the Roman Catholic Bulgarians.
According to epigraphic evidence at least the aristocracy of the Bulgars was Oghur Turkic in culture and Tengrist, but it is suggested that other ethnic elements may have been part of their composition.
This might have facilitated their eventual Slavonization, although the majority of the population appears to have been  withdrawn to the hinterland of Constantinople or Asia Minor prior to any permanent Slavic and Bulgar settlement south of the Danube.
Despite the process of ethno-religious fusion among the Orthodox Christians, strong nationalist sentiments persisted into the Catholic community in the northwestern part of the country.
The Bulgarian Orthodox Church is the independent national church of Bulgaria like the other national branches of the Orthodox communion and is considered a dominating element of Bulgarian national consciousness.
Bulgarian-American Stephane Groueff wrote the celebrated book "Manhattan Project", about the making of the first atomic bomb and also penned "Crown of Thorns", a biography of Tsar Boris III of Bulgaria.
Others claimed that the Paeonians are Bulgarians.
However, any direct connection between the Bulgars and postulated Asian counterparts rest on little more than speculative and "contorted etymologies".
Nowadays there are some 40,000 Roman Catholic Bulgarians in Bulgaria, additional 10,000 in the Banat in Romania and up to 100,000 people of Bulgarian ancenstry in South America.
There are several different layers of Bulgarian names.
The area was further fought over during the World War I (1915–1918) and the World War II (1941–1944).
n the 16th and the 17th centuries Roman Catholic missionaries converted a small number of Bulgarian Paulicians in the districts of Plovdiv and Svishtov to Roman Catholicism.
Bulgarians may wear the martenitsa (мартеница) – an adornment made of white and red yarn and worn on the wrist or pinned on the clothes – from 1 March until the end of the month.
the ''Smirnenski'' family ().
They stand upon two crossed oak branches with acorns, which symbolize the power and the longevity of the Bulgarian state.
Despite the position of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as a unifying symbol for all Bulgarians, small groups of Bulgarians have converted to other faiths through the course of time.
The ethnic Macedonians were considered Macedonian Bulgarians by most ethnographers until the early 20th century and beyond with a big portion of them evidently self-identifying as such.
Veselin Topalov won the 2005 World Chess Championship.
Also an autonomous Ottoman province, called Eastern Rumelia was created in northern Thrace.
He received a number of awards and was the joint top scorer at the 1994 World Cup.
According to Y-DNA data of hundreds of Macedonians, they have the lowest genetic distance against the Bulgarian population (0.0815).
The Slavic-speakers of Greek Macedonia and most among the Torlaks in Serbia have also had a history of identifying as Bulgarians and many were members of the Bulgarian Exarchate, which included most of the territory regarded as Torlak.
Most of the U carriers belong to U5 and U4.
During the 10th century the Bulgarians established a form of national identity that was far from modern nationalism but helped them to survive as a distinct entity through the centuries.
Some of the performers impersonate royalty, field-workers and craftsmen.
Another typical Bulgarian surname suffix, though less common, is ''-ski''.
There are many different Bulgarian pastries as well such as banitsa.
Most Bulgarians live in Bulgaria, where they number around 6 million, constituting 85% of the population.
The Thracian language has been described as a southern Baltic language.
Many Bulgarians also live in the diaspora, which is formed by representatives and descendants of the old (before 1989) and new (after 1989) emigration.
The First Bulgarian Empire was founded in 681.
Some Bulgarians supported the Russian Army when they crossed the Danube in the middle of the 18th century.
Most Bulgarians belong to three unrelated Y-DNA haplogroups, 20% of whom to I-M423 (I2a1b), 18% to E-V13 (E1b1b1a1b1a) and 17.5% to R-M17 (R1a1a), but the biggest part belongs to macro-haplgoroup R (~28%).
Their armed struggle reached its peak with the April Uprising which broke out in 1876.
To the common people, belonging to this Orthodox commonwealth became more important than their ethnic origins.
Modern versions of the alphabet are now used to write five more Slavic languages such as Belarusian, Macedonian, Russian, Serbian and Ukrainian as well as Mongolian and some other 60 languages spoken in the former Soviet Union.
A symbiosis was carried out between the numerically weak Bulgars and the numerous Slavic tribes in that broad area from the Danube to the north, to the Aegean Sea to the south, and from the Adriatic Sea to the west, to the Black Sea to the east, who accepted the common ethnonym "''Bulgarians''".
Some ancient authors claimed that the Moesi and Dacians are Bulgars, it should be noted that often they made errors.
In different periods to the ethnogenesis of the local population contributed also different indo-European and Turkic people, who settled or lived on the Balkans.
The major port towns in Pontic Bulgaria remained Byzantine Greek in their outlook.
Oriental dishes do exist in Bulgarian cuisine with most common being moussaka, gyuvetch, and baklava.
During the Early Byzantine Era, the Roman provincials in Scythia Minor and Moesia Secunda were already engaged in economic and social exchange with the 'barbarians' north of the Danube.
Anyway most of the East-West Slavs share only a modest gene flow with Bulgarians.
Julia Kristeva and Tzvetan Todorov were among the most influential European philosophers in the second half of the 20th century.
This community became both, basic form of social organization and source of identity for all the ethnic groups inside it.
Missionary work continued throughout the second half of the 19th and the first half of the 20th century.
Macedonian Slavs were identified then predominantly as Bulgarians, and significant Bulgarophile sentiments endured up among them until the end of the Second World War.
Bulgarians are considered most closely related to the neighbouring Macedonians; indeed it is sometimes said there is no discernible ethnic difference between them.
In 1903 they participated in the unsuccessful Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising against the Ottomans in Macedonia and the Adrianople vilayet.
There is a further heterogeneity among Bulgarian regions and different of the major haplogroups may prevail in different regions, one region (Haskovo) for example is genetically nearer to the Czech population than to any other Bulgarian regions by Y-DNA.
The large scale population transfers and territorial expansions during the 8th and 9th century, additionally increased the number of the Slavs and Byzantine Christians within the state, making the Bulgars quite obviously a minority.
Ivet Lalova along with Irina Privalova is currently the fastest white woman at 100 metres.
