Its flora encompass more than 3,800 species of which 170 are endemic and 150 are considered endangered.
Oriental dishes such as moussaka, gyuvech, and baklava are also present.
Thracians, one of the three primary ancestral groups of modern Bulgarians, began appearing in the region during the Iron Age.
Bulgarian performers have gained popularity in several other genres like progressive rock (FSB), electropop (Mira Aroyo) and jazz (Milcho Leviev).
All ethnic groups speak Bulgarian, either as a first or as a second language.
The left-wing uprising of 9 September 1944 led to the abolition of monarchic rule, but it was not until 1946 that a one-party people's republic was established.
This site also offers insights for understanding the social hierarchy of the earliest European societies.
He acknowledged the spiritual supremacy of the pope and received a royal crown from a papal legate.
This played a significant role in forming Bulgaria's militaristic approach to foreign affairs during the first half of the 20th century.
Football is by far the most popular sport.
The best performance of the national team at FIFA World Cup finals came in 1994, when it advanced to the semi-finals by defeating consecutively Greece, Argentina, Mexico and Germany, finishing fourth.
As a result, Bulgaria scores low in terms of innovation, competitiveness and high-value added exports.
Until February 2013 GERB had 117 seats in the National Assembly, ruling as a minority government without support from the other political parties in the parliament.
The same year ''Foreign Policy'' magazine listed Bezmer Air Base as one of the six most important overseas facilities used by the USAF due to its proximity to the Middle East.
Normally, the prime minister-elect is the leader of the party receiving the most votes in parliamentary elections, although this is not always the case.
A National Centre for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) operates the only supercomputer in Southeastern Europe.
Bulgaria has  of railway track and currently a total of 81&nbsp;km of high-speed lines are in operation.
The protest wave was marked by self-immolations, spontaneous demonstrations and a strong sentiment against political parties.
Sunni Muslims are the second-largest community and constitute 10 per cent of the religious makeup, although a majority of them do not pray and find the use of Islamic veils in schools unacceptable.
The government implemented strict austerity measures with IMF and EU encouragement to some positive fiscal results, but the social consequences of these measures have been "catastrophic" according to the International Trade Union Confederation.
Fire is an essential element of Bulgarian folklore, used to banish evil spirits and diseases.
The Soviet-style planned economy saw some market-oriented policies emerging on an experimental level under Todor Zhivkov (1954–1989).
Urban areas are particularly affected by energy production from coal-based powerplants and automobile traffic, while pesticide usage in the agriculture and antiquated industrial sewage systems produce extensive soil and water pollution with chemicals and detergents.
The loss of COMECON markets in 1990 and the subsequent "shock therapy" of the planned system caused a steep decline in industrial and agricultural production, ultimately followed by an economic collapse in 1997.
Most of the local population gradually lost its distinct national consciousness, identifying as Christians.
The war resulted in significant territorial losses, and a total of 87,500 soldiers killed.
Bulgaria has a dynamic climate, which results from its being positioned at the meeting point of Mediterranean and continental air masses and the barrier effect of its mountains.
Some famous players are AS Monaco forward Dimitar Berbatov and Hristo Stoichkov, winner of the Golden Boot and the Golden Ball and the most successful Bulgarian player of all time.
Yogurt, lukanka, banitsa, shopska salad, lyutenitsa and kozunak are among the best-known local foods.
Patriotic Front (right-wing, 18)
The latter is credited with inventing gold working and exploitation.
Mining and its related industries employ a total of 120,000 people and generate about five per cent of the country's GDP.
Bulgarian cuisine is similar to those of other Balkan countries and demonstrates a strong Turkish and Greek influence.
A peace treaty with Byzantium in 681 marked the beginning of the First Bulgarian Empire.
The population of Bulgaria is 7,364,570 people according to the 2011 national census.
Bulgaria has an active tripartite economic and diplomatic collaboration with Romania and Greece, maintains strong relations with EU members, the United States, and Russia, and continues to improve its traditionally good ties with China and Vietnam.
Economic indicators have worsened amid the late-2000s financial crisis.
Bulgaria did not comply with Soviet demands to expel German forces from its territory, resulting in a declaration of war and an invasion by the USSR in September 1944.
However, fighting against corruption has become the focus of the government because of the EU accession, and several anti-corruption programs have been undertaken by different government agencies.
A third of all households consist of only one person and 75.5 per cent of families do not have children under the age of 16.
Some 937,000 to 1,200,000 people—mostly young adults—left the country by 2005.
The situation has improved in recent years, and several government-funded programs have been put into place in an attempt to reduce pollution levels.
More than three-quarters of Bulgarians subscribe to Eastern Orthodoxy.
Parties must register with the commission prior to participating in a national election.
More than 90 per cent of fixed lines are served by the Bulgarian Telecommunications Company (BTC),  while mobile services are provided by three operators—Mtel, GLOBUL and BTC/Vivacom.
Consequently, population growth and birth rates are among the lowest in the world while death rates are among the highest.
Only two weeks after its initial formation the Oresharski government came under opposition criticism and had to deal with large-scale protests some with more than 11 000 participants.
It resulted in the release of the nurses by Muammar Gaddafi's government, which was granted a contract to receive a nuclear reactor and weapons supplies from France in exchange.
Bulgaria's geographic coordinates are 43° N 25° E.
The government survived five votes of no-confidence before voluntarily resigning on 23 July 2014.
Bulgarian wine is known for its Traminer, Muskat and Mavrud types, of which up to 200,000 tonnes are produced annually.
'''', ), is a country in southeastern Europe.
The Bulgarian Orthodox Church gained autocephalous status in 927 AD, and currently has 12 dioceses and over 2,000 priests.
By the end of the 14th century, factional divisions between the feudal landlords and the spread of Bogomilism had caused the Second Bulgarian Empire to split into three tsardoms—Vidin, Tarnovo and Karvuna—and several semi-independent principalities that fought each other, along with Byzantines, Hungarians, Serbs, Venetians and Genoese.
The country has a dense network of about 540 rivers, most of which are relatively small and with low water levels.
The rapid expansion of alternative energy sources such as wind and solar power stations make Bulgaria one of the fastest-growing wind energy producers in the world.
Bulgaria has a typical civil law legal system.
Veselin Topalov became FIDE World Chess Champion by winning the FIDE World Chess Championship 2005.
In the late 6th century BC, the Persians conquered most of present-day Bulgaria.
These policies (combined with the end of communist rule in 1989) resulted in the emigration of some 300,000 ethnic Turks to Turkey.
Vladimir Dimitrov, Nikolay Diulgheroff and Christo are some of the most famous modern Bulgarian artists.
However, with no support from the other three political parties that entered the parliament, on 24 May, GERB leader Borisov returned the president's mandate to try and form a government.
Almost all top export items of Bulgaria are industrial commodities such as oil products, copper products and pharmaceuticals.
The empire reached its zenith under Ivan Asen II (1218–1241), when commerce and culture flourished.
Lonely Planet ranked it among its top 10 destinations for 2011.
The HIV trial in Libya, which followed after the imprisonment of several Bulgarian nurses in Benghazi in 1998, had a significant impact on relations between Bulgaria, the European Union, and Libya.
After being tasked by President Rosen Plevneliev to form a government, Borisov's GERB formed a coalition and members of the parties in the Reformist Bloc (Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria (DSB), Union of Democratic Forces (SDS), Bulgaria for Citizens Movement (DBG) and Bulgarian Agrarian National Union (BZNS)) were chosen for Minister positions.
In 2013, air pollution in Bulgaria was more severe than any other European country.
Agriculture has declined significantly in the past two decades.
Kaloyan Mahlyanov (Калоян Махлянов), known as Kotoōshū Katsunori is a former professional sumo wrestler who became the first European to earn the title ozeki in Japan.
Bulgarians are the main ethnic group and comprise 84.8 per cent of the population.
Under Samuil, Bulgaria briefly recovered from these attacks, but this rise ended when Byzantine emperor Basil II defeated the Bulgarian army at Klyuch in 1014.
This allowed the Russian Empire to seek a solution by force without risking military confrontation with other Great Powers, as had happened in the Crimean War.
Tarnovo was captured by the Ottomans after a three-month siege in 1393.
Bulgaria is one of the most corrupt European Union members and ranks 75th in the Corruption Perceptions Index.
The capital Sofia, the medieval capital Veliko Tarnovo, coastal resorts Golden Sands and Sunny Beach and winter resorts Bansko, Pamporovo and Borovets are some of the locations most visited by tourists.
Stefka Kostadinova is the reigning world record holder in the women's high jump at 2.09 m, which she jumped during the 1987 World Championships in Athletics in Rome.
Until 1989, Bulgaria was the world's second-largest wine exporter.
The Balkan mountains run laterally through the middle of the country.
The Supreme Administrative Court and Supreme Court of Cassation are the highest courts of appeal and oversee the application of laws in subordinate courts.
Some of these first gold smelters produced the coins, weapons and jewellery of the Varna Necropolis treasure, the oldest in the world with an approximate age of over 6,000 years.
Extraction of metals and minerals, production of chemicals, machinery and vehicle components, petroleum refining and steel are among the major industrial activities.
The same year, intercompany debt exceeded €51 billion, meaning that 60 per cent of all Bulgarian companies were mutually indebted.
The religious visual arts heritage includes frescoes, murals and icons, many produced by the medieval Tarnovo Artistic School.
The primary causes of death are similar to those in other industrialised countries, mainly cardiovascular diseases, neoplasms and respiratory diseases.
The total fertility rate (TFR) was estimated in 2013 at 1.43 children born/woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1.
The currency is the lev, which is pegged to the euro at a rate of 1.95583 levа for 1 euro.
Paganism was abolished in favour of Eastern Orthodox Christianity under Boris I in 864.
After several consecutive years of high growth, GDP contracted 5.5 per cent in 2009 and unemployment remains above 12 per cent.
Ivan Asen and Peter laid the foundations of the Second Bulgarian Empire with Tarnovo as the capital.
A new constitution that provided for a relatively weak elected president and for a prime minister accountable to the legislature was adopted in July 1991.
Wages, however, account for only half of the total household income, owing to the substantial informal economy which amounts to almost 32% of GDP.
Cultural events are advertised in the largest media outlets, including the Bulgarian National Radio, and daily newspapers ''Dneven Trud'', ''Dnevnik'' and ''24 Chasa''.
Bulgaria's strategic geographic location and well-developed energy sector make it a key European energy centre despite its lack of significant fossil fuel deposits.
In 1981 Bulgarian-born writer Elias Canetti was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
The economy largely recovered during a period of rapid growth several years later, but the average salary remains one of the lowest in the EU at 952 leva (€488) per month in March 2016.
Meanwhile, internet media is growing in popularity due to its lack of censorship and the diversity of content and opinions it presents.
According to Yale University's 2012 Environmental Performance Index, Bulgaria is a "modest performer" in protecting the environment.
Bulgarian is the only language with official status and native for 85.2 per cent of the population.
NPS fields 27,000 police officers in its local and national sections.
Following a series of reductions beginning in 1990, the number of active troops contracted from 152,000 in 1988 to about 32,000 in the 2000s, supplemented by a reserve force of 302,500 soldiers and officers and 34,000 paramilitary servicemen.
After the Liberation, Bulgarian literature quickly adopted European literary styles such as Romanticism and Symbolism.
Euro-Atlantic integration became a priority for the country since the fall of Communism, although the Communist leadership also had aspirations of leaving the Warsaw Pact and joining the European Communities by 1987.
Maria Gigova and Maria Petrova have each held a record of three world-titles in rhythmic gymnastics.
By the mid-1950s standards of living rose significantly, while political repressions were lessened.
The most notable topographical features are the Danubian Plain, the Balkan Mountains, the Thracian Plain, and the Rhodope Mountains.
With influence from the Persians, the bulk of the Thracian tribes were united in the Odrysian kingdom in the 470s BC by king Teres, but were later subjugated by Alexander the Great and by the Romans in 46 AD.
After his death Byzantine domestic policies changed and a series of unsuccessful rebellions broke out, the largest being led by Peter Delyan.
'''Bulgaria''' (; , tr.
Bulgaria's written musical composition can be traced back to the early Middle Ages and the works of Yoan Kukuzel (c. 1280–1360).
Yordanka Donkova  is a former hurdling athlete, notable for winning an Olympic gold medal and bronze medal as well as 9 medals at European indoor and outdoor championships.
Nestinarstvo, a ritual fire-dance of Thracian origin, is included in the list of UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage.
Bulgaria's population of 7.4 million people is predominantly urbanised and mainly concentrated in the administrative centres of its 28 provinces.
Succeeding rulers strengthened the Bulgarian state throughout the 8th and 9th centuries.
The communist-dominated Fatherland Front took power, ended participation in the Axis and joined the Allied side until the war ended.
The Bulgarian Socialist Party nominated ex-Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski for the post of Prime Minister in May 2013.
Nine historical and natural objects have been inscribed in the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites:  the Madara Rider, the Thracian tombs in Sveshtari and Kazanlak, the Boyana Church, the Rila Monastery, the Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo, Pirin National Park, Sreburna Nature Reserve and the ancient city of Nesebar.
Weak law enforcement and overall low capacity of civil service remain as challenges in curbing corruption.
Government estimates from 2003 put the literacy rate at 98.6 per cent, with no significant difference between the sexes.
In an attempt to erase the identity of the ethnic Turk minority, an assimilation campaign was launched in 1984 which included closing mosques and forcing ethnic Turks to adopt Slavic names.
After the Battle of Nicopolis in 1396 brought about the fall of the Vidin Tsardom, the Ottomans conquered all Bulgarian lands south of the Danube.
The majority of the population, or 72.5 per cent, reside in urban areas; approximately one-sixth of the total population is concentrated in Sofia.
Bulgaria is home to Maritsa Iztok-2, a lignite-fired power station causing the highest damage costs to health and the environment in the entire European Union according to the European Environment Agency.
He lost his title in the World Chess Championship 2006 against Vladimir Kramnik.
From a largely agricultural country with a predominantly rural population in 1948, by the 1980s Bulgaria had transformed into an industrial economy with scientific and technological research at the top of its budgetary expenditure priorities.
The vice chairman of the Alternative for Bulgarian Revival party Ivaylo Kalfin was voted for Depute Prime Minister and Minister of Labor and Social Policy.
One of its most distinguishing features is ''extended rhythmical time'', which has no equivalent in the rest of European music.
In December 1989 the ruling Communist Party allowed multi-party elections, which subsequently led to Bulgaria's transition into a democracy and a market-based economy.
Most of the plant and animal life is central European, although representatives of Arctic and alpine species are present at high altitudes.
Economic activities are fostered by the lowest personal and corporate income tax rates in the EU, and the second-lowest public debt of all member states at 16.5 per cent of GDP in 2012.
The inventory is mostly of Soviet origin, such as MiG-29 fighters, SA-10 Grumble SAMs and SS-21 Scarab short-range ballistic missiles.
The country has won a total of 218 medals: 52 gold, 86 silver, and 80 bronze, which puts it in 24th place in the all-time ranking.
The oldest written Slavic language, Bulgarian is distinguishable from the other languages in this group through certain grammatical peculiarities such as the lack of noun cases and infinitives, and a suffixed definite article.
''''), officially the '''Republic of Bulgaria''' (, tr.
Of the services sector, tourism is the most significant contributor to economic growth.
and number of representatives (2014):
In 1185 Asen dynasty nobles Ivan Asen I and Peter IV organised a major uprising which resulted in the re-establishment of the Bulgarian state.
The Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (BAS) is the leading scientific establishment and employs most Bulgarian researchers in its numerous institutes.
Bulgaria spends 0.25 per cent of GDP on scientific research, thus having one of the lowest R&D budgets in Europe.
Many languages in Eastern Europe and Asia use Cyrillic script, which originated in the Preslav Literary School around the 9th century.
The strong economic and religious influence of Tarnovo made it a "Third Rome", unlike the already declining Constantinople.
International military relations were further expanded in April 2006, when Bulgaria and the United States signed a defence cooperation agreement providing for the usage of Bezmer and Graf Ignatievo air bases, the Novo Selo training range, and a logistics centre in Aytos as joint military training facilities.
Bulgaria performs well in sports such as wrestling, weight-lifting, boxing, gymnastics, volleyball, football and tennis.
Rail links are available with Romania, Turkey, Greece, and Serbia, and express trains serve direct routes to Kiev, Minsk, Moscow and Saint Petersburg.
A total of 756 troops are deployed abroad as part of various UN and NATO missions.
After several years of reforms it joined the European Union in 2007 despite continued concerns about government corruption.
and kept it until 479 BC.
The State provides free education in primary and secondary public schools.
Northern Bulgaria averages  cooler and registers  more precipitation annually than the regions south of the Balkan mountains.
The Thracian Plain is roughly triangular, beginning southeast of Sofia and broadening as it reaches the Black Sea coast.
Several Bulgarian revolts erupted throughout the nearly five centuries of Ottoman rule, most notably the Habsburg-backed Tarnovo uprisings in 1598 and in 1686, the Chiprovtsi Uprising in 1688 and Karposh's Rebellion in 1689.
Educational standards have been traditionally high, although still far from European benchmarks and in continuing deterioration for the past decade.
The National Police Service (NPS) combats general crime, maintains public order and supports the operations of other law enforcement agencies.
The majority of children are born to unmarried women (of all births 57.4 per cent were outside marriage in 2012).
The Constitution of Bulgaria defines it as a secular state with guaranteed religious freedom, but designates Orthodoxy as a "traditional" religion.
Bulgaria is also a net exporter of agricultural and food products, of which two-thirds go to OECD countries.
Altogether Kostadinova set seven world records - three outdoors and four indoors.
Bulgaria is a net receiver of funds from the EU.
In 1946 it became a one-party socialist state as part of the Soviet-led Eastern Bloc.
The Treaty of San Stefano was signed on 3 March 1878 by Russia and the Ottoman Empire, and included a provision to set up an autonomous Bulgarian principality roughly on the territories of the Second Bulgarian Empire.
The emergence of a unified Bulgarian state dates back to the establishment of the First Bulgarian Empire in 681 AD, which dominated most of the Balkans and functioned as a cultural hub for Slavs during the Middle Ages.
It was superseded by the subsequent Treaty of Berlin, signed on 13 July, provided for a much smaller state comprising Moesia and the region of Sofia, leaving large populations of Bulgarians outside the new country.
The judiciary is overseen by the Ministry of Justice.
While major sections of Bulgaria's media are controlled by state entities, including Bulgarian National Television, the Bulgarian National Radio, and the Bulgarian Telegraph Agency, reporting is generally deemed to be unbiased by direct government interference, although there is no specific legislation to maintain this.
By 2012, it had increased to €83 billion, or 227 per cent of GDP.
Petar Stoychev is a long distance marathon swimmer who set a new swimming world record for crossing the English Channel in 2007.
The educational process spans through 12 grades, where grades one through eight are primary and nine through twelve are secondary level.
Internet usage has increased rapidly since 2000—the number of users grew from 430,000 to 3.4&nbsp;million (48 per cent penetration rate) in 2010.
However, pollution from factories and metallurgy works and severe deforestation continue to cause major problems to the health and welfare of the population.
Total military spending in 2009 cost $819&nbsp;million.
Political parties gather in the National Assembly, which consists of 240 deputies elected to four-year terms by direct popular vote.
Written media has no legal restrictions,
Polls carried out seven years after the country's accession to the EU found only 15% of Bulgarians felt they had personally benefited from membership, with almost 40% of the population saying they would not bother to vote in the 2014 EU elections.
It restored national consciousness and became a key factor in the liberation struggle, resulting in the 1876 April Uprising.
Principal areas of research and development are energy, nanotechnology, archaeology and medicine.
and a large number of private television and radio stations also exist.
As a consequence, the Parliament was dissolved and a new provisional government was set up by the President.
Attack (far right, 11)
The other Great Powers immediately rejected the treaty out of fear that such a large country in the Balkans might threaten their interests.
Temperature amplitudes vary significantly in different areas.
The lowest recorded temperature is , while the highest is .
In recent years, Bulgaria has emerged as a travelling destination with its inexpensive resorts and beaches outside the reach of the tourist industry.
Bulgarian PPS GDP per capita stood at 47 per cent of the EU average in 2014 according to Eurostat data, while the cost of living was 48 per cent of the average.
Bulgarian folk music is by far the most extensive traditional art and has slowly developed throughout the ages as a fusion of Eastern and Western influences.
It became a member of NATO in 2004 and participated in the War in Afghanistan.
After the division of the Roman Empire in the 5th century the area fell under Byzantine control.
Over 75% of surface rivers meet the standards for good quality.
Meat consumption is lower than the European average, given a notable preference for a large variety of salads.
However, the clergy remaining in some isolated monasteries kept it alive, and that helped it to survive as in some rural, remote areas, as well as in the militant Catholic community in the northwestern part of the country.
The first Christian monastery in Europe was established around the same time by Saint Athanasius in central Bulgaria.
Bulgaria is in a state of demographic crisis.
Nearly 34 percent of its electricity is produced by the nuclear power station at Kozloduy and public opinion strongly supports nuclear energy development.
He also allowed the Bulgarian Patriarchate to retain its autocephalous status and all its dioceses, but reduced it to an archbishopric.
Bulgaria has participated in most Olympic competitions since its first appearance at the 1896 games, when it was represented by Charles Champaud.
In the 1980s Bulgaria was known as the "Silicon Valley of the Eastern Bloc" because of its large-scale computing technology exports to COMECON states.
BSP Left Bulgaria (centre-left, 38)
Bulgaria became the sixth country in the world to have an astronaut in space with Georgi Ivanov's flight on Soyuz 33 in 1979.
After a disastrous defeat in the Second Balkan War, Bulgaria again found itself fighting on the losing side as a result of its alliance with the Central Powers in World War I.
Ottoman authorities established the Rum Millet, a religious administrative community which governed all Orthodox Christians regardless of their ethnicity.
The following years saw several conflicts with its neighbours, which prompted Bulgaria to align with Germany in both world wars.
