He returned to bullfighting five months later with an eyepatch, multiple titanium plates in his skull, and the nickname 'The Pirate'.
Supporters of a ban on bullfighting remain a minority in Spain.
The Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and his government have lifted the ban on live bullfights being shown on TVE and live bullfights are now shown at the traditional 6 p.m. time on TVE as of September 2012.
Participants and spectators share the risk; it is not unknown for angry bulls to smash their way through barriers and charge the surrounding crowd of spectators.
Late-19th-century / early-20th-century ''Fin-de-siècle'' Spanish ''regeneracionista'' some intellectuals protested against what they called the policy of ''pan y toros'' ("bread and bulls"), an analogue of Roman ''panem et circenses'' promoted by politicians to keep the populace content in its oppression.
It has been alleged that toreros seek to elicit inspiration and art from their work and an emotional connection with the crowd transmitted through the bull.
After the bull has been hooked multiple times behind the shoulder by other toreros in the arena, the bullfight usually concludes with the killing of the bull, ideally by a single sword thrust, which is called the ''estocada''.
At this point, the picador stabs just behind the ''morrillo'', a mound of muscle on the fighting bull's neck, weakening the neck muscles and leading to the animal's first loss of blood.
The close proximity places the bullfighter at risk of being gored or trampled by the bull.
Matadors are usually gored every season, with picadors and banderilleros being gored less often.
The cows are brought to the arena in crates and then taken out in order.
Others, such as author Alexander Fiske-Harrison have argued that there are mitigating circumstances to this: "In terms of animal welfare, the fighting bull lives four to six years whereas the meat cow lives one to two.
At the end of the tercio de muerte, when the matador has finished
What is more, it doesn’t just live in the sense of existing, it lives a full and natural life.
In southern France, however, the traditional form of the corrida still exists and it is protected by French law.
Before the events that are held in the ring, people (usually young men) run in front of a small group of bulls that have been let loose, on a course of a sectioned-off subset of a town's streets.
In this historically Portuguese-settled area, a form of bullfight has developed in which the bull is taunted by a matador, but the lances are tipped with velcro and aimed at velcro patches secured to the bull's shoulder.
A cuadrilla is made up of a ''teneur de corde'', an ''entraîneur'', a ''sauteur'', and six ''écarteurs''.
''Jallikattu'' is a traditional bull-taming sport played in Tamil Nadu, India as a part of Pongal celebrationson Mattu Pongal day.
This is a competition between teams named ''cuadrillas'', which belong to certain breeding estates.
The front man secures the animal's head and is quickly aided by his fellows who surround and secure the animal until he is subdued.
If the picador is successful, the bull will hold its head and horns slightly lower during the following stages of the fight.
The bullring has a chapel where a matador can pray before the corrida, and where a priest can be found in case a sacrament is needed.
In 1974, Angela Hernandez (also known as Angela Hernandez Gomez and just Angela), of Spain, won a case in the Spanish Supreme Court allowing women to be bullfighters in Spain; a prohibition against women doing so was put in place in Spain in 1908.
Prior to 1930, the horses did not wear any protection.
This is made of wood or aluminum, making it lighter and much easier to handle.
In recent years, animal welfare activists have tried to stop the practice because of cruelty to the animal.
This is not to be confused with the bloodless bullfights referred to below which are indigenous to France.
In the ''cavaleiro'', a horseman on a Portuguese Lusitano horse (specially trained for the fights) fights the bull from horseback.
However the station will continue to broadcast 'Tendido Cero', a bullfighting magazine programme.
This spectacle was said to be enjoyed by Charlemagne, Alfonso X the Wise and the Almohad caliphs, among others.
This is the first stage, the ''tercio de varas'' ("the lancing third").
There the bull becomes a stud for the rest of his life.
Belmonte introduced a daring and revolutionary style, in which he stayed within a few centimetres of the bull throughout the fight.
Saldaña among other celebrations, there were also bullfights."
Sometimes, the life of the bull is spared due to his braveness (''indulto''); once the animal has been treated, it is returned to live in the dehesa.
In 2015, 438 of 687 Members of the European Parliament (MEP) voted in favour of amending the 2016 E.U.
In the second stage, called the ''pega'' ("holding"), the forcados, a group of eight men, challenge the bull directly without any protection or weapon of defence.
However, on 1 January 2012, it became prohibited in Catalonia (including Barcelona, the capital of this region) after a ban passed in the Regional Government in July 2010 came into effect in 2012.
There are also theories that it was introduced into Hispania by the Emperor Claudius, as a substitute for gladiators, when he instituted a short-lived ban on gladiatorial combat.
Nevertheless, former PSOE Prime Minister Zapatero was more lukewarm towards the Fiesta, and under his government there was a 6-year ban on live bullfights broadcast on the state-run national TV Channel.
However, different rules may be applied in some competitions.
Torero costumes are inspired by 17th-century Andalusian clothing, and matadores are easily distinguished by the gold of their ''traje de luces'' ("suit of lights"), as opposed to the lesser banderilleros, who are also known as ''toreros de plata'' ("bullfighters of silver").
The name ''correbous'' is essentially Catalan and Valencian; in other parts of Spain they have other names.
It is usually broken down into ''tandas'', or "series", of passes.
Bullfighting is often linked to Rome, where many human-versus-animal events were held as competition and entertainment, the ''Venationes''.
In Portugal, the finale consists of a tradition called the ''pega'', where men (''forcados'') try to grab and hold the bull by its horns when it runs at them.
The bull is released into the ring, where he is tested for ferocity by the ''matador'' and ''banderilleros'' with the magenta and gold ''capote'' ("cape").
Bullfighting has been banned in three Mexican states: Sonora in 2013, Guerrero in 2014 and Coahuila in 2015.
The King has allegedly stated that "the day the EU bans bullfighting is the day Spain leaves the EU".
In the traditional corrida, three ''matadores'' each fight two bulls, each of which is between four and six years old and weighs no less than 460&nbsp;kg (1,014&nbsp;lb) Each matador has six assistants—two ''picadores'' ("lancers on horseback") mounted on horseback, three ''banderilleros'' – who along with the matadors are collectively known as ''toreros'' ("bullfighters") – and a ''mozo de espadas'' ("sword page").
The guide further warns those attending bullfights to "Be prepared to witness various failed attempts at killing the animal before it lies down."
The question of public funding is particularly controversial in Spain, since widely disparaged claims have been made by supporters and opponents of bullfighting.
Such belief was part of the wider current of thought known as ''anti-flamenquismo'' whereby they simultaneously campaigned against the popularity of both bullfighting and flamenco music, which they believed to be "oriental" elements of Spanish culture which were responsible for Spain's backwardness as compared to the rest of Europe.
Forcados are dressed in a traditional costume of damask or velvet, with long knitted hats as worn by the ''campinos'' (bull headers) from Ribatejo.
The ''estoque de verdad'' (real sword) is made out of steel.
The écarteurs will try, at the last possible moment, to dodge around the cow and the sauteur will leap over it.
A special breed of cattle is used for bullfighting, and the bulls involved must be bred in large ranches, in conditions as similar as possible to the way they would behave in the wild.
While there is usually no doubt about the outcome, the bull is not viewed by bullfighting supporters as a sacrificial victim — it is instead seen by the audience as a worthy adversary, deserving of respect in its own right.
Most Portuguese bullfights are held in two phases: the spectacle of the ''cavaleiro'', and the ''pega''.
The bulk of subsidies are paid by local town halls where there is a historical tradition and support for bullfighting and related events, which are often held without charge to participants and spectators.
This part of the referendum is applied on a regional level, meaning that in regions where the population voted against the ban, which are the same regions where bullfighting is celebrated the most, killing the animal publicly in the bullfighting plaza is still performed.
Cristina Sánchez de Pablos, of Spain, was one of the first female bullfighters to gain prominence; she debuted as a bullfighter in Madrid on 13 February 1993.
The front man provokes the bull into a charge to perform a ''pega de cara'' or ''pega de caras'' (face grab).
Live Bullfights are shown at the traditional 6 p.m. time on TVE as of September 2012.
The bulls themselves are generally fairly small, much less imposing than the adult bulls employed in the ''corrida''.
This order of the Government of India was overturned by the  Supreme Court by its judgement on 12 January 2016 and will be effective at least for one year.
In the Middle Ages across Europe, knights would joust in competitions on horseback.
Those years are spent free roaming in the dehesa, the lightly wooded natural pastureland which is the residue of the ancient forests of Spain.
Ernest Hemingway said of it in his 1932 non-fiction book ''Death in the Afternoon'': "Bullfighting is the only art in which the artist is in danger of death and in which the degree of brilliance in the performance is left to the fighter's honour."
At one point, it resulted in so many fatalities that the French government tried to ban it, but had to back down in the face of local opposition.
Since the 19th century, Spanish-style ''corridas'' have been increasingly popular in Southern France where they enjoy legal protection in areas where there is an uninterrupted tradition of such bull fights, particularly during holidays such as Whitsun or Easter.
Bullfighting is seen as a symbol of Spanish culture.
In October 2008, in a statement to Congress, Luis Fernández, the President of Spanish State Broadcaster TVE, confirmed that the station will no longer broadcast live bullfights due to the high cost of production and a rejection of the events by advertisers.
Often the bull would disembowel the horse during this stage.
The government of José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, was the first to be more opposed to bullfighting, prohibiting children under 14 from attending and limiting or prohibiting the broadcast of bullfights on national TV, although the latter measure was reversed after his party lost the elections in 2011.
Some matadors, notably Juan Belmonte, have been seriously gored many times: according to Ernest Hemingway, Belmonte's legs were marred by many ugly scars.
Bullfighting has been seen as intertwined with religion and religious folklore in Spain at a popular level, particularly in the areas where it is most popular.
The ban took effect on 1 January 2012, and affects only the one remaining functioning Catalonian bullring, the Plaza de toros Monumental de Barcelona.
Among France's most important venues for bullfighting are the ancient Roman arenas of Nîmes and Arles, although there are bull rings across the South from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic coasts.
Nevertheless, his party is overall not opposed to bullfighting and anti-bullfighting measures have only been passed in municipalities where it governs in coalition with the far-left party Podemos which has taken a clearer anti-bullfighting stance.
This meant Catalonia became the second Community of Spain  (first was Canary Islands in 1991), and the first on the mainland, to ban bullfighting.
"Bloodless" variations, though, are permitted and have attracted a following in California, Texas, and France.
File:Madrid Bullfight.JPG|Third tercio: faena of ''muleta''.
In the 19th century, areas of southern and southwestern France adopted bullfighting, developing their own distinctive form.
This ultimately enables the matador to perform the killing thrust later in the performance.
The faena refers to the entire performance with the cape (muleta).
Following the Spanish–American War, the Americans suppressed the custom in the Philippines under the tenure of Governor General Leonard Wood, and it was replaced with a now-popular Filipino sport, basketball.
The participants, or ''raseteurs'', begin training in their early teens against young bulls from the Camargue region of Provence before graduating to regular contests held principally in Arles and Nîmes but also in other Provençal and Languedoc towns and villages.
Pro-bullfighting supporters include the Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and his party (Partido Popular), as well as most leaders of the major left-leaning opposition PSOE Party, including former Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez and the current Presidents of Andalusia, Extremadura and Castilla-La-Mancha.
The other parts of the corrida are still performed the same way as before in the cities that celebrate it.
In the Portuguese Azores islands, there is a form of bullfighting called ''tourada à corda'', in which a bull is led on a rope along a street, while players taunt and dodge the bull, who is not killed during or after the fight, but returned to pasture and used in later events.
However, in June 2015 The Paris Court of Appeals removed bullfighting/"la corrida" from France's cultural heritage list.
Nonetheless, the bulls remain dangerous due to their mobility and vertically formed horns.
State-run Spanish TVE had cancelled live coverage of bullfights in August 2007 until September 2012, claiming that the coverage was too violent for children who might be watching, and that live coverage violated a voluntary, industry-wide code attempting to limit "sequences that are particularly crude or brutal".
This type of fighting drew more attention from the crowds.
The aesthetic of bullfighting is based on the interaction of the man and the bull.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests issued a notification in 2011 that banned the use of bulls as performing animals, thereby banning the sport.
But the sport was continued to be held under Tamil Nadu Regulation of Jallikattu Act No 27 of 2009.
Until the use of protection was instituted, the number of horses killed during a fiesta generally exceeded the number of bulls killed.
Bullfights of this kind held in France are no different from those held in Spain and Latin America excepting minor cosmetic differences such as music.
This new style prompted the construction of dedicated bullrings, initially square, like the ''Plaza de Armas'', and later round, to discourage the cornering of the action.
The latter theory was supported by Robert Graves (picadors are related to warriors who wielded the javelin, but their role in the contest is now a minor one limited to "preparing" the bull for the matador.)
Furthermore, bullfighting is the cultural activity which generates the most tax revenue for the Spanish state (45 million euros in VAT tax and over 12 million in social security).
Instead, it is considered a highly ritualized cultural event and art form which some see as deeply tied to Hispanic culture and identity.
This has been lifted since his government was voted out in 2011.
File:Finito de Córdoba.jpg|First tercio: torero drawing a ''Verónica''.
Despite its slow decrease in popularity among younger generations, it remains a widespread cultural activity with millions of followers throughout the country.
The correbous are seen mainly in the municipalities in the south of Tarragona, with the exceptions of a few other towns in other provinces of Catalonia.
To protect the horse from the bull's horns, the animal wears a protective, padded covering called ''peto''.
budget to indicate that the “Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) appropriations or any other appropriations from the budget should not be used for the financing of lethal bullfighting activities”.
This is a bloodless spectacle (for the bulls) in which the objective is to snatch a rosette from the head of a young bull.
However, even Podemos leader Pablo Iglesias has recently stated that even though he is opposed to it, he would not illegalize bullfighting if his party came to power.
The modern style of Spanish bullfighting is credited to Juan Belmonte, generally considered the greatest matador of all time.
For example, competitions for Coupe Jeannot Lafittau are arranged with cows without ropes.
If his performance was exceptional, the president will award two ears.
It can happen that some bulls, after an exceptional performance, are healed, released to pasture until their end days and used for breeding.
Bullfighting was noted in the Philippines as early as 1619, when it was among the festivities in celebration of Pope Urban III's authorisation of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception.
Bullfighting was introduced by the Portuguese to Zanzibar and to Pemba Island, in modern Tanzania, where it is known as ''mchezo wa ngombe''.
Several cities around the world (especially in Catalonia) have symbolically declared themselves to be Anti-Bullfighting Cities, including Barcelona in 2006.
In Spain, they began to fight bulls.
These subsidies have been keeping practice of bullfighting alive.
Bullfighting is now banned in many countries; people taking part in such activity would be liable for terms of imprisonment for animal cruelty.
Since horses are not used, and performers are not professionals, recortes are less costly to produce.
The sword is called ''estoque,'' and the act of thrusting the sword is called an ''estocada''.
It is a rural idyll, although with the modern additions of full veterinary care and an absence of predators big enough to threaten evolution’s answer to a main battle tank."
With the discovery of antibiotics and advances in surgical techniques, fatalities are now rare, although over the past three centuries 534 professional bullfighters have died in the ring or from injuries sustained there, most recently matador Victor Barrio on 10 July 2016, whose death was broadcast on live TV.
The first recorded bullfight may be the ''Epic of Gilgamesh,'' which describes a scene in which Gilgamesh and Enkidu fought and killed the Bull of Heaven ("The Bull seemed indestructible, for hours they fought, till Gilgamesh dancing in front of the Bull, lured it with his tunic and bright weapons, and Enkidu thrust his sword, deep into the Bull's neck, and killed it").
The greatest Spanish performer of this art is said to have been El Cid knight.
The guide stresses that these procedures are a normal part of bullfighting and that death is rarely instantaneous.
An ''encierro'' or ''running of the bulls'' is an activity related to a bullfighting fiesta.
Afterwards, the bulls are herded back to their pen by ''gardians'' (Camarguais cowboys) in a ''bandido'', amidst a great deal of ceremony.
There are many historic fighting venues in the Iberian Peninsula, France and Latin America.
The encounter with the picador often fundamentally changes the behaviour of a bull; distracted and unengaging bulls will become more focused and stay on a single target instead of charging at everything that moves.
Sometimes a matador will place his own banderillas.
In Spanish the more general ''torero'' is used for the lead fighter, and only when needed to distinguish a man is the full title ''matador de toros'' used; in English, "matador" is generally used for the bullfighter.
The manner in which the bull charges the horse provides important clues to the matador about which side the bull favors.
The participants enter the arena in a parade, called the ''paseíllo'', to salute the presiding dignitary, accompanied by band music.
They do not take the rosette with their bare hands but with a claw-shaped metal instrument called a ''raset'' or ''crochet'' (''hook'') in their hands, hence their name.
The teneur de corde controls the dangling rope attached to the cow's horns and the entraîneur positions the cow to face and attack the player.
The Spanish Royal Family is divided on the issue, from Queen Sofía who does not hide her dislike for bullfights; to King Juan Carlos who occasionally presides over a bullfight from the royal box as part of his official duties; to their daughter Princess Elena who is well known for her liking of bullfights and who often accompanies the king in the presiding box or attends privately in the general seating.
Bullfighting had some popularity in the Philippines during Spanish rule, though foreign commentators derided the quality of local bulls and toreros.
The oldest representation of what seems to be a man facing a bull is on the Celtiberian tombstone from Clunia and the cave painting ''El toro de hachos'', both found in Spain.
The modern corrida is highly ritualized, with three distinct stages or ''tercios'' ("thirds"); the start of each being announced by a bugle sound.
Over time, these have evolved more or less into standardized national forms mentioned below.
In Costa Rica the law prohibits the killing of bulls and other animals in public and private shows.
Such pardons are nevertheless rare.
The bullfight, as it is practiced today, involves professional ''toreros'' (of whom the most senior, who actually kills the bull, is called a matador) who execute various formal moves which have a meaning, or at least a name, according to the bullfighter's style or school.
The cape is thought to be red to mask the bull's blood, although the color is now a matter of tradition.
The killing of the sacred bull (tauroctony) is the essential central iconic act of Mithras, which was commemorated in the mithraeum wherever Roman soldiers were stationed.
The ''course'' itself takes place in a small (often portable) arena erected in a town square.
The bull is not killed in the ring and, at the end of the ''corrida'', leading oxen are let into the arena and two ''campinos'' on foot herd the bull among them back to its pen.
A Portuguese television station stopped broadcasting of bullfights in January 2008, on the grounds that they were too violent for minors.
As of April 2012, the latest addition to this list is the Andalusian City of Seville.
Those who oppose bullfighting maintain that the practice is a cowardly, sadistic tradition of torturing, humiliating and killing a bull amidst pomp and pageantry.
On 8 January 2016, the Government of India passed an order exempting Jallikattu from all performances where bulls can not be used, effectively reversing the ban.
The Government of Tamil Nadu ordered that  be deposited by the organizers in case of an accident or injury during the event and enacted a rule to allow a team of veterinarians would be present at the venue for certifying the bulls for participation in the event and to provide treatment for bulls that get injured.
The absence of spectacles since 1984 would be due to lack of demand.
The media often reports the more horrific of bullfighting injuries, such as the September 2011 goring of matador Juan José Padilla's head by a bull in Zaragoza, resulting in the loss of his left eye, use of his right ear, and facial paralysis.
The stars of these spectacles are the bulls, who get top billing and stand to gain fame and statues in their honor, and lucrative product endorsement contracts.
For a period of about 15–20 minutes, the ''raseteurs'' compete to snatch rosettes (''cocarde'') tied between the bulls' horns.
his faena, he will change swords to take up the steel one.
While it is not very popular in Texas, bullfighting is legal (the only U.S. state to allow it), and both bloodless and pure forms of bullfighting occur at rodeos in small Texas towns.
On 7 May 2014, the Supreme Court of India struck down the state law and banned the sport.
Similar to the Portuguese Azorean ''tourada a corda'', the bull is restrained by a rope, generally neither bull nor player is harmed, and the bull is not killed at the end of the fight.
On 12 December 2010, Ecuador's president Rafael Correa announced that in an upcoming referendum, the country would be asked whether to ban bullfighting; in the referendum, held in May 2011, the Ecuadorians agreed on banning the final killing of the bull that happens in a corrida.
A distinct type of bloodless bullfighting is practised in California's Central Valley.
This means the bull is no longer killed before the public, and is instead taken back inside the barn to be killed at the end of the event.
In Spain, opposition to bullfighting is referred to as the ''antitaurino'' movement.
The bull was released into a closed arena where a single fighter on horseback was armed with a lance.
The court also asked the Government of India to amend the law on preventing cruelty to animals to bring bulls within its ambit.
About 30% of Spaniards actively follow bullfighting in Spain.
In the final stage, the ''tercio de muerte'' ("the third of death"), the matador re-enters the ring alone with a small red cape, or ''muleta'', and a sword.
Comical spectacles based on bullfighting, called ''espectáculos cómico-taurinos'' or ''charlotadas'', are still popular in Spain and Mexico.
It does not affect the ''correbous'', a traditional game of the Ebro area (south of Catalonia) where lighted flares are attached to a bull’s horns.
Spanish-style bullfighting is called ''corrida de toros'' (literally "running of bulls") or ''la fiesta'' ("the festival").
On  2010, with the two main parties allowing their members a free vote, the ban was passed 68 to 55, with 9 abstentions.
The Animal Welfare Board of India filed a case in the Supreme Court of India for an outright ban on Jallikattu because of the cruelty to animals and the threat to public safety involved.
The bull is usually killed out of sight of the audience by a professional butcher.
The Supreme Court noted that any flouting of the ban should result in penalties for cruelty to animals under The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
Balls of flammable material are attached to a bull's horns.
If so, he usually embellishes this part of his performance and employs more varied manoeuvres than the standard ''al cuarteo'' method commonly used by banderilleros.
On the other hand, the Bullfighting world is also inextricably linked to religious iconography involved with religious devotion in Spain, with Bullfighters seeking the protection of various Virgins and often being members of religious brotherhoods.
In the next stage, the ''tercio de banderillas'' ("the third of banderillas"), each of the three banderilleros attempts to plant two ''banderillas'', sharp barbed sticks, into the bull's shoulders.
The largest venue of its kind is the Plaza México in central Mexico City, which seats 48,000 people, and the oldest are the Plazas of Béjar and Ronda, in the Spanish provinces of Ávila and Málaga.
He may also demonstrate his domination of the bull by caping and bringing it especially close to his body.
In certain more rural rings, the practice includes award of the bull's tail.
cannot legislate to ban bullfighting, it can stop granting farming subsidies to bull breeders.
According chronicle of the time, in 1128 "... when Alfonso VII of León and Castile married Berengaria of Barcelona  daughter of Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Barcelona at
Bullfighting traces its roots to prehistoric bull worship and sacrifice in Mesopotamia and the Mediterranean region.
Bulls are bred specifically for the sporting event and a specific breed of cattle bred for this purpose is known as "Jellicut".
Originally, at least five distinct regional styles of bullfighting were practised in southwestern Europe: Andalusia, Aragon&ndash;Navarre, Alentejo, Camargue, Aquitaine.
''Bull wrestling'', or ''bull fighting'', is a bloodsport between bulls found in some parts of the world, such as in India (known as ''dhirio''), Japan (''tōgyū''), Balkans (''korida''), Turkey (''boğa güreşi'', literally "bull wrestling"), Persian Gulf, and Southeast Asia, in which the bulls lock horns (under varied rules).
This was symbolic, as the city did not have the power to stop it.
A special type of surgeon has developed, in Spain and elsewhere, to treat ''cornadas'', or horn-wounds.
Religious festivities and royal weddings were celebrated by fights in the local plaza, where noblemen would ride competing for royal favor, and the populace enjoyed the excitement.
On 18 December 2009, the parliament of Catalonia, one of Spain's seventeen Autonomous Communities, approved by majority the preparation of a law to ban bullfighting in Catalonia, as a response to a popular initiative against bullfighting that gathered more than 180,000 signatures.
The matador confronts the bull with the capote, performing a series of passes and observing the behavior and quirks of the bull.
Before the ''course'', an ''abrivado''—a "running" of the bulls in the streets—takes place, in which young men compete to outrun the charging bulls.
The series (tanda) ends with a final series of passes in which the matador, using the cape, tries to maneuver the bull into a position to stab it between the shoulder blades and through the aorta or heart.
