Agri-environment schemes spread across the neighbouring area of Romney Marsh have been set up to provide over 800 hectares of additional flower-rich habitat for the bees.
In queens and workers this is then groomed into the corbiculae (pollen baskets) on the hind legs where it can be seen as bulging masses that may contain as many as a million pollen grains.
", Dickinson's poem, "The Bumble-Bee's Religion" (1881) begins "His little Hearse-like Figure / Unto itself a Dirge / To a delusive Lilac / The vanity divulge / Of Industry and Morals / And every righteous thing / For the divine Perdition / of Idleness and Spring."
These nests are small compared to honeybee hives, which hold about 50,000 bees.
Bumblebees are parasitised by tracheal mites, ''Locustacarus buchneri''; protozoans including ''Crithidia bombi'' and ''Apicystis bombi''; and microsporidians including ''Nosema bombi'' and ''Nosema ceranae''.
In 2006 the bumblebee researcher Dave Goulson founded a registered charity, the Bumblebee Conservation Trust, to prevent the extinction "of any of the UK's bumblebees."
The species ''Bombus hortorum'' in particular has been found to be impacted by the pesticides; their brood development has been reduced and their memory has been negatively affected.
nest, neutral, and food sites), and they learn to use this bouquet to identify both rewarding and unrewarding flowers.
Bumblebees do not exhibit the "bee dances" used by honeybees to tell other workers the locations of food sources.
Bumblebees of the subgenus ''Psithyrus'' (known as 'cuckoo bumblebees', and formerly considered a separate genus) are brood parasites, sometimes called kleptoparasites, in the colonies of other bumblebees, and have lost the ability to collect pollen.
Bees beat their wings about 200 times a second.
Compared to honey bees and carpenter bees, bumblebees have the lowest chill-coma temperature.
The queens were checked for mites and American foulbrood disease.
This scent mark is a general chemical bouquet that bumblebees leave behind in different locations (e.g.
Cuckoo bumblebees do not make nests; their queens aggressively invade the nests of other bumblebee species, kill the resident queens and then lay their own eggs, which are cared for by the resident workers.
Pollen is removed from flowers deliberately or incidentally by bumblebees.
In 2011, London's Natural History Museum led the establishment of an International Union for the Conservation of Nature Bumblebee Specialist Group, chaired by Dr. Paul H. Williams, to assess the threat status of bumblebee species worldwide using Red List criteria.
This ignores the effect of dynamic stall (an airflow separation inducing a large vortex above the wing), which briefly produces several times the lift of the aerofoil in regular flight.
An egg passes along the oviduct to the vagina where there is a chamber called the spermatheca, in which the sperm from the mating is stored.
The method assumes small amplitude oscillations without flow separation.
The exoskeleton of the abdomen is divided into plates called dorsal tergites and ventral sternites.
hyperboreus'', which parasitises its nest.
Some credit physicist Ludwig Prandtl (1875–1953) of the University of Göttingen in Germany with popularizing the idea.
terrestris'' had results that suggests that use of neonicotinoid pesticides can affect how well bumblebees are able to forage and pollinate.
Bumblebees appear as characters, often eponymously, in children's books.
Some bumblebees native to North America are also vanishing, such as ''Bombus terricola'', ''Bombus affinis'', and ''Bombus occidentalis'', and one, ''Bombus franklini'', may be extinct.
Low levels of neonicotinoids can reduce the number of bumblebees in a colony by as much as 55%, and cause dysfunction in the bumblebees' brains.
insularis'' and ''B.
The female ''Psithyrus'' has a number of morphological adaptations for combat, such as larger mandibles, a tough cuticle and a larger venom sac that increase her chances of taking over a nest.
Additionally, John Maynard Smith, a noted biologist with a strong background in aeronautics, has pointed out that bumblebees would not be expected to sustain flight, as they would need to generate too much power given their tiny wing area.
Among Beatrix Potter's "little books", Babbity Bumble and other members of her nest appear in ''The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse'' (1910).
Other bees have similar physiology, but the mechanisms seem best developed and have been most studied in bumblebees.
In 2012 a fossil bumblebee, ''Bombus (Bombus) randeckensis'' was found in the Miocene rocks of the Randeck Maar in southwestern Germany and confidently placed in the subgenus ''Bombus''.
The eggs that hatch develop into female workers, and in time, the queen populates the colony, with workers feeding the young and performing other duties similar to honeybee workers.
sylvestris,'' feeds directly from flowers.
In 2009 and 2010, the Trust attempted to reintroduce the short-haired bumblebee, ''Bombus subterraneus'', which had become extinct in Britain, from the British-derived populations surviving in New Zealand from their introduction there a century earlier.
They use this information to find out if a flower has been recently visited by another bee.
After arriving at a flower, they extract nectar using their long tongues ("glossae") and store it in their crops.
Bumblebees, despite their ability to sting, are eaten by certain predators.
The males do not survive the winter but, like nonparasitic bumblebee queens, ''Psithyrus'' females find suitable locations to spend the winter and enter diapause after mating.
When it enters a flower, the bumblebee's body hairs receive a dusting of pollen from the anthers.
Upon emerging from their cocoons, the ''Psithyrus'' males and females disperse and mate.
They usually emerge from hibernation later than their host species.
When red clover was introduced as a crop to New Zealand in the nineteenth century, it was found to have no local pollinators, and clover seed had accordingly to be imported each year.
The genus has been divided variously into up to 49 subgenera, a degree of complexity criticised by Williams (2008).
(Psithyrus) vestalis'', genetic analysis of individuals captured in the wild showed that about 42% of the host species' nests at a single location had "lost their fight against their parasite".
This genus is the only extant group in the tribe Bombini, though a few extinct related genera (e.g., ''Calyptapis'') are known from fossils.
However, "bumblebee" remained in use, for example in ''The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse'' (1910) by Beatrix Potter, "Suddenly round a corner, she met Babbitty Bumble--"Zizz, Bizz, Bizzz!"
Other species make nests above ground, whether in thick grass or in holes in trees.
Some bumblebees rob nectar, making a hole near the base of a flower to access the nectar while avoiding pollen transfer.
In 1885 and 1886 the Canterbury Acclimatization Society brought in 442 queens, of which 93 survived and quickly multiplied.
Because of the reproductive competition between workers and the queen, bumblebees are considered "primitively eusocial".
A '''bumblebee''' (also written '''bumble bee''') is a member of the genus '''''Bombus''''', part of Apidae, one of the bee families.
Bumblebees rely on this chemical bouquet more when the flower has a high handling time, that is, where it takes a longer time for the bee to find the nectar once inside the flower.
Male bumblebees collect only nectar and do so to feed themselves.
Bumblebees must warm up their bodies considerably to get airborne at low ambient temperatures.
by Romessa Awadalla (2015); ''Bumble Bee Bob Has a Big Butt'' by Papa Campbell (2012); ''Buzz, Buzz, Buzz!
Others say Swiss gas dynamicist Jacob Ackeret (1898–1981) did the calculations.
In nesting bumblebees, it is modified to form a pollen basket, a bare shiny area surrounded by a fringe of hairs used to transport pollen, whereas in cuckoo bees, the hind leg is hairy all round, and pollen grains are wedged among the hairs for transport.
Depending on need, she may allow her egg to be fertilised.
The latter term was used in ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' (''circa'' 1600) by William Shakespeare, "The honie-bags steale from the humble Bees."
Bumblebees are important agricultural pollinators, so their decline in Europe, North America, and Asia is a cause for concern.
They are found primarily in higher altitudes or latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, although they are also found in South America where a few lowland tropical species have been identified.
The longer the tongue, the deeper the bumblebee can probe into a flower and bees probably learn by experience which flower source is best-suited to their tongue length.
Usually, cuckoo bumblebees can be described as queen-intolerant inquilines, since the host queen is often killed to enable the parasite to produce more offspring, though some species, such as ''B.
Bumblebee is the name of a prominent character in the Transformers franchise, his name denotes his Black-on-Yellow vehicle paint job, directly referencing the bee-genus because of its black and yellow stripes.
They adapt to higher elevations by extending their wing stroke amplitude.
Williams identifies 15 subgenera that are seen to be monophyletic, fewer in number, diagnosable from morphology, and at least roughly correspond to behavioural and ecological groupings: Examples of ''Bombus'' species include ''Bombus atratus, Bombus dahlbomii, Bombus fervidus, Bombus lapidarius, Bombus ruderatus,'' and ''Bombus rupestris.''
Before finding and invading a host colony, a ''Psithyrus'' female, such as that of the ''Psithyrus'' species of ''B.
European bumblebees have also been introduced to New Zealand and Tasmania.
caliginosus'', ''B.
Because bumblebees do not overwinter the entire colony, they do not stockpile honey, so are not useful as honey producers.
In temperate zones, young queens (gynes) leave the nest in the autumn and mate, often more than once, with males (drones) that are forcibly driven out of the colony.
Another stimulant to foraging activity is the level of food reserves in the colony.
A bumblebee nest is not organised into hexagonal combs like that of a honeybee; the cells are instead clustered together untidily.
This was one of nine books censored under the Bishop's Ban issued by the Archbishop of Canterbury John Whitgift and the Bishop of London Richard Bancroft.
Bumblebees gather nectar to add to the stores in the nest, and pollen to feed their young.
They may visit quite different flowers from the workers because of their different nutritional needs.
Bee colonies that had been affected by the pesticide released more foragers and collected more pollen than bees who had not been dosed with neonicotinoid.
The horses were fed on clover and hay, both of which were permanently grown on a typical farm.
This early attempt at "surround sound" was unsuccessful, and the music was excluded from the film's release.
Little artificial fertiliser was used.
How neat she spreads the wax!
The muscle temperature can be raised by shivering.
In fertilised queens, the ovaries only become active when the queen starts to lay.
To develop, the larvae must be fed both nectar for carbohydrates and pollen for protein.
Of 19 species of native nestmaking bumblebees and six species of cuckoo bumblebees formerly widespread in Britain, three have been extirpated, eight are in serious decline, and only six remain widespread.
The origin of this claim has been difficult to pin down with any certainty.
Female bumblebees can sting repeatedly, but generally ignore humans and other animals.
The chill-coma temperature in relation to flying insects is the temperature at which flight muscles cannot be activated.
By the summer of 2013, workers of the species were found near the release zone, proving that nests had been established.
The European honey buzzard follows flying bees back to their nest, digs out the nest with their feet, and eats larvae, pupae and adults as they find them.
This is efficient, since it lets the system consisting of muscle and wing operate at its resonant frequency, leading to low energy consumption.
The restored habitat has produced a revival in at least five "Schedule 41 priority" species: the ruderal bumblebee, ''Bombus ruderatus'';  the red-shanked carder bee, ''Bombus ruderarius''; the shrill carder bee, ''Bombus sylvarum''; the brown-banded carder bee, ''Bombus humilis'' and the moss carder bee,  ''Bombus muscorum''.
They tend to visit the same patches of flowers every day, as long as they continue to find nectar and pollen there, a habit known as pollinator or flower constancy.
The corbiculate bees are a monophyletic group.
Compared to a honeybee, a bumblebee has a broader body and a more rounded tip to the abdomen.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), the term "bumblebee" was first recorded as having been used in the English language in the 1530 work ''Lesclarcissement'' by John Palsgrave, "I bomme, as a bombyll bee dothe."
Among the many books for younger children are ''Bumble the Bee'' by Yvon Douran and Tony Neal (2014); ''Bertie Bumble Bee'' by K. I. Al-Ghani (2012); ''Ben the Bumble Bee: How do bees make honey?''
hypnorum'' has spread into the United Kingdom despite hosting high levels of a nematode that normally interferes with queen bees' attempts to establish colonies.
''Bombus pensylvanicus'' is a species that follows this type of colony cycle.
californicus'', ''B.
In at least some species, once a bumblebee has visited a flower, it leaves a scent mark on it.
In the case of the parasitism of ''B.
For example, in California a group of bumblebees consists of largely black species including ''B.
Bumblebees are social insects that form colonies with a single queen.
Sizes are very variable even within species; the largest British species, ''B.
In the early spring, the queen comes out of diapause and finds a suitable place to create her colony.
Larvae are fed pollen in one of two ways, depending on the bumblebee species.
The New Zealand population of buff-tailed bumblebees naturally colonised Tasmania, 1,500 miles away, in 1992.
Queen and worker bumblebees can sting.
Bumblebees are also reared commercially to pollinate tomatoes grown in greenhouses.
Only fertilised queens can lay diploid eggs (one set of chromosomes from a drone, one from the queen) that mature into workers and new queens.
Once they have collected nectar and pollen, female workers return to the nest and deposit the harvest into brood cells, or into wax cells for storage.
Some concerns exist about the impact of the international trade in mass-produced bumblebee colonies.
In 2014, a new bumblebee, ''Bombus cerdanyensis'', was described from Late Miocene lacustrine beds of La Cerdanya, Spain, while another, ''Oligobombus cuspidatus'' was described from the late Eocene Bembridge Marls of the Isle of Wight.
The orchestral interlude ''Flight of the Bumblebee'' was composed (c. 1900) by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov.
Although a large majority of bumblebees follow such monogynous colony cycles that only involve one queen, some select Bombus species (such as ''Bombus atratus'') will spend part of their life cycle in a polygynous phase (have multiple queens in one nest during these periods of polygyny).
Magnan refers to his assistant André Sainte-Laguë.
However, bumblebees live in insulated shelters and can shiver to warm up before venturing into the cold.
vosnesenskii'', ''B.
Like their relatives the honeybees, bumblebees feed on nectar, using their long hairy tongues to lap up the liquid; the proboscis is folded under the head during flight.
Many species of bumblebees also exhibit "nectar robbing": instead of inserting the mouthparts into the flower in the normal way, these bees bite directly through the base of the corolla to extract nectar, avoiding pollen transfer.
The queen remains in hibernation until spring of the following year in order to optimize conditions to search for a nest.
The scientist and illustrator Moses Harris (1731–1785) painted accurate watercolour drawings of bumblebees in his ''An Exposition of English Insects Including the Several Classes of Neuroptera, Hymenoptera, & Diptera, or Bees, Flies, & Libellulae (1776–80)''.
When at rest or flying, the proboscis is kept folded under the head.
After the emergence of the first or second group of offspring, workers take over the task of foraging and the queen spends most of her time laying eggs and caring for larvae.
terrestris'' by ''B.
Compared to honeybees they are larger and stouter-bodied.
Sophie Cardinal and Bryan Danforth comment that "While remarkable, a hypothesis of dual origins of advanced eusociality is congruent with early studies on corbiculate morphology and social behavior."
These bees may be offering some form of communication based on the buzzing sounds made by their wings, which may stimulate other bees to start foraging.
Harmless insects such as hoverflies often derive protection from resembling bumblebees, in Batesian mimicry, and may be confused with them.
Bees monitor the amount of honey in the honeypots, and when little is left or when high quality food is added, they are more likely to go out to forage.
Pocket-making bumblebees create pockets of pollen at the base of the brood-cell clump from which the larvae feed themselves.
Of the bumblebees ''Bombus bimaculatus'' has the lowest at .
Unlike honeybees, bumblebees only store a few days' worth of food, so are much more vulnerable to food shortages.
From 2011 the Trust, in partnership with Natural England, Hymettus and the RSPB, has reintroduced short-haired bumblebee queens from Skåne in southern Sweden to restored flower-rich meadows at Dungeness in Kent.
dahlbomii'' of Chile, up to about 40&nbsp;mm long, and described as "flying mice" and "a monstrous fluffy ginger beast".
In 1599, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, someone, possibly Tailboys Dymoke, published ''Caltha Poetarum: Or The Bumble Bee'', under the pseudonym "T. Cutwode".
Unlike the workers of more advanced social insects such as honeybees, bumblebee workers are fertile, and can lay unfertilised haploid eggs (with only a single set of chromosomes) that develop into viable male bumblebees.
They forage using colour and spatial relationships to identify flowers to feed from.
While foraging, bumblebees can reach ground speeds of up to .
Bumblebees generally visit flowers that exhibit the bee pollination syndrome and these patches of flowers may be up to 1–2&nbsp;km from their colony.
The industry grew quickly, starting with other companies in the Netherlands.
In ''On the Origin of Species'' (1859), Charles Darwin speculated about "humble-bees" and their interactions with other species:
J. K. Rowling said the name "seemed to suit the headmaster, because one of his passions is music and I imagined him walking around humming to himself".
In each case, Müllerian mimicry provides the bees in the group with a selective advantage.
Depending on the species and morph, the warning colours range from entirely black, to bright yellow, red, orange, white, and pink.
Where Watts wrote "How skilfully she builds her cell!
The temperature of the flight muscles, which occupy much of the thorax, needs to be at least  before flight can take place.
The cuckoo bumblebees ''Psithyrus'' have sometimes been treated as a separate genus but are now considered to be part of ''Bombus'', in one or more subgenera.
The world's first bumblebee sanctuary was established at Vane Farm in the Loch Leven National Nature Reserve in Scotland in 2008.
In later years, McMasters has backed away from this origin, suggesting there could be multiple sources, and the earliest he has found was a reference in the 1934 book '''' by French entomologist Antoine Magnan (1881–1938); they had applied the equations of air resistance to insects and found  their flight was impossible, but  "One shouldn't be surprised that the results of the calculations don't square with reality".
Workers eventually begin to lay male eggs later in the season when the queen's ability to suppress their reproduction diminishes.
The following passage appears in the introduction to ''Le Vol des Insectes'':
Unlike in honeybees, a bumblebee's sting lacks barbs, so the bee can sting repeatedly without injuring itself; by the same token, the sting is not left in the wound.
Other bees in California include a group of species all banded black and yellow.
Pollen-storing bumblebees keep pollen in separate wax pots and feed it to the larvae.
Nests may be dug up by badgers and eaten whole, including any adults present.
They survive in a resting state (diapause), generally below ground, until the weather warms up in the spring with the early bumblebee being the species that is among the first to emerge.
Four species of bumblebee from the United Kingdom were therefore imported as pollinators.
His daughter, the poet Sylvia Plath, wrote a group of poems about bees late in 1962, within four months of her suicide, transforming her father's interest into her poetry.
The genus ''Bombus'', the only one extant in the tribe Bombini, comprises over 250 species; for an overview of the differences between bumblebees and other bees and wasps, see characteristics of common wasps and bees.
Wax is secreted from glands on the abdomen and extruded between the sternites where it resembles flakes of dandruff.
Farms thus provided flowering clover and flower-rich meadows, favouring bumblebees.
Incidental removal occurs when bumblebees come in contact with the anthers of a flower while collecting nectar.
The largest bumblebee species in the world is ''B.
Bumblebees use a combination of colour and spatial relationships to learn from which flowers to forage.
Greater use of native pollinators, such as ''Bombus ignitus'' in China and Japan, has occurred as a result.
Advanced eusocial behaviour appears to have evolved twice in the group, giving rise to controversy, now largely settled, as to the phylogenetic origins of the four tribes; it had been supposed that eusocial behaviour had evolved only once, requiring the Apini to be close to the Meliponini, which they do not resemble.
The bumblebee tribe Bombini is one of four groups of corbiculate bees (those with pollen baskets) in the Apidae, the others being the Apini (honeybees), Euglossini (orchid bees), and Meliponini (stingless bees).
The thick pile created by long setae (bristles) acts as insulation to keep bumblebees warm in cold weather; species from cold climates have longer setae (and thus thicker insulation) than those from the tropics.
Bumblebees are increasingly cultured for agricultural use as pollinators, among other reasons because they can pollinate plants such as tomato in greenhouses by buzz pollination whereas other pollinators cannot.
Each species of cuckoo bee has a specific host species, which it may physically resemble.
However, bumblebees have been seen to fly in colder ambient temperatures.
An old provincial name, "dumbledor", also denoted a buzzing insect such as a bumblebee or cockchafer, "dumble" probably imitating the sound of these insects, while "dor" meant "beetle".
Dipteran flies in the families Syrphidae (hoverflies), Asilidae (robber flies), Tabanidae (horseflies), Oestridae (bot or warble flies) and Bombyliidae (bee flies) all include Batesian mimics of bumblebees, resembling them closely enough to deceive at least some predators.
Mechanisation removed the need for horses and most of the clover; artificial fertilisers encouraged the growth of taller grasses, outcompeting the meadow flowers.
For this species the cycle begins in February, reproduction starts in July or August, and ends in the winter months.
The drones and workers die as the weather turns colder; the young queens feed intensively to build up stores of fat for the winter.
Similar declines have been reported in Ireland, with four species designated endangered, and another two considered vulnerable to extinction.
Bumblebee species are not normally aggressive, but may sting in defence of their nest, or if harmed.
However the OED also states that the term "'''humblebee'''" predates it, having first been used in 1450 in ''Fysshynge wyth Angle'', "In Juyll the greshop & the humbylbee in the medow."
The decline has been caused by habitat loss, the mechanisation of agriculture, and pesticides.
It is scraped from the abdomen by the legs, moulded until malleable and used in the construction of honeypots, to cover the eggs, to line empty cocoons for use as storage containers and sometimes to cover the exterior of the nest.
In Europe, birds including bee-eaters and shrikes capture adult bumblebees on the wing; smaller birds such as great tits also occasionally learn to take bumblebees, while camouflaged crab spiders catch them as they visit flowers.
Although the bees affected by the pesticide were able to collect more pollen, they took a longer amount of time doing so.
The last native British short-haired bumblebee was captured near Dungeness in 1988.
Further, it is necessary, since insect motor nerves generally cannot fire 200 times per second.
Bumblebees are also capable of buzz pollination, in which they dislodge pollen from the anthers by creating a resonant vibration with their flight muscles.
This is the most northernmost occurrence of any eusocial insect.
Bumblebees are Northern Hemisphere animals.
The colonies are smaller than those of honeybees, growing to as few as 50 individuals in a nest.
Most of the flowers, and the bumblebees that fed on them, disappeared from Britain by the early 1980s.
Bumblebees have round bodies covered in soft hair (long branched setae) called ''pile'', making them appear and feel fuzzy.
This significant increase in pesticide and fertilizer use associated with the industrialization of agriculture has had adverse effects on the ''Bombus'' genus.The bees are directly exposed to the chemicals in two ways: by consuming nectar that has been directly treated with pesticide, or through physical contact with treated plants and flowers.
''Bumblebee'' is also the name of an automotive Racing stripe that wraps around the grill instead of down the centre of the vehicle; it can be found mainly on Chevrolet Camaros (which happens to be the Transformers Autobot's most popular vehicle mode).
The tree bumblebee ''B.
Many  species of ''Bombus'', including the group sometimes called ''Psithyrus'' (cuckoo bumblebees), have evolved Müllerian mimicry, where the different bumblebees in a region resemble each other, so that a young predator need only learn to avoid any of them once.
The fossil record for bees is very incomplete, but by 2012 some 11 specimens that might possibly be Bombini, some poorly documented, had been described; some (such as ''Calyptapis florissantensis'' from Florissant, USA, and ''Oligoapis beskonakensis'' from Beskonak, Turkey) dated from the Oligocene.
