They test new technical equipment and develop new techniques, strategies, and procedures for finding hidden intelligence-gathering devices.
The Chief Special Agent's office was used not only for security work within the State Department but also in several aspects of immigration control and in the control of crime on the high seas.
Where there exists an identifiable nexus to the United States, DSS coordinates their alien smuggling investigations with the resident or regional Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Attache.
* Gregory B. Starr (2013- ) Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Diplomatic Security and Director of the Diplomatic Security Service.
Later, security functions were merged and, in 1948, Foreign Correlations (an intelligence service) was incorporated into the office, bringing in that aspect of security.
These agents are given special training in consular functions, and are commissioned consular officers.
This staff worked closely with Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and FBI Counterintelligence.
The Chief Special Agent's office, working as the investigative and identification arm of the Passport Office, successfully exposed several of these subversive operations.
These materials receive the same secure shipment as diplomatic pouches but, unlike diplomatic pouches, are declared to customs on entry into a country.
Marshals Service, Guatemalan National Police, and INTERPOL to locate alleged murder suspect 24-year-old Ariel Beau Patrick, who was taken into custody in Guatemala.
* Francis X. Taylor (2002–2005), Brigadier General and former head of the Air Force's Office of Special Investigations.
The Department continues its efforts to enhance its domestic security program.
They work closely with host country law enforcement agencies, and have recently been instrumental in dismantling several large alien smuggling rings.
Tomas was arrested by law enforcement officials from the Philippine National Bureau of Investigations and National Police.
With the outbreak of World War II, the office expanded again to manage interning and exchanging diplomatic officials of enemy powers and screening Americans, or those claiming American citizenship, after they were forced to leave occupied territories.
If there is a nexus to diplomatic activities, the U.S. Foreign Service, or terrorism, DSS is typically involved.
The Diplomatic Courier Service is constantly evolving to meet the increasingly restrictive guidelines imposed by various countries.
Special Agents Bill Miller and Jeff Riner were given a tip by an associate of Ramzi Yousef about his location.
These students return to their countries better prepared to fight terrorism and protect Americans overseas during a crisis.
The DSS is the federal law enforcement branch of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security.
This is because the host country will not investigate or prosecute diplomats, who are considered to have immunity from their laws.
As the threat of terrorist acts against America grew, the SY expanded its role as a part of the United States Department of State.
The assumption is that the name "Office of the Chief Special Agent," which was sometimes used in 1916, and to this day by various information portals to include the Department of State's website, to downplay the bureau's original mission.
The Department of State's Bureau of Secret Intelligence was also known as '''U-1''', an off-the-books adjunct to the Division of Information.
Recently multi-agency press releases from the U.S. Attorney’s offices use the technically correct Diplomatic Security Service.
Ambassador to the United Nations, and foreign dignitaries/diplomats who visit the United States.
SEOs also work to detect and prevent the loss of sensitive information from technical espionage, a continuing challenge in light of rapidly changing technology in detection equipment, computer systems, intrusion detection systems, and access control equipment.
'''Contract security and administrative support staff'''
With the help of the U.S.
Almost 100 direct hire DS employees and contractors have been   Killed in Action(KIA) while employed by the bureau.
The Office of Security was also responsible for starting the use of overseas agents carrying out various tasks to protect the security of the United States.
STS's support technical security support domestically and at ESC's and ESO's worldwide.
Reacting to the crisis in electronic surveillance, SY upgraded its technical security program and began hiring engineers.
In the 1930s, it became clear that there were major passport fraud activities worldwide involving both Communists and Nazis.
They conducted sensitive investigations, especially on the operations of foreign agents and their activities in the United States.
Special Agents are sometimes referred to as "DS Agents" or "DSS Agents."
The DSS is the primary conduit utilized by the Bureau of Diplomatic Security and the Department of State for the majority of all security and law enforcement matters.
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS)'''.
On November 23, 2009 DSS Special Agents from the U.S. embassy’s Regional Security Office (RSO) worked closely with the U.S.
Both terms are used interchangeably within the agency and other organizations.
4151, the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986, which codified the recommendations of the Inman panel.
Such cases would involve other agencies such as the Department of Justice.
All training programs enhance the understanding of both foreign intelligence and espionage threats and countermeasures, and educate employees on the foreign intelligence environment.
App., and its regulations, 41 C.F.R.
Overseas SEO's manage Engineering Service Centers (ESC) and Engineering Service Offices (ESO), which provide technical security to one or multiple posts under the management of Regional Security Officers (RSO).
OSAC provides a forum for sharing best practices and provides the tools needed to cope with today’s ever-changing challenges and security-related issues abroad.
Also, the Bureau expanded to provide state-of-the-art security to the Department's communications and information systems.
Since then, more than $49 million has been paid for information that prevented or resolved acts of international terrorism against Americans.
Beginning in the late 1960s, several ambassadors and Department officials were kidnapped or assassinated.
The DS Rewards for Justice Program was initiated in 1992.
The assignment of Seabee teams to search for listening devices at the U.S. embassies in Moscow and Warsaw led to the Seabee program within the Department.
Through 2001, $62 million had been paid to over forty people in this effort.
DS's mission is to provide a safe and secure environment for the conduct of U.S. foreign policy.
Since the September 11 attacks in 2001, DS has played an active role in the global "war on terrorism".
Pope, formerly of San Francisco, was taken into custody by Mexican authorities in La Paz, Mexico on January 12 and returned to the United States on January 18, 2011 to face trial.
Investigation of passport fraud in New York City led to the discovery of a Soviet intelligence network that, in turn, revealed a number of Soviet agents and American Communist Party members engaged in espionage activities.
By the end of the 1950s, hundreds of listening devices planted by foreign intelligence services were found in U.S. embassies.
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) were officially established.
Diplomatic Security Service''' was known as the '''Bureau of Secret Intelligence''' at its inception (1916).
February 3, 2011 - Paul Eischeid, a fugitive, and member of the Hells Angels who had eluded U.S.
DSS Special Agents are responsible for the protection of the Secretary of State, certain foreign dignitaries during their visits to the U.S., and others as designated by the Secretary of State.
These actions highlighted the possible exploitation of U.S. diplomats for political purposes.
Security officers received more intensive training and learned new skills, like defensive driving.
The '''Bureau of Diplomatic Security - DS''' is the political face and parent organization of the '''U.S.
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) located Derrick Yancey, a former Deputy Sheriff from DeKalb County Georgia, in Punta Gorda, Belize.
AMW - America's Most Wanted featured the capture of Robert Snyder in Belize - DSS Special Agent (RSO) Rob Kelty interviewed by John Walsh - Segment aired on February 27, 2010 on AMW.
Any time there is a threat or an attack against a U.S. embassy or consulate, DSS Special Agents are the first on the scene to investigate.
One important result of that report was the separation of security functions in the Department.
Major activities include protective services, management of security programs for Foreign Service posts, criminal investigations, and background investigations, in addition to administrative, training, and liaison functions.
'''Civil Service specialists'''
In 1984, Secretary of State George Shultz formed an advisory panel to study make recommendations on minimizing the probability of terrorist attacks on U.S. citizens and facilities.
Marshals for nearly eight years—is finally in handcuffs.
* Robert E. Lamb (1985–1989), Foreign Service Officer, was Assistant Secretary of State for Administration and Security from 1983–1987, and then became the Assistant Secretary of State for Diplomatic Security when the position was formally established.
Starr was reappointed February 1, 2013 as the DSS Director.
The Office of Protective Intelligence and Investigations in the Threat Intelligence and Analysis division has DSS Special Agents who travel all over the world investigating threats to the Secretary of State and U.S. embassies and consulates.
Yancey was featured on America's Most Wanted.
Diplomatic Security Service is one of the most widely represented law enforcement organizations in the world, its capability to track and capture fugitives who have fled U.S. jurisdiction to avoid prosecution is often considered unmatched.
As mentioned earlier DSS is structured as a law enforcement agency, primarily made up of U.S. Federal Agents.
Diplomatic Security Service in Argentina led to the elusive fugitive's capture.
* Sheldon Krys (1989–1991), Foreign Service Officer, was also concurrently the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Information Management.
Engineers plan and conduct technical surveillance inspections to detect and nullify clandestine intrusions.
SEOs continually are challenged to identify security risks, analyze those risks, and develop systems to ensure the integrity of Department of State computers and worldwide network information systems.
Postal Inspection Service (USPIS), security at State expanded and increased the depth of personnel investigations.
The Antiterrorism Assistance Program, provides terrorism-focused police training to civilian security personnel from friendly governments.
The '''Bureau of Diplomatic Security''', more commonly known as '''Diplomatic Security''', or '''DS''', is the security and law enforcement arm of the United States Department of State.
DSS worked with Philippine officials to apprehend Tomas, who is wanted in South Korea on charges that he defrauded an individual there of more than $200,000.
Authorities say an Interpol Red Notice, as well as investigations by the U.S.
* Richard J. Griffin (2005–2007), a former Secret Service Agent and former Inspector General of the Veteran's Administration.
The DSS was structured as a law enforcement agency, primarily made up of Federal Agents.
SEOs protect personnel, facilities, and sensitive information against espionage, terrorism, and crime.
In recent years, DSS has expanded its overseas investigations program with A/RSO-I's (Assistant Regional Security Officer-Investigators) also known as "Overseas Criminal Investigators."
Both terms DS and DSS are used interchangeably within the State Department and other agencies.
Marshals Service and our law enforcement counterparts in Peru to locate Viste,” said Jeffrey W. Culver, Director of the Diplomatic Security Service."
DS continues to conduct criminal and personnel security investigations critical to the protection of American borders and the national security of the United States.
However, he still retained his title of Special Assistant to the Secretary and reported directly to the Secretary on sensitive matters.
By the end of the 1980s, DS began sharing information with the American business community operating abroad, through the Overseas Security Advisory Council, which itself expanded to include all members of the U.S. private sector, including non-governmental organizations, religious groups, academic organizations, and associations.
The DSS consists of the 2,000 Special Agents charged with protection of visiting foreign dignitaries and U.S. diplomatic missions overseas.
Despite multiple awards, appeals from multiple U.S.
Under the Assistant Secretary of State are several Deputy Assistant Secretaries; the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary is the Director for the Diplomatic Security Service (DSS).
Postal Inspection Service (USPIS) had the best laboratory, the director of the new agency was recruited there.
'''Security Engineering Officers''' (SEO) are responsible for managing the Department's technical and information security programs, projects, and resources throughout the world.
While focused on improving security at U.S. missions abroad, several highly publicized incidents at the State Department firmly emphasized the need to strengthen domestic security as well.
Tomas was assigned to the U.S. embassy in Seoul as a Customs and Border Protection Officer.
Unlike investigations conducted in the United States by other federal agencies, DSS Agents have to work jointly with their foreign counterparts in often hostile areas of the world.
Overseas DSS must take the role of local and state law enforcement when investigating issues such as spousal or child abuse by U.S. government personnel assigned to the embassy.
The agency develops and implements security programs to protect the more than 100 domestic State Department facilities as well as the residence of the Secretary of State.
In 1918, the United States Congress passed legislation requiring passports for Americans traveling abroad and visas for aliens wishing to enter the United States.
With more than 480 special agents assigned to diplomatic missions in 157 countries, DS is the most widely represented American security and law enforcement organization around the world.
Marshals tell AMW that the accused murderer was taken down in Buenos Aires on Feb. 3, 2011.
'''Special Agents''' of the '''U.S.
SY began to survey U.S. embassies for vulnerability to attack.
Upon arrival at a local bar, at 6:05 PM local time, a DSS agent tapped on Yancey's shoulder and told him "It is time to go."
These highly skilled engineers develop, maintain, and install electrical and mechanical systems such as access and perimeter controls, closed-circuit television, alarms, locks, and x-ray and bomb detection equipment.
Since the bombings, the State Department has spent billions of dollars to improve systems and facilities and increase security staffing to protect personnel and dependents around the world.
On July 30, 2010, special agents from the U.S. Department of State's Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) located fugitive George Alvin Viste in Peru.
Diplomatic pouches can contain thousands of pounds of equipment and construction materials, as well as classified documents bound for sensitive posts.
Robert A. Hartung, Assistant Director, of Diplomatic Security's Threat Investigations and Analysis Directorate, announced on September 2, 2010 that the U.S. Department of State’s Rewards for Justice (RFJ) program is offering rewards of up to $5 million each for information that leads law enforcement or security forces to Hakimullah Mehsud and Wali ur Rehman.
It is a felony to apply or assist someone in applying for a U.S. Passport or Visa when they are not entitled to one.
After the war, Secretary of State Edward Stettinius undertook a complete reorganization of the Department that directly affected the Chief Special Agent's office.
Also in that year, the Marine Security Guard Program was inaugurated at U.S. embassies.
Personnel security background investigations are conducted on all employees, applicants, and contractors seeking employment with the Department.
DSS investigations, carried out by numerous Field Offices and Resident Agent offices throughout the U.S, and by RSOs overseas, focus mainly on passport or visa fraud.
DS has protected Yasser Arafat, the Dalai Lama and Prince Charles.
'''Diplomatic Couriers''' protect information by ensuring the secure movement of classified U.S. Government material across international borders to over 180 Foreign Service missions.
Special agents investigate more than 3,500 passport and visa fraud violations each year.
SY assumed responsibility for the security of Department of State domestic facilities, which included information security, building passes, and the physical security of Department of State facilities.
The Diplomatic Security Service investigates crimes against State Department personnel and other U.S. Government personnel and families assigned under Chief of Mission authority at a U.S. embassy or consulate abroad.
The Council is established under authority of the Secretary of State pursuant to 22 U.S.C.
* Gregory B. Starr (2007–2008), Acting Assistant Secretary, a Diplomatic Security Special Agent and Director of the Diplomatic Security Service.
The division conducts numerous counterintelligence and security awareness training programs for all U.S. Government personnel requesting or having access to sensitive Department of State facilities and information.
The Inman Panel's recommendations received strong support from Congress, and on August 27, 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed H.R.
The Secretary requested the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) review and make recommendations on physical and personnel security.
Assistant Secretaries within the State Department are allowed to use the title of Ambassador.
DSS Special Agents on the New York JTTF provided critical information in the immediate aftermath of 9/11 and DSS Agents assigned as Regional Security Officers around the world tracked down leads for the FBI and other federal agencies.
In addition to investigating crimes involving passport and visa fraud, DSS agents are engaged in other types of investigation.
* Eric J. Boswell (1996–1998), Foreign Service Officer.
Since 1984, DS has administered the Rewards for Justice Program, which pays monetary rewards of up to $5 million, or in recent years even more, upon special authorization by the Secretary of State, to individuals who provide information which substantially leads to the countering of terrorist attacks against United States persons.
On April 26, 2010 after failing to check in with pretrial services within two days of his April 21 hearing on his bond status, Andrew Warren 42, was apprehended by a combined team of Norfolk Police Department Fugitive Investigators, DSS Special Agents and U.S.
The discovery of a listening device in the Great Seal at the U.S. embassy in Moscow was the catalyst for developing countermeasures technology.
To find out more about the Council, please visit  www.OSAC.gov.
Today the Diplomatic Security Counterintelligence Directorate conducts a robust counterintelligence program designed to deter, detect, and neutralize the efforts of foreign intelligence services targeting Department of State personnel, facilities, and diplomatic missions worldwide.
* Anthony Cecil Eden Quainton (1992–1995), Foreign Service Officer, attempted to transfer the Bureau over to the Department of Justice
'''Security Technical Specialists''' (STS) are support personnel within the Bureau of Diplomatic Security who assist in worldwide technical security programs.
All counterespionage investigations are conducted in close coordination with the FBI in accordance with their statutory mandate to prosecute instances or allegations of suspected espionage.
On February 11, 2009, the United States District Court, Southern District of California issued a federal arrest warrant for Yaffe for unlawful flight to avoid prosecution.
The Chief Special Agent began reporting his normal activities to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.
Yaffe, wanted in California for multiple counts of alleged child sexual assault, kidnapping, and unlawful flight to avoid prosecution, was returned to the United States on May 12, 2009, to face trial.
Although the Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) is an organization within the Bureau of Diplomatic Security, it is the primary conduit utilized by the Bureau of Diplomatic Security for the majority of all law enforcement and security matters.
Additionally, Diplomatic courier control officers escort sensitive, but unclassified, crated materials within the United States and across international boundaries.
Belize authorities then arrested Yancey.
John Pope has been wanted by the San Francisco District Attorney's Office since October 20, 1998, in connection with allegations of fraud concerning embezzlement of $1,000,000 from the estate of a deceased San Francisco businessman.
On September 19, 2009, Special Agents from the U.S.
Mr. Myers’ arrest is the culmination of a three-year joint DSS/FBI investigation.
For people who do not work for the Department of State (DOS), there is much confusion about the relationship between the DS and the DSS.
The Director for the Diplomatic Security Service, who is the top ranking, active Special Agent in the service, leads a force of Special Agents, Diplomatic Couriers, Security Engineering Officers, and Security Technical Specialists.
A new security office was set up, separate from the Chief Special Agent's office.
Domestically SEO's manage, plan, and provide engineering support to worldwide technical security programs and to the Secretary of State and visiting dignitaries.
On November 4, 1985, the U.S. Bureau of Diplomatic Security (DS) and the U.S.
The Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) was created in 1985 under the Federal Advisory Committee Act to promote security cooperation between American private sector interests worldwide and the U.S. Department of State.
DSS also conducts tens of thousands of background investigations per year - not just for the Department of State, but for other federal agencies as well.
For the heads of the DS predecessor (SY) see the Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) page.
Viste is wanted in Clark County, Washington on seven different criminal charges including the rape of a child, child molestation, and incest.
With the coming of WWII in the minds of the political leaders of America, they decided it was time to develop a separate branch of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security.
One major addition to the Bureau of Diplomatic Society stemming from the addition of the Office of Security was the development of security staffs on a regional level.
Even within Department of State there is still some confusion regarding the difference between DS and the DSS.
Senators, and despite having maintained his integrity by not backing down, Secretary Rusk removed Otepka from his position and ultimately fired him.
Although a back-door approach, these investigations succeeded in exposing for the first time the existence of such Soviet operations.
During World War I, the Chief Special Agent's office was given the responsibility for interning and exchanging diplomatic officials of enemy powers and assisting in screening people repatriated from enemy-controlled areas.
DS receives about 3,000 requests for overseas investigative assistance from U.S. law enforcement agencies annually and has achieved notable success in locating and apprehending wanted fugitives who have fled the United States .
The panel examined the Department's security programs and, in a report published in June 1985, made its recommendations to the Secretary.
SY responded to the emerging threat by hiring over a hundred new agents and purchasing vehicles, radios, and other support equipment.
Judge Ellen S. Huvelle of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia issued a bench warrant for the arrest of the former CIA officer.
Yaffe was profiled on the television show America’s Most Wanted on April 11, 2009.
This new Office of Security (SY) had a program of regional security staffs in the United States and, for the first time, security officers at missions overseas.
The new Bureau had a clearly defined mandate outlined in legislation and structured along the lines of other Federal law enforcement, security, and intelligence agencies.
The Diplomatic Security Service maintains agents in dozens of Joint Terrorism Task Force operations around the country.
Diplomatic Security Service of the Department of State was formally established in 1916 under Secretary of State Robert Lansing.
Also during this decade, a special assignments staff was created to investigate possible misconduct and contact with foreign intelligence services by State Department personnel.
The intensity of terrorist attacks against Americans increased.
Security engineering officers (SEOs) continue to design and manage security equipment programs at all posts, which are vital to the protection of our people and facilities abroad.
The counterintelligence division conducts aggressive counterintelligence inquires and counterespionage investigations with other U.S. Government agencies.
The DSS is an organization within DS.
DS also provides protective services to distinguished dignitaries visiting the United States, as well as 24-hour protection to the Secretary of State.
The security improvements developed and implemented during the 1980s helped Americans withstand the heightened threat in the next decade.
Diplomatic Security Service - DSS''' are sworn Federal law enforcement agents who are responsible for the security of Foreign Service personnel, property and sensitive information throughout the world.
As overseas security requirements increased, so did the demands on our Diplomatic Courier Service.
The DSS is an organization within the Bureau of Diplomatic Security (DS).
Shortly thereafter, the Chief Special Agent's office began investigating passport and visa fraud.
The rages of terrorism continued, creating a new and increasingly dangerous threat to U.S. citizens and missions abroad, as well as to distinguished visitors to the United States.
§ 2656 and in accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), as amended, 5 U.S.C.
The panel made recommendations concerning access control, physical and technical security, security awareness for employees, restriction of traffic around the building, creation of a chemical/biological program, and additional resources for security.
DSS also investigates other alleged improper or illegal behavior by Department of State personnel, to include incidents of espionage.
U.S. Navy Seabees and a cadre of specially trained Security Technical Specialists (STS) assist SEOs with the maintenance and repair of our security systems.
On January 28, 2009, a news story broke about a CIA station chief in Algiers, Algeria who was under investigation by DSS for having allegedly raped two Muslim women.
However, they spend a large amount of their time working with the fraud units in consular sections, investigating visa and passport fraud, alien smuggling and human trafficking, although they have responsibilities outside of their respective Consular assignments for mission security.
Three agents were recruited from the United States Secret Service because of their experience with counterfeit documents.
Was first the Director of the Office of Foreign Missions, then brought on to concurrently be the DS Assistant Secretary.
Before the United States entered World War I, German and Austrian spies were conducting operations in New York City.
Sometimes Americans, including Foreign Service Officers (FSOs) are the target of DSS investigations, such as an FSO selling visas for personal gain.
On October 8, 2010, Special Agents from the U.S. Department of State's Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) located Dario Sarimiento Tomas in Pampanga, Philippines.
