* Many religions prescribe a particular way to live, which includes customs relating to disposal of the dead.
Intentional burial, particularly with grave goods, may be one of the earliest detectable forms of religious practice since, as Philip Lieberman suggests, it may signify a "concern for the dead that transcends daily life."
Their locations are occasionally discovered during construction projects.
As such all graves are dug to greater depth for the initial burial than the traditional six feet to facilitate this practice.
Bodies of small children and infants often produce very little in the way of "ashes", as ashes are composed of bone, and young people have softer bones, largely cartilage.
In general, however, clothing buried with a body decays more rapidly than the same buried alone.
The reasoning for the plate was to hinder their return home by suppressing any spirits in the coffin.
When Walt Disney was cremated his ashes were buried in a secret location in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, California.
In other cases, it may be to prevent the grave from becoming a tourist attraction or a destination of pilgrimage.
For example, United States construction companies have run into conflict with Native American groups that have wanted to preserve their burial grounds from disturbance.
Some burial sites at Forest Lawn, such as those of Humphrey Bogart, Mary Pickford and Michael Jackson, are secluded in private gated gardens or mausoleums with no public access.
The body should be placed with the feet facing the Qiblih.
Exhumations may also occur as part of grave robbing, or as an act of desecration to show disrespect.
Sites of large former battlefields may also contain one or more mass graves.
In lieu of recovery, divers or submersibles may leave a plaque dedicated to the memory of the ship or boat and its crew, and family members are invited to attend the ceremony.
The remains of the Venerable or the Blessed are sometimes exhumed to ensure their bodies lie in their correctly marked graves, as their gravesites usually become places for devotees to gather, and also to collect relics.
Reinterment refers to the reburial of a corpse.
Burial is not necessarily a public health requirement.
Many Ancient Egyptian mummies have been removed for study and public display.
Exemplary sites include Shanidar in Iraq, Kebara Cave in Israel and Krapina in Croatia.
An example is the Mercy Brown Vampire Incident of Rhode Island, which occurred in 1892.
Burial is often seen as indicating respect for the dead.
In the United States, coffins are usually covered by a grave liner or a burial vault, which prevents the coffin from collapsing under the weight of the earth or floating away during a flood.
* A decomposing body releases unpleasant gases related to decomposition.
Secondary burial is a burial, cremation, or inhumation that is dug into a pre-existing barrow or grave any time after its initial construction.
Warriors in some ancient societies were buried in an '''upright''' position.
The United Kingdom's Tomb of the Unknown Warrior is in Westminster Abbey, France's is buried underneath the Arc de Triomphe, Italy's is buried in the Monumento al Milite Ignoto in Rome, Canada's is buried at the National War Memorial in Ottawa, Australia's Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is located at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, New Zealand's Tomb of the Unknown Warrior is in Wellington, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Russia is in Alexander Garden in Moscow and the United States' Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is located at Arlington National Cemetery.
For example, when the remains of MIA soldiers are discovered, or the case of Nicholas II of Russia and his family, who were exhumed from unmarked graves near Yekaterinburg to be reinterred in the Peter and Paul Fortress in St. Petersburg.
Families may make this decision to locate the deceased in a more pertinent or convenient place.
* Respect for the physical remains.
They are one of the chief sources of information on prehistoric cultures, and numerous archaeological cultures are defined by their burial customs, such as the
Pets and other animals of emotional significance are often ceremonially buried.
Personal objects of the deceased, such as a favorite piece of jewelry or photograph, may be included with the body.
Folk belief often held such individuals could rise as some form of undead (such as a vampire) and burying them at crossroads would inhibit their ability to find and wreak havoc on their living relations and former associates.
The formal prayer and the ring are meant to be used for those who have reached fifteen years of age.
An additional benefit of using containers to hold the body is that if the soil covering the corpse is washed away by a flood or some other natural process then the corpse will still not be exposed to open air.
Other ritual practices place the body in a '''flexed''' position with the legs bent or '''crouched''' with the legs folded up to the chest.
As a result, burial grounds are found throughout the world.
In recent times, cremation has become a popular option in the western world.
Burials may be placed in a number of different positions.
Notable individuals may be exhumed to answer historical questions.
Depending on the culture, the way the body is positioned may have great significance.
Many prominent people were buried in private cemeteries on their respective properties, sometimes in lead-lined coffins.
As such, burial is seen as a means of preventing smells from expanding into open air.
Permanent burial in privately run cemeteries is allowed.
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was once believed to have been buried in such a manner, but today it is known that such burials were never allowed in Mozart's Vienna whose Magistrate refused to agree to the burial regulations decreed by Joseph II.
The burial of bodies in the '''extended''' position, i.e., lying flat with arms and legs straight, or with the arms folded upon the chest, and with the eyes and mouth closed.
Douaumont ossuary is one such mass grave, and it contains the remains of 130,000 soldiers from both sides of the Battle of Verdun.
However, in some cultures, being buried face down shows marked disrespect.
Deceased individuals who were either not identified or misidentified at the time of burial may be reburied if survivors so wish.
In 2013, a viral video caught a dog burying a dead puppy by pushing sand with its own nose.
Many countries have buried an unidentified soldier (or other member of the military) in a prominent location as a form of respect for all unidentified war dead.
Some reasons follow:
Most modern cultures document the location of graves with headstones, which may be inscribed with information and tributes to the deceased.
Live burial sometimes occurs, in which individuals are buried while still alive.
Cross-roads form a crude cross shape and this may have given rise to the belief that these spots were selected as the next best burying-places to consecrated ground.
Photographs taken at Forest Lawn are not permitted to be published, and their information office usually refuses to reveal exactly where the remains of famous people are buried.
These containers slow the decomposition process by (partially) physically blocking decomposing bacteria and other organisms from accessing the corpse.
Judaism does not generally allow multiple bodies in a grave.
This may occur when identification of the deceased is impossible.
In many cultures graves are marked with durable markers, or monuments, intended to help remind people of the buried person.
Civilizations attempting genocide often employ mass burial for victims.
In Islam, the body is placed in supine position, hands along the sides and the head is turned to its right with the face towards the Qibla.
Slaves were buried oriented East to West, with feet at the Eastern end (head at the Western end, thus raising facing East).
This is accomplished by excavating a pit or trench, placing the deceased and objects in it, and covering it over.
Some scholars, however, argue that these bodies may have been disposed of for secular reasons.
In many cultures, human corpses were usually buried in soil.
A larger container may be used, such as a ship.
Also in many countries permits are required by some governing agency like the board of health in order to legally conduct a disinterment.
Evidence suggests that the Neanderthals were the first human species to practice burial behavior and intentionally bury their dead, doing so in shallow graves along with stone tools and animal bones.
* ''Inadvertent'': People have been unintentionally buried alive because they were pronounced dead by a coroner or other official, when they were in fact still alive.
Remains are either collected privately for cremation or reburied in an urn or niche.
Such monumental inscriptions may subsequently be useful to genealogists and family historians.
In shared family burial sites (e.g.
A method with similar benefits is freeze-drying the corpse.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the WHO advises that only corpses carrying an infectious disease strictly require burial.
The earliest undisputed human burial dates back 100,000 years.
Some of the options include scattering the ashes at a place that was loved by the deceased or keeping the ashes at home.
Methods of burial may be heavily ritualized and can include natural burial (sometimes called "green burial"); embalming or mummification; the use of containers for the dead such as a shrouds, caskets, grave liners, and burial vaults all of which can retard decomposition of the body.
In ancient Rome, Vestal Virgins who broke their vows were punished in this way.
In cremation the body of the deceased is burned in a special oven.
A variety of grave goods were present at the site, including the mandible of a wild boar in the arms of one of the skeletons.
In a particularly odd case, an elephant which trampled a human mother and child buried its victims under a pile of leaves before disappearing into the bushes.
Sometimes objects or grave goods are buried with the body, which may be dressed in fancy or ceremonial garb.
Forest Lawn's Court of Honor indicates that some of its crypts have plots which are reserved for individuals who may be "voted in" as "Immortals"; no amount of money can purchase a place.
Although many unidentified deceased are buried in potter's fields, some are memorialized, especially in smaller communities or in the case of deaths publicized by local media.
Urnfield culture of the European Bronze Age.
Jewish law forbids the exhumation of a corpse.
* The inclusion of ceremonial garb and sacred objects is sometimes viewed as necessary for reaching the afterlife.
Many cultures feel that the deceased should be presented looking his or her finest.
Most modern cultures mark the location of the body with a headstone.
In some cases, the coffins (or urns) may simply be buried side by side.
Most families bury deceased pets on their own properties, mainly in a yard, with a shoe box or any other type of container served as a coffin.
Chimpanzees and elephants are known to throw leaves and branches over fallen members of their family groups.
A number of tombs are also kept from the public eye.
According to ''Christian Century'' magazine, the perspective of the Roman Catholic Church is that anonymous burials reflect a dwindling belief in God.
Bodies are often buried wrapped in a shroud or placed in a coffin (or in some cases, a '''casket''').
Another possible explanation is that the ancient Teutonic (Germanic) ethnic groups often built their altars at the cross-roads, and since human sacrifices, especially of criminals, formed part of the ritual, these spots came to be regarded as execution grounds.
It is forbidden to carry the body for more than one hour's journey from the place of death.
* Many cultures believe in an afterlife.
Naval ships sunk in combat are also considered mass graves by many countries.
The roots of burial as a practice reach back into the Middle Palaeolithic and coincide with the appearance of ''Homo neanderthalensis'' and ''Homo sapiens'', in Europe and Africa respectively.
An exception to this is a grave in the military cemetery in Jerusalem, where there is a ''kever achim'' (Hebrew, "grave of brothers") where two soldiers were killed together in a tank and are buried in one grave.
Catacombs also constitute a form of mass grave.
Many cultures practice anonymous burial as a norm, not an exception.
Slaves from nearby plantations were regularly in attendance.
However, some people are buried in anonymous or secret graves for various reasons.
The body may be dressed in fancy and/or ceremonial clothes.
This serves two purposes.
There is at least one attested case of a person being buried upside down by instruction; a Major Peter Labilliere of Dorking (d. June 4, 1800) lies thus upon the summit of Box Hill.
An example of a cross-road execution-ground was the famous Tyburn in London, which stood on the spot where the Roman road to Edgware and beyond met the Roman road heading west out of London.
There are several common alternatives to burial.
Humans are not the only species which bury their dead; the practice has been observed in chimpanzees, elephants, and possibly dogs.
Prehistoric cemeteries are referred to by the more neutral term grave field.
It is often associated with the belief that there is a liminal phase between the time that a person dies and finally decays.
In many Christian traditions, ordained clergy are traditionally buried in the opposite orientation, and their coffins carried likewise, so that at the General Resurrection they may rise facing, and ready to minister to, their people.
In the UK once the top of a coffin has been lowered below ground level in a burial if it raised again, say for example the grave sides are protruding and need further work, this is considered an exhumation and the Home Office are required to be notified and a full investigation undertaken.
Many of these family cemeteries were not documented and were therefore lost to time and abandon; their grave markers having long since been pilfered by vandals or covered by forest growth.
Some, such as the catacombs of Paris, only became a mass grave when individual burials were relocated from cemeteries marked for demolition.
Writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote a number of stories and poems about premature burial, including a story called "The Premature Burial."
Individuals who are buried at the expense of the local authorities and buried in potter's fields may be buried in mass graves.
Natural burial—also called "green burial"—is the process by which a body is returned to the earth to decompose naturally in soil.
a married couple), if the previously deceased person has been buried for an insufficient period of time the second body may be buried elsewhere until it is safe to move it to the requested grave.
Some catacombs, for example those in Rome, were designated as a communal burial place.
Green burials are developing in Canada (Victoria, BC, and Cobourg, Ontario), as well as in Australia and Ireland.
In rare, historical cases (e.g.
Frequently, cultures have different sets of exhumation taboos.
Exhumation is the act of digging up a buried corpse.
Historically, '''burial at cross-roads''' was the method of disposing of executed criminals and people who have committed suicide.
Slave funerals were typically at night when the workday was over, with the master present to view all the ceremonial procedures.
If this is planned for in advance, the first casket may be buried more deeply than is the usual practice so that the second casket may be placed over it without disturbing the first.
Bahá'í burial law prescribes both the location of burial and burial practices and  precludes cremation of the dead.
An unmarked grave is a grave with no such memorial marker.
This mirrors the layout of Christian churches, and for much the same reason; to view the coming of Christ on Judgment day (Eschaton).
Exhumation enables archaeologists to search the remains to better understand human culture.
It also enables construction agencies to clear the way for new constructions.
Some religions consecrate special ground to bury the dead, and some families build private family cemeteries.
are shown with crossed arms, such as the god Osiris, the Lord of the Dead, or mummified royalty with crossed arms in high and low body positions, depending upon the dynasty.
Also, before interment, a specific Prayer for the Dead is ordained.
* ''Intentional'': buried alive as a method of execution or murder, called ''immurement'' when the person is entombed within walls.
Artifacts such as clothing and objects provide insight into how the individual lived.
In folklore and mythology, exhumation has also been frequently associated with the performance of rites to banish undead manifestations.
Pope Formosus or Oliver Cromwell), a body may be exhumed for posthumous execution, dissection, or gibbeting.
Natural burial became popularized in the United Kingdom in the early 1990s by Ken West, a professional cremeterian for the City of Carlisle responding to the U.K's call for changes in government that aligned with the United Nations' Environmental Program Local Agenda 21.
The bodies may also be transferred to a more dignified place.
Through time, mounds of earth, temples, and underground caverns were used to store the dead bodies of ancestors.
It also serves the purpose to see if they are supernaturally Incorrupt.
This practice, also known as the inclusion of grave goods, serves several purposes:
Survivors may cause the deceased to be buried in a secret location or other unpublished place, or in a grave with a false name (or no name at all) on the marker.
Many cultures treat placement of dead people in an appropriate position to be a sign of respect even when burial is impossible.
Once all plots are full, older remains may be moved to an ossuary to accommodate more bodies, in accordance with burial contracts, religious and local burial laws.
Sometimes multiple bodies are buried in a single grave either by choice (as in the case of married couples), due to space concerns, or in the case of mass graves as a way to deal with many bodies at once.
Another sort of unmarked grave is a burial site with an anonymous marker, such as a simple cross; boots, rifle and helmet; a sword and shield; a cairn of stones; or even a monument.
Exhumation of human remains occur for a number of reasons unrelated to the burial location, including identification of the deceased or as part of a criminal investigation.
'''Burial''' or ''' interment''' is the ritual act of placing a dead person or animal, sometimes with objects, into the ground.
For example, U.S. Navy policy declares such wrecks a mass grave (such as the USS Arizona Memorial) and forbids the recovery of remains.
In addition, there are multiple green burial sites in the United States.
Humans are not always the only species to bury their dead.
Some cultures keep the dead close to provide guidance to the living, while others "banish" them by locating burial grounds at a distance from inhabited areas.
The passing of time may mean political situations change and a burial can take place in different circumstances.
At death, a slave’s body was wrapped in cloth.
There is far greater flexibility in dealing with the remains in cremation as opposed to the traditional burial.
Live burial may also occur due to avalanches on mountain slopes.
Various expedients have been devised to prevent this event, including burying live telephones or telemetry sensors in graves.
Second, headstones often contain information or tributes to deceased.
In nonstandard burial practices, such as mass burial, the body may be positioned arbitrarily.
Extended burials may be '''supine''' (lying on the back) or '''prone''' (lying on the front).
The practice is called ''jiǎngǔ'' in Taiwan, or ''boc mo'' in Vietnam '揀骨 “digging up bones” and is an important ritual in the posthumous “care” of children for their deceased parents and ancestors.
The location of the burial may be determined taking into account concerns surrounding health and sanitation, religious concerns, and cultural practices.
Later ancient Egyptian gods and royalty, from approximately 3500 B.C.
At the cemetery in a small rural town of Harding, KwaZulu-Natal, many grave sites have no identification, and just have a border of stones which mark out the dimensions of the grave site itself.
In Hong Kong where real estate is at a premium, burials in government-run cemeteries are disinterred after six years under exhumation order.
Often, personal property was buried with slaves to appease spirits.
* Though not generally a motivation for the inclusion of grave goods with a corpse, it is worth considering that future archaeologists may find the remains (compare time capsule).
In modern times, the custom of burying dead people below ground, with a stone marker to indicate the burial place, is used in most cultures; although other means such as cremation are becoming more popular in the West (cremation is the norm in India and mandatory in Japan).
According to Christian doctrine, this orientation permitted rising to face the return of Christ without having to turn around upon the call of Gabriel’s trumpet.
In most jurisdictions a legal exhumation usually requires a court order or permission by the next of kin of the deceased.
Swift's notion of inverted burial might seem the highest flight of fancy, but it appears that among English millenarians the idea that the world would be "turned upside down" at the Apocalypse enjoyed some currency.
This can be a sign of disrespect to the deceased, or at least nonchalance on the part of the inhumer, or due to considerations of time and space.
Superstition also played a part in the selection of crossroads in the burial of suicides.
People may come to be buried alive in a number of different ways:
Similar stories have attached themselves to other noted eccentrics, particularly in southern England, but not always with a foundation in truth.
Before interment the body should be wrapped in a shroud of silk or cotton, and a ring should be placed on its finger bearing the inscription "''I came forth from God, and return unto Him, detached from all save Him, holding fast to His Name, the Merciful, the Compassionate''".
Alternatives to burial may include cremation, burial at sea, promession, cryopreservation, and others.
Bodies with the arms crossed date back to ancient cultures such as Chaldea in the 10th century BC, where the "X" symbolized their sky god.
It has been used to prevent the odor of decay, to give family members closure and prevent them from witnessing the decomposition of their loved ones, and in many cultures it has been seen as a necessary step for the deceased to enter the afterlife or to give back to the cycle of life.
In Great Britain this tradition was altered by the  ‘Burial of Suicide Act’ of 1823 which abolished the legal requirements of burying suicidees and other people at crossroads.
In many cultures graves will be grouped, so the monuments make up a necropolis, a "city of the dead" paralleling the community of the living.
After death, a body will decay.
If an individual dies in suspicious circumstances, the police may request exhumation in order to determine the cause of death.
Others dress the deceased in burial shrouds, which range from very simple to elaborate depending on the culture.
Some couples or groups of people (such as a married couple or other family members) may wish to be buried in the same plot.
In some cases, the remains of unidentified individuals may be buried in mass graves in potter's fields, making exhumation and future identification troublesome for law enforcement.
The coffin should be of crystal, stone or hard fine wood.
Mecca) and the face turned to the right and facing Qibla.
If left lying on top of the ground, scavengers may eat the corpse, considered disrespectful to the deceased in many (but not all) cultures.
Some burial practices are heavily ritualized; others are simply practical.
Occasionally these differences result in conflict, especially in cases where a culture with more lenient exhumation rules wishes to operate on the territory of a different culture.
Human burial practices are the manifestation of the human desire to demonstrate "respect for the dead".
For instance, in 2002 a survey for the Federal Guild of German Stonemasons found that, depending on the location within Germany, from 0% to 43% of burials were anonymous.
