A total of 38,087 Burundian refugees have been repatriated between January and November 2007.
In 1992, the government promulgated a new constitution that provided for a multi-party system.
'''Burundi''' ( or ), officially the '''Republic of Burundi''' (, ; ,  or ), is a landlocked country in the African Great Lakes region of East Africa, bordered by Rwanda to the north, Tanzania to the east and south, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the west.
Anti-Tutsi ethnic propaganda disseminated by the remnants of the 1972 UBU, which had re-organized as PALIPEHUTU in 1981, led to killings of Tutsi peasants in the northern communes of Ntega and Marangara in August 1988.
Initially the South African Protection Support Detachment was deployed to protect Burundian leaders returning from exile.
Its effort to gain trust was eroded when it decreed an amnesty for those who had called for, carried out, and taken credit for the killings.
When several Burundians of close acquaintance meet for a gathering they drink ''impeke'', a beer, together from a large container to symbolize unity.
It is estimated that some 300,000 people, mostly civilians, were killed in the years following the assassination.
The latter also recruits child soldiers.
The Burundian army fought back and the FLN suffered heavy losses.
Reconstruction efforts in Burundi started to practically take effect after 2006.
He and the president of Rwanda died together when their airplane was shot down.
Another major lake is Lake Tanganyika, located in much of Burundi's southwestern corner.
Deforestation of the entire country is almost completely due to overpopulation, with a mere  remaining and an ongoing loss of about 9% per annum.
This was the first direct meeting since June 2007.
Food, medicine, and electricity remain in short supply.
The death toll was put at 5,000 by the government, though some international NGOs believe this understates the losses.
In early 2005, ethnic quotas were formed for determining positions in Burundi's government.
The first and largest of these political parties was the Union for National Progress (UPRONA).
Both are described as genocide in the final report of the International Commission of Inquiry for Burundi presented in 2002 to the United Nations Security Council.
Both Germans and Belgians ruled Burundi and Rwanda as a European colony known as Ruanda-Urundi.
The homes of rural residents were also pillaged.
Martial arts are popular, as well.
The First Vice President is Therence Sinunguruza, and the Second Vice President is Gervais Rufyikiri.
Burundi's primary exports are coffee and tea, which account for 90% of foreign exchange earnings, though exports are a relatively small share of GDP.
Many Rwandan Tutsi fled Rwanda and arrived in Burundi.
However, the terms of the September 2006 Ceasefire between the government and the last remaining armed opposition group, the FLN (Forces for National Liberation, also called NLF or FROLINA), were not totally implemented, and senior FLN members subsequently left the truce monitoring team, claiming that their security was threatened.
Later that same year, Tutsi Prime Minister, then-Captain Michel Micombero, carried out another coup in November, 1966, this time deposing Ntare, abolishing the monarchy and declaring the nation a republic, though his one-party government was effectively a military dictatorship.
Persons found guilty of consensual same-sex relations risk two to three years in prison and a fine of 50,000 to 100,000 Burundian francs.
Major Pierre Buyoya (Tutsi) overthrew Bagaza in 1987 and suspended the constitution, dissolving the political parties.
A feared general massacre was averted, but violence broke out.
In 1996, Pierre Buyoya (Tutsi) took power through a coup d’état.
In August 1984, Bagaza was elected head of state.
Approximately 80% of Burundi's population lives in poverty.
The main difficulty in the early stages was continued resistance to the peace process by the last Hutu nationalist rebel group.
In regards to telecommunications infrastructure, Burundi is ranked 2nd to last in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI) – an indicator for determining the development level of a country’s information and communication technologies.
A few weeks later, Buyoya appointed a new government, with an equal number of Hutu and Tutsi among his ministers.
He became the first Hutu head of state, leading a pro-Hutu government.
He imposed a staunch regime of law and order and sharply repressed Hutu militarism.
Most Christian holidays are celebrated, with Christmas being the largest.
Burundi's president appoints officials to his Council of Ministers, which is also part of the executive branch.
This method of negotiation can be defined as a form of diplomacy involving governmental or intergovernmental representatives, who may use their positive reputations, mediation, or the "carrot and stick" method as a means of obtaining or forcing an outcome, frequently along the lines of "bargaining" or "win-lose".
In 2000, the Burundian President signed the treaty, as well as 13 of the 19 warring Hutu and Tutsi factions.
On 18 September 1962 Burundi joined the United Nations.
As a result of deep poverty, Burundi is dependent on foreign aid.
Burundi's capital is Bujumbura.
Crafts are an important art form in Burundi and are attractive gifts to many tourists.
Dependence of the sector on donor assistance is limited.
There are two national parks, Kibira National Park to the northwest (a small region of rain forest, adjacent to Nyungwe Forest National Park in Rwanda), Ruvubu National Park to the northeast (along the Rurubu River, also known as Ruvubu or Ruvuvu).
This would require separate and direct talks with the rebel groups.
On 20 January 1959, Burundi's ruler Mwami Mwambutsa IV requested Burundi's independence from Belgium and dissolution of the Ruanda-Urundi union.
In late 2007 and early 2008, FLN combatants attacked government-protected camps where former combatants were living.
Foreign Policy reports, Subsistence farming is highly relied upon, however due to large population growth and no coherent policies governing land ownership, many people don't have the resources to sustain themselves.
A number of Hutu refugees in the capital, Bujumbura, were killed.
In the wake of the elections, on 13 October, the 29-year-old Prince Rwagasore was assassinated, robbing Burundi of its most popular and well-known nationalist.
The signatories were arrested and jailed.
It has greatly benefited from the transitional government, which has functioned and is in the process of transitioning to one that will be popularly elected.
He reinstated military rule under the Military Committee for National Salvation (CSMN).
The southwestern border is adjacent to Lake Tanganyika.
The freedom of expression is limited; journalists are frequently arrested for carrying out legitimate professional activities.
Members of the National Assembly are elected by popular vote and serve for five-year terms.
The establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a Special Tribunal for investigation and prosecution has not yet been implemented.
Imigani, indirimbo, amazina, and ivyivugo are literary genres in Burundi.
Burundi's political system is that of a presidential representative democratic republic based upon a multi-party state.
Burundi ranked number 147 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking, down from 144 in 2013.
Civil war broke out.
Other crafts such as masks, shields, statues and pottery are made in Burundi.
An estimated 5% of the population adheres to traditional indigenous religious beliefs.
With the return of refugees, amongst others, property conflicts have started.
The newest province, Rumonge, was created on 26 March 2015 from portions of Bujumbura Rural and Bururi.
The peace talks took the form of Track I mediations.
Bujumbura International Airport is the only airport with a paved runway and  as of May 2015 it was serviced by five airlines (Brussels Airlines, Ethiopian Airlines, flydubai, Kenya Airways and RwandAir).
Subsistence agriculture accounts for 90% of agriculture.
The purchasing power of most Burundians has decreased as wage increases have not kept up with inflation.
As president, Micombero became an advocate of African socialism and received support from the People's Republic of China.
A coalition government involving 12 of the 13 parties was formed.
As the talks progressed, South African President Thabo Mbeki and United States President Bill Clinton also lent their respective weight.
Burundi's culture is based on local tradition and the influence of neighboring countries, though cultural prominence has been hindered by civil unrest.
Following World War II, Ruanda-Urundi was classified as a United Nations Trust Territory under Belgian administrative authority.
Burundi now participates in African Union peacekeeping missions, including the mission to Somalia against Al-Shahab militants.
Since Burundi's independence in 1962, there have been two events called genocides in the country: the 1972 mass killings of Hutus by the Tutsi-dominated army, and the 1993 mass killings of Tutsis by the Hutu majority.
There will be a new school opening in one of the poorest regions, Rusaga, that is funded by an English charity the Burundi Education Foundation.
The European intervention exacerbated social differences between the Tutsi and Hutu, and contributed to political unrest in the region.
On 28 August 2000, a transitional government for Burundi was planned as a part of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
Due to stipulations in Burundi's constitution, 30% of Senate members must be female.
There is an urgent need for reform of the judicial system.
More refugees started fleeing to Rwanda.
Burundi gained independence in 1962 and initially had a monarchy, but a series of assassinations, coups, and a general climate of regional instability culminated in the establishment of a republic and one-party state in 1966.
While there are still some difficulties with refugee returns and securing adequate food supplies for the war-weary population, the mission managed to win the trust and confidence of a majority of the formerly warring leaders, as well as the population at large.
Only one in two children go to school, and approximately one in 15 adults has HIV/AIDS.
Besides agriculture, other industries include: assembly of imported components; public works construction; food processing, and light consumer goods such as blankets, shoes, and soap.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration were done in tandem with elections preparations.
Speaker of Parliament, Sylvestre Ntibantunganya (Hutu), was appointed as president in October 1994.
Genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity remain unpunished.
Refugee camps are now closing down, and 450,000 refugees have returned.
Muslims constitute 2–5%, the majority of whom are Sunnis and live in urban areas.
Because of the Arusha Accord, Burundi enacted a transitional government in 2000.
Other agricultural products include cotton, tea, maize, sorghum, sweet potatoes, bananas, manioc (tapioca); beef, milk, and hides.
Rebel raids were reported in other parts of the country.
In August 2008, President Nkurunziza met with the FLN leader Agathon Rwasa, with the mediation of Charles Nqakula, South Africa’s Minister for Safety and Security.
The agreements took four years to plan.
In practical terms it was considered part of the Belgian colonial empire, and was known as Ruanda-Urundi.
, the Transitional National Assembly consists of 170 members, with the Front for Democracy in Burundi holding 38% of seats, and 10% of the assembly is controlled by UPRONA.
On 17 April 2008, the FLN bombarded Bujumbura.
Second, and perhaps most importantly, the Burundians believed the treaty would be irrelevant without an accompanying cease fire.
The world-famous Royal Drummers of Burundi, who have performed for over 40 years, are noted for traditional drumming using the karyenda, amashako, ibishikiso, and ikiranya drums.
Burundi's push for independence was influenced by the Rwandan Revolution and the accompanying instability and ethnic conflict that occurred there.
Settlement by rural populations has led to deforestation, soil erosion and habitat loss.
He appointed Adrien Sibomana (Hutu) as Prime Minister.
For each of Burundi's eighteen provinces, one Hutu and one Tutsi senator are chosen.
Ruanda-Urundi continued its kingship dynasty despite the invasion of Europeans.
Burundi has the severest hunger and malnourishment rates of all 120 countries ranked in the Global Hunger Index."
In 1963, King Mwambutsa appointed a Hutu prime minister, Pierre Ngendandumwe, but he was assassinated on 15 January 1965 by a Rwandan Tutsi employed by the U.S. Embassy.
Burundi's literacy rate is low due to low school attendance and because literacy in Kirundi only provides access to materials printed in that language.
Burundi will remain heavily dependent on aid from bilateral and multilateral donors – foreign aid represents 42% of Burundis national income, the second highest rate in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In 2003, FRODEBU leader Domitien Ndayizeye (Hutu) was elected president.
Due to the expense, meat is eaten only a few times per month.
In 2009, the adult literacy rate in Burundi was estimated to be 67% (73% male and 61% female), with a literacy rate of 77% and 76%, respectively, for men and women between the ages of 15 to 24.
Burundi became a constitutional monarchy with Mwami Mwambutsa IV, Prince Rwagasore's father, serving as the country's king.
The economy of the country is shattered –  Burundi has one of the lowest per capita gross incomes in the world.
Following the attempted coup, protests however continued and over 100,000 people had fled the country by 20 May causing a humanitarian emergency.
In October 1993, Tutsi soldiers assassinated Ndadaye, an act which resulted in a genocide against Tutsi, which led to years of violence between Hutu rebels and Tutsi majority army.
There are reports of continued and widespread abuses of human rights, including unlawful killings, torture, disappearances and restrictions on freedom of expression.
In early 1994, the parliament elected Cyprien Ntaryamira (Hutu) to the office of president.
The nation's largest source of revenue is coffee, which makes up 93% of Burundi's exports.
For more than 200 of those years, Burundi was an independent kingdom, until the beginning of the twentieth century, when Germany colonized the region.
Burundi has the fifth highest total fertility rate in the world, at 6.08 children born/woman (2012 estimates).
The focus of the UN’s mission had been to enshrine the power-sharing arrangements in a popularly voted constitution, so that elections may be held and a new government installed.
Burundi's export earnings – and its ability to pay for imports – rests primarily on weather conditions and international coffee and tea prices.
On 13 March 1992, Tutsi coup leader Pierre Buyoya established a constitution, which provided for a multi-party political process and reflected multi-party competition.
Burundi's lands are mostly agricultural or pasture.
Both were established in 1982 to conserve wildlife populations.
In April 2009, the government of Burundi changed the law to criminalise homosexuality.
Economic growth in Burundi is relatively steady but Burundi is still behind neighboring countries.
Microfinance, however, plays a larger role, with 4% of Burundians being members of microfinance institutions – a larger share of the population than that reached by banking and postal services combined.
There is a long-term plan to link the country via rail to Kigali and then onward to Kampala, and Kenya.
In 2000, the province encompassing Bujumbura was separated into two provinces, Bujumbura Rural and Bujumbura Mairie.
Germany established armed forces in Ruanda and Burundi at the end of the 19th century, colonizing the area and establishing German East Africa.
The President of Burundi is the head of state and head of government.
First, a transitional power-sharing government would be established, with the presidents holding office for three-year terms.
His administration drafted a new constitution in 1981, which maintained Burundi as a one-party state.
Some musical instruments of note are the flute, zither, ikembe, indonongo, umuduri, inanga, and the inyagara.
The country claimed independence on 1 July 1962, and legally changed its name from Ruanda-Urundi to Burundi.
After the First World War and Germany's defeat, it ceded the territory to Belgium.
The country's oral tradition is strong, relaying history and life lessons through storytelling, poetry, and song.
The president also chooses two vice-presidents.
One scientific study of 178 nations rated Burundi's population as having the lowest satisfaction with life in the world.
The mainly Tutsi Union for National Progress withdrew from the government and parliament.
Dance often accompanies drumming performance, which is frequently seen in celebrations and family gatherings.
Burundi's transportation network is limited and underdeveloped.
In 1976, Colonel Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, a Tutsi, led a bloodless coup and toppled Micombero.
Since farming is the main industry, a typical Burundian meal consists of sweet potatoes, corn, and peas.
Many analysts consider this period as the beginning of the "culture of impunity."
These forces became part of the African Union Mission to Burundi, deployed to help oversee the installation of a transitional government.
Burundi's largest industry is agriculture, which accounted for just over 30% of the GDP.
Amnesty International has condemned the action, calling it a violation of Burundi’s obligations under international and regional human rights law, and against the constitution, which guarantees the right to privacy.
An ethnic-based war that lasted for over a decade resulted in more than 200,000 deaths, forced more than 48,000 refugees into Tanzania, and displaced 140,000 others internally.
Members of the Senate are elected by electoral colleges, which consist of members from each of Burundi's provinces and communes.
It was involved with several "quick effect" projects, including rehabilitating and building schools, orphanages, health clinics, and rebuilding infrastructure such as water lines.
The last Burundian monarchy is said to have begun in the late 17th century.
However, smaller militant Hutu groups – such as the Forces for National Liberation – remained active.
The second objective involved a restructuring of the military, where the two groups would be represented equally.
On 20 October 1924, this land, which consisted of modern-day Rwanda and Burundi, became a Belgian League of Nations mandate territory.
Ten percent of Burundian boys are allowed a secondary education.
Burundi's first elections took place on 8 September 1961 and UPRONA, a multi-ethnic unity party led by Prince Louis Rwagasore won just over 80% of the electorate's votes.
Burundi remains an overwhelmingly rural society, with just 13% of the population living in urban areas in 2013.
Six years later, on 6 June 1998, the constitution was changed, broadening National Assembly's seats and making provisions for two vice presidents.
The spoilers of the peace talks were the hardliner Tutsi and Hutu groups who refused to sign the accord; as a result, violence intensified.
Burundi is a landlocked, resource-poor country with an underdeveloped manufacturing sector.
It is estimated that during this initial Hutu outbreak, anywhere from 800 to 1200 people were killed.
Burundi's constitution mandates representation in the Transitional National Assembly to be consistent with 60% Hutu, 40% Tutsi, and 30% female members, as well as three Batwa members.
Kigali is the city with the most daily flight connections to Bujumbura.
Burundian Independence Day is celebrated annually on 1 July.
Talks were initiated under the aegis of former Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere in 1995; following his death, South African President Nelson Mandela took the helm.
Despite common misconceptions, Burundi and Rwanda have never been under a common rule before European colonization.
After being defeated in World War I, Germany was forced to cede "control" of a section of the former German East Africa to Belgium.
The ''Cour Suprême'' (Supreme Court) is Burundi's highest court.
The total number of casualties was never established, but contemporary estimates show that between 80,000 and 210,000 people were killed.
In addition, several hundred thousand Hutu are estimated to have fled the genocide into Zaïre, Rwanda, and Tanzania.
The country lies on a rolling plateau in the center of Africa.
Kirundi, French, and Swahili are spoken throughout Burundi.
Parliamentary elections in May, 1965 brought a majority of Hutu into the parliament, but when King Mwambutsa appointed a Tutsi prime minister, some Hutu felt this was unjust and ethnic tensions were further increased.
Pierre Nkurunziza (Hutu), once a leader of a rebel group, was elected president in 2005. , the Burundian government was talking with the Hutu-led Palipehutu-National Liberation Forces (NLF) to bring peace to the country.
The World Happiness Report 2016 Update ranked Burundi as the world's least happy nation.
An estimated 250,000 people died in Burundi from the combined conflicts between 1962 and 1993.
In 2014, the average farm size was about one acre.
The main Hutu party was skeptical of the offer of a power-sharing government; they alleged that they had been deceived by the Tutsi in past agreements.
He then set about promoting various reforms.
During the 1940s, a series of policies caused divisions throughout the country.
A new ceasefire was signed on 26 May 2008.
In February 2005, the  Constitution was approved with over 90% of the popular vote.
Bouts of ethnic cleansing and ultimately two civil wars and genocides during the 1970s and again in the 1990s left the country undeveloped and its population as one of the world's poorest.
In May, June, and August 2005, three separate elections were also held at the local level for the Parliament and the presidency.
Perpetrators regularly escape prosecution and punishment by the state.
As of 7 May 2015, the President of Burundi is Pierre Nkurunziza.
Protestant and Anglican practitioners constitute the remaining 15–25%.
This would cover ordinary crimes, but not grave violations of international humanitarian law like war crimes or crimes against humanity .
Less than 2% of the population has electricity in its homes.
Despite calls by the UN, AU, U.S., France, South Africa, Belgium and various other governments, the ruling party held parliamentary elections on 29 June but these were boycotted by the opposition.
The source of the Nile River is in Bururi province, and is linked from Lake Victoria to its headwaters via the Ruvyironza River Lake Victoria is also an important water source, which serves as a fork to the Kagera River.
