In 1940, Keaton married Eleanor Norris (July 29, 1918 – October 19, 1998), who was 23 years his junior.
Lost after the comedy epic's "roadshow" exhibition, the audio of that scene was discovered, and combined with still pictures to recreate the scene.)
Despite being diagnosed with cancer in January 1966, he was never told that he was terminally ill or that he had cancer; Keaton thought that he was recovering from a severe case of bronchitis.
Lewis was particularly moved by the fact that Eleanor said his eyes looked like Keaton's.
Her financial extravagance (she would spend up to a third of his salary on clothes) was another factor in the breakdown of the marriage.
Eleanor Keaton was cast in the chorus, and during rehearsals, she fielded questions directed at her husband, creating difficulties in communication.
Keaton was reunited with them about a decade later when his older son turned 18.
He made his last starring feature ''El Moderno Barba Azul'' (1946) in Mexico; the film was a low budget production, and it may not have been seen in the United States until its release on VHS in the 1980s, under the title ''Boom In The Moon''.
On April 3, 1957, Keaton was surprised by Ralph Edwards for the weekly NBC program ''This Is Your Life''.
In 1914, Keaton told the ''Detroit News'': "The secret is in landing limp and breaking the fall with a foot or a hand.
In 1964, Keaton appeared with Joan Blondell and Joe E. Brown in the final episode of ABC's circus drama, ''The Greatest Show on Earth'', starring Jack Palance.
Keaton died shortly after completing the film.
After the birth of Robert, the relationship began to suffer.
It was too dramatic for some filmgoers expecting a lightweight comedy, and reviewers questioned Keaton's judgment in making a comedic film about the Civil War, even while noting it had a "few laughs".
The act ran up against laws banning child performers in vaudeville.
He appeared in a total of 14 Arbuckle shorts, running into 1920.
His unit remained intact and was not broken up to provide replacements, as happened to some other late-arriving divisions.
The final entry was ''She's Oil Mine'', and Keaton swore he would never again "make another crummy two-reeler."
According to one biographer, Keaton was made to go to school while performing in New York, but only attended for part of one day.
The house suffered approximately $10,000 worth of damage from a fire in the nursery and dining room in 1931.
that MGM fired him after the filming was complete, despite the film being a resounding hit.
His large deep eyes are the most eloquent feature; with merely a stare he can convey a wide range of emotions, from longing to mistrust, from puzzlement to sorrow."
Keaton designed and modified his own pork pie hats during his career.
Confined to a hospital during his final days, Keaton was restless and paced the room endlessly, desiring to return home.
Keaton was not at home at the time, and his wife and children escaped unharmed, staying at the home of Tom Mix until the following morning.
During the railroad water-tank scene in ''Sherlock Jr.'', Keaton broke his neck when a torrent of water fell on him from a water tower, but he did not realize it until years afterward.
He recovered in the 1940s, remarried, and revived his career to a degree as an honored comic performer for the rest of his life, earning an Academy Honorary Award in 1959.
Dedicated to bringing greater public attention to Keaton’s life and work, the membership includes many individuals from the television and film industry: actors, producers, authors, artists, graphic novelists, musicians, and designers, as well as those who simply admire the magic of Buster Keaton.
In 2012, Kino Lorber released ''The Ultimate Buster Keaton Collection'', a 14-disc Blu-ray box set of Keaton's work, including 11 of his feature films.
Kinescopes were made for distribution of the programs to other parts of the country since there was no transcontinental coaxial cable until September 1951.
He took the camera back to his hotel room, dismantled and reassembled it.
Then, the facade of a two-story building toppled forward on top of Keaton.
His distributor, United Artists, insisted on a production manager who monitored expenses and interfered with certain story elements.
A 1957 film biography, ''The Buster Keaton Story'', starring Donald O'Connor as Keaton was released.
Keaton retold the anecdote over the years, including a 1964 interview with the CBC's ''Telescope''.
He also appeared in the early television series ''Faye Emerson's Wonderful Town''.
Keaton signed with MGM in 1928, a business decision that he would later call the worst of his life.
By the time he was 21, his father's alcoholism threatened the reputation of the family act, so Keaton and his mother, Myra, left for New York, where Buster Keaton's career swiftly moved from vaudeville to film.
Keaton dated actress Dorothy Sebastian beginning in the 1920s and Kathleen Key in the early 1930s.
Keaton plays a lowly janitor at a newspaper.
l got a ring that Buster Keaton was in the lobby.
''Life with Buster Keaton'' (1951), an attempt to recreate the first series on film and so allowing the program to be broadcast nationwide, was less well received.
His career declined afterward with a dispiriting loss of his artistic independence when he was hired by MGM, which resulted in a crippling alcoholism that ruined his family life.
Hirschfeld said that modern film stars were more difficult to depict, that silent film comedians such as Laurel and Hardy and Keaton "looked like their caricatures".
However, Buster Keaton was always able to show the authorities that he had no bruises or broken bones.
But we had no luck with Keaton, because he thought up his best gags himself and we couldn't steal ''him!''"
Critic Anthony Lane also noted Keaton's body language: "The traditional Buster stance requires that he remain upstanding, full of backbone, looking ahead... in ''The General'' he clambers onto the roof of his locomotive and leans gently forward to scan the terrain, with the breeze in his hair and adventure zipping toward him around the next bend.
He realized too late that the studio system MGM represented would severely limit his creative input.
Keaton claimed he was having so much fun that he would sometimes begin laughing as his father threw him across the stage.
A suitcase handle was sewn into Keaton's clothing to aid with the constant tossing.
He made a series of two-reel comedies, including ''One Week'' (1920), ''The Playhouse'' (1921), ''Cops'' (1922), and ''The Electric House'' (1922).
Keaton was born into a vaudeville family in Piqua, Kansas, the small town where his mother, Myra Keaton (''née'' Cutler), happened to go into labor.
''The Railrodder'' was made in tandem with a behind-the-scenes documentary about Keaton's life and times, called ''Buster Keaton Rides Again'', also made for the National Film Board, which is twice the length of the short film.
"Raymond recognized Buster and their friendship started."
Keaton died of lung cancer on February 1, 1966, aged 70, in Woodland Hills, California.
One of his most biting parodies is ''The Frozen North'' (1922), a satirical take on William S. Hart's Western melodramas, like ''Hell's Hinges'' (1916) and ''The Narrow Trail'' (1917).
Many of Keaton's films from the 1920s, such as ''Sherlock Jr.'' (1924), ''The General'' (1926), and ''The Cameraman'' (1928), remain highly regarded, with the second of these three widely viewed as his masterpiece.
When the tour landed in Los Angeles, Keaton invited the entire cast and crew to a spaghetti party at his Woodland Hills home, and entertained them by singing vaudeville songs.
Keaton estimated that he and his wife Eleanor made thousands of the hats during his career.
Keaton said he canceled the filmed series himself because he was unable to create enough fresh material to produce a new show each week.
The International Buster Keaton Society was founded on October 4, 1992 – Buster’s birthday.
The screenplay, by Sidney Sheldon, who also directed the film, was loosely based on Keaton's life but contained many factual errors and merged his three wives into one character.
Keaton had prints of the features '' Three Ages'', ''Sherlock, Jr.'', ''Steamboat Bill, Jr.'', ''College'' (missing one reel) and the shorts "The Boat" and "My Wife's Relations", which Keaton and Rohauer had transferred to safety stock from deteriorating nitrate film stock.
Keaton and Arbuckle became close friends, and Keaton was one of few people to defend Arbuckle's character during accusations that he was responsible for the death of actress Virginia Rappe.
Throughout the 1940s, Keaton played character roles in both "A" and "B" features.
In January 1962, he worked with comedian Ernie Kovacs on a television pilot tentatively titled "Medicine Man," shooting scenes for it on January 12, 1962—the day before Kovacs died in a car crash.
However, taken as a whole, Keaton's Columbia shorts rank as the worst comedies he made, an assessment he concurred with in his autobiography.
Between 1947 and 1954, they appeared regularly in the Cirque Medrano in Paris as a double act.
Around the same time, after buying the comedian's house, the actor James Mason found numerous cans of Keaton's films.
In ''In The Good Old Summertime'', Keaton personally directed the stars Judy Garland and Van Johnson in their first scene together where they bump into each other on the street.
He intercepts a request from the editor to visit a construction site adjacent to the newspaper headquarters to investigate possible safety violations.
In 1921, Keaton married Natalie Talmadge, sister-in-law of his boss, Joseph Schenck, and sister of actresses Norma Talmadge and Constance Talmadge.
In ''The Playhouse'' (1921), he parodied his contemporary Thomas H. Ince, Hart's producer, who indulged in over-crediting himself in his film productions.
About this time, he also appeared on NBC's ''The Martha Raye Show''.
Keaton directed the film, along with Edward F. Cline.
After attempts at reconciliation, Talmadge divorced Keaton in 1932, taking his entire fortune and refusing to allow any contact between Keaton and his sons, whose last name she had changed to Talmadge.
In 1987 Italian singer-songwriters Claudio Lolli and Francesco Guccini wrote a song, "Keaton", about his work on that film.
The marriage lasted until his death.
He wears a small version of Hart's campaign hat from the Spanish–American War and a six-shooter on each thigh, and during the scene in which he shoots the neighbor and her husband, he reacts with thick glycerin tears, a trademark of Hart's.
In December 1958, Keaton was a guest star as Charlie, a hospital janitor who provides gifts to sick children, in a special Christmas episode of ''The Donna Reed Show'' on ABC.
He returned to the program in 1965 in the episode "Now You See It, Now You Don't".
Unknown to them at the time, MGM also had saved some of Keaton's work: all his 1920-1926 features and his first eight two-reel shorts.
The book ''Buster Keaton Remembered'', by Eleanor Keaton and Vance, published after her death, was favorably reviewed.
Keaton also found steady work as an actor in TV commercials, including a series of silent ads for Simon Pure Beer made in 1962 by Jim Mohr in Buffalo, New York in which he revisited some of the gags from his silent film days.
Evolved from the knockabout upbringing of the vaudeville stage, Keaton’s comedy is a whirlwind of hilarious, technically precise, adroitly executed, and surprising gags, very often set against a backdrop of visually stunning set pieces and locations—all this masked behind his unflinching, stoic veneer.” Keaton has inspired full academic study.
In 1926, Keaton spent $300,000 to build a  home in Beverly Hills designed by architect Gene Verge, Sr., which was later owned by James Mason and Cary Grant.
So that's how he did it—it ''hurt''—but you had to care enough not to care."
Several times I'd have been killed if I hadn't been able to land like a cat.
The Society’s nickname, the “Damfinos,” draws its name from a boat in Buster’s 1921 comedy, “The Boat.”
The act evolved as Keaton learned to take trick falls safely; he was rarely injured or bruised on stage.
Joe Keaton disapproved of films, and Buster also had reservations about the medium.
Keaton was given more screen time in ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum'' (1966).
During his time in uniform, he suffered an ear infection that permanently impaired his hearing.
Keaton parodied the tired formula of the melodramatic transformation from bad guy to good guy, through which went Hart's character, known as "the good badman".
Also in 1965, he traveled to Italy to play a role in ''Due Marines e un Generale'', co-starring alongside the famous Italian comedian duo of Franco Franchi and Ciccio Ingrassia.
The next day I met with him at his home.
Upon Keaton's return to Hollywood, he made a screen comeback in a series of 16 two-reel comedies for Educational Pictures.
The actors would phonetically memorize the foreign-language scripts a few lines at a time and shoot immediately after.
However, MGM did allow Keaton some creative participation on his last originally developed/written silent film ''The Cameraman'', 1928, which was his first project under contract with them, but hired Edward Sedgwick as the official director.
'''Joseph Frank''' "'''Buster'''" '''Keaton''' (October 4, 1895 – February 1, 1966) was an American actor, director, producer, writer, and stunt performer.
Keaton's personal favorite was the series' debut entry, ''Pest from the West'', a shorter, tighter remake of Keaton's little-viewed 1935 feature ''The Invader''; it was directed not by White but by Del Lord, a veteran director for Mack Sennett.
Keaton served in the United States Army in France with the 40th Infantry Division during World War I.
The couple had two sons, Joseph, aka Buster Keaton Jr. (June 2, 1922– February 14, 2007), and Robert  Talmadge Keaton (February 3, 1924– July 19, 2009), later both surnamed Talmadge.
The program was produced as a benefit for the Motion Picture Relief Fund and featured a plethora of celebrities, including Dick Van Dyke, Danny Kaye, Phil Silvers, Gregory Peck, Cesar Romero, and  Lucille Ball.
This knockabout style of comedy led to accusations of child abuse, and occasionally, arrest.
Influenced by her family, Talmadge decided not to have more children, and this led to the couple staying in separate bedrooms.
In 1934, Keaton accepted an offer to make an independent film in Paris, ''Le Roi des Champs-Élysées''.
This is discussed in the TCM documentary ''Buster Keaton: So Funny it Hurt'', with Keaton complaining about having to shoot lousy films not just once, but three times.
Film critic David Thomson later described Keaton's style of comedy: "Buster plainly is a man inclined towards a belief in nothing but mathematics and absurdity ... like a number that has always been searching for the right equation.
Rohauer in that same article recalls, "I was in the projection room.
Also in 1954, Keaton and his wife Eleanor met film programmer Raymond Rohauer, with whom the couple would develop a business partnership to re-release Keaton's films.
Those films' director, William Asher, who cast Keaton, recalled,
He played the central role in Samuel Beckett's ''Film'' (1965), directed by Alan Schneider.
The high point in the Educational series is ''Grand Slam Opera'', featuring Buster in his own screenplay as an amateur-hour contestant.
Critics rediscovered Keaton in 1949 and producers occasionally hired him for bigger "prestige" pictures.
In 1964, he told an interviewer that in making "this particular pork pie", he "started with a good Stetson and cut it down", stiffening the brim with sugar water.
Keaton later said, "I took a lot of pratfalls to build that dump."
Look at his face—as beautiful but as inhuman as a butterfly—and you see that utter failure to identify sentiment."
Keaton was interred at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Hollywood Hills, California.
"Stuntmen don't get laughs," Keaton had said.
Jimmy assists Spencer Tracy's character, Captain C. G. Culpepper, by readying Culpepper's ultimately-unused boat for his abortive escape.
In 1994, caricaturist Al Hirschfeld penned a series of silent film stars for the United States Post Office, including Rudolph Valentino and Keaton.
She co-starred with Keaton in ''Our Hospitality''.
Comedy director Leo McCarey, recalling the freewheeling days of making slapstick comedies, said, "All of us tried to steal each other's gagmen.
He amazed the cast and crew by doing many of his own stunts, although Thames Television said his increasingly ill health did force the use of a stunt double for some scenes.
He had cameos in such films as ''In the Good Old Summertime'' (1949), ''Sunset Boulevard'' (1950), and ''Around the World in 80 Days'' (1956).
The more adventurous ideas called for dangerous stunts, performed by Keaton at great physical risk.
According to a frequently repeated story, which may be apocryphal, Keaton acquired the nickname "Buster" at about 18 months of age.
I started so young that landing right is second nature with me.
She came to know his routines so well that she often participated in them on TV revivals.
The films proved popular.
At the age of 55, he successfully recreated one of the stunts of his youth, in which he propped one foot onto a table, then swung the second foot up next to it, and held the awkward position in midair for a moment before crashing to the stage floor.
The skit called "A Day in the Park" was filmed and broadcast in color.
it is the ''angle'' that you remember: the figure perfectly straight but tilted forward, like the Spirit of Ecstasy on the hood of a Rolls-Royce... in ''The Three Ages'', he drives a low-grade automobile over a bump in the road, and the car just ''crumbles'' beneath him.
A scene from ''Steamboat Bill Jr.'' required Keaton to run into the shot and stand still on a particular spot.
In one segment, Ball and Keaton do a silent sketch on a park bench with the two clowns wrestling over an oversized newspaper, until a policeman (played by Harvey Korman) breaks up the fun.
Employing picturesque locations, the film's storyline reenacted an actual wartime incident.
''I've Got a Secret'' host Garry Moore recalled, "I asked (Keaton) how he did all those falls, and he said, 'I'll show you'.
Despite tangles with the law and a disastrous tour of music halls in the United Kingdom, Keaton was a rising star in the theater.
Rerun it on video, and you can see Buster riding the collapse like a surfer, hanging onto the steering wheel, coming beautifully to rest as the wave of wreckage breaks."
When Keaton transposed his experience in vaudeville to film, in many works he parodied melodramas.
Keaton's writers included Clyde Bruckman, Joseph Mitchell, and Jean Havez, but the most ingenious gags were generally conceived by Keaton himself.
Imitators of our act don't last long, because they can't stand the treatment.
At the age of three, Keaton began performing with his parents in ''The Three Keatons''.
A 1987 documentary, ''Buster Keaton: A Hard Act to Follow'', directed by Kevin Brownlow and David Gill, won two Emmy Awards.
Keaton's loss of independence as a filmmaker coincided with the coming of sound films (although he was interested in making the transition) and mounting personal problems, and his career in the early sound era was hurt as a result.
The stunt required precision, because the prop house weighed two tons, and the window only offered a few inches of clearance around Keaton's body.
After this, it was Keaton's father who began to use the nickname to refer to the youngster.
The Coronet Theatre art house in Los Angeles, with which Rohauer was involved, was showing ''The General'' which "Buster hadn't seen ... in years and he wanted me to see it," Eleanor Keaton said in 1987.
In 1950, Keaton had a successful television series, ''The Buster Keaton Show'', which was broadcast live on a local Los Angeles station.
After a few days, Keaton warmed up to the rest of the cast with his "utterly delicious sense of humor", according to Fritzi Burr, who played opposite him as his wife Queen Aggravaine.
Keaton was forced to use a stunt double during some of the more dangerous scenes, something he had never done in his heyday, as MGM wanted badly to protect its investment.
Keaton starred in four films for American International Pictures: 1964's ''Pajama Party'' and 1965's ''Beach Blanket Bingo'', ''How to Stuff a Wild Bikini'' and ''Sergeant Deadhead''.
Actor Paul Peterson, a regular on "The Donna Reed Show," recalls in the book ''The Fall of Buster Keaton'' (2010, Scarecrow Press) that Keaton "put together an incredible physical skit.
In 1954, Keaton played his first television dramatic role in "The Awakening", an episode of the syndicated anthology series ''Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., Presents''.
MGM tried teaming the laconic Keaton with the rambunctious Jimmy Durante in a series of films, ''The Passionate Plumber'', ''Speak Easily'', and ''What!
He said, 'It's valueless.
The appearance, since it was released after his death, was his posthumous swansong.
Keaton also had a cameo as Jimmy, appearing near the end of the film ''It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World'' (1963).
Keaton also appeared on Ed Wynn's variety show.
Fairbanks recommended Keaton to take the role for the remake five years later, since the film was to have a comic slant.
The singular event that triggered Scriven filing for divorce in 1935 was her finding Keaton with Leah Clampitt Sewell (libertine wife of millionaire Barton Sewell) on July 4 the same year in a hotel in Santa Barbara.
The latter would be Keaton's last starring feature in his home country.
He was eventually billed as "The Little Boy Who Can't Be Damaged," with the overall act being advertised as "'The Roughest Act That Was Ever in the History of the Stage."
Keaton played time-traveler Mulligan, who traveled from 1890 to 1960, then back, by means of a special helmet.
The act was mainly a comedy sketch.
Among the re-discovered films was Keaton's long-lost classic ''The Boat''.
In 1960, Keaton returned to MGM for the final time, playing a lion tamer in a 1960 adaptation of Mark Twain's ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn''.
After the infant sat up and shook off his experience, Houdini remarked, "That was a real buster!"
Keaton's personal life had stabilized with his 1940 marriage, and now he was taking life a little easier, abandoning Columbia for the less strenuous field of feature films.
The film's opening intertitles give it its mock-serious tone, and are taken from "The Shooting of Dan McGrew" by Robert W. Service.
With the failure of his marriage and the loss of his independence as a filmmaker, Keaton lapsed into a period of alcoholism.
Keaton told interviewer Fletcher Markle that  Houdini happened to be present one day when the young Keaton took a tumble down a long flight of stairs without injury.
Though it would come to be regarded as Keaton's greatest achievement, the film received mixed reviews at the time.
I go down and there he is with Eleanor.
He first appeared on stage in 1899 in Wilmington, Delaware.
Audiences of the 1920s recognized the parody and thought the film hysterically funny.
The half-hour program, which also promoted the release of the biographical film ''The Buster Keaton Story'' with Donald O'Connor, summarized Keaton's life and career up to that point.
He was named "Joseph" to continue a tradition on his father's side (he was sixth in a line bearing the name Joseph Keaton) and "Frank" for his maternal grandfather, who disapproved of his parents' union.
I don't own the rights.'"
His skills were amazing.
Later, Keaton changed his middle name to "Francis".
Unlike his contemporary Harold Lloyd, who kept his films from being televised, Keaton's periodic television appearances helped to revive interest in his silent films in the 1950s and 1960s.
Keaton said he was lucky if he used only six hats in making a film.
''Three Ages'' (1923), his first feature-length film, is a parody of D. W. Griffith's ''Intolerance'' (1916), from which it replicates the three inter-cut shorts structure.
During his first meeting with Arbuckle, he asked to borrow one of the cameras to get a feel for how it worked.
During this period, he made another film, in England, ''The Invader'' (released in the United States as ''An Old Spanish Custom'' in 1936).
In a British television documentary about his career, his widow Eleanor told producers of Thames Television that Keaton was up out of bed and moving around, and even played cards with friends who came to visit the day before he died.
A theatrical feature film, ''The Misadventures of Buster Keaton'', was fashioned from the series.
I never saw anything like it before or since."
Among its strongest admirers was Orson Welles, who stated that ''The General'' was cinema's highest achievement in comedy, and perhaps the greatest film ever made.
The director was usually Jules White, whose emphasis on slapstick and farce made most of these films resemble White's Three Stooges comedies.
Keaton later claimed that he was soon Arbuckle's second director and his entire gag department.
(Thirty years later, both Keaton and Durante had cameo roles in ''It's a Mad Mad Mad Mad World'', albeit not in the same scenes.)
In 1965, Keaton starred in the short film ''The Railrodder'' for the National Film Board of Canada.
It can, however, be viewed, under its alternate title ''A Pony For Chris'' on an Ernie Kovacs DVD set.
Keaton was so demoralized during the production of 1933's ''What!
In the first Keaton pictures with sound, he and his fellow actors would shoot each scene three times: one in English, one in Spanish, and one in either French or German.
With the exception of ''Seeing Stars'', a minor publicity film produced in 1922, ''Limelight'' was the only time in which the two would ever appear together on film.
The short also featured the impression of a performing monkey which was likely derived from a co-biller's act (called ''Peter the Great'').
