Camouflage is found in many butterflies.
Some caterpillars have hairs and bristly structures that provide protection while others are gregarious and form dense aggregations.
In both sexes, the genitalia are adorned with various spines, teeth, scales and bristles, which act to prevent the butterfly from mating with an insect of another species.
In most families of butterfly the antennae are clubbed, unlike those of moths which may be threadlike or feathery.
Butterflies in the genus ''Agathymus'' do not fix their eggs to a leaf, instead the newly laid eggs fall to the base of the plant.
Several American states have chosen an official state butterfly.
There is a reverse migration in the spring.
A Batesian mimic imitates another species to enjoy the protection of that species' aposematism.
While some caterpillars spin a cocoon to protect the pupa, most species do not.
In the genera ''Colias'', ''Erebia'', ''Euchloe'', and ''Parnassius'', a small number of species are known that reproduce semi-parthenogenetically; when the female dies, a partially developed larva emerges from her abdomen.
When metamorphosis is complete, the pupal skin splits, the adult insect climbs out, and after its wings have expanded and dried, it flies off.
Some, like the monarch and the painted lady, migrate over long distances.
Adult butterflies have large, often brightly coloured wings, and conspicuous, fluttering flight.
Collecting butterflies was once a popular hobby; it has now largely been replaced by photography, recording, and rearing butterflies for release into the wild.
Some butterflies have organs of hearing and some species make stridulatory and clicking sounds.
When the larva is fully grown, hormones such as prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) are produced.
The egg stage lasts a few weeks in most butterflies, but eggs laid close to winter, especially in temperate regions, go through a diapause (resting) stage, and the hatching may take place only in spring.
The dry-season forms are usually more cryptic, perhaps offering better camouflage when vegetation is scarce.
The structural colouration of butterflies is inspiring nanotechnology research to produce paints that do not use toxic pigments and in the development of new display technologies.
Colour vision may be widespread but has been demonstrated in only a few species.
Butterflies have the typical four-stage insect life cycle.
A possible source of the name is the bright yellow male of the brimstone (''Gonepteryx rhamni''); another is that butterflies were on the wing in meadows during the spring and summer butter season while the grass was growing.
The bacterium ''Bacillus thuringiensis'' has been used in sprays to reduce damage to crops by the caterpillars of the large white butterfly, and the entomopathogenic fungus ''Beauveria bassiana'' has proved effective for the same purpose.
The thorax is composed of three segments, each with a pair of legs.
This most likely happens when the egg overwinters before hatching and where the host plant loses its leaves in winter, as do violets in this example.
If one wing is surgically removed early on, the other three will grow to a larger size.
The vast majority of butterflies have a four-stage life cycle; egg, larva (caterpillar), pupa (chrysalis) and imago (adult).
The antennae come in various shapes and colours; the hesperids have a pointed angle or hook to the antennae, while most other families show knobbed antennae.
The sensory receptors are concentrated in the tips and can detect odours.
There is also decoration in the form of hairs, wart-like protuberances, horn-like protuberances and spines.
Butterflies then land on the ground or on a perch to mate.
The first maxillae are elongated into a tubular proboscis which is curled up at rest and expanded when needed to feed.
Nearly all butterflies are diurnal, have relatively bright colours, and hold their wings vertically above their bodies when at rest, unlike the majority of moths which fly by night, are often cryptically coloured (well camouflaged), and either hold their wings flat (touching the surface on which the moth is standing) or fold them closely over their bodies.
The ants provide some degree of protection to these larvae and they in turn gather honeydew secretions.
The second and third segments of the thorax bear the wings.
Some larvae, especially those of the Lycaenidae, form mutual associations with ants.
Many females produce between one hundred and two hundred eggs.
Caterpillars have short antennae and several simple eyes.
+ Sexual dimorphism in ''Anthocharis cardamines''
The fore and hindwings are not hooked together (as they are in moths) but are coordinated by the friction of their overlapping parts.
Butterflies are distributed worldwide except Antarctica, totalling some 18,500 species.
Others have deimatic behaviours, such as rearing up and waving their front ends which are marked with eyespots as if they were snakes.
Some species have a reduced proboscis or maxillary palps and do not feed as adults.
In some species, such as the great spangled fritillary, the eggs are deposited close to but not on the food plant.
Butterfly eggs are protected by a hard-ridged outer layer of shell, called the ''chorion''.
The antennae are richly covered with sensory organs known as sensillae.
Courtship is often aerial and often involves pheromones.
Many butterflies have eyespots on the wings; these too may deflect attacks, or may serve to attract mates.
The butterfly was sometimes depicted with the maw of a jaguar, and some species were considered to be the reincarnations of the souls of dead warriors.
At this point the larva stops feeding, and begins "wandering" in the quest for a suitable pupation site, often the underside of a leaf or other concealed location.
Usually have reduced forelegs, so appear four-legged; often brightly coloured
Many species show sexual dimorphism in the patterns of UV reflective patches.
Caterpillars are also affected by a range of bacterial, viral and fungal diseases, and only a small percentage of the butterfly eggs laid ever reach adulthood.
Butterflies use their antennae to sense the air for wind and scents.
Butterflies may have one or more broods per year.
There it spins a button of silk which it uses to fasten its body to the surface and moults for a final time.
Brush-footed or four-footed butterflies
These include wake capture, vortices at the wing edge, rotational mechanisms and the Weis-Fogh 'clap-and-fling' mechanism.
The first and second maxillae bear palps which function as sensory organs.
Studies using ''Vanessa atalanta'' in a wind tunnel show that they use a wide variety of aerodynamic mechanisms to generate force.
Each of the three thoracic segments has two legs (among nymphalids, the first pair is reduced and the insects walk on four legs).
One Japanese superstition says that if a butterfly enters your guest room and perches behind the bamboo screen, the person whom you most love is coming to see you.
The structure of the transforming insect is visible from the exterior, with the wings folded flat on the ventral surface and the two halves of the proboscis, with the antennae and the legs between them.
The group comprises the large superfamily Papilionoidea, along with two smaller groups, the skippers (superfamily Hesperioidea) and the moth-butterflies (superfamily Hedyloidea).
Most of the tissues and cells of the larva are broken down inside the pupa, as the constituent material is rebuilt into the imago.
The male has a pair of clasping organs attached to a ring structure, and during copulation, a tubular structure is extruded and inserted into the female's vagina.
Some butterflies also visit dung, rotting fruit or carcasses to obtain minerals and nutrients.
Predators of butterflies include ants, spiders, wasps, and birds.
The pupa or chrysalis, unlike that of moths, is not wrapped in a cocoon.
He published the results in the folio sized handbook ''The Natural History of British Butterflies'' in 1924.
The mouthparts are designed for sucking and the mandibles are usually reduced in size or absent.
At the end of each instar, the larva moults, the old cuticle splits and the new cuticle expands, rapidly hardening and developing pigment.
Many butterflies are sexually dimorphic.
Flower constancy has been observed for at least one species of butterfly.
''Madam Butterfly'' is a 1904 opera by Giacomo Puccini about a romantic young Japanese bride who is deserted by her American officer husband soon after they are married.
The ''Oxford English Dictionary'' derives the word straightforwardly from Old English ''butorflēoge'', butter-fly; similar names in Old Dutch and Old High German show that the name is ancient.
The life histories of their host plants also influence butterfly behaviour.
A spermatophore is deposited in the female, following which the sperm make their way to a seminal receptacle where they are stored for later use.
Butterflies in their adult stage can live from a week to nearly a year depending on the species.
Migrations have been studied in more recent times using wing tags and also using stable hydrogen isotopes.
Some butterflies, especially in the tropics, have several generations in a year, while others have a single generation, and a few in cold locations may take several years to pass through their whole life cycle.
Butterfly eggs vary greatly in size and shape between species, but are usually upright and finely sculptured.
Some butterflies have parasitoidal relationships with organisms including protozoans, flies, ants, and other invertebrates, and are predated by vertebrates.
In the pupa, the wing forms a structure that becomes compressed from top to bottom and pleated from proximal to distal ends as it grows, so that it can rapidly be unfolded to its full adult size.
It has recently been shown that the British painted lady undertakes a 9,000-mile round trip in a series of steps by up to six successive generations, from tropical Africa to the Arctic Circle — almost double the length of the famous migrations undertaken by monarch.
The earliest Lepidoptera fossils are of a small moth, ''Archaeolepis mane'', of Jurassic age, around 190 million years ago (mya).
These prolegs have rings of tiny hooks called crochets that are engaged hydrostatically and help the caterpillar grip the substrate.
As it hardens it contracts, deforming the shape of the egg.
Some also derive nourishment from pollen, tree sap, rotting fruit, dung, decaying flesh, and dissolved minerals in wet sand or dirt.
The close association of butterflies with fire and warfare persisted into the Aztec civilisation; evidence of similar jaguar-butterfly images has been found among the Zapotec and Maya civilisations.
A newly emerged butterfly needs to spend some time inflating its wings with hemolymph and letting them dry, during which time it is extremely vulnerable to predators.
This is lined with a thin coating of wax which prevents the egg from drying out before the larva has had time to fully develop.
It is not clear how it dispersed; adults may have been blown by the wind or larvae or pupae may have been accidentally transported by humans, but the presence of suitable host plants in their new environment was a necessity for their successful establishment.
Butterflies have evolved mechanisms to sequester these plant toxins and use them instead in their own defence.
Eric Carle's children's book ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar'' portrays the larva as an extraordinarily hungry animal, while also teaching children how to count (to five) and the days of the week.
When Taira no Masakado was secretly preparing for his famous revolt, there appeared in Kyoto so vast a swarm of butterflies that the people were frightened&nbsp;— thinking the apparition to be a portent of coming evil.
Near the end of each stage, the larva undergoes a process called apolysis, mediated by the release of a series of neurohormones.
Some species are myrmecophiles, forming mutualistic associations with ants and gaining their protection.
Butterfly fossils date to the Palaeocene, about 56 million years ago.
These may also cause ambush predators such as spiders to approach from the wrong end, enabling the butterflies to detect attacks promptly.
The caterpillar is seated on a toadstool and is smoking a hookah; the image can be read as showing either the forelegs of the larva, or as suggesting a face with protruding nose and chin.
The pupal transformation into a butterfly through metamorphosis has held great appeal to mankind.
Butterflies are able to change from one mode to another rapidly.
Study of the structural colouration of the wing scales of swallowtail butterflies led to the development of more efficient light-emitting diodes.
The zoological illustrator Frederick William Frohawk succeeded in rearing all the butterfly species found in Britain, at a rate of four per year, to enable him to draw every stage of each species.
'''Butterflies''' are insects in the clade Rhopalocera from the order Lepidoptera, which also includes moths.
The polarized light near the ultraviolet spectrum appears to be particularly important.
The naked pupa, often known as a chrysalis, usually hangs head down from the cremaster, a spiny pad at the posterior end, but in some species a silken girdle may be spun to keep the pupa in a head-up position.
Eggs are almost invariably laid on plants.
These migrations take place over a number of generations and no single individual completes the whole trip.
If their body temperature reaches , they can orientate themselves with the folded wings edgewise to the sun.
The Melissa Arctic (''Oeneis melissa'') overwinters twice as a caterpillar.
In the Philippines, a lingering black butterfly or moth in the house is taken to mean a death in the family.
Chemical defences are widespread and are mostly based on chemicals of plant origin.
Adult butterflies consume only liquids, ingested through the proboscis.
Small, brightly coloured; often have false heads with eyespots and small tails resembling antennae
Butterflies navigate using a time-compensated sun compass.
Vision is well developed in butterflies and most species are sensitive to the ultraviolet spectrum.
One of the most popular, and most often recorded, songs by Sweden's eighteenth-century bard, Carl Michael Bellman, is "Fjäriln vingad syns på Haga" (The butterfly wingèd is seen in Haga), one of his ''Fredman's Songs''.
The oldest butterflies are from the Palaeocene MoClay or Fur Formation of Denmark.
Of these, 775 are Nearctic; 7,700 Neotropical; 1,575 Palearctic; 3,650 Afrotropical; and 4,800 are distributed across the combined Oriental and Australian/Oceania regions.
The flight styles of butterflies are often characteristic and some species have courtship flight displays.
Taste receptors are located on the palps and on the feet.
As in all insects, the body is divided into three sections: the head, thorax, and abdomen.
Braconid and other parasitic wasps lay their eggs in lepidopteran eggs or larvae and the wasps' parasitoid larvae devour their hosts, usually pupating inside or outside the desiccated husk.
Sir John Tenniel drew a famous illustration of Alice meeting a caterpillar for Lewis Carroll's ''Alice in Wonderland'', c. 1865.
Butterflies feed primarily on nectar from flowers.
These are capable of distinguishing flower shapes or motion but not for clearly viewing distant objects.
A Roman sculpture depicts a butterfly exiting the mouth of a dead man, representing the Roman belief that the soul leaves through the mouth.
Butterflies evolved from moths, so while the butterflies are monophyletic (forming a single clade), the moths are not.
Most wasps are very specific about their host species and some have been used as biological controls of pest butterflies like the large white butterfly.
Often have metallic spots on wings; often conspicuously coloured with black, orange and blue
Butterfly larvae, caterpillars, have a hard (sclerotised) head with strong mandibles used for cutting their food, most often leaves.
Several boundaries seen in the adult colour pattern are marked by changes in the expression of particular transcription factors in the early pupa.
Diderot's ''Encyclopédie'' cites butterflies as a symbol for the soul.
The front two segments have a pair of spiracles which are used in respiration.
The epidermis bears tufts of setae, the position and number of which help in identifying the species.
Many are well camouflaged; others are aposematic with bright colours and bristly projections containing toxic chemicals obtained from their food plants.
These are switched by the hormone ecdysone.
Many migratory butterflies live in semi-arid areas where breeding seasons are short.
Large blue (''Phengaris arion'') caterpillars trick ''Myrmica'' ants into taking them back to the ant colony where they feed on the ant eggs and larvae in a parasitic relationship.
According to Mircea Eliade, some of the Nagas of Manipur claim ancestry from a butterfly.
According to Lafcadio Hearn, a butterfly was seen in Japan as the personification of a person's soul; whether they be living, dying, or already dead.
Caterpillars mature through a series of developmental stages known as instars.
Some species are pests because in their larval stages they can damage domestic crops or trees; other species are agents of pollination of some plants, and caterpillars of a few butterflies (e.g., harvesters) eat harmful insects.
The common Mormon of India has female morphs which imitate the unpalatable red-bodied swallowtails, the common rose and the crimson rose.
Basking is an activity which is more common in the cooler hours of the morning.
Several species of butterflies need more sodium than that provided by nectar and are attracted by sodium in salt; they sometimes land on people, attracted by the salt in human sweat.
Some papilionid caterpillars such as the giant swallowtail (''Papilio cresphontes'') resemble bird droppings.
Some species will bask or perch on chosen perches.
Butterflies are threatened in their early stages by parasitoids and in all stages by predators, diseases and environmental factors.
The antennae are composed of many segments and have clubbed tips (unlike moths that have tapering or feathery antennae).
Some like the oakleaf butterfly and autumn leaf are remarkable imitations of leaves.
In many cases the plants themselves evolved these toxic substances as protection against herbivores.
The long proboscis can be coiled when not in use for sipping nectar from flowers.
The male passes a spermatophore to the female; to reduce sperm competition, he may cover her with his scent, or in some species such as the Apollos (''Parnassius'') plugs her genital opening to prevent her from mating again.
Colour perception is good, especially in some species in the blue/violet range.
Behavioural defences include perching and angling the wings to reduce shadow and avoid being conspicuous.
Dark colours in wet-season forms may help to absorb solar radiation.
Many species of butterfly maintain territories and actively chase other species or individuals that may stray into them.
Blues, coppers, hairstreaks
Butterflies can only fly when their temperature is above ; when it is cool, they can position themselves to expose the underside of the wings to the sunlight to heat themselves up.
The front eight segments have spiracles and the terminal segment is modified for reproduction.
Each species of butterfly has its own host plant range and while some species of butterfly are restricted to just one species of plant, others use a range of plant species, often including members of a common family.
As in many other insects, the lift generated by butterflies is more than can be accounted for by steady-state, non-transitory aerodynamics.
Copulation takes place tail-to-tail and may last from minutes to hours.
Some species lay eggs singly, others in batches.
Each egg contains a number of tiny funnel-shaped openings at one end, called ''micropyles''; the purpose of these holes is to allow sperm to enter and fertilize the egg.
The nature of the glue has been little researched but in the case of ''Pieris brassicae'', it begins as a pale yellow granular secretion containing acidophilic proteins.
In line with this, the ancient Greek word for "butterfly" is ψυχή (''psȳchē''), which primarily means "soul" or "mind".
Some flies lay their eggs on the outside of caterpillars and the newly hatched fly larvae bore their way through the skin and feed in a similar way to the parasitoid wasp larvae.
Some day-flying moths, such as the hummingbird hawk-moth, are exceptions to these rules.
They communicate with the ants using vibrations that are transmitted through the substrate as well as using chemical signals.
This is viscous and darkens when exposed to air, becoming a water-insoluble, rubbery material which soon sets solid.
The caterpillars grow, sometimes very rapidly, and when fully developed, pupate in a chrysalis.
Some temperate region butterflies, such as the Camberwell beauty, lay their eggs in the spring and have them hatch in the summer.
The developing wings are present in later stage instars and the gonads start development in the egg stage.
Many tropical butterflies have seasonal forms for dry and wet seasons.
Butterflies have appeared in art from 3500 years ago in ancient Egypt.
Spectacular large-scale migrations associated with the monsoon are seen in peninsular India.
Adjoining these is the labium-hypopharynx which houses a tubular spinneret which is able to extrude silk.
They have cylindrical bodies, with ten segments to the abdomen, generally with short prolegs on segments 3–6 and 10; the three pairs of true legs on the thorax have five segments each.
Large numbers of butterflies are viewed as bad omens.
The eastern North American population of monarchs can travel thousands of miles south-west to overwintering sites in Mexico.
When the small cabbage white was accidentally introduced to New Zealand, it had no natural enemies.
Butterflies are often polymorphic, and many species make use of camouflage, mimicry and aposematism to evade their predators.
In the ancient Mesoamerican city of Teotihuacan, the brilliantly coloured image of the butterfly was carved into many temples, buildings, jewellery, and emblazoned on incense burners.
Butterflies are important as pollinators for some species of plants.
The mouthparts are adapted for chewing with powerful mandibles and a pair maxillae, each with a segmented palp.
They sip water from damp patches for hydration and feed on nectar from flowers, from which they obtain sugars for energy, and sodium and other minerals vital for reproduction.
The number of generations per year varies from temperate to tropical regions with tropical regions showing a trend towards multivoltinism.
The butterfly is a symbol of being transgender, because of the transformation from caterpillar to winged adult.
This glue is easily seen surrounding the base of every egg forming a meniscus.
The reproductive stage of the insect is the winged adult or imago.
The head is small and dominated by the two large compound eyes.
Traditionally, the butterflies have been divided into the superfamily Papilionoidea and the smaller groupings of the Hesperioidea (skippers) and the more moth-like Hedyloidea of America.
Many butterflies use chemical signals, pheromones; some have specialized scent scales (androconia) or other structures (coremata or "hair pencils" in the Danaidae).
They can see polarized light and therefore orient even in cloudy conditions.
In the English county of Devon, people once hurried to kill the first butterfly of the year, to avoid a year of bad luck.
A butterfly's sense of taste is coordinated by chemoreceptors on the tarsi, or feet, which work only on contact, and are used to determine whether an egg-laying insect's offspring will be able to feed on a leaf before eggs are laid on it.
