Lewis vigorously resisted conversion, noting that he was brought into Christianity like a prodigal, "kicking, struggling, resentful, and darting his eyes in every direction for a chance to escape."
She was separated from her alcoholic and abusive husband, novelist William L. Gresham, and came to England with her two sons, David and Douglas.
In 1956, he married American writer Joy Davidman; she died of cancer four years later at the age of 45.
First, that human beings, all over the earth, have this curious idea that they ought to behave in a certain way, and cannot really get rid of it.
Tolkien about these trends.
His teenage writings moved away from the tales of Boxen, and he began using different art forms, including epic poetry and opera, to try to capture his new-found interest in Norse mythology and the natural world.
He described his last struggle in ''Surprised by Joy'':
I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that people often say about Him: 'I'm ready to accept Jesus as a great moral teacher, but I don't accept his claim to be God.'
After he was discharged from the hospital, Lewis returned to the Kilns, though he was too ill to return to work.
You must make your choice.
Lewis's own mother had died when he was a child, and his father was distant, demanding, and eccentric.
Describing an encounter with a fellow Irishman, he wrote: "Like all Irish people who meet in England, we ended by criticisms on the invincible flippancy and dullness of the Anglo-Saxon race.
He developed a particular fondness for , in part because of Yeats's use of Ireland's Celtic heritage in poetry.
It is deeply concerned with religious ideas, but the setting is entirely pagan, and the connections with specific Christian beliefs are left implicit.
After Lewis returned to Oxford University, he received a First in Honour Moderations (Greek and Latin literature) in 1920, a First in Greats (Philosophy and Ancient History) in 1922, and a First in English in 1923.
Kathryn Lindskoog, an independent Lewis scholar, argued that Hooper's scholarship is not reliable and that he has made false statements and attributed forged works to Lewis.
Lewis's health continued to improve, and according to his friend George Sayer, Lewis was fully himself by early 1963.
But what was worst was the English landscape&nbsp;...
Theologian John Hick argues that New Testament scholars do not now support the view that Jesus claimed to be God.
Asked by Lloyd-Jones when he would write another book, Lewis replied, "When I understand the meaning of prayer."
On the other hand, Paul Stevens of the University of Toronto has written that "Lewis's mere Christianity masked many of the political prejudices of an old-fashioned Ulster Protestant, a native of middle-class Belfast for whom British withdrawal from Northern Ireland even in the 1950s and 1960s was unthinkable".
Lewis also portrays Universal Morality in his works of fiction.
He also wrote ''The Four Loves'', which rhetorically explains four categories of love: friendship, eros, affection, and charity.
He became an atheist at age 15, though he later described his young self as being paradoxically "angry with God for not existing".
Most of Lewis's posthumous work has been edited by his literary executor Walter Hooper.
Lewis and fellow novelist J. R. R. Tolkien were close friends.
New Testament scholar N. T. Wright criticises Lewis for failing to recognise the significance of Jesus' Jewish identity and setting&nbsp;– an oversight which "at best, drastically short-circuits the argument" and which lays Lewis open to criticism that his argument "doesn't work as history, and it backfires dangerously when historical critics question his reading of the gospels," although he believes this "doesn't undermine the eventual claim."
Lewis returned to the Anglican Communion at the age of 32, owing to the influence of Tolkien and other friends, and he became an "ordinary layman of the Church of England".
After leaving Malvern, he studied privately with William T. Kirkpatrick, his father's old tutor and former headmaster of Lurgan College.
Lewis wrote several works on Heaven and Hell.
''Mere Christianity'' was voted best book of the twentieth century by ''Christianity Today'' in 2000.
He considers C. S. Lewis a negative influence and has accused Lewis of featuring religious propaganda, misogyny, racism, and emotional sadism in his books.
His illness caused him to miss the autumn term at Cambridge, though his health gradually began improving in 1962 and he returned that April.
This coincidence was the inspiration for Peter Kreeft's book ''Between Heaven and Hell: A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, & Aldous Huxley''.
A world so frail and faulty as we see.
Throughout his life, he sought out the company of other Irish people living in England and visited Northern Ireland regularly, even spending his honeymoon there in 1958 at the Old Inn, Crawfordsburn.
It was aired on British television starring Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom.
''The Chronicles of Narnia'' is a series of seven fantasy novels for children and is considered a classic of children's literature.
In a 2005 interview, Douglas Gresham acknowledged that he and his brother were not close, but he did say that they are in email contact.
In September 1913, Lewis enrolled at Malvern College, where he remained until the following June.
In his biography ''Jack: A Life of C. S. Lewis'', he wrote:
In responding to the second idea Lewis notes that people often complain that one set of moral ideas is better than another, but that this actually argues for there existing some "Real Morality" to which they are comparing other moralities.
As a result, he resigned from his post at Cambridge in August.
At Oxford, he was the tutor of poet John Betjeman, critic Kenneth Tynan, mystic Bede Griffiths, novelist Roger Lancelyn Green and Sufi scholar Martin Lings, among many other undergraduates.
In ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' he describes Universal Morality as the "deep magic" which everyone knew.
He later came to consider himself honoured by worshipping with men of faith who came in shabby clothes and work boots and who sang all the verses to all the hymns.
He called this "my Irish life".
Lewis occasionally expressed a somewhat tongue-in-cheek chauvinism toward the English.
It was during this time that Lewis abandoned his childhood Christian faith and became an atheist, becoming interested in mythology and the occult.
Readers of his fiction are often unaware of what Lewis considered the Christian themes of his works.
The friendship with Moore was particularly important to Lewis while he was recovering from his wounds in hospital, as his father did not visit him.
In addition to Christian themes, Lewis also borrows characters from Greek and Roman mythology, as well as traditional British and Irish fairy tales.
His book "A Preface to ''Paradise Lost''" is still one of the most valuable criticisms of that work.
Lewis began his academic career as an undergraduate student at Oxford University, where he won a triple first, the highest honours in three areas of study.
Lewis is featured as a main character in ''The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica'' series by James A. Owen.
They all contributed financially to the purchase of the house, which passed to Maureen, who by then was Dame Maureen Dunbar, when Warren died in 1973.
Anscombe had a completely different recollection of the debate's outcome and its emotional effect on Lewis.
In his later writings, some believe that he proposed ideas such as purification of venial sins after death in purgatory (''The Great Divorce'' and ''Letters to Malcolm'') and mortal sin (''The Screwtape Letters''), which are generally considered to be Roman Catholic teachings, although they are also widely held in Anglicanism (particularly in high church Anglo-Catholic circles).
When he was seven, his family moved into "Little Lea", the family home of his childhood, in the Strandtown area of East Belfast.
He has not left that open to us.
Lewis also wrote an autobiography titled ''Surprised by Joy'', which places special emphasis on his own conversion.
The second novel, ''Perelandra'', depicts a new Garden of Eden on the planet Venus, a new Adam and Eve, and a new "serpent figure" to tempt Eve.
If Aslan represented the immaterial Deity in the same way in which Giant Despair a character in ''The Pilgrim's Progress'' represents despair, he would be an allegorical figure.
His experience of the horror of war confirmed his atheism.
David informed Lewis that he was going to become a ritual slaughterer to present this type of Jewish religious functionary to the world in a more favourable light.
He writes plays and poems of rare spirit and beauty about our old Irish mythology".
Lewis's book ''A Grief Observed'' describes his experience of bereavement in such a raw and personal fashion that he originally released it under the pseudonym N. W. Clerk to keep readers from associating the book with him.
''That Hideous Strength'' is in fact set in the environs of "Edgestow" university, a small English university like Durham, though Lewis disclaims any other resemblance between the two.
They both served on the English faculty at Oxford University, and were active in the informal Oxford literary group known as the Inklings.
Lewis's brother Warren wrote: "For Jack the attraction was at first undoubtedly intellectual.
Speculation regarding their relationship re-surfaced with the 1990 publication of A. N. Wilson's biography of Lewis.
The books that make up ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' have sold the most and have been popularised on stage, TV, radio, and cinema.
Lewis, an expert on the subject of allegory, maintained that the books were not allegory, and preferred to call the Christian aspects of them "suppositional".
Lewis experienced a certain cultural shock on first arriving in England: "No Englishman will be able to understand my first impressions of England", Lewis wrote in ''Surprised by Joy''.
The story can be seen as an account of what might have happened if the terrestrial Adam had defeated the serpent and avoided the Fall of Man, with Ransom intervening in the novel to "ransom" the new Adam and Eve from the deceptions of the enemy.
Lewis has been the subject of several biographies, a few of which were written by close friends, such as Roger Lancelyn Green and George Sayer.
Lewis's friendship with Coghill and Tolkien grew during their time as members of the Kolbítar, an Old Norse reading group that Tolkien founded and which ended around the time of the inception of the Inklings.
Peter Bide, performed the ceremony at her bed in the Churchill Hospital on 21 March 1957.
He rejected the recruiting office's suggestion of writing columns for the Ministry of Information in the press, as he did not want to "write lies" to deceive the enemy.
The manuscript was eventually published in 1977, though Lewis scholar Kathryn Lindskoog doubts its authenticity.
In 1985, the screenplay ''Shadowlands'' by William Nicholson dramatized Lewis's life and relationship with Joy Davidman Gresham.
Paddy was killed in action in 1918 and Lewis kept his promise.
It was also during the same wartime period that Lewis was invited to become first President of the Oxford Socratic Club in January 1942, a position that he enthusiastically held until he resigned on appointment to Cambridge University in 1954.
The floor stone inscription is a quotation from an address by Lewis: I believe in Christianity as I believe that the Sun has risen, not only because I see it but because by it I see everything else.
He was then sent to the health-resort town of Malvern, Worcestershire, where he attended the preparatory school Cherbourg House, which Lewis calls "Chartres" in his autobiography.
In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis was honoured with a memorial in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.
Certainly Anscombe herself believed that Lewis's argument, though flawed, was getting at something very important; she thought that this came out more in the improved version of it that Lewis presented in a subsequent edition of ''Miracles''&nbsp;– though that version also had 'much to criticize in it'."
Lewis continued to raise Gresham's two sons after her death.
Lewis was surprised to find his English peers indifferent to Yeats and the Celtic Revival movement, and wrote: "I am often surprised to find how utterly ignored Yeats is among the men I have met: perhaps his appeal is purely Irish&nbsp;– if so, then thank the gods that I am Irish."
In 2005, a one-hour television movie entitled ''C.
These then are the two points that I wanted to make.
In reality, he is an invention giving an imaginary answer to the question, 'What might Christ become like, if there really were a world like Narnia and He chose to be incarnate and die and rise again in that world as He actually has done in ours?'
After complaining of a painful hip, she was diagnosed with terminal bone cancer, and the relationship developed to the point that they sought a Christian marriage.
Media coverage of his death was almost completely overshadowed by news of the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy, which occurred on the same day (approximately 55 minutes following Lewis's collapse), as did the death of English writer Aldous Huxley, author of ''Brave New World''.
Lewis was schooled by private tutors before being sent to the Wynyard School in Watford, Hertfordshire, in 1908, just after his mother's death from cancer.
Lewis's last novel was ''Till We Have Faces'', which he thought of as his most mature and masterly work of fiction but which was never a popular success.
Douglas remains involved in the affairs of the Lewis estate.
C. S. Lewis is commemorated on 22 November in the church calendar of the Episcopal Church.
After his conversion to Christianity, his interests gravitated towards Christian theology and away from pagan Celtic mysticism.
He is one of two characters in Mark St. Germain's 2009 play ''Freud's Last Session'', which imagines a meeting between Lewis, aged 40, and Sigmund Freud, aged 83, at Freud's house in Hampstead, London, in 1939, as the Second World War is about to break out.
We needed, many of us, a key to the meaning of the universe.
Joy was the only woman whom he had met&nbsp;... who had a brain which matched his own in suppleness, in width of interest, and in analytical grasp, and above all in humour and a sense of fun."
In 1954, he was awarded the newly founded chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Cambridge University, and was elected a fellow of Magdalene College.
His last academic work, ''The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature'' (1964), is a summary of the medieval world view, a reference to the "discarded image" of the cosmos.
Douglas Gresham is a Christian like Lewis and his mother, while David Gresham turned to the faith into which his mother had been born, becoming Orthodox Jewish in his beliefs.
These broadcasts were appreciated by civilians and servicemen at that stage.
One of the main theses in Lewis's apologia is that there is a common morality known throughout humanity.
Before Lewis's conversion to Christianity, he published two books: ''Spirits in Bondage'', a collection of poems, and ''Dymer'', a single narrative poem.
On 22 November, exactly one week before his 65th birthday, Lewis collapsed in his bedroom at 5:30&nbsp;pm and died a few minutes later.
Another short work, ''The Screwtape Letters'', consists of suave letters of advice from senior demon Screwtape to his nephew Wormwood on the best ways to tempt a particular human and secure his damnation.
The first book, ''Out of the Silent Planet'', was apparently written following a conversation with his friend J.R.R.
S. Lewis: Beyond Narnia'' provided a general synopsis of Lewis's life, starring Anton Rodgers.
Lewis stayed in Durham, where he was overwhelmed by the cathedral.
Lewis's condition continued to decline, and in mid-November he was diagnosed with end-stage renal failure.
Studying with Kirkpatrick ("The Great Knock", as Lewis afterwards called him) instilled in him a love of Greek literature and mythology and sharpened his debate and reasoning skills.
Lewis used a similar argument in ''The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe'', when the old Professor advises the young heroes that their sister's claims of a magical world must logically be taken as either lies, madness, or truth.
Various critics have suggested that it was Lewis's dismay over sectarian conflict in his native Belfast which led him to eventually adopt such an ecumenical brand of Christianity.
Soon after Lewis entered Oxford in the 1917 summer term, he joined the Officers' Training Corps at the university as his "most promising route into the army".
Both were published under the pen name Clive Hamilton.
He routinely introduced her as his mother, referred to her as such in letters, and developed a deeply affectionate friendship with her.
He later served in the local Home Guard in Oxford.
Later Sayer changed his mind.
Authors of adult fantasy literature such as Tim Powers have also testified to being influenced by Lewis's work.
Lewis's Christian apologetics, and this argument in particular, have been criticised.
Curiously, the religious and conservative Betjeman detested Lewis, whereas the anti-establishment Tynan retained a lifelong admiration for him.
Clive Staples Lewis was born in Belfast, Ireland, on 29 November 1898.
His works entered the public domain in 2014 in countries where copyright expires 50 years after the death of the creator, such as Canada.
He also grew to love nature; its beauty reminded him of the stories of the North, and the stories of the North reminded him of the beauties of nature.
He did not intend to.
Lewis is also regarded by many as one of the most influential Christian apologists of his time, in addition to his career as an English professor and an author of fiction.
In addition to his scholarly work, Lewis wrote several popular novels, including the science fiction ''Space Trilogy'' for adults and the Narnia fantasies for children.
Lewis died on 22 November 1963 from renal failure, one week before his 65th birthday.
C. S. Lewis's stepson Douglas Gresham denies the forgery claims, saying, "The whole controversy thing was engineered for very personal reasons&nbsp;...
The ''Space Trilogy'' (also called the ''Cosmic Trilogy'' or ''Ransom Trilogy'') dealt with what Lewis saw as the dehumanising trends in contemporary science fiction.
Lewis lived with and cared for Moore until she was hospitalised in the late 1940s.
He suffered from depression and homesickness during his convalescence and, upon his recovery in October, he was assigned to duty in Andover, England.
Lewis spoke well of Mrs. Moore throughout his life, saying to his friend George Sayer, "She was generous and taught me to be generous, too."
''Mere Christianity'', ''The Problem of Pain'', and ''Miracles'' were all concerned, to one degree or another, with refuting popular objections to Christianity, such as the question, "How could a good God allow pain to exist in the world?"
Her fanciful theories have been pretty thoroughly discredited."
This work deliberately echoes two other more famous works with a similar theme: the ''Divine Comedy'' of Dante Alighieri, and Bunyan's ''The Pilgrim's Progress''.
He is best known for his fictional work, especially ''The Screwtape Letters'', ''The Chronicles of Narnia'', and ''The Space Trilogy'', and for his non-fiction Christian apologetics, such as ''Mere Christianity'', ''Miracles'', and ''The Problem of Pain''.
His father was Albert James Lewis (1863–1929), a solicitor whose father Richard had come to Ireland from Wales during the mid-19th century.
Lewis also had fairly progressive views on the topic of "animal morality", in particular the suffering of animals, as is evidenced by several of his essays: most notably, ''On Vivisection'' and "On the Pains of Animals."
Lewis then attended Campbell College in the east of Belfast about a mile from his home, but he left after a few months due to respiratory problems.
Lewis wrote several prefaces to works of literature and poetry, such as Layamon's ''Brut''.
''The Chronicles of Narnia'' have been particularly influential.
He found the school socially competitive.
Lewis was a committed Anglican who upheld a largely orthodox Anglican theology, though in his apologetic writings, he made an effort to avoid espousing any one denomination.
Lewis was a prolific writer, and his circle of literary friends became an informal discussion society known as the "Inklings", including J. R. R. Tolkien, Nevill Coghill, Lord David Cecil, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and his brother Warren Lewis.
In the introduction to the 1997 edition of his biography of Lewis he wrote:
The book was poorly received by critics at the time, although David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, one of Lewis's contemporaries at Oxford, gave him much-valued encouragement.
Lewis was raised in a religious family that attended the Church of Ireland.
Tolkien, but which was never completed.
Lewis's main character Elwin Ransom is based in part on Tolkien, a fact to which Tolkien alludes in his letters.
The Kilns was a house in the district of Headington Quarry on the outskirts of Oxford, now part of the suburb of Risinghurst.
These two facts are the foundation of all clear thinking about ourselves and the universe we live in.
Ransom appears in the story but it is not clear whether the book was intended as part of the same series of novels.
He records making a specific commitment to Christian belief while on his way to the zoo with his brother.
Early in his career, Lewis considered sending his work to the major Dublin publishers, writing: "If I do ever send my stuff to a publisher, I think I shall try Maunsel, those Dublin people, and so tack myself definitely onto the Irish school."
From 1941, he was occupied at his summer holiday weekends visiting R.A.F.
The broadcasts were anthologised in ''Mere Christianity''.
Other narrative poems have since been published posthumously, including ''Launcelot'', ''The Nameless Isle'', and ''The Queen of Drum''.
Film adaptations have been made of three of ''The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe'' (2005), ''Prince Caspian'' (2008) and ''The Voyage of the Dawn Treader'' (2010).
As one critic has said, Lewis "repeatedly extolled the virtues of all branches of the Christian faith, emphasising a need for unity among Christians around what the Catholic writer  called 'Mere Christianity', the core doctrinal beliefs that all denominations share."
For example, Air Chief Marshal Sir Donald Hardman wrote:
Walter Hooper, Lewis's literary executor, discovered a fragment of another science-fiction novel by Lewis called ''The Dark Tower''.
That is the one thing we must not say.
Lewis visited her every day in this home until her death.
His first novel after becoming a Christian was ''The Pilgrim's Regress'' (1933), which depicted his experience with Christianity in the style of John Bunyan's ''The Pilgrim's Progress''.
He had an elder brother, Warren Hamilton Lewis.
Lewis was very interested in presenting a reasonable case for Christianity.
The title is a reference to William Blake's ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'', a concept that Lewis found a "disastrous error" .
It is a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche from the unusual perspective of Psyche's sister.
He eventually returned to Christianity, having been influenced by arguments with his Oxford colleague and friend J. R. R. Tolkien, whom he seems to have met for the first time on 11 May 1926, and by the book ''The Everlasting Man'' by G. K. Chesterton.
As a teenager, Lewis was wonder-struck by the songs and legends of what he called ''Northernness'', the ancient literature of Scandinavia preserved in the Icelandic sagas.
Had God designed the world, it would not be
In the second chapter of ''Mere Christianity'' Lewis recognises that "many people find it difficult to understand what this Law of Human Nature&nbsp;... is".
In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis joined some of Britain's greatest writers recognised at Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey.
The school was closed not long afterwards due to a lack of pupils; the headmaster Robert "Oldie" Capron was soon after committed to a psychiatric hospital.
Many ideas in the trilogy, particularly opposition to de-humanization as portrayed in the third book, are presented more formally in ''The Abolition of Man'', based on a series of lectures by Lewis at Durham University in 1943.
Much of his scholarly work concentrated on the later Middle Ages, especially its use of allegory.
His early separation from Christianity began when he started to view his religion as a chore and a duty; around this time, he also gained an interest in the occult, as his studies expanded to include such topics.
He goes on to claim that there must be someone or something behind such a universal set of principles.
They know the Law of Nature; they break it.
In 1916, Lewis was awarded a scholarship at University College, Oxford.
In 2008, ''The Times'' ranked him eleventh on their list of "the 50 greatest British writers since 1945".
Several C. S. Lewis Societies exist around the world, including one which was founded in Oxford in 1982 to discuss papers on the life and works of Lewis and the other Inklings, and generally appreciate all things Lewisian.
Since she was divorced, this was not straightforward in the Church of England at the time, but a friend, the Rev.
Lewis at first regarded her as an agreeable intellectual companion and personal friend, and it was on this level that he agreed to enter into a civil marriage contract with her so that she could continue to live in the UK.
Pullman is an atheist and so fierce a critic of Lewis's work as to be dubbed "the anti-Lewis".
But many find it not to their taste.
Ironically, many friends recommended the book to Lewis as a method for dealing with his own grief.
The next day at 5:00&nbsp;pm, Lewis suffered a heart attack and lapsed into a coma, unexpectedly awaking the following day at 2:00&nbsp;pm.
Lewis did not invent this argument, but developed and popularized it&nbsp;– although it is sometimes referred to as "Lewis's trilemma".
Lewis continues to attract a wide readership.
Lewis was only 40 when the war started, and he tried to re-enter military service, offering to instruct cadets; but his offer was not accepted.
At first, he would answer to no other name, but later accepted Jack, the name by which he was known to friends and family for the rest of his life.
Flowers were laid by Walter Hooper, trustee and literary advisor to the Lewis Estate.
Within months of entering Oxford, the British Army shipped him to France to fight in the First World War.
Of Tolkien, Lewis writes in ''Surprised by Joy'':
