Cabernet Sauvignon has a long history in Italian wines, being first introduced to the Piedmont region in 1820.
Other regions in New Zealand have sprung up with a renewed focus on producing distinctive New Zealand Cabernet Sauvignon: The Gimblett Road and Havelock North regions of Hawkes Bay, with their warm gravel soils, have started to achieve notice as well as Waiheke Island near Auckland.
Under the American system, varietal Cabernet Sauvignon can include up to 25% other grapes.
In the United Kingdom, English wine producers have experimented with growing the variety in plastic tunnels which can create a greenhouse effect and protect the grapes from the less than ideal climate of the wine region.
Overall the grape lags far behind Pinot noir in New Zealand's red wine grape plantings.
Early examples of South African Cabernet Sauvignon were produced by grapes planted in vineyard locations that were cooler than ideal, creating very herbaceous wines with the distinctive "green bell pepper" notes.
Throughout Bordeaux there is a legal maximum permitted yield of 50 hectoliters (hl) per hectare (ha).
In California, the main stylistic difference in Cabernet Sauvignon is between hillside/mountain vineyards and those on flatter terrain like valley floors or some areas of the Central Valley.
The vine is one of the last major grape varieties to bud and ripen (typically 1–2 weeks after Merlot and Cabernet franc) and the climate of the growing season affects how early the grapes will be harvested.
Milder spices, such as black pepper, pair better due to their ability to minimize the perception of tannins—such as in the classic pairings of Cabernet Sauvignon with ''steak au poivre'' and pepper-crusted ahi tuna.
In New Zealand, climate has been a challenge in finding wine regions suitable for producing Cabernet Sauvignon.
Aromas of violets are a characteristic of Margaux.
It is, however, susceptible to the vine diseases ''Eutypella scoparia'' and excoriose.
The marchese Piero Antinori was one of the first to create a "Chianti-style" wine that ignored the DOC regulations, releasing a 1971 Sangiovese-Cabernet Sauvignon blend known as ''Tignanello'' in 1978.
New World wines, with bolder fruit flavors that may even be perceived as sweet, will pair well with bolder dishes that have lots of different flavor influences.
The aroma of blackcurrants is one of the most distinctive and characteristic element of Cabernet Sauvignon that is present in virtually every style of the wine across the globe.
Wine producers that wish to make a wine more approachable within a couple of years will drastically reduce the maceration time to as a little as a few days.
For most of its history the grape has been viewed with suspicion as a "foreign influence" that distracts from the native grape varieties.
It is often made as a single varietal in the ''vin de pays'' of the Languedoc.
The Cabernet Sauvignon grape itself is very small, with a thick skin, creating a high 1:12 ratio of seed (pip) to fruit (pulp).
Cabernet Sauvignons with high alcohol levels do not pair well with spicy foods due to hotness levels of the capsaicins present in spices like chili peppers being enhanced by the alcohol with the heat accentuating the bitterness of the tannins.
Winemakers often use a variety of oak barrels from different locations and of different ages and blend the wine as if they are blending different grape varieties.
Today it is found in some quantities in every Spanish wine region, though it is not permitted in every ''Denominación de Origen'' (DO) designated region.
In late 2006, the ''Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology'' published the result of studies conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai that showed the beneficial relationship of resveratrol, a compound found in all red wine, in reducing the risk factors associated with Alzheimer's disease.
In the 1980s, a new epidemic of phylloxera hit California, devastating many vineyards, which needed replanting.
In Oregon there are small quantities of Cabernet Sauvignon planted in the warmer southern regions of the Umpqua and Rogue Valleys.
In addition to its cool climate, Monterey is also prone to being very windy, which can have the effect of shutting down the grape vines and further inhibiting ripeness.
The grape's true origins were discovered in 1996 with the use of DNA typing at the UC Davis Department of Viticulture and Enology, by a team led by Dr. Carole Meredith.
Overall, the majority of Californian Cabernets are meant to be approachable after only a couple of years in the bottle but can still have the potential to improve further over time.
Resveratrol has also been shown to promote the clearance of amyloid-beta peptides.
The 1976 Judgment of Paris wine tasting event helped to catapult Californian Cabernet Sauvignons onto the international stage when Stag's Leap Wine Cellars' 1973 Stags Leap District Cabernet Sauvignon beat out classified Bordeaux estates like Château Mouton Rothschild, Château Montrose, Château Haut-Brion and Château Léoville-Las Cases in a blind tasting conducted by French wine experts.
As the wine ages and the tannins lessen, more subtle and less bitter dishes will pair better with Cabernet Sauvignon.
Some regions, such as Portugal with its abundance of native grape varieties, have largely ignored Cabernet Sauvignon as it seeks to rejuvenate its wine industry beyond Port production.
But Cabernet Sauvignon can be blended with a variety of grapes such as Shiraz, Tempranillo and Sangiovese.
Outside of Bordeaux, Cabernet Sauvignon is found in varying quantities throughout Le Midi and in the Loire Valley.
In Provence, the grape had some presence in the region in the mid 19th century, when viticulturist Jules Guyot recommended it as a blending partner with Syrah.
DNA evidence has shown Cabernet Sauvignon is the result of the crossing of two other Bordeaux grape varieties— Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc— which has led grapevine historians, or ''ampelographers'', to believe that the grape originated in Bordeaux.
With vineyards severely ravaged or lost, many Bordeaux wine growers turned to Merlot, increasing its plantings to where it soon became the most widely planted grape in Bordeaux.
The vines are choice plantings for growers due to their hardy vine stalks and resistance to the cold winter frost that is commonplace in Eastern Washington.
The wine's high tannin content as well as the oak influences and high alcohol levels associated with many regional styles play important roles in influencing how well the wine matches with different foods.
American oak, particularly from new barrels, imparts stronger oak flavors that are less subtle than those imparted by French oak.
In the mid-1970s, the grape earned notoriety and controversy as a component in the so-called "Super Tuscan" wines of Tuscany.
The tannic nature of Cabernet Sauvignon is an important winemaking consideration.
The introduction of Cabernet Sauvignon in  Spanish wine occurred in the Rioja region when the Marqués de Riscal planted cuttings from Bordeaux.
For vineyard plantings along flat river valleys, the climate of the region is the most important consideration; as plantings move to higher elevations and along hillsides, soil type is a greater concern.
In the 1970s, the Coonawarra region first brought international attention to Australian Cabernet Sauvignons with intense fruit flavors and subtle minty notes.
The team that went on to discover the VvMYBA1 and VvMYBA2 genes that control grape color have suggested that a gene involved in anthocyanin production has been deleted in the subepidermis of Malian, and then subepidermal cells invaded the epidermis to produce Shalistin.
When blended with Sangiovese in significant quantities, Cabernet Sauvignon can dominate the blend with most Tuscan producers aiming to find a particular balance that suits their desired style.
The influence of Australian flying winemakers has been considerable in how Cabernet Sauvignon is treated by some Languedoc wine estates, with some producers making wines that can seem like they are from the New World.
The most widely recognized is the herbaceous or green bell pepper flavor caused by pyrazines, which are more prevalent in underripened grapes.
A common method is oak aging, which exposes the wine to gradual levels of oxidation that can mellow the harsh grape tannins as well as introduce softer "wood tannins".
'''Cabernet Sauvignon''' () is one of the world's most widely recognized red wine grape varieties.
During a series of trials between 1924 and 1930, the pollen of Cabernet Sauvignon was used to fertilize Glera vines (the white wine grape used to make the sparkling wine Prosecco) to create the red Italian wine grape Incrocio Manzoni 2.15.
There was some speculation that ravaged Cabernet vineyards would be replanted with other varietals (such as those emerging from the Rhone Rangers movement) but in fact California plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon  doubled between 1988 and 1998; many wine regions— such as Napa Valley north of Yountville and Sonoma's Alexander Valley— were almost completely dominated by the grape variety.
The use of oak in California Cabernet has a long history, with many producers favoring the use of new oak barrels heavily composed of American oak.
By itself, particularly when harvested at less than ideal ripeness, it can lack a sense of fruit or "fleshiness" on the palate which can be compensated by adding the rounder flavors of Merlot.
While Cabernet Sauvignon has the potential to pair well with bitter dark chocolate, it will not pair well with sweeter styles such as milk chocolate.
Some Spanish and Italian Cabernet Sauvignons will need similar time as Bordeaux to develop but most examples are typically made to be drunk earlier.
The decision to blend is then followed by the decision of when to do the blending—before, during or after fermentation.
To the human palate this compound is detectable in wines with pyrazine levels as low as   2 nanograms (ng) per liter.
In recent years, there have been increased plantings of Cabernet Sauvignon in the Uco Valley of the Mendoza Province; the wines coming from vineyards planted at higher altitudes garner some international attention.
The origin of Super Tuscans is rooted in the restrictive DOC practices of the Chianti zone prior to the 1990s.
Washington Cabernet Sauvignon is characterized by its fruitiness and easy drinking styles that are not overly tannic.
For many years, the origin of Cabernet Sauvignon was not clearly understood and many myths and conjectures surrounded it.
Another theory was that the grapevine originated in the Rioja region of Spain.
While Cabernet Sauvignon can grow in a variety of climates, its suitability as a varietal wine or as a blend component is strongly influenced by the warmth of the climate.
In California, Cabernet Sauvignon has developed its characteristic style and reputation, recognizable in the world's market.
In the 1980s, the  Bulgarian wine industry was largely driven and introduced to the international wine market by the success of its Cabernet Sauvignon wines.
It has also been shown that non-alcoholic extracts of Cabernet Sauvignon protect hypertensive rats during ischaemia and reperfusion.
As the region's winemakers started to better understand the area's ''terroir'' and how the different grape varieties performed in different region, Cabernet Sauvignon increased in plantings all along the Left Bank region of the Gironde river in the Médoc as well as Graves region, where it became the dominant variety in the wine blends.
The style of Cabernet Sauvignon is strongly influenced by the ripeness of the grapes at harvest.
The temperature of fermentation will play a role in the result, with deeper colors and more flavor components being extracted at higher temperatures while more fruit flavors are maintained at lower temperature.
Winemakers can also control the influence of oak by using alternatives to the standard ''barrique'' barrels.
The Cabernet wines of the Moulis are characterized by their soft tannins and rich fruit flavors while the southern Graves region is characterized by strong blackcurrant flavors, though in less intense wines over all.
Other producers followed suit and soon the prices for these Super Tuscans were consistently beating the prices of some of the most well known Chianti.
Cabernet from Sonoma County has shown a tendency to feature anise and black olive notes while Napa County Cabernets are characterized by their strong black fruit flavors.
In the Maipo Valley, Cabernet Sauvignon wines are characterized by their pervasive blackcurrant fruit and an earthy, dusty note.
Familiarity and ease of pronunciation have helped to sell Cabernet Sauvignon wines to consumers, even when from unfamiliar wine regions.
It can be in the eastern Mediterranean wine regions of Cyprus, Greece, Israel and Lebanon.
Another method that winemakers consider is ''tea bagging'' with oak chips or adding oak planks to the wines while fermenting or aging it in stainless steel tanks.
As the vines age, and better vineyards locations are identified, regional styles are starting to emerge among South African Cabernet Sauvignons: the Stellenbosch region is noted for heavy, full bodied wines while Constantia's wines are characterized by their herbal and minty flavors.
While these methods are less costly than oak barrels, they create more pronounced oak flavors, which tend not to mellow or integrate with the rest of the wine's components; nor do they provide the gradual oxidation benefit of barrel aging.
In the wine regions of the Left Bank, the Cabernet influence of the wine has shown unique characteristics in the different regions.
South American Cabernets have very pronounced fruit flavors when they are young and the best made examples will maintain some of those flavors as they age.
Among consumers Cabernet has become a familiar wine which has aided in its accessibility and appeal even from obscure wine regions and producers.
Larger barrels have a smaller wood-to-wine ratio and therefore less pronounced oak flavors.
The acidity levels of these wines will be lower and the tannins will also be softer, making the wines more approachable at a younger age.
The Cabernet grape variety has thriven in a variety of vineyard soil types, making the consideration of soil less of concern particularly for New World winemakers.
In most circumstances, matching the weight (alcohol level and body) of the wine to the heaviness of the food is an important consideration.
Old World wines, such as Bordeaux, have earthier influences and will pair better with mushrooms.
The Languedoc producers who give serious consideration to Cabernet Sauvignon, generally rely on irrigation to compensate for the climate.
Cabernet Sauvignon is a very bold and assertive wine that has potential to overwhelm light and delicate dishes.
In cooler climates, Cabernet Sauvignon tends to produce wines with blackcurrant notes that can be accompanied by green bell pepper notes, mint and cedar which will all become more pronounced as the wine ages.
Cleggett registered this "White Cabernet" under the name of Shalistin.
Clay- and limestone-based soils are often cooler, allowing less heat to reach the vines, delaying ripening.
As the wines age they can sometimes develop aromas associated with cedar, cigar boxes and pencil shavings.
Cabernet blanc is a crossing of Cabernet Sauvignon and an unknown hybrid grape variety that was discovered in Switzerland in the late 20th century.
In the Napa Valley wine regions of Oakville and Rutherford, the soil is more alluvial and dusty.
In Australia there has been experimentation with carbonic maceration to make softer, fruity Cabernet Sauvignon wines.
The results of these long maceration periods are very tannic and flavorful wines that require years of aging.
In Napa, the hillside vineyards of Diamond Mountain District, Howell Mountain, Mt.
In contrast, starches such as pastas and rice will have little effect on tannins.
Malbec, used today mostly in Fronsac, can add additional fruit and floral aromas.
In addition to ripeness levels, the harvest yields can also have a strong influence in the resulting quality and flavors of Cabernet Sauvignon wine.
The wine can typically pair well with a variety of cheeses, such as Cheddar, mozzarella and Brie, but full flavored or blue cheeses will typically compete too much with the flavors of Cabernet Sauvignon to be a complementary pairing.
After the early 1980s' unsuccessful trend to create more "food friendly" wines, with less ripeness and less oak influence, winemakers' focus shifted back to oak influence, but producers were more inclined to limit and lighten the use of oak barrels, with many turning to French oak or a combination of new and older oak barrels.
In Bordeaux, the soil aspect of ''terroir'' was historically an important consideration in determining which of the major Bordeaux grape varieties were planted.
Mint flavors are often associated with wine regions that are warm enough to have low pyrazine levels but are still generally cool, such as Australia's Coonawarra region and some areas of Washington State.
Recent Washington American Viticultural Areas (AVAs) that have seen some success with their Cabernet Sauvignons include Red Mountain, Walla Walla Valley and parts of the Yakima Valley AVA near the Tri-Cities region.
The most pronounced effects are from the use of oak during production.
Prior to this discovery, this origin had been suspected from the similarity of the grapes' names and the fact that Cabernet Sauvignon shares similar aromas with both grapes—such as the blackcurrant and pencil box aromas of Cabernet franc and the grassiness of Sauvignon blanc.
Cygne blanc is a white-berried seedling of Cabernet Sauvignon that was discovered in 1989 growing in a garden in Swan Valley, Western Australia.
In addition to having a softening effect on the grape's naturally high tannins, the unique wood flavors of vanilla and spice complement the natural grape flavors of blackcurrant and tobacco.
In warmer regions, such as the Colchagua Province and around Curicó, the grapes ripen more fully; they produce wines with rich fruit flavors that can be perceived as sweet due to the ripeness of the fruit.
Cabernet Sauvignon is the most widely planted red grape variety in Washington state according to the Washington State Wine Commission.
In general, Cabernet Sauvignon wines are lighter and less structured, drinkable much earlier than Bordeaux wine.
When more on the unripe side, the grapes are high in pyrazines and will exhibit pronounced green bell peppers and vegetal flavors.
In Saint-Estèphe and Pessac-Léognan, the grape develops more mineral flavors.
The different styles of Cabernet Sauvignon from different regions can also influence how well the wine matches up with certain foods.
There is some belief that soil could also be a contributor to the minty notes, since the flavor also appears in some wines from the Pauillac region but not from similar climate of Margaux.
Many wine regions in California give the vine an abundance of sunshine with few problems in ripening fully, which increases the likelihood of producing varietal Cabernet wines.
Throughout the United States, Cabernet Sauvignon is made in both varietal and blended styles.
Throughout California there are many wine regions that have the potential to grow Cabernet Sauvignon to full ripeness and produce fruity, full-bodied wines with alcohol levels regularly above the Bordeaux average of 12–13%—often in excess of 14%.
Even with the ability to age, some Cabernet Sauvignon wines can still be approachable a few years after vintage.
The varietal versions often have lighter fruit flavors and are meant to be consumed young.
Today it is the most widely planted red wine grape in South Africa.
Its widespread popularity has also contributed to criticism of the grape as a "colonizer" that takes over wine regions at the expense of native grape varieties.
A common factor affecting the flavors of Bordeaux wines is the harvest yields of Cabernet Sauvignon.
The Bordeaux wine region accounts for more than 60% of the Cabernet Sauvignon grown in France.
In Bordeaux, the tannins of the wines tend to soften after ten years and can typically last for at least another decade-sometimes longer depending on the producer and vintage.
Early records indicate that the grape was a popular planting in the Médoc region during the 18th century.
In the 1980s, inexpensive Bulgarian Cabernet Sauvignon was highly touted for its value and helped to establish that country's wine industry and garner it more international presence in the wine market.
There are a couple of noted Cabernet Sauvignon flavors that are intimately tied to viticultural and climate influences.
The bitterness of the tannins can also be counterbalanced by the use of bitter foods, such as radicchio and  endive, or with cooking methods that involve charring like grilling.
In Argentina, Cabernet Sauvignon lags behind Malbec as the country's main red grape but its numbers are growing.
In regions where the climate is warmer, there is more emphasis on soil that is less fertile, which promotes less vigor in the vine which can keep yields low.
As producers begun to concentrate on limiting yields, regional differences began to emerge that distinguished Chilean Cabernets.
In winemaking, the decision for the degree of oak influence (as well as which type of oak) will have a strong impact on the resulting wine.
The grape is performing a similar function for many countries in Eastern Europe, including Turkey, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, and Ukraine.
The study showed that resveratrol found in Cabernet Sauvignon can reduce levels of amyloid beta peptides, which attack brain cells and are part of the etiology of Alzheimer's.
Over time it was discovered that the unique characteristics of each grape variety can complement each other and enhance the overall quality of wine.
In recent years, several Midi wine estates, such as Mas de Daumas Gassac have received international acclaim for their Cabernet Sauvignon blended in Hérault, with Rhône grapes like Syrah.
Styles from various regions and producers may also have aromas of eucalyptus, mint and tobacco.
Rutherford Cabernet Sauvignon has been often quoted as giving a sense of ''terroir'' with a taste of "Rutherford dust".
In regions like Bordeaux, under the threat of inclement harvest season weather, Cabernet Sauvignon is often harvested a little earlier than ideal and is then blended with other grapes to fill in the gaps.
In many aspects, Cabernet Sauvignon can reflect the desires and personality of the winemaker while still presenting familiar flavors that express the typical character of the variety.
During this time Chianti could be composed of no more than 70% Sangiovese and had to include at least 10% of one of the local white wine grapes.
In southern Italy, the grape is mostly used as a blending component with local varieties-such as Carignan in Sardinia, Nero d'Avola in Sicily, Aglianico in Campania and Gaglioppo in Calabria.
Today the grape is permitted in several ''Denominazioni di origine controllata'' (DOCs) and is used in many ''Indicazione Geografica Tipica'' (IGT) wines that are made outside DOC perimeters in certain regions.
The DNA evidence determined that Cabernet Sauvignon was the offspring of Cabernet franc and Sauvignon blanc and was most likely a chance crossing that occurred in the 17th century.
Following maceration, the Cabernet must can be fermented at high temperatures up to 30 °C (86 °F).
Two other well known Cabernet Sauvignon flavors are mint and eucalyptus.
The wines of the Aconcagua region are noted for their ripe fruit but closed, tight structure that needs some time in the bottle to develop.
From these elements the high proportions of phenols and tannins can have a stark influence on the structure and flavor of the wine—especially if the must is subjected to long periods of maceration (skin contact) before fermentation.
In the mid-1990s, there was more emphasis on harvesting at fuller ripeness, and new clones were introduced that produced riper, sweeter fruit.
In the DOCs of Langhe and Monferrato, Cabernet is a permitted blending grape with Nebbiolo as well as Barbera.
In 1977 a vine producing 'bronze' grapes was found in the vineyards of Cleggett Wines in Australia.
Despite its prominence in the industry, the grape is a relatively new variety, the product of a chance crossing between Cabernet Franc and Sauvignon blanc during the 17th century in southwestern France.
While the grape is permitted to be planted in some German wine regions (such as the Mosel), the vineyard sites best suited for ripening Cabernet are generally already occupied with Riesling; many producers are ill-inclined to uproot the popular German variety in favor of Cabernet Sauvignon.
In some regions, climate will be more important than soil.
The decision to first start blending Cabernet Sauvignon was partly derived from financial necessity.
The green bell pepper flavor is not considered a wine fault but it may not be desirable to all consumers' tastes.
The loose berry clusters and thick skins of the grape provided a good resistance to rot in the sometimes wet maritime climate of Bordeaux.
When Cabernet Sauvignon is young, the wines typically exhibit strong fruit flavors of black cherries and plum.
It can be found in several wine regions with many large producers using grapes from several states.
In Piedmont, the grape was sometimes used as an "illegal" blending partner with Nebbiolo for DOC classified Barolo with the intention of adding color and more fruit flavors.
Even within the American oak family, the location of the oak source also plays a role with oak from the state of Oregon having more pronounced influence on Cabernet Sauvignon than oak from Missouri, Pennsylvania and Virginia.
Today Cabernet Sauvignon is the second most widely planted red wine grape in Australia, following Shiraz with which it is often blended.
In 1991 one of the Bronze Cabernet vines started producing white grapes.
The percentage of Cabernet Sauvignon used in the blend will depend on ''terroir'' and the winemakers styles as well as the vintage.
It is also primarily a blending grape in the Ribera del Duero, but producers in Navarra have found some international acclaim for their varietal wines.
The vine itself is prone to vigorous yields, particularly when planted on the vigorous SO4 rootstock.
This has had an adverse effect on the quality of production from some producers who regularly use grapes harvested at excessive yields.
In regions that are too cool, there is a potential for more herbaceous and green bell pepper flavours from less than ideally ripened grapes.
In the southwest French ''appellation d'origine contrôlée'' (AOCs) of Bergerac and Buzet it is used to make rosé wine.
The "Bordeaux blend" of Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet franc, with potentially some Malbec, Petit Verdot or Carménère, is the classic example of blended Cabernet Sauvignon, emulated in the United States with wines produced under the "Meritage" designation.
The word "Sauvignon" is believed to be derived from the French ''sauvage'' meaning "wild" and to refer to the grape being a wild ''Vitis vinifera'' vine native to France.
South African wines tend to favor more Old World styles and typically require six to eight years' aging before they start to develop further flavors.
It is produced in both varietal and blended styles;  some producers favor a Bordeaux blend, while others follow the Australian example of blending with Syrah.
Production and plantings of the grape in California are similar in quantity to those of Bordeaux.
One additional method is micro-oxygenation which mimics some of the gradual aeration that occurs with barrel aging, with the limited exposure to oxygen aiding in the polymerization of the tannins into larger molecules, which are perceived on the palate as being softer.
For most of the 20th century, it was the world's most widely planted premium red wine grape until it was surpassed by Merlot in the 1990s.
The particular success of Cabernet-based Bordeaux blends in the 225 liter (59 gallon) ''barrique'' were a significant influence in making that barrel size one of the most popular worldwide.
The California wine region of Monterey was noted in the late 20th century for its very vegetal Cabernet Sauvignon with pronounced green pepper flavor, earning the nickname of "Monterey veggies".
In the Right bank regions of Saint-Émilion and Pomerol, Cabernet is a distant third in plantings behind Merlot & Cabernet franc.
While the period when the name ''Cabernet Sauvignon'' became more prevalent over ''Petite Vidure'' is not certain, records indicate that the grape was a popular Bordeaux planting in the 18th century Médoc region.
While Merlot seemed to thrive in clay- and limestone-based soils (such as those of the Right Bank regions of the Gironde estuary), Cabernet Sauvignon seemed to perform better in the gravel-based soil of the Médoc region on the Left Bank.
Fats and proteins reduce the perception of tannins on the palate.
Excessive yields can result in less concentrated and flavorful wine with flavors more on the green or herbaceous side.
It is the likely "birthplace" of the vine, and producers across the globe have invested heavily in trying to reproduce the structure and complexity of Bordeaux wines.
The grape is most prominent in the Catalan wine region of Penedès, where its use was revived by the estates of Bodegas Torres and Jean León.
To reduce yields, producers can plant the vines on less vigorous rootstock and also practice green harvesting with aggressive pruning of grape clusters soon after ''veraison''.
Built partially on its historical success in Bordeaux as well as New World wine regions like California and Australia, planting the grape is considered a solid choice in any wine region that is warm enough to cultivate it.
In 1983,  Cabernet Sauvignon was crossed with the white German wine grape Bronner to create the white wine grape Souvignier gris.
If winemakers choose not to shorten the period of maceration, in favor of maximizing color and flavor concentrations, there are some methods that they can use to soften tannin levels.
The choice of fining agents can also reduce tannins with gelatin and egg whites being positively-charged proteins that are naturally attracted to the negatively charged tannin molecules.
In some regions it is used to add flavor and structure to Carignan while it is blended with Négrette in Gaillac and Fronton as well as Tannat in Madiran.
It is generally found in the warmer sites of the Columbia Valley.
Its popularity is often attributed to its ease of cultivation—the grapes have thick skins and the vines are hardy and naturally low yielding, budding late to avoid frost and resistant to viticultural hazards such as rot and insects—and to its consistent presentation of structure and flavours which express the typical character ("typicity") of the variety.
When harvested overripe the wines can taste jammy and may have aromas of stewed blackcurrants.
