Cacti are native to the Americas, ranging from Patagonia in the south to parts of western Canada in the north—except for ''Rhipsalis baccifera'', which also grows in Africa and Sri Lanka.
Botanical gardens play an important role in ''ex situ'' conservation; for example, seeds of cacti and other succulents are kept in long-term storage at the Desert Botanical Garden, Arizona.
Fruit that falls to the ground may be eaten by other animals; giant tortoises are reported to distribute ''Opuntia'' seeds in the Galápagos Islands.
Spines, which are modified leaves, are present on even those cacti with true leaves, showing the evolution of spines preceded the loss of leaves.
One evolutionary question at present unanswered is whether the switch to full CAM photosynthesis in stems occurred only once in the core cacti, in which case it has been lost in ''Maihuenia'', or separately in Opuntioideae and Cactoideae, in which case it never evolved in ''Maihuenia''.
Slugs and snails also eat cacti.
Cactus spines are produced from specialized structures called areoles, a kind of highly reduced branch.
Individual stems are about  high with a diameter of , and may be found in clumps up to  wide.
Most spines are straight or at most slightly curved, and are described as hair-like, bristle-like, needle-like or awl-like, depending on their length and thickness.
For example, of the 36 genera in the subfamily Cactoideae sampled in the research, 22 (61%) were found not monophyletic.
The structure of the leaves varies somewhat between these groups.
The bodies of cacti other than opuntias are less often eaten, although Anderson reported that ''Neowerdermannia vorwerkii'' is prepared and eaten like potatoes in upland Bolivia.
The concentration of salts in the root cells of cacti is relatively high.
The first cacti are thought to have been only slightly succulent shrubs or small trees whose leaves carried out photosynthesis.
Cacti can also form new roots quickly when rain falls after a drought.
''Melocactus'' species were present in English collections of cacti before the end of the 16th century (by 1570 according to one source,) where they were called ''Echinomelocactus'', later shortened to ''Melocactus'' by Joseph Pitton de Tourneville in the early 18th century.
For a more detailed discussion of the phylogeny of the cacti, see Classification of the Cactaceae.
Many cacti have roots that spread out widely, but only penetrate a short distance into the soil.
Although semi-desert cacti may be exposed to high light levels in the wild, they may still need some shading when subjected to the higher light levels and temperatures of a greenhouse in summer.
For example, the type locality of ''Pelecyphora strobiliformis'' near Miquihuana, Mexico, was virtually denuded of plants, which were dug up for sale in Europe.
A possible stimulus to their evolution may have been uplifting in the central Andes, some 25–20&nbsp;million years ago, which was associated with increasing and varying aridity.
Curt Backeberg, in particular, is said to have named or renamed 1,200 species without one of his names ever being attached to a specimen, which, according to David Hunt, ensured he "left a trail of nomenclatural chaos that will probably vex cactus taxonomists for centuries."
For the cultivation of epiphytic cacti, see Cultivation of ''Schlumbergera'' (Christmas or Thanksgiving cacti), and Cultivation of epiphyllum hybrids.
The popularity of cacti means many books are devoted to their cultivation.
''Rebutia minuscula'' survives temperatures down to  in cultivation) and may flower better when exposed to a period of cold.
In 1737, he placed the cacti he knew into two genera, ''Cactus'' and ''Pereskia''.
''Ex situ'' conservation aims to preserve plants and seeds outside their natural habitats, often with the intention of later reintroduction.
They lived in tropical areas that experienced periodic drought.
It is recommended that any cut surfaces be allowed to dry for a period of several days to several weeks until a callus forms over the cut surface.
Stems have stomata and the formation of bark takes place later than in normal trees.
Concern for water conservation in arid regions has led to the promotion of gardens requiring less watering (xeriscaping).
A '''cactus''' (plural: ''cacti'', ''cactuses'', or ''cactus'') is a member of the plant family '''Cactaceae''', a family comprising ca 127 genera with some 1750 known species of the order Caryophyllales.
:The only genus is ''Pereskia''.
All cacti are included in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which "lists species that are not necessarily now threatened with extinction but that may become so unless trade is closely controlled."
The prominence of these ribs depends on how much water the stem is storing: when full (up to 90% of the mass of a cactus may be water), the ribs may be almost invisible on the swollen stem, whereas when the cactus is short of water and the stems shrink, the ribs may be very visible.
Europeans first encountered cacti when they arrived in the New World late in the 15th century.
Mescaline is concentrated in the photosynthetic portion of the stem above ground.
"Helminosporium rot" is caused by ''Bipolaris cactivora'' (syn.
Conservation of cacti can be ''in situ'' or ''ex situ''.
Other cacti have hooked spines.
they are xerophytes), but the first ancestors of modern cacti were already adapted to periods of intermittent drought.
Only two of the remaining eight, Cacteae and Rhipsalideae, were shown to be monophyletic in a 2011 study by Hernández-Hernández et al.
Plants are trees or shrubs with leaves; their stems are smoothly round in cross section, rather than being ribbed or having tubercles.
Fruto de Stenocereus queretaroensis.jpg|Fruit prepared from ''Stenocereus queretaroensis''
The word "cactus" is derived through Latin from the Ancient Greek  (''kaktos''), a name used by Theophrastus for a spiny plant, which may have been the cardoon (''Cynara cardunculus'').
The majority of cacti are stem succulents, i.e., plants in which the stem is the main organ used to store water.
Detailed treatments published in the 21st century have divided the family into around 125–130 genera and 1,400–1,500 species, which are then arranged into a number of tribes and subfamilies.
Thus, ''Stenocereus eruca'' has stems growing along the ground, rooting at intervals.
The flowers of this cactus are funnel-shaped, white to deep pink, up to  long, and open at night.
In the genus ''Pereskia'', the branches are covered with leaves, so the species of this genus may not be recognized as cacti.
Ferocactus1.jpg|Shorter clustered columnar habit (''Ferocactus pilosus'')
''Pereskia'' is considered close to the ancestral species from which all cacti evolved.
All cacti have some adaptations to promote efficient water use.
Even those cacti without visible photosynthetic leaves do usually have very small leaves, less than  long in about half of the species studied and almost always less than  long.
Other features include a relatively dull color, often white or green; a radially symmetrical shape, often tubular; a smell described as "musty"; and the production of a large amount of sugar-rich nectar.
A range of pests attack cacti in cultivation.
Cochineal is the product of an insect that lives on some cacti.
Some cacti, such as all ''Ariocarpus'' and ''Discocactus'' species, are included in the more restrictive Appendix I, used for the "most endangered" species.
The surface of the stem may be smooth (as in some species of ''Opuntia'') or covered with protuberances of various kinds, which are usually called tubercles.
A very wet growing medium can cause both seeds and seedlings to rot.
They are used for human food and as fodder for animals, usually after burning off their spines.
The latter was achieved by tightly controlling the opening of stomata.
The great majority of cacti have no visible leaves; photosynthesis takes place in the stems (which may be flattened and leaflike in some species).
In a normal shoot, nodes bearing leaves or flowers would be separated by lengths of stem (internodes).
Rhipsalis paradoxa.jpg|Epiphytic cactus (''Rhipsalis paradoxa'')
Commercial production has now increased following a rise in demand for natural dyes.
In more tropical southern areas, the climber ''Hylocereus undatus'' provides ''pitahaya orejona'', now widely grown in Asia under the name dragon fruit.
The fruits produced by cacti after the flowers have been fertilized vary considerably; many are fleshy, although some are dry.
Globular cacti may be solitary, such as ''Ferocactus latispinus'', or their stems may form clusters that can create large mounds.
Using this approach, most of the ''Pereskia'' species investigated exhibit some degree of CAM-cycling, suggesting this ability was present in the ancestor of all cacti.
The outside of the tubular structure often has areoles that produce wool and spines.
Classification of the cacti currently remains uncertain and is likely to change.
This results in a relatively fixed number of spines, with flowers being produced only from the ends of stems, which are still growing and forming new areoles.
Photosynthesis requires plants to take in carbon dioxide gas ().
In leafless cacti, areoles are often borne on raised areas on the stem where leaf bases would have been.
Otherwise, stem cuttings can be made, ideally from relatively new growth.
They rapidly became a major weed problem, but are now controlled by biological agents, particularly the moth ''Cactoblastis cactorum''.
Some exceptions are allowed, e.g., for "naturalized or artificially propagated plants".
Cochineal is a red dye produced by a scale insect that lives on species of ''Opuntia''.
All contain a large number of seeds.
Cacti can be propagated by seed, cuttings or grafting.
Fusarium rot can gain entry through a wound and cause rotting accompanied by red-violet mold.
Other sources say that water can be withheld during winter (November to March in the Northern Hemisphere).
Some cacti have flattened spines (e.g.
None are known to be wind-pollinated and self-pollination occurs in only a very few species; for example the flowers of some species of ''Frailea'' do not open (cleistogamy).
All the species of ''Pereskia'' are superficially like normal trees or shrubs and have numerous leaves.
Early in their evolutionary history, the ancestors of modern cacti (other than one group of ''Pereskia'' species) developed stomata on their stems and began to delay developing bark.
Nopal11.jpg|Salad including sliced ''nopales'' (opuntia pads)
Cacti whose stems are even smaller may be described as globular (or globose).
Flowers are also produced from areoles.
A few species differ significantly in appearance from most of the family.
Semi-desert cacti need careful watering.
Cacti are used as construction materials.
However, cacti are very difficult to preserve in this way; they have evolved to resist drying and their bodies do not easily compress.
Dragonfruit Chiayi market.jpg|Dragon fruit for sale in Taiwan
A number of species of cacti have been shown to contain psychoactive agents, chemical compounds that can cause changes in mood, perception and cognition through their effects on the brain.
Illegal collecting of cacti from the wild continues to pose a threat.
ficus-indica'' being declared Weeds of National Significance by the Australian Weeds Committee in April 2012.
Like ''Pereskia'' species today, early ancestors may have been able to switch from the normal C3 mechanism, where carbon dioxide is used continuously in photosynthesis, to CAM cycling, in which when the stomata are closed, carbon dioxide produced by respiration is stored for later use in photosynthesis.
Hakendornen IMGP7026 WP.jpg|Hooked central spine (cf.
Such stems contain chlorophyll and are able to carry out photosynthesis; they also have stomata (small structures that can open and close to allow passage of gases).
The spines of cacti are often useful in identification, since they vary greatly between species in number, color, size, shape and hardness, as well as in whether all the spines produced by an areole are similar or whether they are of distinct kinds.
Their capital from the 15th century was Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City); one explanation for the origin of the name is that it includes the Nahuatl word ''nōchtli'', referring to the fruit of an opuntia.
Cacti produce spines, always from areoles as noted above.
''Pereskia'' species have "normal" leaves, with a midrib and a flattened blade (lamina) on either side.
In addition to their use as psychoactive agents, some cacti are employed in herbal medicine.
Both the fruit and pads are eaten, the former often under the Spanish name ''tuna'', the latter under the name ''nopal''.
enters the plant and is captured in the form of organic acids stored inside cells (in vacuoles).
Ultimately, if botanists want to know whether a particular plant is an example of, say, ''Mammillaria mammillaris'', they should be able to compare it with the type specimen to which this name is permanently attached.
As an example, ''Pachycereus schottii'' is pollinated by a particular species of moth, ''Upiga virescens'', which also lays its eggs among the developing seeds its caterpillars later consume.
In one case, a young saguaro only  tall had a root system with a diameter of , but no more than  deep.
It can be preserved by boiling to produce syrup and by drying.
Structures with a high surface area-to-volume ratio, such as thin leaves, necessarily lose water at a higher rate than structures with a low area-to-volume ratio, such as thickened stems.
It spread rapidly in the Mediterranean area, both naturally and by being introduced—so much so, early botanists assumed it was native to the area.
They can provide some shade, which lowers the temperature of the surface of the cactus, also reducing water loss.
Although church authorities under the Spanish attempted to suppress its use, this failed, as shown by the Christian element in the common name "San Pedro cactus"—Saint Peter cactus.
Their flowers may have superior ovaries (i.e., above the points of attachment of the sepals and petals), and areoles that produce further leaves.
They trap air near the surface of the cactus, creating a moister layer that reduces evaporation and transpiration.
Drier spiny fruits may cling to the fur of mammals or be moved around by the wind.
Reproduction by cuttings makes use of parts of a plant that can grow roots.
The word "cactus" derives, through Latin, from the Ancient Greek , ''kaktos'', a name originally used by Theophrastus for a spiny plant whose identity is not certain.
Ferocactus1001.jpg|Varied spines of a ''Ferocactus''
''Pereskia'' species superficially resemble other tropical forest trees.
Opuntias (prickly pears) were used for a variety of purposes by the Aztecs, whose empire, lasting from the 14th to the 16th century, had a complex system of horticulture.
Allowing the temperature to rise above  is not recommended.
Plants using the C3 mechanism lose as much as 97% of the water taken up through their roots in this way.
Cacti have a variety of uses: many species are used as ornamental plants, others are grown for fodder or forage, and others for food (particularly their fruit).
They consist of shorter, more ball-shaped stems than columnar cacti.
Tissue derived from the petals and sepals continues the pericarpel, forming a composite tube—the whole may be called a floral tube, although strictly speaking only the part furthest from the base is floral in origin.
When mature, they have woody stems that may be covered with bark and long-lasting leaves that provide the main means of photosynthesis.
The original species is thought to have come from central Mexico, although this is now obscure because the indigenous people of southern North America developed and distributed a range of horticultural varieties (cultivars), including forms of the species and hybrids with other opuntias.
Some cacti only have spines when young, possibly only when seedlings.
A small number of cactus species in the tribes Hylocereeae and Rhipsalideae have become adapted to life as climbers or epiphytes, often in tropical forests, where water conservation is less important.
:The only genus is ''Maihuenia'', with two species, both of which form low-growing mats.
Cacti in pots may be placed outside in the summer to ornament gardens or patios, and then kept under cover during the winter.
These appear to cause only limited visible symptoms, such as chlorotic (pale green) spots and mosaic effects (streaks and patches of paler color).
In the absence of leaves, enlarged stems carry out photosynthesis.
Thus, a 2011 study found "an extraordinarily high proportion of genera" were not monophyletic, so were not all descendants of a single common ancestor.
More recent studies show that "it is highly unlikely that significant carbon assimilation occurs in the stem"; ''Pereskia'' species are described as having "C3 with inducible CAM."
By the early 1800s, enthusiasts in Europe had large collections (often including other succulents alongside cacti).
The stem is typically succulent, meaning it is adapted to store water.
Naming and classifying cacti has been both difficult and controversial since the first cacti were discovered for science.
The ICSG classification of the cactus family recognizes four subfamilies, the largest of which is divided into nine tribes.
In the case of cacti, there is general agreement that an open medium with a high air content is important.
Stem shapes vary considerably among cacti.
The general advice given is that during the growing season, cacti should be allowed to dry out between thorough waterings.
Various kinds of graft are used—flat grafts, where both scion and stock are of similar diameters, and cleft grafts, where a smaller scion is inserted into a cleft made in the stock.
For the host plant—the "stock"—growers choose one that grows strongly in cultivation and is compatible with the plant to be propagated—the ''scion.''
CAM-cycling is present in ''Pereskia'' species.
Smaller and younger specimens of ''Cephalocereus senilis'', for example, are columnar, whereas older and larger specimens may become tree-like.
A broad distinction can be made between semidesert cacti and epiphytic cacti, which need different conditions and are best grown separately.
One of these, his ''Cactus opuntia'' (now part of ''Opuntia ficus-indica''), was described as "''''" (with larger fruit ... now in Spain and Portugal), indicative of its early use in Europe.
They have fleshy succulent stems that are major organs of photosynthesis.
Saguaro_gatherers2.jpg|Gathering saguaro in 1907
Some cacti produce floral tubes without wool or spines (e.g.
However, when he published ''Species Plantarum'' in 1753—the starting point for modern botanical nomenclature—he relegated them all to one genus, ''Cactus''.
''Gymnocalycium'') or completely devoid of any external structures (e.g.
Cacti are often grown in greenhouses, particularly in regions unsuited to the cultivation of cacti outdoors, such the northern parts of Europe and North America.
The weed potential of Opuntia species in Australia continues however, leading to all opuntioid cacti except ''O.
Species of ''Pereskia'' within clade A always lack two key features of the stem present in most of the remaining "caulocacti": like most non-cacti, their stems begin to form bark early in the plants' life and also lack stomata—structures that control admission of air into a plant and hence control photosynthesis.
The Aztecs symbolically linked the ripe red fruits of an opuntia to human hearts; just as the fruit quenches thirst, so offering human hearts to the sun god ensured the sun would keep moving.
Leaves are normally absent, although sometimes very reduced leaves are produced by young plants.
As well as defending against herbivores, spines help prevent water loss by reducing air flow close to the cactus and providing some shade.
Rebutia flavistylus 2 rev.jpg|Clustered globular habit (''Rebutia'' species)
Cacti inhabit diverse regions, from coastal plains to high mountain areas.
Their stems are typically flattened, almost leaf-like in appearance, with fewer or even no spines, such as the well-known Christmas cactus or Thanksgiving cactus (in the genus ''Schlumbergera'').
Attempts by the Roman Catholic church to suppress its use after the Spanish conquest were largely unsuccessful, and by the middle of the 20th century, peyote was more widely used than ever by indigenous peoples as far north as Canada.
Cacti are one group of drought-resistant plants recommended for dry landscape gardening.
A key issue in retaining water is the ratio of surface area to volume.
Cacti show many adaptations to conserve water.
The ribbed or fluted stems of many cacti allow the stem to shrink during periods of drought and then swell as it fills with water during periods of availability.
Outside the Americas, the Indian fig cactus is an important commercial crop in Sicily, Algeria and other North African countries.
Fungicides may be of limited value in combating these diseases.
Although in most cacti, the stem acts as the main organ for storing water, some cacti have in addition large taproots.
Long used by the  peoples of Central and North America, demand fell rapidly when European manufacturers began to produce synthetic dyes in the middle of the 19th century.
Most species of cacti have lost true leaves, retaining only spines, which are highly modified leaves.
More recent molecular studies suggest a much younger origin, perhaps in very Late Eocene to early Oligocene periods, around 35–30&nbsp;million years ago.
The flower as a whole is usually radially symmetrical (actinomorphic), but may be bilaterally symmetrical (zygomorphic) in some species.
Species showing the typical hummingbird-pollination syndrome have flowers with colors towards the red end of the spectrum, anthers and stamens that protrude from the flower, and a shape that is not radially symmetrical, with a lower lip that bends downwards; they produce large amounts of nectar with a relatively low sugar content.
Some cacti produce "pads" or "joints" that can be detached or cleanly cut off.
Spines provide protection from herbivores and camouflage in some species, and assist in water conservation in several ways.
The two clades of ''Pereskia'' differ in their geographical distribution; with one exception, clade A is found around the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea, whereas clade B occurs south of the Amazon Basin.
With one exception, they are native to the Americas, where their range extends from Patagonia to British Columbia and Alberta in western Canada.
By the early 20th century, botanists came to feel Linnaeus's name ''Cactus'' had become so confused as to its meaning (was it the genus or the family?)
Grazing, in many areas by introduced animals, such as goats, has caused serious damage to populations of cacti (as well as other plants);  two examples cited by Anderson are the Galápagos Islands generally and the effect on ''Browningia candelaris'' in Peru.
The pollination syndrome associated with bats includes a tendency for flowers to open in the evening and at night, when bats are active.
Several other species of ''Echinopsis'', including ''E.
Water may form up to 90% of the total mass of a cactus.
:Some 15 genera are included in this subfamily.
* Subfamily Pereskioideae K. Schumann
Flower buds, particularly of ''Cylindropuntia'' species, are also consumed.
A mature saguaro (''Carnegiea gigantea'') is said to be able to absorb as much as  of water during a rainstorm.
The general recommendation of 25–75% organic-based material, the rest being inorganic such as pumice, perlite or grit, is supported by other sources.
Other species of cactus with long-lasting leaves, such as the opuntioid ''Pereskiopsis'', also have succulent leaves.
Those that feed on sap include: mealybugs, living on both stems and roots; scale insects, generally only found on stems; whiteflies, which are said to be an "infrequent" pest of cacti; red spider mites, which are very small but can occur in large numbers, constructing a fine web around themselves and badly marking the cactus via their sap sucking, even if they do not kill it; and thrips, which particularly attack flowers.
Columnar cacti growing in semidesert areas are among those most likely to be bat-pollinated; this may be because bats are able to travel considerable distances, so are effective pollinators of plants growing widely separated from one another.
Their areoles identify them as cacti, and in spite of their appearance, they, too, have many adaptations for water conservation.
Some cacti have taproots; in genera such as ''Copiapoa'', these are considerably larger and of a greater volume than the body.
The access of air to internal spaces within a plant is controlled by stomata, which are able to open and close.
Immediately below the outer epidermis, a hypodermal layer developed made up of cells with thickened walls, offering mechanical support.
