The 13th General Conference on Weights and Measures of 1967 defined a second as: "the duration of 9,192,631,770 cycles of microwave light absorbed or emitted by the hyperfine transition of caesium-133 atoms in their ground state undisturbed by external fields".
Binary compounds with sulfur, selenium, and tellurium also exist.
Due to its large ionic radius, caesium is one of the "incompatible elements".
Nevertheless, germanium, rubidium, selenium, silicon, tellurium, and several other elements can be substituted for caesium in photosensitive materials.
They have also been used to treat epilepsy.
The chemistry of caesium is similar to that of other alkali metals, in particular rubidium, the element above caesium in the periodic table.
Caesium forms alloys with the other alkali metals, gold, and mercury (amalgams).
The high water solubility is a disadvantage which makes it incompatible with large pool irradiators for food and medical supplies.
Caesium is then extracted from pollucite primarily by three methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct reduction.
The isotopes with mass numbers of 129, 131, 132 and 136, have half-lives between a day and two weeks, while most of the other isotopes have half-lives from a few seconds to fractions of a second.
Since 1967, the International System of Measurements has based the primary unit of time, the second, on the properties of caesium.
The phosphate, acetate, carbonate, halides, oxide, nitrate, and sulfate salts are water-soluble.
The metal can also be isolated by electrolysis of fused caesium cyanide (CsCN).
Caesium formate brine can be blended with potassium and sodium formates to decrease the density of the fluids to that of water (1.0&nbsp;g·cm−3, or 8.3&nbsp;pounds per gallon).
Commercial pollucite contains more than 19% caesium.
This high coordination number and softness (tendency to form covalent bonds) are properties exploited in separating Cs+ from other cations in the remediation of nuclear wastes, where 137Cs+ must be separated from large amounts of nonradioactive K+.
Caesium chloride (CsCl) crystallizes in the simple cubic crystal system.
One of the world's most significant and richest sources of caesium is the Tanco Mine at Bernic Lake in Manitoba, Canada, estimated to contain 350,000&nbsp;metric tons of pollucite ore, representing more than two-thirds of the world's reserve base.
This solution can be evaporated to produce caesium chloride or transformed into caesium alum or caesium carbonate.
Caesium is used to reduce the radar signature of exhaust plumes in the SR-71 Blackbird military aircraft.
In addition, the metal has a rather low boiling point, , the lowest of all metals other than mercury.
137Cs and 134Cs have half-lives of 30 and two years, respectively.
The radioactive 135Cs has a very long half-life of about 2.3&nbsp;million years, longest of all radioactive isotopes of caesium.
It has only one stable isotope, caesium-133.
It has a melting point of , making it one of the few elemental metals that are liquid near room temperature.
Many of the simple salts are hygroscopic, but less so than the corresponding salts of lighter alkali metals.
The radioactive isotope caesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years and is used in medical applications, industrial gauges, and hydrology.
Within the pegmatites, the large grain size and the strong separation of the minerals results in high-grade ore for mining.
Applications for nonradioactive caesium included photoelectric cells, photomultiplier tubes, optical components of infrared spectrophotometers, catalysts for several organic reactions, crystals for scintillation counters, and in magnetohydrodynamic power generators.
The analogous platinum compound, red caesium platinide (Cs2Pt), contains the platinide ion that behaves as a pseudochalcogen.
Caesium also was, and still is, used as a source of positive ions in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS).
Radiocaesium does not accumulate in the body as readily as other fission products (such as radioiodine and radiostrontium).
Most of the mined caesium (as salts) is directly converted into caesium formate (HCOO−Cs+) for applications such as oil drilling.
A stoichiometric mixture of caesium and gold will react to form yellow caesium auride (Cs+Au−) upon heating.
The remaining 90% has a biological half-life between 50 and 150 days.
They tried to generate elemental caesium by electrolysis of molten caesium chloride, but instead of a metal, they obtained a blue homogeneous substance which "neither under the naked eye nor under the microscope" showed the slightest trace of metallic substance"; as a result, they assigned it as a subchloride ().
This can occur with other alkali metals, but caesium is so potent that this explosive reaction can be triggered even by cold water.
Although the element is only mildly toxic, the metal is a hazardous material and the radioisotopes would present a significant health and ecological hazard in the environment.
The alkaline earth metals were precipitated either as sulfates or oxalates, leaving the alkali metal in the solution.
Exceptionally pure and gas-free caesium can be produced by  thermal decomposition of caesium azide , which can be produced from aqueous caesium sulfate and barium azide.
The German chemist Robert Bunsen and physicist  Gustav Kirchhoff discovered caesium in 1860 by the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy.
Potassium, rubidium, and caesium form insoluble salts with chloroplatinic acid, but these salts show a slight difference in solubility in hot water, and the less-soluble caesium and rubidium hexachloroplatinate ((Cs,Rb)2PtCl6) were obtained by fractional crystallization.
It rapidly etches the surface of semiconductors such as silicon.
This structure is shared with CsBr and CsI, and many other compounds that do not contain Cs.
Another notable source of pollucite is in the Karibib Desert, Namibia.
From the caesium chloride, the two scientists estimated the atomic weight of the new element at 123.35 (compared to the currently accepted one of 132.9).
Nevertheless, it is more abundant than such elements as antimony, cadmium, tin, and tungsten, and two orders of magnitude more abundant than mercury and silver; it is 3.3% as abundant as rubidium, with which it is closely associated, chemically.
Since then, caesium has been widely used in highly accurate atomic clocks.
This technology is used primarily in the isolation of viral particles, subcellular organelles and fractions, and nucleic acids from biological samples.
The function of a drilling fluid is to lubricate drill bits, to bring rock cuttings to the surface, and to maintain pressure on the formation during drilling of the well.
The price of 99.8% pure caesium (metal basis) in 2009 was about US$10 per gram ($280 per ounce), but the compounds are significantly cheaper.
Leaching with water or dilute ammonia () yields a dilute chloride (CsCl) solution.
Caesium salts have been evaluated as antishock reagents following the administration of arsenical drugs.
Radiocaesium follows potassium and tends to accumulate in plant tissues, including fruits and vegetables.
Some small differences arise from the fact that it has a higher atomic mass and is more electropositive than other (nonradioactive) alkali metals.
Plants vary widely in the absorption of caesium, sometimes displaying great resistance to it.
Double salts are often less soluble, and the low solubility of caesium aluminium sulfate is exploited in refining Cs from ores.
Caesium-134, and to a lesser extent caesium-135, have also been used in hydrology to measure the caesium output by the nuclear power industry.
The latter may be heated in a vacuum to generate .
As a daughter product of fission bomb testing from the 1950s through the mid-1980s, caesium-137 was released into the atmosphere, where it was absorbed readily into solution.
The median lethal dose (LD50) for caesium chloride in mice is 2.3&nbsp;g per kilogram, which is comparable to the LD50 values of potassium chloride and sodium chloride.
Caesium clocks regulate the timing of cell phone networks and the Internet.
It has been used in agriculture, cancer treatment, and the sterilization of food, sewage sludge, and surgical equipment.
The only stable caesium isotope is 133Cs, with 78 neutrons.
Caesium is an alkali metal and has physical and chemical properties similar to those of rubidium and potassium.
These clocks measure frequency with an error of 2 to 3&nbsp;parts in 1014, which corresponding to an accuracy of 2&nbsp;nanoseconds per day, or one second in 1.4&nbsp;million&nbsp;years.
Caesium hydroxide is a very strong base, and will rapidly corrode glass.
Caesium fluoride enjoys a niche use in organic chemistry as a base and as an anhydrous source of fluoride ion.
Also called the "caesium chloride structure", this structural motif is composed of a primitive cubic lattice with a two-atom basis, each with an eightfold coordination; the chloride atoms lie upon the lattice points at the edges of the cube, while the caesium atoms lie in the holes in the centre of the cubes.
The hydrogen gas produced by the reaction is heated by the thermal energy released at the same time, causing ignition and a violent explosion.
Caesium-137 has been employed in a variety of industrial measurement gauges, including moisture, density, levelling, and thickness gauges.
At temperatures below , it does not alloy with cobalt, iron, molybdenum, nickel, platinum, tantalum, or tungsten.
137Cs decomposes to a short-lived 137mBa by beta decay, and then to nonradioactive barium, while 134Cs transforms into 134Ba directly.
Though not commercially feasible, the ore can be directly reduced with potassium, sodium, or calcium in vacuum can produce caesium metal directly.
In the acid digestion, the silicate pollucite rock is dissolved with strong acids, such as hydrochloric (HCl), sulfuric (), hydrobromic (HBr), or hydrofluoric (HF) acids.
During magma crystallization, caesium is concentrated in the liquid phase and crystallizes last.
Because of their effect on heart rhythms, however, they are less likely to be used than potassium or rubidium salts.
Xenon was used in the experimental spacecraft Deep Space 1 launched in 1998.
After separation, the pure precipitated double salt is decomposed, and pure CsCl is precipitated by evaporating the water.
The fuel was ionized by contact with a charged tungsten electrode.
Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power-generating systems were researched, but failed to gain widespread acceptance.
Caesium is mined mostly from pollucite, while the radioisotopes, especially caesium-137, a fission product, are extracted from waste produced by nuclear reactors.
With nuclear weapons testing in the 1950s through the 1980s, 137Cs was released into the atmosphere and returned to the surface of the earth as a component of radioactive fallout.
Historically, the most important use for caesium has been in research and development, primarily in chemical and electrical fields.
Caesium was not recognized as a high-performance industrial metal until the 1950s.
CsOH has been previously regarded by chemists as the "strongest base", reflecting the relatively weak attraction between the large Cs+ ion and OH−; it is indeed the strongest Arrhenius base, but a number of compounds that do not dissolve in water, such as ''n''-butyllithium and sodium amide, are more basic.
It mixes with all the other alkali metals (except lithium); the alloy with a molar distribution of 41% caesium, 47% potassium, and 12% sodium has the lowest melting point of any known metal alloy, at .
In 1860, Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered caesium in the mineral water from Dürkheim, Germany.
Because biochemical processes can confuse and substitute caesium with potassium, excess caesium can lead to hypokalemia, arrythmia, and acute cardiac arrest.
It can be handled only under inert gas, such as argon.
The high density of the caesium ion makes solutions of caesium chloride, caesium sulfate, and caesium trifluoroacetate () useful in molecular biology for density gradient ultracentrifugation.
It is used in photoelectric cells because caesium-based cathodes, such as the intermetallic compound , have a low threshold voltage for emission of electrons.
Caesium salts sometimes replace potassium or sodium salts in organic synthesis, such as cyclization, esterification, and polymerization.
This is because caesium explodes instantly upon contact with water, leaving little time for hydrogen to accumulate.
Caesium vapour is used in many common magnetometers.
The CsCl structure is preferred because Cs+ has an ionic radius of 174&nbsp;pm and  181&nbsp;pm.
Being a heavy element, caesium provides good stopping power with better detection.
Caesium is a very soft (it has the lowest hardness of all elements, 0.2 Mohs), very ductile, pale metal, which darkens in the presence of trace amounts of oxygen.
Caesium clocks have improved over the past half-century and are regarded as "the most accurate realization of a unit that mankind has yet achieved."
The range of photoemissive devices using caesium include optical character recognition devices, photomultiplier tubes, and video camera tubes.
Caesium is the most electropositive chemical element.
Caesium can be stored in vacuum-sealed borosilicate glass ampoules.
Very few applications existed for caesium until the 1920s, when it came into use in radio vacuum tubes, where it had two functions; as a getter, it removed excess oxygen after manufacture, and as a coating on the heated cathode, it increased the electrical conductivity.
Caesium has also been used in thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): When exposed to radiation, it acquires crystal defects that, when heated, revert with emission of light proportionate to the received dose.
It is the 45th most abundant element and the 36th among the metals.
The beta decay from 137Cs to 137mBa is a strong emission of gamma radiation.
The electrolysis of the aqueous solution of chloride with a mercury anode produced a caesium amalgam which readily decomposed under the aqueous conditions.
Because of this high reactivity, caesium metal is classified as a hazardous material.
It reacts with solid water at temperatures as low as .
From this mixture, the lithium was precipitated by ammonium carbonate.
Therefore, the largest deposits of caesium are zone pegmatite ore bodies formed by this enrichment process.
The International Atomic Energy Agency and other sources have warned that radioactive materials, such as caesium-137, could be used in radiological dispersion devices, or "dirty bombs".
Like other alkali metals, caesium has a great affinity for oxygen and is used as a "getter" in vacuum tubes.
Completion fluids assist the emplacement of control hardware after drilling but prior to production by maintaining the pressure.
Caesium compounds may provide a faster response (CsF) and be less hygroscopic (CsI).
Caesium fluoride or caesium aluminium fluoride are used in fluxes formulated for brazing aluminium alloys that contain magnesium.
But corrosion by caesium on spacecraft components has pushed development in the direction of inert gas propellants, such as xenon, which are easier to handle in ground-based tests and do less potential damage to the spacecraft.
Although it has a large nuclear spin (+), nuclear magnetic resonance studies can use this isotope at a resonating frequency of 11.7&nbsp;MHz.
In the same way, the aluminate, carbonate, or hydroxide may be reduced by magnesium.
It has also been used in well logging devices for measuring the electron density of the rock formations, which is analogous to the bulk density of the formations.
It forms well-defined intermetallic compounds with antimony, gallium, indium, and thorium, which are photosensitive.
The caesium ion is also larger and less "hard" than those of the lighter alkali metals.
number of nucleons in the nucleus) from 112 to 151.
Experiments with dogs showed that a single dose of 3.8 millicuries (140&nbsp;MBq, 4.1&nbsp;μg of caesium-137) per kilogram is lethal within three weeks; smaller amounts may cause infertility and cancer.
Although the stoichiometric content of caesium in pollucite is 42.6%, pure pollucite samples from this deposit contain only about 34% caesium, while the average content is 24&nbsp;wt%.
Caesium metal is one of the most reactive elements and is highly explosive in the presence of water.
Notably, caesium and fluorine have the lowest and highest electronegativities, respectively, among all the known elements.
Relatively few chemical applications use caesium.
Its compounds burn with a blue or violet colour.
In addition to the superoxide and the ozonide , several brightly coloured suboxides have also been studied.
The metal is extremely reactive and pyrophoric, reacting with water even at −116&nbsp;°C (−177&nbsp;°F).
Caesium metal is highly reactive and very pyrophoric.
Known year-to-year variation within that period allows correlation with soil and sediment layers.
These include , , ,  (dark-green), CsO, , as well as .
The aluminium sulfate component is converted to insoluble aluminium oxide by roasting the alum with carbon, and the resulting product is leached with water to yield a  solution.
After conversion to the nitrates and extraction with ethanol, a sodium-free mixture was obtained.
137Cs and 90Sr are the principal medium-lived products of nuclear fission, and the prime sources of radioactivity from spent nuclear fuel after several years of cooling, lasting several hundred years.
To obtain a pure sample of caesium,  of mineral water had to be evaporated to yield  of concentrated salt solution.
But such amounts would not ordinarily be encountered in natural sources.
Caesium was the first element to be discovered with a spectroscope, which had been invented by Bunsen and Kirchhoff only a year previously.
It ignites spontaneously in air, and reacts explosively with water even at low temperatures, more so than the other alkali metals (first group of the periodic table).
Alternatively, caesium metal may be obtained from the purified compounds derived from the ore. Caesium chloride and the other caesium halides can be reduced at  with calcium or barium, and caesium metal distilled from the result.
However, this fission product yield is reduced in most reactors because the predecessor, 135Xe, is a potent neutron poison and frequently transmutes to stable 136Xe before it can decay to 135Cs.
The element is used as an internal standard in spectrophotometry.
Caesium fluoride (CsF) is a hygroscopic white solid that is widely used in organofluorine chemistry as a source of fluoride anions.
More so than the other alkali metals, caesium forms numerous binary compounds with oxygen.
As expected for an alkali metal, the only common oxidation state is +1.
Doping with caesium compounds enhances the effectiveness of several metal-ion catalysts for chemical synthesis, such as acrylic acid, anthraquinone, ethylene oxide, methanol, phthalic anhydride, styrene, methyl methacrylate monomers, and various olefins.
To supply the developing market, Cabot Corporation built a production plant in 1997 at the Tanco mine near Bernic Lake in Manitoba, with a capacity of  per year of caesium formate solution.
About 10% of absorbed radiocaesium washes out of the body relatively quickly in sweat and urine.
Caesium is also important for its photoemissive properties, converting light to electron flow.
The only economically important ore for caesium is pollucite , which is found in a few places around the world in zoned pegmatites, associated with the more commercially important lithium minerals, lepidolite and petalite.
The latest versions are more accurate than 1 part in 1015, about 1 second in 20&nbsp;million years.
This difference is apparent in the 8-coordination of CsCl.
In contrast, most other alkaline halides have the sodium chloride (NaCl) structure.
The compound reacts violently with water, yielding caesium hydroxide, metallic gold, and hydrogen gas; in liquid ammonia it can be reacted with a caesium-specific ion exchange resin to produce tetramethylammonium auride.
The pure metal was eventually isolated by the German chemist Carl Setterberg while working on his doctorate with Kekulé and Bunsen.
Nevertheless, Field Emission Electric Propulsion thrusters that accelerate liquid metal ions such as caesium have been built.
The largest present-day use of nonradioactive caesium is in caesium formate drilling fluids for the extractive oil industry.
Other than 134mCs (with a half-life of just under 3&nbsp;hours), all are very unstable and decay with half-lives of a few minutes or less.
Like all metal cations, Cs+ forms complexes with Lewis bases in solution.
Other uses of the metal include high-energy lasers, vapour glow lamps, and vapour rectifiers.
Since the 1990s, the largest application of the element has been as caesium formate for drilling fluids, but it has a range of applications in the production of electricity, in electronics, and in chemistry.
Almost all caesium produced from nuclear fission comes from the beta decay of originally more neutron-rich fission products, passing through various isotopes of iodine and xenon.
With hydrochloric acid, a mixture of soluble chlorides is produced, and the insoluble chloride double salts of caesium are precipitated as caesium antimony chloride (), caesium iodine chloride (), or caesium hexachlorocerate ().
It is a ready marker of the movement of soil and sediment from those times.
In 1967, acting on Einstein's proof that the speed of light as the most constant dimension in the universe, the International System of Units used two specific wave counts from an emission spectrum of caesium-133 to co-define the second and the metre.
It is stored and shipped in dry, saturated hydrocarbons such as mineral oil.
Because caesium does not substitute for potassium as readily as rubidium, the alkali evaporite minerals sylvite (KCl) and carnallite () may contain only 0.002% caesium.
Roasting pollucite with calcium carbonate and calcium chloride yields insoluble calcium silicates and soluble caesium chloride.
Caesium is a relatively rare element estimated to average 3&nbsp;parts per million in the Earth's crust.
After reduction of the hexachloroplatinate with hydrogen, caesium and rubidium were separated by the difference in solubility of their carbonates in alcohol.
The auride anion here behaves as a pseudohalogen.
Isotope 137 has been used in hydrologic studies analogous to those with tritium.
Caesium fluoride has the halite structure, which means that the Cs+ and F− pack in a cubic closest packed array as do Na+ and Cl− in sodium chloride.
The double salt with antimony (such as ), bismuth, cadmium, copper, iron, and lead are also poorly soluble.
Those two isotopes are the largest source of residual radioactivity in the area of the Chernobyl disaster.
At the present rate of world mine production of 5 to 10&nbsp;metric tons per year, reserves will last for thousands of years.
The isotope 135Cs is one of the long-lived fission products of uranium produced in nuclear reactors.
It is also well-documented that mushrooms from contaminated forests accumulate radiocaesium (caesium-137) in the fungal sporocarps.
Nonradioactive caesium compounds are only mildly toxic and nonradioactive caesium is not a significant environmental hazard.
Consequently, Cs is found in few minerals.
'''Caesium''' or '''cesium''' is a chemical element with symbol&nbsp;'''Cs''' and atomic number&nbsp;55.
The Caesium standard is the primary standard for standards-compliant time and frequency measurements.
In reality, the product was probably a colloidal mixture of the metal and caesium chloride.
The isotopes 134 and 137 are present in the biosphere in small amounts from human activities, differing by location.
Caesium-137 is a radioisotope commonly used as a gamma-emitter in industrial applications.
Furthermore, it is biodegradable and may be recycled, which is important in view of its high cost (about $4,000&nbsp;per barrel in 2001).
Percentage amounts of caesium may be found in beryl () and avogadrite (), up to 15&nbsp;wt% Cs2O in the closely related mineral pezzottaite (Cs(Be2Li)Al2Si6O18), up to 8.4&nbsp;wt% Cs2O in the rare mineral londonite (), and less in the more widespread rhodizite.
Unlike the components of many other heavy liquids, caesium formate is relatively environment-friendly.
It is highly pyrophoric: the autoignition temperature of caesium is −116&nbsp;°C, and it ignites explosively in air to form caesium hydroxide and various oxides.
The high density of the caesium formate brine (up to 2.3&nbsp;g·cm−3, or 19.2&nbsp;pounds per gallon), coupled with the relatively benign nature of most caesium compounds, reduces the requirement for toxic high-density suspended solids in the drilling fluid—a significant technological, engineering and environmental advantage.
The principal use of nonradioactive caesium, as caesium formate in petroleum drilling fluids because it is much less toxic than alternatives, though it is more costly.
In quantities of more than about 100&nbsp;grams (3.5&nbsp;oz), caesium is shipped in hermetically sealed, stainless steel containers.
The process yielded  of rubidium chloride and  of caesium chloride from the initial 44,000&nbsp;litres of mineral water.
The Bikita pegmatite deposit in Zimbabwe is mined for its petalite, but it also contains a significant amount of pollucite.
At least 21 metastable nuclear isomers exist.
A few amalgams have been studied:  is black with a purple metallic lustre, while CsHg is golden-coloured, also with a metallic lustre.
While they are less prevalent than either caesium-133 or caesium-137, these bellwether isotopes are produced solely from anthropogenic sources.
Caesium-based atomic clocks use the electromagnetic transitions in the hyperfine structure of caesium-133 atoms as a reference point.
