Patients with heavy, uncontrolled bleeding may not tolerate the hemodynamic effects of regional anesthesia.
Some C-sections are also performed upon request.
Elective caesareans at 38 weeks showed increased health complications in the newborn.
Vaginal delivery in this case does not worsen the outcome for either infant as compared with caesarean section.
All those involved in delivery of obstetric and midwifery care in the UK undergo mandatory training in conducting breech deliveries in the simulation environment (using dummy pelvises and mannequins to allow practice of this important skill) and this training is carried out regularly to keep skills up to date.
Women undergoing this operation recover quickly and can look after the newborns soon after surgery.
According to The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), successful VBAC is associated with decreased maternal morbidity and a decreased risk of complications in future pregnancies.
Some women who have had caesarean sections, especially emergency caesareans, experience post-traumatic stress disorder.
This may be done in cases of intractable bleeding or when the placenta cannot be separated from the uterus.
Caesarean section is recommended when vaginal delivery might pose a risk to the mother or baby.
The expectant mother was normally anesthetized with alcohol, and herbal mixtures were used to encourage healing.
Self-inflicted caesarean section is the concept of a mother alone performing her own caesarean section.
There may be a somewhat higher incidence of postnatal depression in the first weeks after childbirth for women who have caesarean sections, but this difference does not persist.
* Higher infant mortality risk: In caesarean sections performed with no indicated medical risk (singleton at full term in a head-down position with no other obstetric or medical complications), the risk of death in the first 28 days of life has been cited as 1.77 per 1,000 live births among women who had caesarean sections, compared to 0.62 per 1,000 for women who delivered vaginally.
More than 45 countries globally have C-section rates less than 7.5% while more than 50 have rates greater than 27%.
Regional anaesthesia is used in 95% of deliveries, with spinal and combined spinal and epidural anaesthesia being the most commonly used regional techniques in scheduled Caesarean section.
:• Small bowel obstruction – the disruption of normal bowel flow, which can result when adhesions twist or pull the small bowel.
The decision whether to perform general anesthesia or regional anesthesia (spinal or epidural anaesthetic) is important and is based on many indications, including how urgent the delivery needs to be as well as the medical and obstetric history of the woman.
A trial of vaginal birth in some of these situations, including after C-section, may be possible.
Taking antibiotics before skin incision rather than after cord clamping reduces the risk for the mother, without increasing adverse effects for the baby.
The US National Institutes of Health says rises in rates of Caesarean sections are not, in isolation, a cause for concern, but may reflect changing reproductive patterns: "The World Health Organization has determined an “ideal rate” of all caesarean deliveries (such as 15 percent) for a population.
* Anesthesia advances
Women who had caesarean sections are more likely to have problems with later pregnancies, and it is recommended that women who want larger families should not seek an elective caesarean unless there are medical indications to do so.
According to the ancient Chinese ''Records of the Grand Historian'', Luzhong, a sixth-generation descendant of the Yellow Emperor, had six sons, all born by "cutting open the body".
The rate has risen to 46% in China and to levels of 25% and above in many Asian, European and Latin American countries.
Vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) is the practice of birthing a baby vaginally after a previous baby has been delivered by caesarean section (surgically).
* The lower uterine segment section is the procedure most commonly used today; it involves a transverse cut just above the edge of the bladder.
Caesarean delivery on maternal request  (CDMR) is a medically unnecessary caesarean section, where the conduct of a childbirth via a caesarean section is requested by the pregnant patient even though there is not a medical indication to have the surgery.
The first successful Caesarean section to be performed in America took place in Mason County, Virginia (now Mason County, West Virginia), in 1794.
He examined all steps in caesarean sections in use, analyzed them for their necessity and, if found necessary, for their optimal way of performance.
Classification is used to help communication between the obstetric, midwifery and anaesthetic team for discussion of the most appropriate method of anaesthesia.
As late as the 12th century, scholar and physician Maimonides expresses doubt over the possibility of a woman's surviving this procedure and again falling pregnant (see Commentary to Mishnah Bekhorot 8:2).
The Hebrew term ניתוח קיסרי (''nitúakh Keisári'') translates literally as Caesarean surgery.
However, it was long considered an extreme measure, performed only when the mother was already dead or considered to be beyond help.
A resuscitative hysterotomy,  also known as a peri-mortem caesarean delivery, is an emergency caesarean delivery carried out where maternal cardiac arrest has occurred, to assist in resuscitation of the mother by removing the aortocaval compression generated by the gravid uterus.
Caesarean section usually resulted in the death of the mother; the first well-recorded incident of a woman surviving a caesarean section was in the 1580s, in Siegershausen, Switzerland: Jakob Nufer, a pig gelder, is supposed to have performed the operation on his wife after a prolonged labour.
Systematic reviews have found no strong evidence about the impact of caesareans for non-medical reasons.
The Ancient Roman caesarean section was first performed to remove a baby from the womb of a mother who died during childbirth.
In the United States about 33% of deliveries are by C-section.
When the first twin is not head down at the point of labour starting, a caesarean section should be recommended.
Women who have had a caesarean are more likely to experience pain that interferes with their usual activities than women who have vaginal births, although by six months there is generally no longer a difference.
For otherwise healthy twin pregnancies where both twins are head down a trial of vaginal delivery is recommended at between 37 and 38 weeks.
The surgeon then makes a decision about uterine exteriorization.
If provided this should be done at 39 weeks of gestation or later.
For most of the time since the 16th century, the procedure had a high mortality rate.
Studies have shown that continuity of care with a known carer may significantly decrease the rate of Caesarean delivery but there is also research that appears to show that there is no significant difference in Caesarean rates when comparing midwife continuity care to conventional fragmented care.
There have apparently been a few successful cases, notably Inés Ramírez Pérez of Mexico who in March 2000, performed a successful Caesarean section on herself.
* Extraperitoneal CS and then moving to low transverse incision (Krönig, 1912)
Caesarean section greatly increases the risk of infection and associated morbidity (estimated to be between 5 and 20 times as high).
On March 5, 2000, in Mexico, Inés Ramírez performed a Caesarean section on herself and survived, as did her son, Orlando Ruiz Ramírez.
A urinary catheter is used to drain the bladder and the skin of the abdomen is then sterilized.
European travelers in the Great Lakes region of Africa during the 19th century observed Caesarean sections being performed on a regular basis.
There are many issues which must be taken into account when planning the mode of delivery for every pregnancy, not just those complicated by a previous caesarean section and there is a list of some of these issues in the list of indications for section in the first part of this article.
When the first twin is not head down, a caesarean section is often recommended.
In this review, no studies found decreased neonatal morbidity due to non-medically indicated (elective) delivery before 39 weeks.
One study found an increased complication risk if a repeat elective caesarean section is performed even a few days before the recommended 39 weeks.
Chanakya, the Chandragupta's teacher and adviser, made up his mind that the baby should survive.
It is true that compared to elective repeat caesarean section, a vaginal birth after caesarean section (VBAC) confers a higher risk for mainly uterine rupture and perinatal death of the child.
The consensus concerning monoamniotic twins (identical twins sharing an amniotic sac), the highest risk type of twins, is that they should be delivered by caesarean section at or shortly after 32 weeks, since the risks of intrauterine death of one or both twins is higher after this gestation than the risk of complications of prematurity.
General anesthesia may be necessary because of specific risks to mother or child.
C-sections are also carried out for personal and social reasons.
His first wife however died in childbirth, giving birth to a stilborn son who might have lived had a caesarean taken place.
The Catalan saint Raymond Nonnatus (1204–1240), received his surname—from the Latin ''non-natus'' ("not born")—because he was born by caesarean section.
Other advantages of regional anesthesia include the absence of typical risks of general anesthesia: pulmonary aspiration (which has a relatively high incidence in patients undergoing anesthesia in late pregnancy) of gastric contents and esophageal intubation.
* Adherence to principles of asepsis
The German term has also been imported into Japanese (帝王切開 ''teiōsekkai'') and Korean (제왕 절개 ''jewang jeolgae''), both literally meaning "emperor incision".
Julius Caesar's mother, Aurelia, lived through childbirth and successfully gave birth to her son, ruling out the possibility the Roman ruler and general was born by caesarean section.
In the UK this is classified as a 'grade 4' section (delivery timed to suit the needs of the service) since there is no rush in these situations.
:• Chronic pelvic pain, which may result when adhesions are present in the pelvis.
An incisions of about 15 cm (6 inches) is then typically made through the mother's lower abdomen.
A planned caesarean (or elective/scheduled caesarean), arranged ahead of time, is most commonly arranged for medical indications which have developed before or during the pregnancy, and ideally after 39 weeks of gestation.
He notes that this hypothesis would predict an increased average birth weight, which some studies have borne out.
In the United States the rate of C-section is around 33% and varies from 23% to 40% depending on the state in question.
Other risks include severe blood loss (which may require a blood transfusion) and postdural-puncture spinal headaches.
In many hospitals the mother's partner is encouraged to attend the surgery to support the mother and share the experience.
If a caesarean is performed in an emergency, the risk of the surgery may be increased due to a number of factors.
The uterus is incised, and this incision is extended with blunt pressure along a cephalad-caudad axis.
Mothers can experience increased incidence of postnatal depression, and can experience significant psychological trauma and ongoing birth-related post-traumatic stress disorder after obstetric intervention during the birthing process.
Standard procedure includes the closure of the peritoneum.
Pliny the Elder theorized that Julius Caesar's name came from an ancestor who was born by caesarean section, but the truth of this is debated (see the discussion of the etymology of ''Caesar'').
Factors like pain in first stage of labor, feelings of powerlessness, intrusive emergency obstetric intervention are important in the subsequent development of psychological issues related to labour and delivery.
As a result of reduced numbers of actual vaginal breech deliveries, obstetricians and midwives are at risk of de-skilling in this important skill.
Caesarean rates in the U.S. have risen considerably since 1996.
Conventionally, caesarean sections are classified as being either an elective surgery or an emergency operation.
'''Caesarean section''', also known as '''C-section''', is the use of surgery to deliver one or more babies.
The World Health Organization recommends that they should be done based on medical need and in many cases they are lifesaving for the mother and baby.
Vaginal delivery in this case does not worsen the outcome for either infant as compared with caesarean section.
:• Infertility, which may end when adhesions distort the tissues of the ovaries and tubes, impeding the normal passage of the egg (ovum) from the ovary to the uterus.
When subcutaneous tissue is 2&nbsp;cm thick or more, surgical suture is used.
China has been cited as having the highest rates of C-sections in the world at 46% as of 2008.
The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and medical policy makers review research studies and find more incidence of suspected or proven sepsis, RDS, hypoglycemia, need for respiratory support, need for NICU admission, and need for hospitalization > 4–5 days.
The majority of breech babies born in the United States and the UK are delivered by caesarean section as studies have shown increased risks of morbidity and mortality for vaginal breech delivery, and most obstetricians counsel against planned vaginal breech birth for this reason.
Because some sources say the procedure is named after Julius Caesar, the procedure's name is sometimes capitalized.
Some link with Julius Caesar or with Roman emperors exists in other languages as well.
The mother of Bindusara (born c. 320 BCE, ruled 298 – c.272 BCE), the second Mauryan Samrat (emperor) of India, accidentally consumed poison and died when she was close to delivering him.
Birth by caesarean section also seems to be associated with worse health outcomes later in life, including overweight or obesitas and problems in the immune system.
Across Europe, there are differences between countries: in Italy the Caesarean section rate is 40%, while in the Nordic countries it is 14%.
Though vaginal birth is possible for the breech baby, certain fetal and maternal factors influence the safety of vaginal breech birth.
Pliny the Elder refers to a certain Julius Caesar (an ancestor of the famous Roman statesman) as ''ab utero caeso'', "cut from the womb" giving this as an explanation for the cognomen "Caesar" which was then carried by his descendents.
Dr. James Barry carried out the first successful Caesarean by a European doctor in Africa in Cape Town, while posted there between 1817 and 1828.
The incisions are then stitched closed.
The capital-versus-lowercase variation reflects a style of lowercasing some eponymous terms (e.g., ''caesarean, eustachian, fallopian, mendelian, parkinsonian, parkinsonism'').
His mother died while giving birth to him.
* Potential for early delivery and complications: Preterm delivery may be inadvertently carried out if due-date calculation is inaccurate.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is used before an incision.
There are efforts to both improve access to and reduce the use of C-section.
Among women in the United Kingdom, Sweden and Australian about 7% preferred caesarean section as a method of delivery.
Other risks include:
Adhesions can cause long term problems, such as:
A caesarean section is associated with risks of postoperative adhesions, incisional hernias (which may require surgical correction) and wound infections.
The infant is delivered, and the placenta is then removed.
The anaesthetist will usually lower the drape temporarily as the child is delivered so the parents can see their newborn.
For example, the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' defines Caesarean birth as "the delivery of a child by cutting through the walls of the abdomen when delivery cannot take place in the natural way, as was done in the case of Julius Caesar".
They also typically take longer to heal from, about six weeks, than vaginal birth.
There was a cultural taboo that mothers not be buried pregnant, that may have reflected a way of saving some fetuses.
However, despite these proactive measures, adhesion formation is a recognized complication of any abdominal or pelvic surgery.
The pain that is experienced because of surgery is greater than that of labor and therefore requires a more intense nerve block.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is effective for endometritis, preventing as many as 3 out of 4 cases.
The available clinical evidence is not sufficient to draw a conclusion on the effect of this practice.
The Canadian rate was 26% in 2005–2006.
* Wet lung: Retention of fluid in the lungs can occur if not expelled by the pressure of contractions during labor.
Established guidelines recommend that caesarean sections not be used before 39 weeks of pregnancy without a medical reason.
One surgeon's opinion is that there is no consistency in this ideal rate, and artificial declarations of an ideal rate should be discouraged.
The peritoneum is opened by repeat stretching, no abdominal swabs are used, the uterus is closed in one layer with a big needle to reduce the amount of foreign body as much as possible, the peritoneal layers remain unsutured and the abdomen is closed with two layers only.
An early account of caesarean section in Iran is mentioned in the book of Shahnameh, written around 1000 AD, and relates to the birth of Rostam, the national legendary hero of Iran.
One in five infertility cases may be adhesion related (stoval)
Nonetheless, even if the etymological hypothesis linking the caesarean section to Julius Caesar is a false etymology, it has been widely believed.
It was the second-most common procedure performed for people ages 18 to 44 years old.
According to Shahnameh ancient Persian book, the hero Rostam was the first person who was born with this method and term رستمينه (''rostamineh'') is corresponded to Caesarean.
This may include obstructed labour, twin pregnancy, high blood pressure in the mother, breech birth, problems with the placenta, umbilical cord or shape of the pelvis, and previous C-section.
With nearly 1.3 million stays, Caesarean section was one of the most common procedures performed in U.S. hospitals in 2011.
Non-medically indicated (elective) childbirth before 39 weeks gestation "carry significant risks for the baby with no known benefit to the mother."
A study found that in 2011, women covered by private insurance were 11% more likely to have a caesarean section delivery than those covered by Medicaid.
Emergency caesarean sections (those where vaginal delivery has been planned beforehand, and the indication for section has developed since this plan was agreed, usually after assessment by a healthcare professional) are classified in the UK as grade 3(delivery within 4 hours of the decision, no maternal or fetal compromise), grade 2 (delivery required within 90 minutes of the decision but no immediate threat to the life of the woman or the fetus) or grade 1 (delivery required within 30 minutes of the decision: immediate threat to the life of the mother or the baby or both.)
The sixth son Jilian founded the House of Mi that ruled the State of Chu (c. 1030–223 BCE).
* The classical caesarean section involves a midline incision on the uterus longitudinal incision which allows a larger space to deliver the baby.
The risk of placenta accreta, a potentially life-threatening condition which is more likely to develop where a woman has had a previous caesarean section, is 0.13% after two caesarean sections, but increases to 2.13% after four and then to 6.74% after six or more.
In Ireland the rate was 26.1% in 2009.
Regional anaesthesia is preferred as it allows the mother to be awake and interact immediately with her baby.
The Arabic term (ولادة قيصرية ''wilaada qaySaríyya'') also means "Caesarean birth."
The increased risks include breathing problems in the baby and amniotic fluid embolism and postpartum bleeding in the mother.
The international healthcare community has previously considered the rate of 10% and 15% to be ideal for caesarean sections.
Often a number of days are required in hospital to recover sufficiently to go home.
For this reason, planned caesarean sections (also known as elective caesarean sections) should not be scheduled before 39 weeks gestation unless there is medical reason to do so.
The Misgav Ladach method is a modified caesarean section which has been used nearly all over the world since the 1990s.
To prevent adhesions from forming after caesarean section, adhesion barrier can be put during surgery to minimize the risk of adhesions between the uterus and ovaries, the small bowel, and almost any tissue in the abdomen or pelvis.
Recommendations encourage counseling to identify the reasons for the request, addressing anxieties and information, and encouraging vaginal birth.
In the case of caesarean sections, rates of respiratory death were 14 times higher in pre-labor at 37 compared with 40 weeks gestation, and 8.2 times higher for pre-labor caesarean at 38 weeks.
It is most common to classify caesarean sections by the urgency of performing them.
Unlike other forms of caesarean section, the welfare of the fetus is a secondary priority only, and the procedure may be performed even prior to the limit of fetal viability if it is judged to be of benefit to the mother.
Infection can occur in around 8% of women who have caesareans, largely endometritis, urinary tract infections and wound infections.
The Babylonian Talmud, an ancient Jewish religious text, mentions a procedure similar to the caesarean section.
He cut open the belly of the queen and took out the baby, thus saving the baby's life.
In a research study widely publicized, singleton children born earlier than 39 weeks may have developmental problems, including slower learning in reading and math.
Along with this is a similar rise in the risk of emergency hysterectomies at delivery.
* The introduction of uterine suturing by Max Sänger in 1882
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends that if after a women has been provided information on the risk of a planned caesarean section and she still insists on the procedure it should be provided.
The Misgave Ladach method is a surgery technical that may have fewer secondary complications and faster healing, due to the insertion into the muscle.
Although Caesarean sections were performed in Roman times, no classical source records a mother surviving such a delivery.
Adverse outcomes in low risk pregnancies occur in 8.6% of vaginal deliveries and 9.2% of caesarean section deliveries.
The method was presented during a FIGO conference in Montréal in 1994 and then distributed by the University of Uppsala, Sweden, in more than 100 countries.
Single-layer uterine closure is used when the mother does not want a future pregnancy.
These “early term” births were associated with more death during infancy, compared to those occurring at 39 to 41 weeks ("full term").
The World Health Organization officially withdrew its previous recommendation of a 15% C-section rates in June 2010.
C-sections result in a small overall increase in poor outcomes in low risk pregnancies.
It is estimated that 75% of twin pregnancies in the United States were delivered by caesarean section in 2008.
The method of delivery does not appear to have an effect on subsequent sexual function.
A Caesarean section is often performed when a vaginal delivery would put the baby or mother at risk.
Approximately 60-80% of women opting for VBAC will successfully give birth vaginally, which is comparable to the overall vaginal delivery rate in the United States in 2010.
Discouraged practices include manual cervical dilation, any subcutaneous drain, or supplemental oxygen therapy with intent to prevent infection.
As blood vessels and muscles have lateral sway, it is possible to stretch rather than cut them.
* A caesarean hysterectomy consists of a caesarean section followed by the removal of the uterus.
General anesthesia is also preferred in very urgent cases, such as severe fetal distress, when there is no time to perform a regional anesthesia.
For example, the modern German, Norwegian, Danish, Dutch, Swedish, Turkish and Hungarian terms are respectively ''Kaiserschnitt'', ''keisersnitt'', ''kejsersnit'', ''keizersnede'', ''kejsarsnitt'', ''sezaryen'', and ''császármetszés'' (literally: "Emperor's cut").
The procedure is termed ''yotzei dofen''.
However, pain during sexual intercourse is less likely than after vaginal birth, although again, by six months there is no difference.
The risk of adhesion formation is one reason why vaginal delivery is usually considered safer than elective caesarean section where there is no medical indication for section for either maternal or fetal reasons.
Both have higher risks than a vaginal birth with no previous caesarean section.
The EXIT procedure is a specialized surgical delivery procedure used to deliver babies who have airway compression.
What matters most is that all women who need caesarean sections receive them."
Whether a particular type of skin cleaner improves outcomes in unclear.
In cases without medical indications the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the UK Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists recommend a planned vaginal delivery.
It is performed at very early gestations where the lower segment of the uterus is unformed as it is safer in this situation for the baby: but it is rarely performed other than at these early gestations, as the operation is more prone to complications than a low transverse uterine incision.
Regardless of whether the twins are delivered by section or vaginally, the medical literature recommends delivery of dichorionic twins at 38 weeks, and monochorionic twins (identical twins sharing a placenta) by 37 weeks due to the increased risk of stillbirth in monochorionic twins who remain in utero after 37 weeks.
The term has also been explained as deriving from the verb ''caedere'', "to cut", with children delivered this way referred to as ''caesones''.
However, research questions this may not be needed, with some studies indicating peritoneal closure is associated with longer operative time and hospital stay.
One variation is the e/ae/æ variation which reflects American and British English spelling differences.
It was described by Michael Stark, the president of the New European Surgical Academy, at the time he was the director of Misgav Ladach, a general hospital in Jerusalem.
The rate has increased in the United States, to 33% of all births in 2012, up from 21% in 1996.
* Blood transfusion
+ Multiplication table
However, there is an increased risk of abruptio placenta and uterine rupture in subsequent pregnancies for women who underwent this method in prior deliveries.
With the introduction of antiseptics and anesthetics in the 1800s survival of both the mother and baby became common.
Both general and regional anaesthesia (spinal, epidural or combined spinal and epidural anaesthesia) are acceptable for use during Caesarean section.
It may be done with a spinal block such that the women is awake or under general anesthesia.
Regional anaesthesia during Caesarean section is different from the analgesia (pain relief) used in labor and vaginal delivery.
It results in less blood loss and has fewer early and late complications for the mother, as well as allowing her to consider a vaginal birth in the next pregnancy.
Furthermore, 20% to 40% of planned VBAC attempts end in caesarean section being needed, with greater risks of complications in an emergency repeat caesarean section than in an elective repeat caesarean section.
Joseph Walsh has speculated that caesarean section rates have increased due to a relationship between birth weight and maternal pelvis size, positing on the basis of Darwinian-inspired logic that since the advent of successful Caesarean birth over the last 150 years, more mothers with small pelvises and babies with large birth weights have survived and contributed to these traits.
However, there is some basis for supposing that women regularly survived the operation in Roman times.
