Bigger changes came to Cairo under Isma'il Pasha (r. 1863–1879), who continued the modernisation processes started by his grandfather.
Cairo itself was besieged by a British and Ottoman force culminating with the French surrender on 22 June 1801.
The immense debt resulting from Isma'il's projects provided a pretext for increasing European control, which culminated with the British invasion in 1882.
Under the rule of President el-Sisi, in March 2015 plans were announced for another yet-unnamed planned city to be built further east of the existing satellite city of New Cairo, intended to serve as the new capital of Egypt.
The best known teams are Al-Ahly, El Zamalek and Al-Ismaily.
Cairo, like many other mega-cities, suffers from high levels of pollution and traffic.
In modern times, Egypt has enjoyed a strong cinematic tradition since the art of film making was first developed, early in the 20th century.
The city named Cairo (Arabic: ''al-Qahira'') was founded to the northeast of Fustat in 959 AD by the victorious Fatimid army.
Cairo is located in northern Egypt, known as Lower Egypt,  south of the Mediterranean Sea and  west of the Gulf of Suez and Suez Canal.
Al-Ahly and El Zamalek  annual football tournament is perhaps the most watched sports event in Egypt as well as the African-Arab region.
Traffic moves at a relatively fluid pace.
An additional 10 million inhabitants live in close proximity to the city.
Cairo was ranked as the "world's most 24-hour city" in a 2011 study conducted by the social networking site Badoo, placing it well ahead of other famous big cities such as New York, London or Paris.
This fortress, known as Babylon, remains the oldest structure in the city.
The results of this has been a permanent haze over the city with particulate matter in the air reaching over three times normal levels.
Its official name '''' () means "the Vanquisher" or "the Conqueror", supposedly due to the fact that the planet Mars, al-Najm al-Qahir (, literally "the Counquering Star"), was rising at the time when the city was founded, possibly also in reference to the much awaited arrival of Caliph al-Mu'izz li Din Allah who reached Cairo in 973 from Mahdia, the old Fatimid capital.
The Mamluk sultans and elites were eager patrons of religious and scholarly life, commonly building religious or funerary complexes whose functions could include a mosque, madrasa, khanqah (for Sufis), water distribution centers (sabils), and mausoleum for themselves and their families.
Over 2 million protesters were at Cairo's Tahrir square.
On 11 February, following weeks of determined popular protest and pressure, Hosni Mubarak resigned from office.
The low periods created another island at the turn of the 14th century that now composes Zamalek and Gezira.
Cairo is an expanding city, which has led to many environmental problems.
* Cairo Taxi/Yellow Cab
To the north of this Coptic enclave is the Amr ibn al-'As Mosque, the first mosque in Egypt and the most important religious center of former Fustat, founded in 642 AD right after the Arab conquest but rebuilt many times since.
The land on which Cairo was established in 969 (present-day Islamic Cairo) was located underwater just over three hundred years earlier, when Fustat was first built.
Homes, roads, electricity, telephone and sewer services were all suddenly in short supply.
However, during the 16th and 17th centuries, Cairo remained an important economic and cultural centre.
Isma'il also sought to modernize the city, which was merging with neighboring settlements, by establishing a public works ministry, bringing gas and lighting to the city, and opening a theater and opera house.
It consists of Cairo Governorate, parts of Giza Governorate, and parts of Qalyubia Governorate.
The British vacated Egypt two years later, leaving the Ottomans, the Albanians, and the long-weakened Mamluks jostling for control of the country.
This achievement had also placed the Egyptian football team as the #12 best team in the world's FIFA rankings.
Over the years, the Nile gradually shifted westward, providing the site between the eastern edge of the river and the Mokattam highlands on which the city now stands.
Northern and extreme eastern parts of Cairo, which include satellite towns, are among the most recent additions to the city, as they developed in the late-20th and early-21st centuries to accommodate the city's rapid growth.
It is also situated at the nucleus of the Coptic Orthodox community, which separated from the Roman and Byzantine church in the late 4th century.
Despite these efforts, Cairo's population has doubled since the 1960s, reaching close to seven million (with an additional ten million in its urban area).
Concurrently, Cairo has established itself as a political and economic hub for North Africa and the Arab world, with many multinational businesses and organisations, including the Arab League, operating out of the city.
After the original opera house was destroyed, Cairo was without an opera house for nearly two decades until the opening of the new Cairo Opera House in 1988.
Dewpoints in the hottest months range from  in June to  in August.
* Ramses Railway Station
In 1250 slave soldiers, known as the Mamluks, seized control of Egypt and like many of their predecessors established Cairo as the capital of their new dynasty.
The Museum of Egyptian Antiquities, known commonly as the Egyptian Museum, is home to the most extensive collection of ancient Egyptian antiquities in the world.
It is still occupied by the military today, but is now open as a tourist attraction comprising, notably, the National Military Museum, the 14th century Mosque of al-Nasir Muhammad, and the 19th century Mosque of Muhammad Ali which commands a dominant position on Cairo's skyline.
Each of them has written for the cinema.
The Cairo International Stadium was built in 1960 and its multi-purpose sports complex that houses the main football stadium, an indoor stadium, several satellite fields that held several regional, continental and global games, including the African Games, U17 Football World Championship and was one of the stadiums scheduled that hosted the 2006 Africa Cup of Nations which was played in January 2006.
The Association ran the festival for seven years until 1983.
The city's metropolitan area is the largest in the Middle East and the Arab world, and 15th-largest in the world, and is associated with Ancient Egypt, as the famous Giza pyramid complex and the ancient city of Memphis are located in its geographical area.
However, while Muhammad Ali initiated the construction of public buildings in the city, those reforms had minimal effect on Cairo's landscape.
In the following days Tahrir Square continued to be the primary destination for protests in Cairo as it took place following a popular uprising that began on Tuesday, 25 January 2011 and is still continuing as of February 2012.
With a population of 6.76 million spread over , Cairo is by far the largest city in Egypt.
The city also suffers from a high level of land pollution.
Because of the Nile's movement, the newer parts of the city—Garden City, Downtown Cairo, and Zamalek—are located closest to the riverbank.
The air pollution in Cairo is a matter of serious concern.
Several notable buildings surround the square including, the American University in Cairo's downtown campus, the Mogamma governmental administrative Building, the headquarters of the Arab League, the Nile Ritz Carlton Hotel, and the Egyptian Museum.
Until his death in March 2012, Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria was the leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church, whose residence is in Cairo.
This achievement lead to the President of the Festival again contacting the FIAPF with the request that a competition should be included at the 1991 Festival.
* Cairo Transportation Authority CTA
Most residents (89%) are Sunni Muslim.
There are flyovers and bridges, such as the Sixth of October bridge that, when the traffic is not heavy, allow fast means of transportation from one side of the city to the other.
On occasion, sewage has escaped onto the streets to create a health hazard.
This dream came true on Monday 16 August 1976, when the first Cairo International Film Festival was launched by the Egyptian Association of Film Writers and Critics, headed by Kamal El-Mallakh.
Located near the Nile Delta, modern Cairo was founded in 969 CE by Jawhar al-Siqilli ("the Sicilian") of the Fatimid dynasty, but the land composing the present-day city was the site of ancient national capitals whose remnants remain visible in parts of Old Cairo.
Cairo has an extensive road network, rail system, subway system and maritime services.
There are over 4,500,000 cars on the streets of Cairo, 60% of which are over 10 years old, and therefore lack modern emission cutting features like catalytic converters.
In 1995, the first environmental acts were introduced and the situation has seen some improvement with 36 air monitoring stations and emissions tests on cars.
Egypt has also been a fount of Arabic literature, producing some of the 20th century's greatest Arab writers such as Taha Hussein and Tawfiq al-Hakim to Nobel Laureate, novelist Naguib Mahfouz.
* Cairo International Airport
Between 1882 and 1937, the population of Cairo more than tripled—from 347,000 to 1.3 million—and its area increased from .
In March 2015, plans were announced for a yet-unnamed planned city to be built east of Cairo, in an undeveloped area of the Cairo Governorate, which would serve as the administrative and financial capital of Egypt.
Being at the heart of Cairo, the square witnessed several major protests over the years.
Cairo is also in every respect the centre of Egypt, as it has been almost since its founding in 969 AD.
Continued civil war allowed an Albanian named Muhammad Ali Pasha to ascend to the role of commander and eventually, with the approval of the religious establishment, viceroy of Egypt in 1805.
During this time, urban Cairo, spurred by new bridges and transport links, continued to expand to include the upscale neighbourhoods of Garden City, Zamalek, and Heliopolis.
Other major squash-playing venues are The Shooting Club (Nadi el Seid) in Dokki, The Maadi Club in Maadi and Wadi Degla in Degla.
It was enclosed by a circuit of walls, which were rebuilt in stone in the late 11th century AD by the vizir Badr al-Gamali, parts of which survive today at Bab Zuwayla in the south and Bab al-Futuh and Bab al-Nasr in the north.
The famous Khan al-Khalili (see below) is a commercial hub which also integrated caravanserais (also known as khans).
The Boulaq district, which lies in the northern part of the city, was born out of a major 16th-century port and is now a major industrial centre.
A natural progression from the active theatre scene of the time, cinema rapidly evolved into a vast motion picture industry.
Another Abbasid construction, the Nilometer on Rhoda Island, is the oldest original structure in Cairo, built in 862 AD.
Today, al-Azhar University is the foremost center of Islamic learning in the world and one of Egypt's largest universities with campuses across the country.
The areas around the old walled city and around the Citadel are characterized by hundreds of mosques, tombs, madrasas, mansions, caravanserais, and fortifications dating from the Islamic era and are often referred to as "Islamic Cairo", especially in English travel literature.
The mosque itself retains significant Fatimid elements but has been added to and expanded in subsequent centuries, notably by the Mamluk sultans Qaitbay and al-Ghuri and by Abd al-Rahman Katkhuda in the 18th century.
The dangerously high levels of mercury in the city's water system has global health officials concerned over related health risks.
The great majority of publishing houses and media outlets and nearly all film studios are there, as are half of the nation's hospital beds and universities.
Cairo traffic is known to be overwhelming and overcrowded.
Most of the sports federations of the country are also located in the city suburbs, including the Egyptian Football Association.
By the 16th century, Cairo also had high-rise apartment buildings where the two lower floors were for commercial and storage purposes and the multiple stories above them were rented out to tenants.
Meanwhile, Cairo flourished as a centre of Islamic scholarship and a crossroads on the spice trade route among the civilisations in Afro-Eurasia.
The most prominent architectural heritage of medieval Cairo, however, dates from the Mamluk period, from 1250 to 1517 AD.
One of the two trains was travelling from Cairo to Assiut, while the other was said to have been en route to Fayoum from Giza.
This area of Cairo is so-named as it contains the remains of the ancient Roman fortress of Babylon and also overlaps the original site of Fustat, the first Arab settlement in Egypt (7th century AD) and the predecessor of later Cairo.
The Mamluks, and the later Ottomans, also built wikalas or caravanserais to house merchants and goods due to the important role of trade and commerce in Cairo's economy.
The uprising took place in Cairo, Alexandria, and in other cities in Egypt, following the Tunisian revolution that resulted in the overthrow of the long-time Tunisian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali.
The majority of the nation's commerce is generated there, or passes through the city.
By 1340, Cairo had a population of close to half a million, making it the largest city west of China.
Construction projects initiated by the Mamluks pushed the city outward while also bringing new infrastructure to the centre of the city.
In 1998, the Festival took place under the presidency of one of Egypt's leading actors, Hussein Fahmy, who was appointed by the Minister of Culture, Farouk Hosni, after the death of Saad El-Din Wahba.
While western Cairo is dominated by wide boulevards, open spaces, and modern architecture of European influence, the eastern half, having grown haphazardly over the centuries, is dominated by small lanes, crowded tenements, and Islamic architecture.
Snowfall is extremely rare; a small amount of graupel, widely believed to be snow, fell on Cairo's easternmost suburbs on 13 December 2013, the first time Cairo's area received this kind of precipitation in many decades.
The Cairo Governorate was just north of the Helwan Governorate from 2008 when some Cairo's southern districts, including Maadi and New Cairo, were split off and annexed into the new governorate, to 2011 when the Helwan Governorate was reincorporated into the Cairo Governorate.
For more than 500 years of recorded history, Egypt has fascinated the West and inspired its creative talents from play writer William Shakespeare, poet and dramatist John Dryden, and novelist and poet Lawrence Durrell to film producer Cecil B. DeMille.
Around 55 people were injured.
File:Flickr - HuTect ShOts - Masjid of Sultan Hassan مسجد ومدرسة السلطان حسن - Cairo - Egypt - 28 05 2010 (2).jpg|The courtyard of the Sultan Hassan mosque-madrasa.
It was built in 876–879 AD in a style inspired by the Abbasid capital of Samarra in Iraq.
The Cairo Geniza is an accumulation of almost 200,000 Jewish manuscripts that were found in the genizah of the Ben Ezra synagogue (built 882) of Fustat, Egypt (now Old Cairo), the Basatin cemetery east of Old Cairo, and a number of old documents that were bought in Cairo in the later 19th century.
File:Bayn al-Qasrayn2.JPG|The Qalawun mausoleum complex at Bayn al-Qasrayn.
File:Kairo Ibn Tulun Moschee BW 5.jpg|Ibn Tulun Mosque, courtyard and minaret
Tension between members of different religions has increased recently.
The metropolis began to encroach on the fertile Nile Delta, prompting the government to build desert satellite towns and devise incentives for city-dwellers to move to them.
It is also the location of several important religious shrines such as the al-Hussein Mosque (whose shrine is believed to hold the head of Husayn ibn Ali), the Mausoleum of Imam al-Shafi'i (founder of the Shafi'i madhhab, one of the primary schools of thought in Sunni Islamic jurisprudence), the Tomb of Sayyida Ruqayya, the Mosque of Sayyida Nafisa, and others.
Today, the site of ''Geziret al-Fil'' is occupied by the Shubra district.
Sometimes the city is informally referred to as '''' (; ).
Land reclamation efforts by the Mamluks and Ottomans further contributed to expansion on the east bank of the river.
Cairo has a very poor dispersion factor because of lack of rain and its layout of tall buildings and narrow streets, which create a bowl effect.
Twenty thousand buses have also been commissioned to the city to improve congestion levels, which are very high.
Wind storms can be frequent, bringing Saharan dust into the city, sometimes from March to May (see Khamasin) and the air often becomes uncomfortably dry.
Today, the Khan el-Khalili is a major tourist attraction and popular stop for tour groups.
Local news agencies reported at least 25 people dead.
Cairo has the oldest and largest film and music industries in the Arab world, as well as the world's second-oldest institution of higher learning, al-Azhar University.
Cairo, as well as neighbouring Giza, has been established as Egypt's main centre for medical treatment, and despite some exceptions, has the most advanced level of medical care in the country.
On 25 October 2009 a passenger train ran into another one near Giza, just outside Cairo.
Many international media, businesses, and organizations have regional headquarters in the city; the Arab League has had its headquarters in Cairo for most of its existence.
Cairo also has many unregistered lead and copper smelters which heavily pollute the city.
The area is also known as Coptic Cairo as it holds a high concentration of old Christian churches including the Hanging Church, the Greek Orthodox Church of St. George, and other Christian or Coptic buildings, most of which are located over the site of the ancient Roman fortress.
The Heliopolis Club in Heliopolis is the home of current world #1 Ramy Ashour and his brother, world #24, Hisham Ashour.
Many medieval elements remain today, including the ornate Mamluk-style gateways.
Most Christians are Coptic Orthodox.
Ruling from Constantinople, Sultan Selim I relegated Egypt to a mere province, with Cairo as its capital.
The request was granted.
Cairo's political influence diminished significantly after the Ottomans supplanted Mamluk power over Egypt in 1517.
On October 2008, the Egyptian Rugby Federation was officially formed and granted membership into the International Rugby Board.
This astonishing growth until recently surged well ahead of city services.
In 1169 Saladin was appointed as the new vizier of Egypt by the Fatimids and two years later he would seize power from the family of the last Fatimid caliph, al-'Āḍid.
Old Cairo, located south of the centre, holds the remnants of Fustat and the heart of Egypt's Coptic Christian community, Coptic Cairo.
Cairo's hospitals include the JCI-accredited As-Salaam International Hospital—Corniche El Nile, Maadi (Egypt's largest private hospital with 350 beds), Ain Shams University Hospital, Dar El Fouad Hospital, as well as Kasr El Aini Hospital.
During that time, Jawhar also commissioned the construction of the al-Azhar Mosque, which developed into the third-oldest university in the world.
Trams in Greater Cairo (Heliopolis and Nasr City) exists now, while Cairo trolleybus was closed.
Football is the most popular sport in Egypt, and Cairo has a number of sporting teams that compete in national and regional leagues.
Among the best-known examples of Mamluk monuments in Cairo are the huge Mosque-Madrasa of Sultan Hasan, the Mosque of Amir al-Maridani, the Mosque of Sultan al-Mu'ayyad (whose twin minarets were built above the gate of Bab Zuwayla), the Sultan Al-Ghuri complex, the funerary complex of Sultan Qaytbay in the Northern Cemetery, and the trio of monuments in the Bayn al-Qasrayn area comprising the complex of Sultan al-Mansur Qalawun, the Madrasa of al-Nasir Muhammad, and the Madrasa of Sultan Barquq.
While the Fustat fire successfully protected the city of Cairo, a continuing power struggle between Shawar, King Amalric I of Jerusalem, and the Zengid general Shirkuh led to the downfall of the Fatimid establishment.
Drawing inspiration from Paris, Isma'il environs a city of maidans and wide avenues; due to financial constraints, only some of them, in the area now composing Downtown Cairo, came to fruition.
This was followed by a third consecutive win in Angola 2010, making Egypt the only country with a record 3-consecutive and 7-total Continental Football Competition winner.
(A caravanserai is a hotel for traders, and usually the focal point for any surrounding area.)
In summer, the highs rarely surpass , and lows drop to about .
It is estimated that 10,000 to 25,000 people a year in Cairo die due to air pollution-related diseases.
In 968, the Fatimids were led by General Jawhar al-Siqilli with his Kutama army, to establish a new capital for the Fatimid dynasty.
Road transport is facilitated by personal vehicles, taxi cabs, privately owned public buses and Cairo microbuses.
It was first named Ismailia Square, after the 19th-century ruler Khedive Ismail, who commissioned the new downtown district's 'Paris on the Nile' design.
Around the turn of the 4th century, as Memphis was continuing to decline in importance, the Romans established a fortress town along the east bank of the Nile.
The areas, which are home to most of Cairo's embassies, are surrounded on the north, east, and south by the older parts of the city.
The area around present-day Cairo, especially Memphis, had long been a focal point of Ancient Egypt due to its strategic location just upstream from the Nile Delta.
The western bank of the Nile is commonly included within the urban area of Cairo, but it composes the city of Giza and the Giza Governorate.
Tahrir Square was founded during the mid 19th century with the establishment of modern downtown Cairo.
At , it is  higher than the Great Pyramid of Giza, which stands some  to the southwest.
6th of October City, west of Cairo, and New Cairo, east of Cairo, are major urban developments which have been built to accommodate additional growth and development of the Cairo area.
As the first Sultan of Egypt, Saladin established the Ayyubid dynasty, based in Cairo, and aligned Egypt with the Abbasids, who were based in Baghdad.
Egypt later won the competition and went on to win the next edition In Ghana (2008) making the Egyptian and Ghanaian national teams the only teams to win the African Nations Cup Back to back which resulted in Egypt winning the title for a record number of six times in the history of African Continental Competition.
The Cairo Tower is a free-standing tower with a revolving restaurant at the top.
Still, when Napoleon arrived in Cairo in 1798, the city's population was less than 300,000, forty percent lower than it was at the height of Mamluk—and Cairene—influence in the mid-14th century.
Cairo holds one of the greatest concentrations of historical monuments of Islamic architecture in the world.
:''For a complete list, see Visitor attractions in Cairo, list of mosques
Analysts trying to grasp the magnitude of the change coined terms like "hyper-urbanization".
This year the festival a milestone of 30 years in an annual celebration and examination of the state of cinema in the world today.
Cairo failed at the applicant stage when bidding for the 2008 Summer Olympic Games, which was hosted in Beijing, China.
It has 136,000 items on display, with many more hundreds of thousands in its basement storerooms.
It was the center of Egyptian government and residence of its rulers until 1874, when Khedive Isma'il moved to 'Abdin Palace.
Al-Azhar University, based in Cairo, is considered the leading authority of Sunni Islam worldwide.
However, Cairo did host the 2007 Pan Arab Games.
Two train cars (the fourth and fifth ones) are reserved for women only, although women may ride in any car they want.
The city also suffers from water pollution as the sewer system tends to fail and overflow.
In recent years, a mysterious black cloud (as Egyptians refer to it) appeared over Cairo every Autumn and causes serious respiratory diseases and eye irritations for the city's citizens.
Although no longer on the spice route, the city facilitated the transportation of Yemeni coffee and Indian textiles, primarily to Anatolia, North Africa, and the Balkans.
The Khedivial Opera House or Royal Opera House was the original opera house in Cairo, Egypt.
Cairo produces 10,000 tons of waste material each day, 4,000 tons of which is not collected or managed.
This once again is a huge health hazard and the Egyptian Government is looking for ways to combat this.
Rainfall is sparse and only happens in the colder months, but sudden showers do cause harsh flooding.
The city was devastated during the 1952 riots known as the Cairo Fire or Black Saturday, which saw the destruction of nearly 700 shops, movie theatres, casinos and hotels in Downtown Cairo.
Gizira Club in Zamalek is where former world #1 Amr Shabana and former world #1 Karim Darwish practice.
There are new sports clubs in the area of New Cairo (one hour far from Cairo's down town), these are Al Zohour sporting club, Wadi Degla sporting club and Platinum Club.
Many of Cairo's oldest Coptic churches, including the Hanging Church, are located along the fortress walls in a section of the city known as Coptic Cairo.
'''Cairo''' ( ;  ''al-Qāhirah,''  ''Kahire'') is the capital and largest city of Egypt.
They play their home games at Cairo International Stadium or Naser Stadium, which is Egypt's 2nd largest stadium, Cairo's largest one and one of the largest stadiums in the world.
A local resident, Samhi Saleh Abdel Al, told reporters that ''"the first train stopped after hitting a cow and 10 minutes later the second train arrived at full speed."''
During his reign, Saladin also constructed the Cairo Citadel, which served as the seat of the Egyptian government until the mid-19th century.
Greater Cairo's volatile aromatic hydrocarbon levels are higher than many other similar cities.
It can get very crowded during rush hour.
The presidents of the Festival since it was founded in 1976 are Saad El-Din Wahba, Hussein Fahmy and Sherif El Shoubashy.
New development includes several high-end residential developments.
Both teams are known as the "rivals" of Egyptian football, and are the first and the second champions in Africa and the Arab world.
It was dedicated on 1 November 1869 and burned down on 28 October 1971.
However, the most notable event in the square was being the focal point of the 2011 Egyptian Revolution against former president Hosni Mubarak.
Egypt was conquered from their base in Ifriqiya and a new fortified city northeast of Fustat was established.
The location of the ancient city is the suburb of Ain Shams (, literally "Sun-Eye" or "Eye of the Sun").
With these credentials, it was clear that Cairo should aim to hold an international film festival.
While the first mosque in Egypt was the Mosque of Amr ibn al-As in Fustat, the Mosque of Ibn Tulun is the oldest mosque to retain its original form and is a rare example of Abbasid architecture, from the classical period of Islamic civilization.
Cairo accounts for 11% of Egypt's population and 22% of her economy (PPP).
It was during this same period that al-Azhar University reached the predominance among Islamic schools that it continues to hold today; pilgrims on their way to hajj often attested to the superiority of the institution, which had become associated with Egypt's body of Islamic scholars.
Four years later, the journalist and writer Cherif El-Shoubashy became president.
However, the origins of the modern city are generally traced back to a series of settlements in the first millennium.
Low periods of the Nile during the 11th century continued to add to the landscape of Cairo; a new island, known as ''Geziret al-Fil'', first appeared in 1174, but eventually became connected to the mainland.
The Fatimids built a separate palatial city which contained their palaces and institutions of government.
Cairene merchants were instrumental in bringing goods to the barren Hejaz, especially during the annual hajj to Mecca.
