Principal imports in the early 20th century included cotton and silk goods, coal, iron and steel, petroleum, timber, raw wool, cotton yarn and cork.
The church is dedicated to the Virgin, and built in the form of a cross, consisting of a nave and four aisles— The old grand altar dated to 1628 and was built from Carrara marble wrecked on the coast, during its transit from Genoa to Antwerp.
It was rebuilt in 1640.
Every month, Casino Le Touquet hosts a dinner and dance cabaret.
Gare de Calais-Ville is the nearest station to the port with trains to Gare de Boulogne-Ville and either Gare de Lille Flandres or Gare de Lille Europe.
By day it is easily distinguishable from other coastal lighthouses by its white color and black lantern.
During the ensuing German occupation, it became the command post for German forces in the Pas-de-Calais/Flanders region and was very heavily fortified, as it was generally believed by the Germans that the Allies would invade at that point.
After the war there was little rebuilding of the historic city and most buildings were modern ones.
This may have helped Operation ''Dynamo'', the evacuation of Allied forces at Dunkirk, as 10th Panzer would have been involved on the Dunkirk perimeter had it not been busy at Calais.
Local bus services are provided by STCE.
The building parts have also been listed as a series of historic monuments by government decree of 26 June 2003, including its roofs and belfry, main hall, glass roof, the staircase, corridor serving the first floor, the rooms on the first floor (including decoration): the wedding room, the VIP lounge, the lounge of the council and the cabinet room.
Julius Caesar mustered 800 to 1,000 sailing boats, five legions and some 2,000 horses at Calais due to its strategic position to attack Britannia.
It was annexed by Edward III of England in 1347 and grew into a thriving centre for wool production.
''Parc Richelieu'', a garden behind the war memorial, was built in 1862 on the old city ramparts and redesigned in 1956.
When the French attacked, they were able to surprise the English at the critical strongpoint of Fort Nieulay and the sluice gates, which could have flooded the attackers, remained unopened.
This event is commemorated in ''The Burghers of Calais'' (''Les Bourgeois de Calais''), one of the most famous sculptures by Auguste Rodin, erected in the city in 1895.
As a fishing port, Calais has several notable fishing markets including Les Délices de la Mer and Huîtrière Calaisenne on the Boulevard La Fayette, the latter of which is noted for its oysters, lobster and crabs from Brittany.
Although Calais is by far the largest city in Pas-de-Calais, the department's prefecture is its third-largest city of Arras.
In the 1930s, the town was known for being a politically socialist stronghold.
The lantern was finally replaced by a new lighthouse on 15 October 1848.
The lighthouse was classified as a historical monument on 22 November 2010.
Many artists have been inspired by its landscapes, among them the composer Henri Dutilleux, the writers Victor Hugo and Charles Dickens, and the painters J. M. W. Turner, Carolus-Duran, Maurice Boitel and Eugène Boudin.
The Emile Fournier et Fils market on the Rue Mouron sells mainly smoked fish including salmon, trout, herring and halibut.
The tower was a main viewing point for the Anglo-French Survey (1784–1790) which linked the Paris Observatory with the Royal Greenwich Observatory using trigonometry.
The governorship or Captaincy of Calais was a lucrative and highly prized public office; the famous Dick Whittington was simultaneously Lord Mayor of the City of London and Mayor of the Staple in 1407.
The British historian Geoffrey Elton once remarked "Calais—expensive and useless—was better lost than kept".
The tower was repaired in 1606, and then had the purpose of serving as a hall to accommodate the merchants of Calais.
The old part of the town, Calais proper (known as Calais-Nord), is situated on an artificial island surrounded by canals and harbours.
The hall has stained glass windows and numerous paintings and exquisite decor.
The Calais Lighthouse (Le phare de Calais) was built in 1848, replacing the old watch tower as the lighthouse of the port.
In 1770, a bell identical to the original bell of 1348 was cast.
Calais was a particularly important centre in the production and trade of wool and cloth, which outweighed the costs of maintaining the town as part of England.
Calais possesses direct rail links to Paris,  to the south.
The British Expeditionary Force or BEF arrived in Calais on its way to the nearby frontline cutting through Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Flanders.
Theatres and cultural centres include Le théâtre municipal, Le Centre Culturel Gérard Philipe, Le Conservatoire à rayonnement départemental (CRD), L'auditorium Didier Lockwood, L'École d'Art de Calais, Le Channel, Le Cinéma Alhambra and La Médiathèque municipale.
The commune of Calais is divided into 13 ''quartier''s :
Calais–Dunkerque Airport is located at Marck,  east north east of Calais.
The town came to be called the "brightest jewel in the English crown" owing to its great importance as the gateway for the tin, lead, lace and wool trades (or "staples").
It was also used as a launch site for V1 flying bombs and for much of the war, the Germans used the region as the site for railway guns used to bombard the south-eastern corner of England.
The town exports in the early 20th century were lace, chemicals, paper, wines, especially champagne, spirits, hay, straw, wool, potatoes, woven goods, fruit, glass-ware, lace and metal-ware.
Though sparing the lives of the delegation members, King Edward drove out most of the French inhabitants, and settled the town with English.
It is known for its scenic cliffs such as Cape Blanc Nez and Cape Gris Nez and for its wide area of dunes.
The town was virtually razed to the ground during World War II, when in May 1940, it was a strategic bombing target of the invading German forces who took the town during the Siege of Calais.
The town came to be called the "brightest jewel in the English crown" owing to its great importance as the gateway for the tin, lead, cloth and wool trades (or "staples").
Since 2008 they have played at the Stade de l'Épopée, a stadium which holds about 12,000 spectators.
'''Calais''' ( , traditionally ; ; ; ) is a town and major ferry port in northern France in the department of Pas-de-Calais, of which it is a sub-prefecture.
The White Cliffs of Dover can easily be seen on a clear day from Calais.
Cité internationale de la Dentelle et de la Mode de Calais is a lace and fashion museum located in an old Boulart factory on the canalside and contains workshops, a library and a restaurant and regularly puts on fashion shows.
Between 26 May and 4 June 1940, some 330,000 Allied troops escaped from the Germans at Dunkirk.
The city's proximity to England has made it a major port for centuries.
One of these victims, Delpierre Auguste, (1889–1910), drowned at age 21 before the beach at Calais; a dock in the city is named for him.
It was arguably the only church in the English perpendicular style in France.
In 1596, the fort was captured by the Spanish Netherlands until May 1598 when it was returned to the French following the Treaty of Vervins.
The region around Calais, then-known as the ''Calaisis'', was renamed the ''Pays Reconquis'' ("Reconquered Country") in commemoration of its recovery by the French.
Basketball is popular in Calais with the teams Calais Basket (male) and COB Calais (female) as is volleyball with the Lis Calais (male) and Stella Calais (female) teams.
Although the early history of habitation in the area is limited, the Romans called the settlement ''Caletum''.
Maintaining Calais was a costly business that was frequently tested by the forces of France and the Duchy of Burgundy, with the Franco-Burgundian border running nearby.
Calais also has Les Seagulls, an American football team.
The town, by then largely in ruins, was liberated by General Daniel Spry's 3rd Canadian Infantry Division between 25 September and 1 October 1944.
The square, massive Norman tower has three-arched belfry windows on each face, surmounted by corner turrets, and a conically-shaped tower of octagonal proportions, topped again by a short steeple.
The people live there while they attempt to enter the United Kingdom by stowing away on lorries, ferries, cars, or trains travelling through the Port of Calais or the Eurotunnel Calais Terminal.
Due to its height, from the late 17th century it became an important watchout post for the city for centuries until 1905; the last keeper of the tower was forced to leave in 1926.
Monument "Jacquard" was erected on the square in 1910, opposite the entrance to the Calais theatre.
It is the principal ferry crossing point between England and France, with the vast majority of Channel crossings being made between Dover and Calais.
It is arguably the only church built in the English perpendicular style in all of France.
The altar-piece, the Assumption, was often attributed to Anthony van Dyck, though in reality it is by Van Sulden; whilst the painting over the side altar, believed to be by Peter Paul Rubens.
During the five years 1901–1905 the average annual value of exports was £8,388,000 (£6,363,000 in the years 1896–1900), of imports £4,145,000 (£3,759,000 in 1896–1900).
In 1189, Richard the Lionheart is documented to have landed at Calais on his journey to the Third Crusade.
Temperature ranges are moderate and the winters are mild with unstable weather.
During World War II, the Germans built massive bunkers along the coast in preparation for launching missiles on England.
Since 1999 or earlier, an increasingly large number of migrants and refugees have started to arrive in the vicinity of Calais, where they remain living in the ''Calais jungle,'' the nickname given to a series of makeshift camps.
Directly in front of the town hall is a bronze cast of ''Les Bourgeois de Calais'' ("The Burghers of Calais"), a sculpture by Auguste Rodin to commemorate six men who were to have been executed by Edward III in 1347.
In 1805 it was a staging area for Napoleon's troops for several months during his planned invasion of the United Kingdom.
The rugby club in Calais is Amicale Rugby Calaisien.
The first document mentioning the existence of this community is the town charter granted by Mathieu d'Alsace in 1181 to Gerard de Guelders, Count of Boulogne; Calais thus became part of the county of Boulogne.
Armand Fallières, president of the Republic, and his government came to Calais for a state funeral for its 27 victims.
The commune of Calais is bordered by the English channel to the north, Sangatte and Coquelles to the west, Coulogne to the south and Marck to the east.
On 7 January 1558, king Henry II of France sent forces led by Francis, Duke of Guise, who laid siege to Calais.
The climate is temperate oceanic in Calais.
On average, ships sail from the port every 30 minutes.
As well as the large port, the town is served by three railway stations: Gare de Calais-Fréthun, Gare de Calais-Ville, and Gare des Fontinettes, the former being the first stop on mainland Europe of the Eurostar line.
It was completed in 1679, with the purpose to protect the bridge of Nieulay crossing the Hames River.
This tower has been classified as a historic monument since 6 November 1931.
These include the Musée des Beaux-Arts et de la Dentelle de Calais, Cité internationale de la Dentelle et de la Mode de Calais and the Musée de la Seconde Guerre Mondiale (World War II museum).
On 9 February 1363 the town was made a staple port.
The 55 metre high tower was electrified in 1883 and automated in 1992.
The town centre, which has seen significant regeneration over the past decade, is dominated by its distinctive town hall (Hôtel de Ville) at Place du Soldat Inconnu.
The fort was briefly the site of a low-key scuffle with Germans in May 1940.
On the first floor of the façade are statues which represent the performing arts subjects of Poetry, Comedy, Dance and Music.
Use of the term is reminiscent of the Spanish Reconquista, with which the French were certainly familiar—and, since it occurred in the context of a war with Spain (Philip II of Spain was at the time Queen Mary's consort), might have been intended as a deliberate snub.
The pulpit and reading-desk, richly sculptured in oak, is another well-executed piece of ecclesiastical workmanship from St. Omers.
An earthquake in 1580 split the tower in two, and at one time it threatened to collapse completely.
The Port of Calais was the first cable ship port in Europe and is the fourth largest port in France and the largest for passenger traffic.
Calais was improved by the Count of Flanders in 997 and fortified by the Count of Boulogne in 1224.
The core area of the city is divided into the Old Town area within the old city walls, and the younger suburbs of St. Pierre, which are connected by a boulevard.
The main centre of night activity in Calais is at the Casino Le Touquet’s on the Rue Royale and at the 555 Club.
In 1943 they built massive bunkers along the coast in preparation for launching missiles on the southeast of England.
General Murray appointed Sir Manley Power to oversee the evacuation of British troops from France.
It contains the Lancaster Tower, a name often given to the fort itself.
A previous town hall had been erected in 1818.
He agreed, however, to spare them, on condition that six of the principal citizens would come to him, bareheaded and barefooted and with ropes around their necks, and give themselves up to death.
Vauban, who visited the fort some time in the 1680s, described it as "a home for owls, and place to hold the Sabbath" rather than a fortification.
The church was assigned as a historic monument by decree of 10 September 1913, only to have its stained glass smashed during a Zeppelin bombardment on 15 January 1915, falling through the roof.
Its customs revenues amounted at times to a third of the English government's revenue, with wool being the most important element by far.
South east of the Place is the church of Notre-Dame, built during the English occupancy of Calais.
South of the Place and opposite the Parc St Pierre is the Hôtel-de-ville (the town hall), and the belfry from the 16th and early 17th centuries.
The stalemate was broken by the victory of the French crown over Burgundy following Joan of Arc's final battle in the Siege of Compiègne in 1430, and the later incorporation of the duchy into France.
Fort Risban, located on the coast on the Avenue Raymond Poincaré at the port entrance, was built by the English to prevent supplies reaching Calais by sea during the siege in November 1346 and continued to be occupied by them until 1558 when Calais was restored to France.
It was damaged in 1658 when a young stable boy set fire to it, while it was temporarily being used as royal stables during a visit of King Louis XIV.
The World War II museum is located at Parc St Pierre opposite the town hall and south of the train station.
Angered, the English king demanded reprisals against the town's citizens for holding out for so long and ordered that the town's population be killed ''en masse''.
Aside from being an important port and boarding point between France and England, it is at the nucleus of many major railway and highway networks and connected by road to Arras, Lens, Béthune and St. Omer.
Today, Calais is visited by more than 10 million annually.
The population of the metropolitan area at the 2010 census was 126,395.
Cordial relations had been restored by that time and on 3 December the mayor of Calais wrote a letter to Power to express thanks for his "considerate treatment of the French and of the town of Calais during the embarkation."
There are still two major lace factories in Calais with around 700 looms and 3000 employees.
The French end of the Channel Tunnel is situated in the vicinity of Calais, in Coquelles some  to the west of the town.
In September 1552, the English adventurer Thomas Stukley, who had been for some time in the French service, betrayed to the authorities in London some French plans for the capture of Calais, to be followed by a descent upon England.
Saint-Inglevert Airfield is located at Saint-Inglevert,  south west of Calais.
It has a height of 35–39 metres (sources differ).
Only at the end of English occupation did it take the name of Place d'Armes.
It contains elements of Flemish, Gothic, Anglo-Norman and Tudor architecture.
It houses police offices.
Of its population of about 12,000 people, as many as 5,400 were recorded as having been connected with the wool trade.
From October to December 1818, the British army used Calais as their departing port to return home after occupying post-Waterloo France.
The Tour du Guet (Watch Tower), situated in Calais Nord on the Places d'Armes, is one of the few surviving pre-war buildings.
Stukley himself might have been the author of these plans.
The 194-metre-long structure contains twenty rooms with relics and photographs related to World War II, and one room dedicated to World War I.
Calais contains several museums.
During the First World War, it served as a military observation post and narrowly missed destruction during World War II.
In May 1940, it was a key objective of the invading German forces and became the scene of a last-ditch defence—the Siege of Calais—which diverted a sizable amount of German forces for several days immediately prior to the Battle of Dunkirk.
Le théâtre municipal or Calais Theatre is located on the Boulevard Lafayette and was built in 1903 on a plot of land which was used as a cemetery between 1811 and 1871.
The loss was regarded by Queen Mary I of England as a dreadful misfortune.
Calais overlooks the Strait of Dover, the narrowest point in the English Channel, which is only  wide here, and is the closest French town to England.
It is a bronze sculpture, attributed to Edward Lormier.
The cast was erected in 1895, funded by a public grant of 10,000 francs.
Calais is served by an airport and an airfield.
Calais was a territorial possession of England until its capture by France in 1558.
There are at least seven colleges in the city, such as Collège Martin Luther King on Rue Martin Luther King, Collège Nationalisé Lucien Vadez on Avenue Yervant Toumaniantz, Collège Les Dentelliers on Rue Gaillard, College Jean Mace on Rue Maréchaux, Collège République on Place République, Collège Vauban on Rue Orléansville, and Collège Privé Mixte Jeanne d'Arc on Rue Champailler.
In 1691, an 1800 cubic metre cistern was added to the church under orders by Vauban.
The municipal charter of Calais, previously granted by the Countess of Artois, was reconfirmed by Edward that year (1347).
Like the town hall it is one of the city's most prominent landmarks.
The building experienced extensive damage during World War II, and was partially rebuilt, although much of the old altar and furnishings were not replaced.
There is also the SOC club which caters in a range of sports including athletics, handball and football and Yacht Club de Calais, a yachting club.
It contained eighteen figures, the two standing on either side of the altar-piece—representing St. Louis and Charlemagne.
The casino features slot machines, blackjack, roulette, and poker facilities.
The building is a former Nazi bunker and wartime military headquarters, built in 1941 by the Todt Organisation.
The monument was dedicated on June 22, 1913.
Fort Nieulay, located along the Avenue Roger Salengro originally dated to the 12th or 13th century.
Place d'Armes is one of the largest squares in the city of Calais, adjoins the watchtower, and during medieval times was once the heart of the city.
The town was captured by the Spanish on 24 April 1596 in an invasion mounted from the nearby Spanish Netherlands by Archduke Albert of Austria, but it was returned to France under the Treaty of Vervins in May 1598.
In 1360 the Treaty of Brétigny assigned Guînes, Marck and Calais—collectively the "Pale of Calais"—to English rule in perpetuity, but this assignment was informally and only partially implemented.
3,000 British and 800 French troops, assisted by Royal Navy warships, held out from 22 to 27 May 1940 against the 10th Panzer Division.
Calais was a key port for the supply of arms and reinforcements to the Western Front.
The people are a mix of refugees, asylum seekers and economic migrants from Darfur, Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Eritrea and other troubled areas of the world.
During the English occupation (1347–1558), it became known as Market Square (place du Marché).
Free car parking facilities are available in front of the Calais ferry terminal and the maximum stay is three days.
Both Louis XIII and Cardinal Richelieu at one time considered expanding the citadel and Calais into a great walled city for military harbour purposes but the proposals came to nothing.
The modern part of the town, St-Pierre, lies to the south and south-east.
Dating from 1229, when Philip I, Count of Boulogne, built the fortifications of Calais, it is one of the oldest monuments of Calais, although the oldest remaining traces date to 1302.
Rodin (who based his design on a fourteenth-century account by Jean Froissart) intended to evoke the viewer's sympathy by emphasizing the pained expressions of the faces of the six men about to be executed.
In 1532, English king Henry VIII visited Calais and his men calculated that the town had about 2400 beds and stabling to keep some 2000 horses.
Hôtel Meurice de Calais is a hotel, established in 1771 as Le Chariot Royal by the French postmaster, Charles-Augustin Meurice, who would later establish the five-star Hôtel Meurice, one of Paris' most famous luxury hotels.
Calais is located  north by road from the French capital of Paris, roughly a 3-hour 15 minute journey.
One of the most elegant landmarks in the city, its ornate 74 metre (246&nbsp;ft) high clock tower and belfry can be seen from out to sea and chimes throughout the day and has been protected by UNESCO since 2005 as part of a series of belfries across the region.
The duration of the English hold over Calais was, to a large extent, the result of the feud between Burgundy and France, under which both sides coveted the town, but preferred to see it in the hands of the English rather than their domestic rivals.
Companies operating from Calais include SeaFrance (currently in liquidation), DFDS Seaways, and P&O Ferries.
It commemorates Joseph Marie Jacquard, popular in Calais because of his contribution to the development of lace through his invention of the Jacquard loom.
It rains on average about  per year.
Cross-channel sightings were made of signal lights at Dover Castle and Fairlight, East Sussex.
Église Notre-Dame is a cathedral which was originally built in the late 13th century and its tower was added in the late 14th or early 15th century.
The port accounts for more than a third of economic activity of the town of Calais.
It has 41 en-suite rooms.
Aside from being a key transport hub, Calais is also a notable fishing port and a centre for fish marketing, and some 3,000 people are still employed in the lace industry for which the town is also famed.
On 27 February 1945 Calais suffered a last bombing raid—this time by British bombers who mistook the town for Dunkirk, which was at that time still occupied by German forces.
As the pebble and sand ridge extended eastward from Calais, the haven behind it developed into fen, as the estuary progressively filled with silt and peat.
The staircase has 271 steps leading up to the lantern.
A new 400 million euro project is underway at the port to create a breakwater protecting a pool of 700 meters long, thus allowing virtually all types of ships to stop at Calais.
The theatre opened in 1905.
At some time prior to the 10th century, it would have been a fishing village on a sandy beach backed by pebbles and a creek, with a natural harbour located at the western edge of the early medieval estuary of the River Aa.
On their arrival he ordered their execution, but pardoned them when his queen, Philippa of Hainault, begged him to spare their lives.
A high and strongly built wall, partaking more of the fortress than a cathedral in its aspect, flanks the building, and protects it from the street where formerly ran the old river, in its course through Calais to the sea.
The Calais migrant crisis led to escalating tension between the UK and France in the summer of 2015.
Dunkirk is located about  by road to the east.
Calais was virtually razed to the ground during World War II.
Cargo traffic has tripled over the past two decades.
Calais is part of the Côte d'Opale (Opal Coast), a cliff-lined section of northern French coast that parallels the white cliffs on the British coast and is part of the same geological formation.
During the English invasion in 1346, sluices gates were added as water defences and a fort was built up around it in 1525 on the principle that the people of the fort could defend the town by flooding it.
During World War II it served as an air raid shelter.
It remained part of the Diocese of Thérouanne from 1379, keeping an ecclesiastical tie with France.
It contains a statue designed by Yves de Coëtlogon in 1962, remembering both world wars with an allegorical figure, representing Peace, which clutches an olive branch to her breast.
The organ—of a deep and mellow tone, and highly ornamented by figures in relief—was built at Canterbury sometime around 1700.
From medieval times, English companies thrived in Calais.
To discourage migrants and refugees from jumping on train shuttles at Calais, the UK government supplied fencing to be installed in the Eurotunnel where the vehicles are loaded on to train shuttles in Calais.
Calais is located on the Pas de Calais, which marks the boundary between the English Channel and North Sea and located at the opposite end of the Channel Tunnel,  from Dover.
The ''Monument Le Pluviôse'' is a  bronze monument built in 1912 by Émile Oscar Guillaume on the centre of the roundabout near the beach of Calais, commemorating the accidental sinking of the submarine ''Pluviôse'' in May 1910, off the beach by the steamer ''Pas de Calais''.
On a clear day the White cliffs of Dover can be viewed across the channel.
The continued English hold on Calais however depended on expensively maintained fortifications, as the town lacked any natural defences.
In the centre of the old town is the Place d'Armes, in which stands the Tour du Guet, or watch-tower, a structure built in the 13th century, which was used as a lighthouse until 1848 when a new lighthouse was built by the port.
By 1815 the fort had fallen into a ruined state and it wasn't until 1903 that it was sold and improved by its farmer tenants.
