The Calgary Jube is the resident home of the Alberta Ballet Company, the Calgary Opera, the Kiwanis Music Festival, and the annual civic Remembrance Day ceremonies.
Over the years, the city has made many land annexations to facilitate growth.
The nearby mountain resort towns of Banff, Lake Louise, and Canmore are also becoming increasingly popular with tourists, and are bringing people into Calgary as a result.
Calgary is also home to what was Western Canada's largest public high school, Lord Beaverbrook High School, with 2,241 students enrolled in the 2005–2006 school year.
As a result, the city experienced an 11.4% decrease in homelessness between 2008 and 2012.
Other publicly-funded post-secondary institutions based in Calgary include the Alberta College of Art and Design, Ambrose University College (associated with the Christian and Missionary Alliance and the Church of the Nazarene), Bow Valley College, Mount Royal University, SAIT Polytechnic, St. Mary's University and the U of C. The publicly funded Athabasca University, Northern Alberta Institute of Technology (NAIT), and the University of Lethbridge also have campuses in Calgary.
John Glenn was the first documented European settler in the Calgary area, in 1873.
Calgary quickly found itself at the centre of the ensuing oil boom.
In 1988, Calgary became the first Canadian city to host the Winter Olympic Games.
Calgary's Bankers Hall Towers are also the tallest twin towers in Canada.
There are a number of art galleries in the downtown along Stephen Avenue; the SoDo (South of Downtown) Design District; the 17 Avenue corridor; and the neighbourhood of Inglewood, including the Esker Foundation.
The last notable event was on July 15, 1999.
The coldest temperature ever recorded was  on February 4, 1893.
These facilities serve as the primary training venues for a number of competitive athletes.
It is now known as the "greatest outdoor show on earth".
As well, Calgary's proximity to the Rocky Mountains affects winter temperature average lows and highs, and tends to result in a mild winter for a city in the Prairie Provinces.
While many Calgarians continue to live in the city's suburbs, more central districts such as 17 Avenue, Kensington, Inglewood, Forest Lawn, Marda Loop and the Mission District have become more popular and density in those areas has increased.
Scotiabank Saddledome
As a consequence of Calgary's high elevation and aridity, summer evenings tend to cool off, with monthly averages below  throughout the summer months.
It is the head office for many major oil and gas related companies, and many financial service business have grown up around them.
In 1997 Calgary hosted The World Police & Fire Games hosting over 16,000 athletes from all over the world.
With a land area of , the Calgary CMA had a population density of  in 2011.
The Progressive Conservative Party had the most to lose, losing 13 of the seats it previously held.
The Faculty of Medicine of the University of Calgary also operates in partnership with Alberta Health Services, by researching cancer, cardiovascular, diabetes, joint injury, arthritis and genetics.
After the arrival of the railway, the Dominion Government started leasing grazing land at minimal cost (up to  for one cent per acre per year).
By the late 19th century, the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) expanded into the interior and established posts along rivers that later developed into the modern cities of Winnipeg, Calgary and Edmonton.
The School Boards are considered to be part of municipal politics in Calgary as they are elected at the same time as City Council.
Calgary was the first among Canada's large cities to adopt a ten-year plan to address the issue.
With other students enrolled in the associated CBe-learn and Chinook Learning Service programs, the school system's total enrolment is 104,182 students.
Originally named Fort Brisebois, after NWMP officer Éphrem-A.
Connecting these parks and most of the city's neighbourhoods is one of the most extensive multi-use (walking, bike, rollerblading, etc.)
Thanks in part to escalating oil prices, the economy in Calgary and Alberta was booming until the end of 2009, and the region of nearly 1.1&nbsp;million people was home to the fastest growing economy in the country.
These winds can raise the winter temperature by , and as much as  in just a few hours, and may last several days.
Mount Royal University, with 13,000 students, grants degrees in a number of fields.
The median age was 36.4 years.
Downtown Calgary is about  above sea level, and the airport is .
Already a transportation and distribution hub, Calgary quickly became the centre of Canada's cattle marketing and meatpacking industries.
Among the largest are Chinook Centre and Southcentre Mall in the south, Westhills and Signal Hill in the southwest, South Trail Crossing and Deerfoot Meadows in the southeast, Market Mall in the northwest, Sunridge Mall in the northeast, and the newly built CrossIron Mills just north of the Calgary city limits, and south of the City of Airdrie.
Alberta and Calgary have been leaders within Canada in addressing homelessness.
In 2013 it was the third busiest in Canada by passenger movement, and third busiest by aircraft movements, is a major cargo hub, and is a staging point for people destined for Banff National Park.
Between 2001 and 2006, Calgary's population grew by 12.4%.
CPR moved its head office from Montreal in 1996 and Imperial Oil moved from Toronto in 2005.
This includes Reeves College, Robertson College, Columbia College, and CDI College.
Oil and gas company office spaces in downtown Calgary are subleasing 40 per cent of their overall vacancies.
Calgary has four major adult acute care hospitals and one major pediatric acute care site: the Alberta Children's Hospital, the Foothills Medical Centre, the Peter Lougheed Centre, the Rockyview General Hospital and the South Health Campus.
Since the climate of the region is generally dry, dense vegetation occurs naturally only in the river valleys, on some north-facing slopes, and within Fish Creek Provincial Park.
Both received major renovations as part of the province's centennial in 2005.
According to the City of Calgary, "Beginning in 1992 with the first Biennial Count of Homeless Persons, The City focused its research efforts on issues of poverty and shelter.
An Affordable Housing Strategy was prepared in 2002, which called for a greater understanding of housing need in Calgary.
Office buildings tend to concentrate within the commercial core, while residential towers occur most frequently within the Downtown West End and the Beltline, south of downtown.
There are also several public charter schools in the city.
As a result, house prices in Calgary have increased significantly in recent years, but stagnated over the last half of 2007, and into 2008.
The site became a post of the North-West Mounted Police (now the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or RCMP).
As of 2008, there were 264 completed high-rise buildings, with 42 more under construction, another 13 approved for construction and 63 more proposed.
Some large employers with Calgary head offices include Canada Safeway Limited, Westfair Foods Ltd., Suncor Energy, Agrium, Flint Energy Services Ltd., Shaw Communication, and Canadian Pacific Railway.
The Calgary International Film Festival is also held in the city annually, as well as the International Festival of Animated Objects.
The presence of the Canadian military has been part of the local economy and culture since the early years of the 20th century, beginning with the assignment of a squadron of Strathcona's Horse.
Canadian Football League
The world-famous Calgary Stampede, still held annually in July, was started by four wealthy ranchers as a small agricultural show in 1912.
Calgary is located at the transition zone between the Canadian Rockies foothills and the Canadian Prairies.
During these boom years, skyscrapers were constructed and the relatively low-rise downtown quickly became dense with tall buildings, a trend that continues to this day.
The downtown region of the city consists of five neighbourhoods: Eau Claire (including the Festival District), the Downtown West End, the Downtown Commercial Core, Chinatown, and the Downtown East Village (also part of the Rivers District).
Agriculture and ranching became key components of the local economy, shaping the future of Calgary for years to come.
Public sector employers rounding out the top five were the University of Calgary and the Calgary Roman Catholic Separate School Division.
Its five-year population change of 12.6 percent was the highest among all CMAs in Canada between 2006 and 2011.
The Calgary Police Service was established in 1885 and assumed municipal, local duties from the NWMP.
Both boards have 7 elected trustees each representing 2 of 14 wards.
The district is home to many ethnic restaurants and stores.
At , the Devonian Gardens is one of the largest urban indoor gardens in the world, and it is located on the 4th floor of The Core Shopping Centre (above the shopping).
There were more than 200 different ethnic origins in Calgary, the most frequently reported were English, Scottish, Canadian, German and Irish.
The base remained the most significant Department of National Defence (DND) institution in the city until it was decommissioned in 1998, when most of the units moved to CFB Edmonton.
Several units have been granted Freedom of the City.
path systems in North America.
Calgary/Springbank Airport, Canada's eleventh busiest, serves as a reliever for the Calgary International taking the general aviation traffic and is also a base for aerial firefighting aircraft.
These buildings are iconographic of the city's booms and busts, and it is easy to recognize the various phases of development that have shaped the image of downtown.
Calgary quickly realized that it could not afford to put so much emphasis on oil and gas, and the city has since become much more diverse, both economically and culturally.
Also, Canada Olympic Park serves as a mountain biking trail in the summer months.
Other major museums include the Chinese Cultural Centre (at , the largest stand-alone cultural centre in Canada), the Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame and Museum (at Canada Olympic Park), The Military Museums, the Cantos Music Museum and the Aero Space Museum.
Roads in predominantly residential areas as well as freeways and expressways do not generally conform to the grid and are usually not numbered as a result.
The auditorium is one of two "twin" facilities in the province, the other located in Edmonton, each being locally known as the "Jube".
An initial proposal that would allow the southwest ring road to be built through the Tsuu T'ina Nation lands was rejected by the Tsuu T'ina people in a referendum in 2009.
In 1894, it was incorporated as "The City of Calgary" in what was then the North-West Territories.
Harper is the second Prime Minister to represent a Calgary riding; the first was R. B. Bennett from Calgary West, who held that position from 1930 to 1935.
Calgarians elect 14 ward councillors and a mayor to Calgary City Council every four years.
Although no one was killed or injured, city officials drafted a law requiring all large downtown buildings to be built with Paskapoo sandstone, to prevent this from happening again.
These include Bowness, Montgomery, and Forest Lawn.
The 2,538-seat auditorium was opened in 1957 and has been host to hundreds of Broadway musical, theatrical, stage and local productions.
Athabasca University provides distance education programs.
The city also has a large number of urban parks including Fish Creek Provincial Park, Nose Hill Park, Bowness Park, Edworthy Park, the Inglewood Bird Sanctuary, Confederation Park, and Prince's Island Park.
There are a wide range of radio stations, including a station for First Nations and the Asian Canadian community.
Downtown is easily accessed using the city's C-Train light rail (LRT) transit system.
The Calgary LRT is one of the continent's busiest carrying 270,000 passengers per weekday and approximately half of Calgary downtown workers take the transit to work.
The subsequent drops in oil prices were cited by industry as reasons for a collapse in the oil industry and consequently the overall Calgary economy.
Companies rounding out the top ten were Mark's Work Wearhouse, the Calgary Co-op, Nexen, Canadian Pacific Railway, CNRL, Shell Canada and Dow Chemical Canada.
After 1980, during the recession, many high-rise construction projects were immediately halted.
Calgary International Airport (YYC), in the city's northeast, is a transportation hub for much of central and western Canada.
Father David Bauer Olympic Arena
Like most large cities, there are many socioeconomic issues including homelessness.
Calgary's economy was so closely tied to the oil industry that the city's boom peaked with the average annual price of oil in 1981.
Calgary's daily newspapers include the ''Calgary Herald'',  ''Calgary Sun'' and ''Metro News''.
This area is quickly becoming one of the city's densest and most active mixed use areas.
Under the artistic direction of Jean Grand-Maître, the Alberta Ballet is at the forefront both at home and internationally.
Oil was first discovered in Alberta in 1902, but it did not become a significant industry in the province until 1947 when reserves of it were discovered near Leduc.
The Honens is an integral component of the classical music scene in Calgary.
Widespread flooding throughout southern Alberta, including on the Bow and Elbow rivers, forced the evacuation of over 75,000 city residents on June 21, 2013 and left large areas of the city, including downtown, without power.
Small business and self-employment levels also rank amongst the highest in Canada.
The Calgary Committee to End Homelessness was formed in 2007 consisting of government representatives as well as business and community leaders.
The larger oil and gas companies are BP Canada, Canadian Natural Resources Limited, Cenovus Energy, Encana, Imperial Oil, Suncor Energy, Shell Canada, Husky Energy, TransCanada, and Nexen, making the city home to 87% of Canada's oil and natural gas producers and 66% of coal producers.
Along with those from units currently stationed in Calgary it represents the 10th Battalion, CEF and the 50th Battalion, CEF of the Canadian Expeditionary Force.
In the 1960s, Calgary started to develop a series of pedestrian bridges, connecting many downtown buildings.
Two rivers run through the city.
Several independent private institutions are located in the city.
Lying beyond these, and usually separated from one another by highways, are suburban communities including Evergreen, Somerset, Country Hills, Sundance, Riverbend, and McKenzie Towne.
At the district's core is the popular ''17 Avenue'', known for its many bars and nightclubs, restaurants, and shopping venues.
Global, City, CTV and CBC television networks have local studios in the city.
Calgary's presence on the Trans-Canada Highway and the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) mainline (which includes the CPR Alyth Yard) also make it an important hub for freight.
A net migration of 25,794 persons/year was recorded in 2006, a significant increase from 12,117 in 2005.
During this election, the Alberta Party won its first ever seat, with MLA Greg Clark in the Calgary-Elbow riding.
It is one of the largest festivals in Canada, with a 2005 attendance of 1,242,928 at the 10-day rodeo and exhibition.
The name derives from the fact that the bridges are usually  above grade.
Notable films shot in and around the city include: Assassination of Jesse James, Brokeback Mountain, Dances with Wolves, Doctor Zhivago, Inception, Legends of the Fall, Unforgiven and The Revenant.
Calgary is the site of the Southern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium performing arts, culture and community facility.
Alberta Junior Hockey League
Calgary International Airport in the northeastern section of the city receives an average of  of precipitation annually, with  of that occurring in the form of rain, and  as snow.
H&R Real Estate Investment Trust, which owns the 58-storey 158,000-square-metre highrise the Bow Tower claims the building was fully leased.
+ Professional sports teams
The Calgary Soldiers' Memorial commemorates those who died during wartime or while serving overseas.
In 2012, the combined population of the downtown neighbourhoods (including the Downtown Commercial Core, the Downtown East Village, the Downtown West End, Eau Claire, Chinatown, and the Beltline) was 36,228.
There are many other civilian pipe bands in the city, notably the Calgary Police Service Pipe Band.
Adjacent to, or directly radiating from the downtown are the first of the inner-city communities.
In Canada, Calgary has the second-highest concentration of head offices in Canada (behind Toronto), the most head offices per capita, and the highest head office revenue per capita.
of 55% in the winter and 45% in the summer (15:00 MST),
National Hockey League
Until 1904 the streets were named; after that date, all streets were given numbers radiating outwards from the city centre.
These include Crescent Heights, Hounsfield Heights/Briar Hill, Hillhurst/Sunnyside (including Kensington BRZ), Bridgeland, Renfrew, Mount Royal, Scarboro, Sunalta, Mission, Ramsay and Inglewood and Albert Park/Radisson Heights directly to the east.
The NWMP detachment was assigned in 1875 to protect the western plains from US whisky traders, and to protect the fur trade.
Winters are cold and the temperature can drop to or below  on average 3.7 days of the year, and are often broken up by warm, dry Chinook winds that blow into Alberta over the mountains.
Every three years, Calgary hosts the Honens International Piano Competition (formerly known as the Esther Honens International Piano Competition).
By the end of the decade, however, the economy was in recovery.
In the 2011 Census, the City of Calgary had a population of 1,096,833 living in 423,417 of its 445,848 total dwellings, a 10.9% change from its 2006 adjusted population of 988,812.
As part of the wider Battle of Alberta, the city's sports teams enjoy a popular rivalry with their Edmonton counterparts, most notably the rivalries between the National Hockey League's Calgary Flames and Edmonton Oilers, and the Canadian Football League's Calgary Stampeders and Edmonton Eskimos.
Calgary hosts a number of annual festivals and events.
Currently the student population of Lord Beaverbrook is 1,812 students (September 2012) and several other schools are equally as large; Western Canada High School with 2035 students (2009) and Sir Winston Churchill High School with 1983 students (2009).
Calgary is one of nine Canadian cities, out of the total of 98 cities internationally, that is in the New York City Global Partners, Inc. organization, which was formed in 2006 from the former Sister City program of the City of New York, Inc.
South Asians (mainly from India or Pakistan) make up the largest group (7.5%), followed by Chinese (6.8%).
Being west of the dry line on most occasions, tornadoes are rare in the region.
Another conifer of widespread distribution found in the Calgary area is the White Spruce (''Picea glauca'').
Canadian Forces Base (CFB) Calgary was established as Currie Barracks and Harvie Barracks following the Second World War.
Some of these structures, such as the Calgary Tower and the Scotiabank Saddledome are unique enough to be symbols of Calgary.
Christians make up 54.9% of the population, while 32.3% have no religious affiliation.
Calgary has also recorded snow every month of the year.
The Bow River is the larger and it flows from the west to the south.
The Tsuu T'ina Nation Indian Reserve No.
A slight majority of the other CMAs in Canada had crime severity indexes greater than Calgary's 60.4.
Calgary hosted the 2009 World Water Ski Championship Festival in August, at the Predator Bay Water Ski Club, approximately  south of the city.
However, as Calgary's population has increased, so has the diversity of its politics.
Alternatively, the name might be Gaelic for either "clear running water" or "bay farm".
The dance company has developed a distinctive repertoire and a high level of performance.
Non-stop destinations include cities throughout Canada, the United States, Europe, Central America, and Asia.
Naheed Nenshi was first elected mayor in the 2010 municipal election.
Proximate urban communities beyond the city within the Calgary Region include: the City of Airdrie to the north; the City of Chestermere, the Town of Strathmore and the Hamlet of Langdon to the east; the towns of Okotoks and High River to the south; and the Town of Cochrane to the northwest.
Labour force (2006)
The commercial core is itself divided into a number of districts including the Stephen Avenue Retail Core, the Entertainment District, the Arts District and the Government District.
Based on borrowing, the library is the second largest in Canada, and sixth-largest municipal library system in North America.
The city is immediately surrounded by two municipal districts – the Municipal District of Foothills No.
Scotiabank Saddledome
The ''Calgary Herald'' and the ''Calgary Sun'' are the main newspapers in Calgary.
Golfing is also an extremely popular activity for Calgarians and the region has a large number of courses.
In 1884, the HBC established a sales shop in Calgary.
DeVry Institute of Technology announced the closure of its Calgary campus operations on June 30, 2013.
Between 1896 and 1914 settlers from all over the world poured into the area in response to the offer of free "homestead" land.
Both auditoriums operate 365 days a year, and are run by the provincial government.
With the energy sector employing a huge number of Calgarians, the fallout from the economic slump of the early 1980s was significant, and the unemployment rate soared.
Health and education
Employment by industry
'''Calgary''' () is a city in the Canadian province of Alberta.
According to the 2011 Statistics Canada Census, persons aged 14 years and under made up 17.9% of the population, and those aged 65 and older made up 9.95%.
The publicly-funded University of Calgary (U of C) is Calgary's largest degree-granting facility with an enrolment of 28,464 students in 2011.
Alberta Junior Hockey League
Distinct from downtown and south of 9th Avenue is Calgary's densest neighbourhood, the Beltline.
Calgary was also the birthplace of the improvisational theatre games known as Theatresports.
They include the Calgary Round-Up Band, the Calgary Stetson Show Band, the Bishop Grandin Marching Ghosts, and the five-time World Association for Marching Show Bands champions, the Calgary Stampede Showband, as well as military bands including the Band of HMCS Tecumseh, the King's Own Calgary Regiment Band, and the Regimental Pipes and Drums of The Calgary Highlanders.
Forest Lawn is among the most diverse areas in the city and as such, the area around 17 Avenue SE within the neighbourhood is also known as International Avenue.
Although the main office is now based in Yellowknife, Canadian North, purchased from Canadian Airlines in September 1998, still maintain the operations and charter offices in Calgary.
However, it is a developer and city convention in Calgary that non-numbered streets within a new community have the same name prefix as the community itself so that streets can more easily be located within the city.
It is situated at the confluence of the Bow River and the Elbow River in the south of the province, in an area of foothills and prairie, about  east of the front ranges of the Canadian Rockies.
The Glenbow Museum is the largest in western Canada and includes an art gallery and First Nations gallery.
The Beltline is the focus of major planning and rejuvenation initiatives on the part of the municipal government to increase the density and liveliness of Calgary's centre.
As of November 2006, Calgary is the most expensive city in Canada for commercial/downtown office space, and the third most expensive city (after Vancouver and Toronto) for residential real-estate.
The downtown region is also home to Prince's Island Park, an urban park located just north of the Eau Claire district.
On October 19, 2015, Calgary elected its first two Liberal federal MPs since 1968, Darshan Kang for Calgary Skyview and Kent Hehr for Calgary Centre.
Before 2015, the Liberals had only elected three MPs from Calgary ridings in their entire history-- Manley Edwards (1940–1945), Harry Hays (1963–1965) and Pat Mahoney (1968–1972).
Calgary is also home to the Tom Baker Cancer Centre (located at the Foothills Medical Centre), the Grace Women's Health Centre, which provides a variety of care, and the Libin Cardiovascular Institute.
The tallest of these is The Bow (Encana headquarters), which is the tallest office tower in Canada outside Toronto.
Numerous films have been shot in Calgary and area.
As of 2011, 30.1% of the population belong to a visible minority group.
The bridge ranked among the top 10 architectural projects in 2012 and among the top 10 public spaces of 2012.
The HBC also built the first of the grand "original six" department stores in Calgary in 1913, the others that followed are Edmonton, Vancouver, Victoria, Saskatoon, and Winnipeg.
Joe Clark, former Prime Minister and former leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (also a predecessor of the CPC), held the riding of Calgary Centre during his second stint in Parliament from 2000 to 2004.
SAIT Polytechnic, with over 14,000 students, provides polytechnic and apprentice education, granting certificates, diplomas and applied degrees.
