In the south is a large inland salt lake, the Salton Sea.
On June 27, 2013, Governor Jerry Brown signed a balanced budget (no deficit) for the state, its first in decades; however the state's debt remains at $132 billion.
Many other endemics originated through differentiation or adaptive radiation, whereby multiple species develop from a common ancestor to take advantage of diverse ecological conditions such as the California lilac (''Ceanothus'').
After June 8, 2010 when Proposition 14 was approved, excepting only the United States President and county central committee offices, all candidates in the primary elections are listed on the ballot with their preferred party affiliation, but they are not the official nominee of that party.
Consequently California also has the largest number of electoral votes in national presidential elections, with 55.
Despite the on-the-ground explorations of California in the 16th century, Rodríguez's idea of California as an island persisted.
The ''American Jewish Year Book'' placed the total Jewish population of California at about 1,194,190 in 2006.
California contains more forestland than any other state except Alaska.
California, with 12% of the United States population, has one-third of the nation's welfare recipients.
The Democrats also now hold a majority in both houses of the state legislature.
Aquatic life in California thrives, from the state's mountain lakes and streams to the rocky Pacific coastline.
On September 9, 1850, as part of the Compromise of 1850, California was admitted to the United States undivided as a free state, denying the expansion of slavery to the Pacific Coast.
Death Valley, a desert with large expanses below sea level, is considered the hottest location in the world; the highest temperature in the world, , was recorded there on July 10, 1913.
The Canadian zone mammals include the mountain weasel, snowshoe hare, and several species of chipmunks.
In 2008, Californians passed Proposition 20 to empower a 14-member independent citizen commission to redraw districts for both local politicians and Congress.
Fremont cottonwood and valley oak thrive in the Central Valley.
It was then claimed by the Spanish Empire as part of Alta California in the larger territory of New Spain.
Endangered animals include the San Joaquin kitfox, Point Arena mountain beaver, Pacific pocket mouse, salt marsh harvest mouse, Morro Bay kangaroo rat (and five other species of kangaroo rat), Amargosa vole, California least tern, California condor, loggerhead shrike, San Clemente sage sparrow, San Francisco garter snake, five species of salamander, three species of chub, and two species of pupfish.
The cool California Current offshore often creates summer fog near the coast.
The majority of these cities and towns are within one of five metropolitan areas: the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area, the San Francisco Bay Area, the Riverside-San Bernardino Area, the San Diego metropolitan area and the Sacramento metropolitan area.
Several dams across the state provide hydro-electric power.
At about , begins the Arctic zone, a treeless region whose flora include a number of wildflowers, including Sierra primrose, yellow columbine, alpine buttercup, and alpine shooting star.
From the 1820s, trappers and settlers from the United States and Canada arrived in Northern California.
The species that are federally classified as endangered are the Contra Costa wallflower, Antioch Dunes evening primrose, Solano grass, San Clemente Island larkspur, salt marsh bird's beak, McDonald's rock-cress, and Santa Barbara Island liveforever.
A more direct connection came in 1869 with the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad through Donner Pass in the Sierra Nevada mountains.
However, during the 20th century, two great disasters happened in California.
In 2010, there were more than 663,000 millionaires in the state, more than any other state in the nation.
The state's crude oil and natural gas deposits are located in the Central Valley and along the coast, including the large Midway-Sunset Oil Field.
The Sierra Nevada falls to Arctic temperatures in winter and has several dozen small glaciers, including Palisade Glacier, the southernmost glacier in the United States.
Alta California became a part of Mexico in 1821 following its successful war for independence, but was ceded to the United States in 1848 after the Mexican–American War.
The lowest temperature in California was  in 1937 in Boca.
As one ascends into the Hudsonian zone, birds become scarcer.
Some 37 years later English explorer Francis Drake also explored and claimed an undefined portion of the California coast in 1579.
The five largest sectors of employment in California are trade, transportation, and utilities; government; professional and business services; education and health services; and leisure and hospitality.
The Reason Foundation's 19th Annual Report on the Performance of State Highway Systems ranked California's highways the third-worst of any state, with Alaska second, and Rhode Island first.
California has a total of  of National Wildlife Refuges.
If at a special primary election, one candidate receives more than 50% of all the votes cast, they are elected to fill the vacancy and no special general election will be held.
California also includes the nation's most populous county, Los Angeles County, and the largest county by area, San Bernardino County.
The Republic's only president was William B. Ide, who played a pivotal role during the Bear Flag Revolt.
California's large number of endemic species includes relict species, which have died out elsewhere, such as the Catalina ironwood (''Lyonothamnus floribundus'').
Unlike most United States States, California law enshrines English as its official language (rather than it being simply the most commonly used), since the passage of Proposition 63 by California voters.
Integrated subway and light rail networks are found in Los Angeles (Metro Rail) and San Francisco (MUNI Metro).
After ushering in the period of organized emigration to California, Marsh helped end the rule of the last Mexican governor of California, thereby paving the way to California's ultimate acquisition by the United States.
The San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge (often abbreviated the "Bay Bridge"), completed in 1936, transports about 280,000 vehicles per day on two-decks.
California's population is greater than that of all but 34 countries of the world.
In 2010, there were 1.17 million new vehicle registrations in force.
Members of the Assembly are subject to term limits of three terms, and members of the Senate are subject to term limits of two terms.
English serves as California's De jure and De facto official language.
In 2008, those unaffiliated with any religion represented 21 percent of the population.
Eleven butterflies are also endangered and two that are threatened are on the federal list.
Los Angeles International Airport (LAX), the 6th busiest airport in the world, and San Francisco International Airport (SFO), the 21st busiest airport in the world, are major hubs for trans-Pacific and transcontinental traffic.
His letters were read, reread, passed around, and printed in newspapers throughout the country, and started the first wagon trains rolling to California.
Various estimates of the native population range from 100,000 to 300,000.
The maritime moderation results in the shoreline summertime temperatures of Los Angeles and San Francisco being the coolest of all major metropolitan areas of the United States and uniquely cool compared to areas on the same latitude in the interior and on the east coast of the North American continent.
Only Arizona and Utah were lower.
Vast expanses of wheat, other cereal crops, vegetable crops, cotton, and nut and fruit trees were grown (including oranges in Southern California), and the foundation was laid for the state's prodigious agricultural production in the Central Valley and elsewhere.
Northwestern California has a temperate climate, and the Central Valley has a Mediterranean climate but with greater temperature extremes than the coast.
After gold was discovered in 1848, the population burgeoned with United States citizens, Europeans, Chinese and other immigrants during the great California Gold Rush.
There are ten general UC campuses, and a number of specialized campuses in the UC system.
Water is diverted from the delta and through an extensive network of pumps and canals that traverse nearly the length of the state, to the Central Valley and the State Water Projects and other needs.
After failing to obtain justice against squatters on his land from the Mexican courts, he determined that California should become part of the United States.
The revolt, which had momentarily declared California an independent state, was successful with the assistance of American and British residents of California, including Isaac Graham; after 1840, 100 of those residents who did not have passports were arrested, leading to the Graham affair in 1840.
California is also home to two major nuclear power plants: Diablo Canyon and San Onofre, the latter having been shut down in 2013.
Since 1990, California has generally elected Democratic candidates to federal, state and local offices, including current Governor Jerry Brown; however, the state has elected Republican Governors, though many of its Republican Governors, such as Arnold Schwarzenegger, tend to be considered moderate Republicans and more centrist than the national party.
California's wind farms include Altamont Pass, San Gorgonio Pass, and Tehachapi Pass.
The 1906 San Francisco earthquake and 1928 St. Francis Dam flood remain the deadliest in U.S history.
California is also home to such notable private universities as Stanford University, the University of Southern California, the California Institute of Technology, and the Claremont Colleges.
, California has an  unemployment rate of 5.5%.
Following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo that ended the war, the western territory of Alta California, became the United States state of California, and Arizona, Nevada, Colorado and Utah became United States Territories.
The state of California's own statistics show a population of 38,292,687 for January 1, 2009.
A Pew Research Center survey revealed that California is somewhat less religious than the rest of the US: 62 percent of Californians say they are "absolutely certain" of their belief in God, while in the nation 71 percent say so.
Along with the rest of the United States, California's immigration pattern has also shifted over the course of the late 2000s-early 2010s.
The state has been a pioneer in road construction.
More than half of illegal immigrants originate from Mexico.
California's mountains produce rain shadows on the eastern side, creating extensive deserts.
Tanbark oak, California laurel, sugar pine, madrona, broad-leaved maple, and Douglas-fir also grow here.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of California was 39,144,818 on July 1, 2015, a 5.08% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
Indeed, almost all of southeastern California is arid, hot desert, with routine extreme high temperatures during the summer.
The center of the state is dominated by the Central Valley, a major agricultural area.
Despite these recent trends, illegal aliens constituted an estimated 7.3 percent of the state's population, the third highest percentage of any state in the country, totaling nearly 2.6 million.
California contains both the highest point (Mount Whitney) and the lowest point (Death Valley) in the contiguous United States.
In particular, illegal immigrants tended to be concentrated in Los Angeles, Monterey, San Benito, Imperial, and Napa Counties – the latter four of which have significant agricultural industries that depend on manual labor.
A 2007 study concluded that California's public school system was "broken" in that it suffered from over-regulation.
One of the largest ranchers in California was John Marsh.
* The research university system in the state is the University of California (UC), a public university system.
These new arrivals used the Siskiyou Trail, California Trail, Oregon Trail and Old Spanish Trail to cross the rugged mountains and harsh deserts in and surrounding California.
In Purchasing Power Parity, it is larger than all but 10 countries (the United States, China, India, Japan, Germany, Russia, Brazil, France, the United Kingdom, and Indonesia), larger than Italy, Mexico, Spain, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, Canada and Turkey.
''Nemophila'', mint, ''Phacelia'', ''Viola'', and the California poppy (''Eschscholzia californica'') – the state flower – also flourish in this zone, along with the lupine, more species of which occur here than anywhere else in the world.
The fauna found throughout several zones are the mule deer, coyote, mountain lion, northern flicker, and several species of hawk and sparrow.
The administration of the state's court system is controlled by the Judicial Council, composed of the Chief Justice of the California Supreme Court, 14 judicial officers, four representatives from the State Bar of California, and one member from each house of the state legislature.
Most small cities have a council-manager form of government, where the elected city council appoints a city manager to supervise the operations of the city.
Principal mammals found in this region include the Sierra coney, white-tailed jackrabbit, and the bighorn sheep.
As the primary driver of the Hispanic population is domestic births, however, it is estimated the Spanish language use will peak and then decline over the course of the coming decades.
The economy of California is large enough to be comparable to that of the largest of countries.
Many of the trees in the California White Mountains are the oldest in the world; an individual bristlecone pine is over 5,000 years old.
While the Sierra rosy finch is the only bird native to the high Arctic region, other bird species such as the hummingbird and Clark's nutcracker.
The state's widespread redistribution of water also invites the frequent scorn of environmentalists.
In expenditure per pupil, California ranked 29th (of the 50 states and the District of Columbia) in 2005–06.
Divided in two by the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta, the northern portion, the Sacramento Valley serves as the watershed of the Sacramento River, while the southern portion, the San Joaquin Valley is the watershed for the San Joaquin River.
Marsh conducted a letter-writing campaign espousing the California climate, soil and other reasons to settle there, as well as the best route to follow, which became known as "Marsh's route."
In general, Democratic strength is centered in the populous coastal regions of the Los Angeles metropolitan area and the San Francisco Bay Area.
California's diverse geography ranges from the Sierra Nevada in the east to the Pacific Coast in the west, from the redwood–Douglas fir forests of the northwest, to the Mojave Desert areas in the southeast.
About 45 percent of the state's total surface area is covered by forests, and California's diversity of pine species is unmatched by any other state.
In 1846 the non-native population of California was estimated to be no more than 8,000, plus about 100,000 Native Americans down from about 300,000 before Hispanic settlement in 1769.
California has twelve dioceses and two archdioceses, the Archdiocese of Los Angeles and the Archdiocese of San Francisco, the former being the largest archdiocese in the United States.
The upper Sonoran zone includes the chaparral belt, characterized by forests of small shrubs, stunted trees, and herbaceous plants.
The Agriculture sector accounts for two percent of the state's GDP and employs around three percent of its total workforce.
California's military forces consist of the Army and Air National Guard, the naval and state military reserve (militia), and the California Cadet Corps.
The trend towards the Democratic Party is most obvious in presidential elections; Republicans have not won California's electoral votes since 1988.
It has many earthquakes due to several faults running through the state, in particular the San Andreas Fault.
Sacramento became California's first incorporated city on February 27, 1850.
The UC system was originally given exclusive authority in awarding Ph.Ds, but this has since changed and the CSU is also able to award several Doctoral degrees.
As in other states, the native inhabitants were forcibly removed from their lands by incoming miners, ranchers, and farmers.
In teaching staff expenditure per pupil, California ranked 49th of 51.
In later decades, the native population was placed in reservations and rancherias, which were often small and isolated and without enough natural resources or funding from the government to sustain the populations living on them.
With its orange paint and panoramic views of the bay, this highway bridge is a popular tourist attraction and also accommodates pedestrians and bicyclists.
Senators serve four-year terms and Assembly members two.
Agriculture is an important sector in California's economy.
Additionally, Proposition 227 requires instruction in public schools take place in English.
As a result of these efforts, California is regarded as a world center of the entertainment and music industries, of technology, engineering, and the aerospace industry, and as the United States center of agricultural production.
As of April 2003, 118 California animals were on the federal endangered list; 181 plants were listed as endangered or threatened.
The state capital is Sacramento, which is located in the northern part of the state.
Although only 1.5% of the state's economy, California's agriculture industry has the highest output of any United States state.
Brushy areas are abundant with dwarf manzanita and ceanothus; the unique Sierra puffball is also found here.
The California High-Speed Rail Authority was created in 1996 by the state to implement an extensive  rail system.
57% came from Asian countries vs. 22% from Latin American countries.
They are responsible for providing any police-sanctioned service to anyone on California's state maintained highways and on state property.
California's vast terrain is connected by an extensive system of controlled-access highways ('freeways'), limited-access roads ('expressways'), and highways.
In January 2011 the California's total debt was at least $265 billion.
By 1854 over 300,000 settlers had come.
Factors contributing to the growth in sales-per-acre include more intensive use of active farmlands and technological improvements in crop production.
He invited immigrants to stay on his ranch until they could get settled, and assisted in their obtaining passports.
After the 2012 elections, when the new system took effect, Democrats gained 4 seats and held a 38-15 majority in the delegation.
In addition, amphibians such as the water puppy and redwood salamander are common too.
About 37,000 earthquakes are recorded each year, but most are too small to be felt.
It would be possible to convert the total supply to 100% renewable energy, including heating, cooling and mobility, by 2050.
According to the USDA in 2011, the three largest California agricultural products by value were milk and cream, shelled almonds, and grapes.
The CSU was originally set up to award only bachelor's and master's degrees, but has since been granted the authority to award several Doctoral degrees.
In overall teacher-pupil ratio, California was also 49th, with 21 students per teacher.
Also, Los Angeles County has held the title of most populous United States county for decades, and it alone is more populous than 42 United States states.
Forest floors are covered with swordfern, alumnroot, barrenwort, and trillium, and there are thickets of huckleberry, azalea, elder, and wild currant.
And although California entered the union as a free state, the "loitering or orphaned Indians" were de facto enslaved by Mexican and Anglo-American masters under the 1853 ''Act for the Government and Protection of Indians''.
In the United States House, the Democrats held a 34–19 edge in the CA delegation of the 110th United States Congress in 2007.
, 85 plant species were listed as threatened or endangered.
Intercity bus travel is provided by Greyhound and Amtrak Thruway Coach.
According to the 2007 American Community Survey, 73% of people who speak a language other than English at home are able to speak English well or very well, with 9.8% not speaking English at all.
Including Los Angeles, four of the top 15 most populous cities in the U.S. are in California: Los Angeles (2nd), San Diego (8th), San Jose (10th), and San Francisco (13th).
Farther inland, there are colder winters and hotter summers.
In 1846 settlers rebelled against Mexican rule during the Bear Flag Revolt.
Between 1831 and 1836, California experienced a series of revolts against Mexico; this culminated in the 1836 California revolt led by Juan Bautista Alvarado, which ended after Mexico appointed him governor of the department.
Two of the pueblos grew into the cities of Los Angeles and San Jose.
Additionally, both the state's current Democratic United States Senators, Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer, have held onto their seats since they were first elected in 1992.
California's interconnected water system is the world's largest, managing over 40,000,000 acre feet of water per year, centered on six main systems of aqueducts and infrastructure projects.
Three of the world's largest 20 firms by revenue, Chevron, Apple, and McKesson, are headquartered in the state.
Among the political idiosyncrasies and trendsetting, California was the second state to recall their state governor, the second state to legalize abortion, and the only state to ban marriage for gay couples twice by voters (including Proposition 8 in 2008).
The rapidly growing population of the state is straining all of its transportation networks, and California has some of the worst roads in the United States.
Each county is governed by an elected board of supervisors.
The high mountains, including the Sierra Nevada, have an alpine climate with snow in winter and mild to moderate heat in summer.
The southeastern border of California with Arizona is entirely formed by the Colorado River, from which the southern part of the state gets about half of its water.
The number of migrants arrested attempting to cross the Mexican border in the Southwest plunged from a high of 1.1 million in 2005 to just 367,000 in 2011.
Earthquakes are common because of the state's location along the Pacific Ring of Fire.
Some other important rivers are the Klamath River and the Trinity River in the far north coast, and the Colorado River on the southeast border with Arizona.
Settled by successive waves of arrivals during the last 10,000 years, California was one of the most culturally and linguistically diverse areas in pre-Columbian North America.
Afterwards, rebels raised the Bear Flag (featuring a bear, a star, a red stripe and the words "California Republic") at Sonoma.
According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) the largest denominations by adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 10,233,334; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 763,818; and the Southern Baptist Convention with 489,953.
Birds unique to this zone are the California thrasher, bushtit, and California condor.
Per capita income varies widely by geographic region and profession.
The San Francisco Board of Supervisors also acts as the city council and the Mayor of San Francisco also serves as the county administrative officer.
Justices of the Supreme Court and Courts of Appeal are appointed by the Governor, but are subject to retention by the electorate every 12 years.
A majority of California's cities are located in either the San Francisco Bay Area or the Sacramento metropolitan area in Northern California; or the Los Angeles area, the Riverside-San Bernardino-Inland Empire, or the San Diego metropolitan area in Southern California.
New York State, in second place, had 9 languages other than English spoken by more than 100,000 persons.
There are about a dozen important commercial airports and many more general aviation airports throughout the state.
California's native population precipitously declined, above all, from Eurasian diseases to which they had no natural immunity.
Sebastián Vizcaíno explored and mapped the coast of California in 1602 for New Spain.
During this time period, international migration produced a net increase of 1,816,633 people while domestic migration produced a net decrease of 1,509,708, resulting in a net in-migration of 306,925 people.
Roman Catholics founded 21 missions along the California coast, as well as the cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco.
Deep-sea life forms include sea bass, yellowfin tuna, barracuda, and several types of whale.
After a series of defensive battles in Southern California, the Treaty of Cahuenga was signed by the Californios on January 13, 1847, securing American control in California.
The geographic area of a special district can spread across multiple cities or counties, or could consist of only a portion of one.
In total, 16 languages other than English were spoken as primary languages at home by more than 100,000 persons, more than any other state in the nation.
In the transition zone, there are Colombian black-tailed deer, black bears, gray foxes, cougars, bobcats, and Roosevelt elk.
Net immigration from Mexico, previously the most common country of origin for new immigrants has dropped to zero/less than zero, since more Mexican nationals are departing for their home country than immigrating.
When Spanish explorer Francisco de Ulloa was exploring the western coast of North America, his initial surveys of the Baja Peninsula led him to believe that it was an island rather than part of the larger continent, so he dubbed the "island" after the mythical island in Montalvo's writing.
California's legal system is explicitly based upon English common law (as is the case with all other states except Louisiana) but carries a few features from Spanish civil law, such as community property.
The kingdom of Queen Calafia, according to Montalvo, was said to be a remote land inhabited by griffins and other strange beasts, and rich in gold.
Shortened forms of the state's name include CA, Cal., Calif. and US-CA.
In the early 20th century, fueled by the efforts of state and local boosters, many Americans saw the Golden State as an ideal resort destination, sunny and dry all year round with easy access to the ocean and mountains.
Also, , 178 species of California plants were listed either as endangered or threatened on this federal list.
However because of its high energy rates, conservation mandates, mild weather in the largest population centers and strong environmental movement, its ''per capita'' energy use is one of the smallest of any United States state.
Although most of the state has a Mediterranean climate, due to the state's large size, the climate ranges from subarctic to subtropical.
California has hundreds of other private colleges and universities, including many religious and special-purpose institutions.
The ranchos developed under ownership by Californios (Spanish-speaking Californians) who had received land grants, and traded cowhides and tallow with Boston merchants.
The Spanish colonization brought the genocide of the indigenous Californian peoples.
The system was originally intended to accept the top one-eighth of California high school students, but several of the schools have become even more selective.
When Commodore John D. Sloat of the United States Navy sailed into Monterey Bay and began the military occupation of California by the United States, Northern California capitulated in less than a month to the United States forces.
Several scholars and Native American activists, including Benjamin Madley and Ed Castillo, have described the actions of the California government as a genocide.
Just before the "Dot Com Bust" California had the 5th largest economy in the world among nations.
The Mojave River is the primary watercourse in the Mojave Desert, and the Santa Ana River drains much of the Transverse Ranges as it bisects Southern California.
, the bighorn sheep was listed as endangered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service.
This dialect, known as California English, has a vowel shift and several other phonological processes that are different from the dialects used in other regions of the country.
