As a result, riots broke out in the city.
Despite swimming being a part of imperial education, Caligula could not swim.
Flaccus tried to placate both the Greek population and Caligula by having statues of the emperor placed in Jewish synagogues.
In response, Caligula ordered the erection of a statue of himself in the Jewish Temple of Jerusalem, a demand in conflict with Jewish monotheism.
Additionally, given Caligula's unpopularity among the surviving sources, it is difficult to separate fact from fiction.
Through Agrippina, Augustus was the maternal great-grandfather of Gaius.
and actually appointed him a priest.
Caligula had the heads removed from various statues of gods and replaced with his own in some temples.
Philo describes the first seven months of Caligula's reign as completely blissful.
It is said that he wished to be worshipped as "''Neos Helios,''" the "New Sun."
In Roman political culture, insanity and sexual perversity were often presented hand-in-hand with poor government.
Philo's works, ''On the Embassy to Gaius'' and ''Flaccus'', give some details on Caligula's early reign, but mostly focus on events surrounding the Jewish population in Judea and Egypt with whom he sympathizes.
Caligula spent time befriending the Praetorian prefect, Naevius Sutorius Macro, an important ally.
The prospect of Rome losing its emperor and thus its political power was the final straw for many.
A conspiracy involving his brother-in-law was foiled in late 39.
Caligula considered Chaerea effeminate because of a weak voice and for not being firm with tax collection.
Suetonius writes that after the banishment of his mother and brothers, Caligula and his sisters were nothing more than prisoners of Tiberius under the close watch of soldiers.
At the age of only seven, he drove his father Germanicus to despair and death by secretly terrorising him.
He helped those who had been harmed by the imperial tax system, banished certain sexual deviants, and put on lavish spectacles for the public, including gladiatorial games.
Perhaps his illness reminded him of his mortality and of the desire of others to advance into his place.
Caligula took things a step further and had those in Rome, including senators, worship him as a tangible, living god.
When several client kings came to Rome to pay their respects to him and argued about their nobility of descent, he allegedly cried out the Homeric line: "Let there be one lord, one king."
All surviving sources, except Pliny the Elder, characterize Caligula as insane.
The character Ellsworth Toohey in Ayn Rand's 1943 novel ''The Fountainhead'' references Caligula in his climactic speech to Peter Keating stating, "Remember the Roman Emperor who said he wished humanity had a single neck so he could cut it?
Disputes occurred in the city of Jamnia.
He had new roads built and pushed to keep roads in good condition.
The larger ship was essentially an elaborate floating palace with marble floors and plumbing.
Chaerea tried to persuade the military to support the senate.
Caligula did not trust the prefect of Egypt, Aulus Avilius Flaccus.
Agrippina and Caligula's brother, Nero, were banished in 29 AD on charges of treason.
Philo of Alexandria reports that Caligula became ruthless after nearly dying of an illness in the eighth month of his reign in AD 37.
The validity of these accounts is debatable.
A few of the contemporaneous historians are known by name.
The current and past highway commissioners were accused of incompetence and embezzlement and forced to repay money.
Flaccus had been loyal to Tiberius, had conspired against Caligula's mother and had connections with Egyptian separatists.
His favorite sister Julia Drusilla died in 38 AD of a fever: his other two sisters, Livilla and Agrippina the Younger, were exiled.
Some modern historians think that Caligula suffered from hyperthyroidism.
Although reviews were overwhelmingly negative (though McDowell's performance as the title character was praised), the film is considered to be a cult classic.
Graves's Caligula commits incest with all three of his sisters and is implied to have murdered Drusilla.
In 1941, Edgar Rice Burroughs wrote ''I Am a Barbarian''.
Augustus had the public worship his spirit on occasion, but Dio describes this as an extreme act that emperors generally shied away from.
By the time Caligula's loyal Germanic guard responded, the Emperor was already dead.
Seneca states that Caligula became arrogant, angry and insulting once becoming emperor and uses his personality flaws as examples his readers can learn from.
In AD 40, Caligula began implementing very controversial policies that introduced religion into his political role.
Jews were accused of not honoring the emperor.
In The Smiths song "Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now" Caligula is referenced in the lyric 'Caligula would have blushed'.
Once, at some games at which he was presiding, he ordered his guards to throw an entire section of the crowd into the arena during intermission to be eaten by animals because there were no criminals to be prosecuted and he was bored.
Indeed, he was represented as a sun god on Egyptian coins.
A handful of other sources add a limited perspective on Caligula.
In AD 38, Caligula focused his attention on political and public reform.
Gaius had two older brothers, Nero and Drusus, as well as three younger sisters, Agrippina the Younger, Julia Drusilla and Julia Livilla.
Ancient historians state that Caligula began falsely accusing, fining and even killing individuals for the purpose of seizing their estates.
A sacred precinct was set apart for his worship at Miletus in the province of Asia and two temples were erected for worship of him in Rome.
Additionally, there are only limited details on later significant events, such as the annexation of Mauretania, Caligula's military actions in Britannia, and his feud with the Roman Senate.
In 31 AD, Caligula was remanded to the personal care of Tiberius on Capri, where he lived for six years.
The conspirators' attempt to use the opportunity to restore the Roman Republic was thwarted: on the day of the assassination of Caligula, the Praetorian Guard declared Caligula's uncle, Claudius, the next Roman emperor.
Szabolcs Hajdu portrayed Caligula in the 1996 film ''Caligula''.
He aided those who lost property in fires, abolished certain taxes, and gave out prizes to the public at gymnastic events.
Suetonius reports that other senators were degraded by being forced to wait on him and run beside his chariot.
In order to gain funds, Caligula asked the public to lend the state money.
Philo of Alexandria and Seneca the Younger describe Caligula as an insane emperor who was self-absorbed, angry, killed on a whim, and indulged in too much spending and sex.
He planned to dig a canal through the Isthmus of Corinth in Greece and sent a chief centurion to survey the work.
Suetonius said that Caligula suffered from "falling sickness", or epilepsy, when he was young.
The mission may have been to accept the surrender of the British chieftain Adminius.
As a boy of just two or three, Gaius accompanied his father, Germanicus, on campaigns in the north of Germania.
While the reliability of these sources is questionable, it is known that during his brief reign, Caligula worked to increase the unconstrained personal power of the emperor, as opposed to countervailing powers within the principate.
Caligula collected and brought back the bones of his mother and of his brothers and deposited their remains in the tomb of Augustus.
Caligula would mock Chaerea with names like "Priapus" and "Venus".
Cluvius Rufus was a senator involved in the assassination of Caligula.
Image:Roman gold coins excavated in Pudukottai India one coin of Caligula 31 41 and two coins of Nero 54 68.jpg|Roman gold coins excavated in Pudukottai, India, examples of Indo-Roman trade during the period.
According to Philo, the visit was met with jeers from the Greek population who saw Agrippa as the king of the Jews.
Cassius Dio wrote an entire chapter on the annexation of Mauretania by Caligula, but it is now lost.
Caligula responded by removing Flaccus from his position and executing him.
The young Gaius earned the nickname "Caligula" (meaning "little soldier's boot", the diminutive form of ''caliga'', hob-nailed military boot) from his father's soldiers while accompanying him during his campaigns in Germania.
Suetonius sees the motive in Caligula calling Chaerea derogatory names.
Caligula's actions as emperor were described as being especially harsh to the senate, to the nobility and to the equestrian order.
The few primary sources disagree on what precisely occurred.
'''Caligula''' () was the popular nickname of ''Gaius Julius Caesar Augustus Germanicus'' (31 August AD 12 – 24 January AD 41), Roman emperor (AD 37–41).
Caligula had two large ships constructed for himself, which were recovered from the bottom of Lake Nemi during the dictatorship of Benito Mussolini.
Fabius Rusticus and Cluvius Rufus both wrote condemning histories on Caligula that are now lost.
In 33 AD, Tiberius gave Caligula an honorary quaestorship, a position he held until his rise to emperor.
Soon after his break with the Senate, Caligula faced a number of additional conspiracies against him.
A feature-length historical film ''Caligula'' was completed in 1979, in which Malcolm McDowell played the lead role.
Suetonius claims that Germanicus was poisoned in Syria by an agent of Tiberius, who viewed Germanicus as a political rival.
We've accomplished what he couldn't accomplish.
At one time, there were detailed contemporaneous histories on Caligula, but they are now lost.
Additionally, Caligula reportedly talked to the full moon.
The adolescent Caligula was then sent to live with his great-grandmother (and Tiberius's mother) Livia.
Caligula reviewed Tiberius's records of treason trials and decided, based on their actions during these trials, that numerous senators were not trustworthy.
Tiberius would not allow Agrippina to remarry for fear her husband would be a rival.
Pliny claims that division was the work of Caligula, but Dio states that in 42 AD an uprising took place, which was subdued by Gaius Suetonius Paulinus and Gnaeus Hosidius Geta, and the division only took place after this.
This diagnosis is mainly attributed to Caligula's irritability and his "stare" as described by Pliny the Elder.
Soon afterwards, the Governor of Germany, Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Gaetulicus, was executed for connections to a conspiracy.
Gaius Julius Caesar (named in honor of his famous relative) was born in Antium (modern Anzio and Nettuno) on 31 August 12 AD, the third of six surviving children born to Germanicus and his second cousin Agrippina the Elder.
The soldiers were amused that Gaius was dressed in a miniature soldier's outfit, including boots and armour.
He states that both the elder Gaius Julius Caesar (Julius Caesar) and the younger Gaius Julius Caesar (Caligula) were stabbed 30 times by conspirators led by a man named Cassius (Cassius Longinus and Cassius Chaerea).
He began the aqueducts Aqua Claudia and Anio Novus, which Pliny the Elder considered engineering marvels.
During his reign, the empire annexed the Kingdom of Mauretania as a province.
His uncle Claudius was spared only because Caligula preferred to keep him as a laughing stock.
However, the rebellion of Tacfarinas had shown how exposed Africa Proconsularis was to its west and how the Mauretanian client kings were unable to provide protection to the province, and it is thus possible that Caligula's expansion was a prudent response to potential future threats.
The ships were among the largest vessels in the ancient world.
He allowed new members into the equestrian and senatorial orders.
In 35 AD, Caligula was named joint heir to Tiberius's estate along with Tiberius Gemellus.
The bulk of what is known of Caligula comes from Suetonius and Cassius Dio.
Cassius Dio's work is invaluable because it alone gives a loose chronology of Caligula's reign.
Untouched by the deadly intrigues, Caligula accepted the invitation to join the Emperor in AD 31 on the island of Capri, where Tiberius had withdrawn five years earlier.
Modern historians have theorized that Caligula lived with a daily fear of seizures.
Josephus gives a detailed description of Caligula's assassination.
Gaius, though, reportedly grew to dislike this nickname.
Modern historians have put forward numerous theories in an attempt to explain these actions.
They accuse Caligula of incest with his sisters, Agrippina the Younger, Drusilla, and Livilla, and say he prostituted them to other men.
To the surprise of many, Caligula was spared by Tiberius.
Gaetulicus, a poet, produced a number of flattering writings about Caligula, but they too are lost.
One coin of Caligula (AD 37–41), and two coins of Nero (AD 54–68).
She is said to have committed suicide, although Suetonius hints that Caligula actually poisoned her.
The story is pitched as a free translation of the memoirs of Britannicus (a fictional character created by Burroughs)  who was the slave of Caligula from early childhood till Caligula's death.
He hated being the grandson of Agrippa and slandered Augustus by repeating a falsehood that his mother was actually conceived as the result of an incestuous relationship between Augustus and his daughter Julia the Elder.
He ordered the execution of Chaerea and of any other known conspirators involved in the death of Caligula.
Epilepsy was long associated with the moon.
He had planned to rebuild the palace of Polycrates at Samos, to finish the temple of Didymaean Apollo at Ephesus and to found a city high up in the Alps.
He was also a nephew of Claudius, Germanicus' younger brother and future emperor.
Eugene O'Neill's play ''Lazarus Laughed'' features the young Caligula as one of its pinnacle characters, where he is portrayed as a psychopath who believes he will only be happy once Tiberius is dead and he is the Caesar.
He would appear here on occasion and present himself as a god to the public.
To gain support, he granted bonuses to the military, including the Praetorian Guard, city troops and the army outside Italy.
Eventually, officers within the Praetorian Guard led by Cassius Chaerea succeeded in murdering the emperor.
The paucity of sources has resulted in significant gaps in modern knowledge of the reign of Caligula.
He levied taxes on lawsuits, weddings and prostitution.
While repeating the earlier stories, the later sources of Suetonius and Cassius Dio provide additional tales of insanity.
Seneca was almost put to death by Caligula in AD 39 likely due to his associations with conspirators.
Seneca the elder and Philo, who both wrote during Tiberius's reign, as well as Josephus record Tiberius as dying a natural death.
Additionally, Tiberius's treason trials had eliminated a number of pro-Julian senators such as Asinius Gallus.
They were unable to reach Caligula's uncle, Claudius; after a soldier, Gratus, found Claudius hiding behind a palace curtain he was spirited out of the city by a sympathetic faction of the Praetorian Guard  to the nearby Praetorian camp.
His nephew Nero Caesar both envied and admired the fact that Gaius had run through the vast wealth Tiberius had left him in so short a time.
There are few surviving sources about the reign of Emperor Caligula, although he is described as a noble and moderate ruler during the first six months of his reign.
Agrippa was rewarded with his territories.
The plot is described as having been planned by three men, but many in the senate, army and equestrian order were said to have been informed of it and involved in it.
Caligula completed the temple of Augustus and the theatre of Pompey and began an amphitheatre beside the Saepta.
Nonetheless, these lost primary sources, along with the works of Seneca and Philo, were the basis of surviving secondary and tertiary histories on Caligula written by the next generations of historians.
This trip to the English Channel could have merely been a training and scouting mission.
"Seashells", or ''conchae'' in Latin, may be a metaphor for something else such as female genitalia (perhaps the troops visited brothels) or boats (perhaps they captured several small British boats).
The grieving Roman people assembled and demanded that Caligula's murderers be brought to justice.
During the same year, though, Caligula was criticized for executing people without full trials and for forcing his supporter Macro to commit suicide.
Caligula's religious policy was a departure from that of his predecessors.
Suetonius claims that Caligula was already cruel and vicious: he writes that, when Tiberius brought Caligula to Capri, his purpose was to allow Caligula to live in order that he "...&nbsp;prove the ruin of himself and of all men, and that he was rearing a viper for the Roman people and a Phaethon for the world."
But we'll have the last laugh.
Caligula's sister, Agrippina the Younger, wrote an autobiography that certainly included a detailed explanation of Caligula's reign, but it too is lost.
Claudius became emperor after procuring the support of the Praetorian Guard.
Details on the Mauretanian events of 39–44 are unclear.
Tacitus writes that the Praetorian Prefect, Macro, smothered Tiberius with a pillow to hasten Caligula's accession, much to the joy of the Roman people, while Suetonius writes that Caligula may have carried out the killing, though this is not recorded by any other ancient historian.
Seneca's various works give mostly scattered anecdotes on Caligula's personality.
Backed by Macro, Caligula had Tiberius's will nullified with regard to Gemellus on grounds of insanity, but otherwise carried out Tiberius's wishes.
After her death, he was sent to live with his grandmother Antonia.
In AD 39, relations between Caligula and the Roman Senate deteriorated.
The claim has been met with scepticism by Cambridge historian Mary Beard.
The military, though, remained loyal to the idea of imperial monarchy.
Caligula's biological father was Germanicus, and he was the nephew and adopted son of Emperor Tiberius.
Although Tiberius was 78 and on his death bed, some ancient historians still conjecture that he was murdered.
Jews were angered by the erection of a clay altar and destroyed it.
Caligula's first acts were said to be generous in spirit, though many were political in nature.
According to historians, Caligula was an excellent natural actor and, recognizing danger, hid all his resentment towards Tiberius.
We've taught men to unite.
The history of Caligula's reign is extremely problematic as only two sources contemporary with Caligula have survived — the works of Philo and Seneca.
It received its world premiere in New York City in June 2008.
He had his cousin and adopted son Tiberius Gemellus executed – an act that outraged Caligula's and Gemellus's mutual grandmother Antonia Minor.
The ''cryptoporticus'' (underground corridor) beneath the imperial palaces on the Palatine Hill where this event took place was discovered by archaeologists in 2008.
They state he sent troops on illogical military exercises, turned the palace into a brothel, and, most famously, planned or promised to make his horse, Incitatus, a consul,
Philo of Alexandria, Josephus and Seneca state that Caligula was insane, but describe this madness as a personality trait that came through experience.
In AD 39, Agrippa accused Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, of planning a rebellion against Roman rule with the help of Parthia.
According to Cassius Dio, a financial crisis emerged in AD 39.
An observer said of Caligula, "Never was there a better servant or a worse master!"
Caligula began appearing in public dressed as various gods and demigods such as Hercules, Mercury, Venus and Apollo.
When Tiberius died on 16 March 37 AD, his estate and the titles of the principate were left to Caligula and Tiberius's own grandson, Gemellus, who were to serve as joint heirs.
Tacitus provides some information on Caligula's life under Tiberius.
Caligula invited Ptolemy to Rome and then suddenly had him executed.
In a now lost portion of his ''Annals'', Tacitus gave a detailed history of Caligula.
When Germanicus died at Antioch in AD 19, his wife Agrippina the Elder returned with her six children to Rome, where she became entangled in a bitter feud with Tiberius.
He ordered a new set of investigations and trials.
The conquest of Britannia was fully realized by his successors.
A brief famine of unknown extent occurred, perhaps caused by this financial crisis, but Suetonius claims it resulted from Caligula's seizure of public carriages; according to Seneca, grain imports were disturbed because Caligula repurposed grain boats for a pontoon bridge.
He was buried within the Mausoleum of Augustus; in 410, during the Sack of Rome ashes in the tomb were scattered.
He replaced the consul and had several senators put to death.
Details recorded on the events vary somewhat from source to source, but they agree that Chaerea stabbed Caligula first, followed by a number of conspirators.
It was said that the bridge was to rival that of the Persian king, Xerxes, crossing of the Hellespont.
In the 1934 novel ''I, Claudius'' by English writer Robert Graves, Caligula is presented as being a murderous sociopath from his childhood, who became clinically insane early in his reign.
Born '''Gaius Julius Caesar Germanicus''' (not to be confused with Julius Caesar), Caligula was a member of the house of rulers conventionally known as the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
Agrippa finally convinced Caligula to reverse the order.
The Germanic guard, stricken with grief and rage, responded with a rampaging attack on the assassins, conspirators, innocent senators and bystanders alike.
This confusion might mean that Caligula decided to divide the province, but the division was postponed because of the rebellion.
In 30 AD, his brother, Drusus Caesar, was imprisoned on charges of treason and his brother Nero died in exile from either starvation or suicide.
Caligula was briefly married to Junia Claudilla, in 33, though she died in childbirth the following year.
She was a granddaughter of Augustus and Scribonia on her mother's side.
He is accused of sleeping with other men's wives and bragging about it, killing for mere amusement, deliberately wasting money on his bridge, causing starvation, and wanting a statue of himself erected in the Temple of Jerusalem for his worship.
Reportedly, he began referring to himself as a god when meeting with politicians and he was referred to as "Jupiter" on occasion in public documents.
Uncomfortable with lingering imperial support, the assassins sought out and stabbed Caligula's wife, Caesonia, and killed their young daughter, Julia Drusilla, by smashing her head against a wall.
Little is written on the first two years of Caligula's reign.
In this context, Philo wrote that Caligula "regarded the Jews with most especial suspicion, as if they were the only persons who cherished wishes opposed to his".
The Temple of Castor and Pollux on the forum was linked directly to the imperial residence on the Palatine and dedicated to Caligula.
He published the accounts of public funds, which had not been made public during the reign of Tiberius.
Recent sources are divided in attempting to ascribe a medical reason for his behavior, citing as possibilities encephalitis, epilepsy or meningitis.
In AD 40, Caligula expanded the Roman Empire into Mauretania and made a significant attempt at expanding into Britannia – even challenging Neptune in his campaign.
