The Sokoto Caliphate was an Islamic state in what is now Nigeria led by Usman dan Fodio.
Sufi caliphates are not necessarily hereditary.
Al-Mawardi has written that members of the majlis should satisfy three conditions: they must be just, have enough knowledge to distinguish a good caliph from a bad one, and have sufficient wisdom and judgment to select the best caliph.
The Fatimid Caliphate was an Isma'ili Shi'i caliphate that spanned a vast area of the Arab world.
The ruling elite of the state belonged to the Ismaili branch of Shi'ism.
The term ''Fatimite'' is sometimes used to refer to the citizens of this caliphate.
First, in al-Baqara, 30, it refers to God creating humanity as his ''khalifa'' on Earth.
Al-Ghazali believed that oppression by a caliph is sufficient grounds for impeachment.
Mu'awiyah became the fifth (or second by Shia reckoning) caliph, establishing the Umayyad Dynasty, named after the great-grandfather of Uthman and Mu'awiyah, Umayya ibn Abd Shams.
At that meeting, Abu Bakr was elected caliph by the Muslim community.
There is little evidence, however, that the idea of a Sharifian Caliphate ever gained wide grassroots support in the Middle East or anywhere else for that matter.
the rightful or competent one in the eyes of the people at that time) nor merely by election but primarily by God.
Furthermore, a Qadi (Islamic judge) was not allowed to discriminate on the grounds of religion, race, colour, kinship or prejudice.
The caliphate remained extant through the colonial period and afterwards, though with reduced power.
The group eventually expanded into Syria and rose to prominence as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) during the Syrian Civil War.
Organisations which call for the re-establishment of the Caliphate include Hizb ut-Tahrir and the Muslim Brotherhood.
Islamic jurists later formulated the concept that all classes were subject to the law of the land, and no person is above the law; officials and private citizens alike have a duty to obey the same law.
Al-Mawardi also said that in emergencies when there is no caliphate and no majlis, the people themselves should create a majlis and select a list of candidates for caliph; then the majlis should select a caliph from the list of candidates.
For the vast majority of Muslims the caliph as leader of the ummah, "is cherished both as memory and ideal" as a time when Muslims "enjoyed scientific and military superiority globally".
Conrad I. Lawrence estimates the average lifespan in the early Islamic Caliphate to be above 35 years for the general population.
Another factor was the diffusion of paper from China, which led to an efflorescence of books and written culture in Islamic society; thus papermaking technology transformed Islamic society (and later, the rest of Afro-Eurasia) from an oral to scribal culture, comparable to the later shifts from scribal to typographic culture, and from typographic culture to the Internet.
In addition, the power of the Mamluks steadily grew until Ar-Radi (934–41) was constrained to hand over most of the royal functions to Muhammad ibn Ra'iq.
After defeating the Kharijites at the Battle of Nahrawan, Ali was later assassinated by the Kharijite Ibn Muljam.
The importance of this is premised by the following verses of the Qur'an:
Their major city and capital Baghdad began to flourish as a center of knowledge, culture and trade.
Ahmadis maintain that in accordance with Quranic verses (such as ) and numerous ahadith on the issue, ''Khilāfah'' can only be established by God Himself and is a divine blessing given to ''those who believe and work righteousness'' and uphold the unity of God, therefore any movement to establish the ''Khilāfah'' centered on human endeavours alone is bound to fail, particularly when the condition of the people diverges from the ‘precepts of prophethood’ and they are as a result disunited, their inability to establish a ''Khilāfah'' caused fundamentally by the lack of righteousness in them.
By the eve of World War&nbsp;I, the Ottoman state, despite its weakness relative to Europe, represented the largest and most powerful independent Islamic political entity.
Sunni Muslims believe that Abu Bakr was chosen by the community and that this was the proper procedure.
By 945, the loss of power became official when the Buyids conquered Baghdad and all of Iraq.
His successor, Uthman, was elected by a council of electors (majlis).
According to author and Egyptian native Lawrence Wright, Ayman al-Zawahiri, bin Laden's mentor and al-Qaeda's second-in-command until 2011, once "sought to restore the caliphate... which had formally ended in 1924 following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire but which had not exercised real power since the thirteenth century."
Muslim reported on the authority of Abdel Aziz al-Muqrin, who said:
Ali then took control but was not universally accepted as caliph by the governors of Egypt, and later by some of his own guard.
After the first four caliphs, the Caliphate was claimed by the Umayyad Caliphate, the Abbasid Caliphate, and the Ottoman Empire, and for relatively short periods by other, competing dynasties in al-Andalus, North Africa, and Egypt.
This argument is advanced by Sunni Muslims, who believe that Muhammad's companion Abu Bakr was elected by the community and that this was the proper procedure.
However, for a variety of reasons, including that they were not elected by Shura and suggestions of impious behaviour, the Umayyad dynasty was not universally supported within the Muslim community.
However this idea, developed by the marja' Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and established in Iran, is not universally accepted among the Shia.
Nearly all of the Moorish dominions in Iberia were lost soon after, with the great Moorish cities of Córdoba and Seville falling to the Christians in 1236 and 1248, respectively.
A vigorous monetary economy developed based on the circulation of a stable high-value currency (the dinar) and the integration of previously independent monetary areas.
Rulers of the emirate used the title "emir" or "sultan" until the 10th century, when Abd al-Rahman III was faced with the threat of invasion by the Fatimid Caliphate.
The movement had collapsed by late 1922.
The Quran uses the term ''khalifa'' twice.
The concepts of welfare and pension were introduced in early Islamic law as forms of ''Zakat'' (charity), one of the Five Pillars of Islam, since the time of the Rashidun caliph Umar in the 7th century.
One factor for the relatively high literacy rates in the early Islamic Empire was its parent-driven educational marketplace, as the state did not systematically subsidize educational services until the introduction of state funding under Nizam al-Mulk in the 11th century.
However, the Muslim Brotherhood, the largest Islamic movement in Egypt, has toned down these Islamist views by accepting in principle that in the modern age the Majlis al-Shura is democracy but during its governance of Egypt in 2013, the Muslim Brotherhood did not put that principle into practice.
Based on the Quran, signatures were required on contracts for every major financial transaction concerning agriculture, industry, commerce, and employment.
The group declared itself a caliphate under Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi on June 29, 2014 and renamed itself as the "Islamic State".
In areas which were previously under Sasanian Empire or Byzantine rule, the Caliphs lowered taxes, provided greater local autonomy (to their delegated governors), greater religious freedom for Jews, and some indigenous Christians, and brought peace to peoples demoralized and disaffected by the casualties and heavy taxation that resulted from the decades of Byzantine-Persian warfare.
Abul A'la Maududi believed the caliph was not just an individual ruler who had to be restored, but was man's representation of God's authority on Earth:
The caliph has overall authority for all religious and organisational matters and is bound to decide and act in accordance with the Qur'an and sunnah.
However, it is not incumbent upon him to always accept the views and recommendations of the members.
Rather than just relying on impeachment, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani stated that the people have an obligation to rebel if the caliph begins to act with no regard for Islamic law.
The '''Sharifian Caliphate''' () was an Arab caliphate proclaimed by the Sharifian rulers of Hejaz in 1924, in lieu of the Ottoman Caliphate.
The Majlis al-Shura (literally "consultative assembly") or parliament was a representation of this idea of consultative governance.
The Abbasid Caliphate had however lost its effective power outside Iraq already by c. 920.
This is not the view of the majority of Islamist groups, as both the Muslim Brotherhood and Hizb ut-Tahrir view the Ottoman state as a caliphate.
The outcome of the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–74 was disastrous for the Ottomans.
The idea of the Sharifian Caliphate had been floating around since at least the 15th century.
During the Umayyad dynasty, the Iberian Peninsula was an integral province of the Umayyad Caliphate ruling from Damascus.
Since the end of the Ottoman Empire, occasional demonstrations have been held calling for the reestablishment of the Caliphate.
According to Barthold, the first time the title of "caliph" was used as a political instead of symbolic religious title by the Ottomans was the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca with the Russian Empire in 1774, when the Empire retained moral authority on territory whose sovereignty was ceded to the Russian Empire.
Al-Qaeda chiefs released a statement in 2005, under which, in what they call "phase five" there will be "an Islamic state, or caliphate".
For a time it was supported by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who was a member of the Central Khilafat Committee.
Islamic art and music also flourished significantly during their reign.
Scholar Olivier Roy writes that "early on, Islamists replace the concept of the caliphate ... with that of the emir."
Therefore, this constitutes a rare period in history in which the descendants of Ali (hence the name Fatimid, referring to Ali's wife Fatima) and the Caliphate were united to any degree, excepting the final period of the Rashidun Caliphate under Ali himself.
Once the subject of intense conflict and rivalry amongst Muslim rulers, the caliphate laid dormant and largely unclaimed since the 1920s.
Each province had a governor appointed by the caliph.
The life expectancy of Islamic society diverged from that of other traditional agrarian societies, with several studies on the lifespans of Islamic scholars concluding that members of this occupational group enjoyed a life expectancy between 69 and 75 years.
Some Islamist interpretations of the role of the Majlis al-Shura are the following:
However, the ''Shi‘at ‘Alī'', "the Party of Ali", were again disappointed when the Abbasid dynasty took power, as the Abbasids were descended from Muhammad's uncle, ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and not from Ali.
The Abbasid caliphs in Egypt had little to no political power; they continued to maintain the symbols of authority, but their sway was confined to religious matters.
He faced two major rebellions and was assassinated by Abd-al-Rahman ibn Muljam, a Khawarij.
Followers of Shia Islam, however, believe a caliph should be an Imam chosen by God from the ''Ahl al-Bayt'' (the "Family of the House", Muhammad's direct descendants).
According to Ahmadiyya thought, it is not essential for a caliph to be the head of a state, rather the religious and organisational significance of the caliphate is emphasised.
For the Twelvers, Ali and his eleven descendants, the twelve Imams, are believed to have been considered, even before their birth, as the only valid Islamic rulers appointed and decreed by God.
However, the Ottomans under Abdul Hamid I claimed a diplomatic victory by being allowed to remain the religious leaders of Muslims in the now-independent Crimea as part of the peace treaty; in return Russia became the official protector of Christians in Ottoman territory.
The Umayyads lost the position of Caliph in Damascus in 750, and Abd al-Rahman I became Emir of Córdoba in 756 after six years in exile.
Its leaders included Mohammad Ali Jouhar, his brother Shawkat Ali, and Abul Kalam Azad, Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, and Barrister Muhammad Jan Abbasi.
There are similarities between Islamic economics and leftist or socialist economic policies.
In 1899 John Hay, U.S. Secretary of State, asked the American ambassador to Ottoman Turkey, Oscar Straus, to approach Sultan Abdul Hamid II to use his position as caliph to order the Tausūg people of the Sultanate of Sulu in the Philippines to submit to American suzerainty and American military rule; the Sultan obliged them and wrote the letter which was sent to Sulu via Mecca.
By 1250 the Mamluks came to power in Egypt.
However, it is not incumbent upon him to always accept the views and recommendations of the members.
Small subsections of Sunni Islamism argue that to govern a state by Sharia is, by definition, to rule via the Caliphate, and use the following verses to sustain their claim.
However, studies of pre-Islamic texts suggest that the original meaning of the phrase was "successor ''selected by'' God."
Following the death of Muhammad, a meeting took place at Saqifah.
In a number of cases, Caliphs had to appear before judges as they prepared to render their verdict.
Thereafter, Cairo became the capital of the caliphate, with Egypt becoming the political, cultural and religious centre of the state.
To aid his fight against the invading Fatimids, who claimed the caliphate in opposition to the generally recognized Abbasid Caliph of Baghdad, Al-Mu'tadid, Abd al-Rahman III claimed the title of caliph himself.
The current caliph is Mirza Masroor Ahmad, who lives in London with a following of 10 to 20 million in over 200 countries and territories of the world.
Allegedly, Shimr Ibn Thil-Jawshan killed Ali's son Hussein and his family at the Battle of Karbala in 680, solidfying the Shia-Sunni split.
Ahmadi Muslims believe that the Ahmadiyya Caliphate established after the passing of the community's founder is the re-establishment of the Rashidun Caliphate.
The majlis is also the means to elect a new caliph.
Ottomans gradually came to be viewed as the de facto leaders and representatives of the Islamic world.
A '''caliphate''' ( ''khilāfa'') is an area containing an Islamic steward known as a '''caliph''' ( '''' )—a person considered a religious successor to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad (Muhammad ibn ʿAbdullāh), and a leader of the entire Muslim community.
The leaders of the dynasty were Ismaili Imams and had a religious significance to Ismaili Muslims.
The Sahaba agreed to this and selected Abu Bakr as their first Khaleef.
The Khalifa provides unity, security, moral direction and progress for the community.
The sultan also enjoyed some authority beyond the borders of his shrinking empire as caliph of Muslims in Egypt, India, and Central Asia.
According to the Islamic jurist Al-Ghazali (Algazel, 1058–1111), the government was also expected to stockpile food supplies in every region in case a disaster or famine occurred.
Large territories, including those with large Muslim populations, such as Crimea, were lost to the Russian Empire.
* The Taiyabi Ismaili have, since the year 1130, followed the Imam's chief officer, the Dai al-Mutlaq, as they believe the Imams are in a state of hiding.
In 750, the Umayyad dynasty was overthrown by another family of Meccan origin, the Abbasids.
They claim that before his death, Muhammad had given many indications, in the hadith of the pond of Khumm in particular, that he considered Ali, his cousin and son-in-law, as his successor.
The British supported and propagated the view that the Ottomans were Caliphs of Islam among Muslims in British India and the Ottoman Sultans helped the British by issuing pronouncements to the Muslims of India telling them to support British rule from Sultan Ali III and Sultan Abdülmecid I.
The Almohad dominance of Iberia continued until 1212, when Muhammad al-Nasir (1199–1214) was defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena by an alliance of the Christian princes of Castile, Aragon, Navarre and Portugal.
His claim was most fervently accepted by the Muslims of British India.
Traditionally, Sunni Muslim madhhabs all agreed that a Caliph must be a descendant of the Quraysh.
The Kings of Morocco still label themselves with the title ''Amir al-Mu'minin'' for the Moroccans, but lay no claim to the Caliphate.
They then extended their power over all of the Maghreb by 1159.
Under the Rashidun each region (Sultanate, Wilayah, or Emirate) of the Caliphate had its own governor (Sultan, Wāli or Emir).
The caliphate was claimed by the sultans of the Ottoman Empire beginning with Murad I (reigned 1362 to 1389), while recognizing no authority on the part of the Abbasid caliphs of the Mamluk-ruled Cairo.
In 2014, ISIL/ISIS made a claim to re-establishing the Caliphate.
Hence the seat of the caliphate moved to the Ottoman capital of Edirne.
Uthman was killed by members of a disaffected group.
The Shia believe in the Imamate, a principle by which rulers are Imams who are divinely chosen, infallible, and sinless and must come from the Ahl al-Bayt regardless of majority opinion, shura or election.
In 1261, following the devastation of Baghdad at the hands of the Mongols, the Mamluk rulers of Egypt tried to gain legitimacy for their rule by declaring the re-establishment of the Abbasid caliphate in Cairo.
After his death in 1908, his first successor, Hakeem Noor-ud-Din became the caliph of the community and assumed the title of ''Khalifatul Masih'' (Successor or Caliph of the Messiah).
Al-Baqillani has said that the leader of the Muslims simply should be from the majority.
The current head of the Sokoto Caliphate is Sa'adu Abubakar.
Business techniques and forms of business organization employed during this time included early contracts, bills of exchange, long-distance international trade, early forms of partnership (''mufawada'') such as limited partnerships (''mudaraba''), and early forms of credit, debt, profit, loss, capital (''al-mal''), capital accumulation (''nama al-mal''), circulating capital, capital expenditure, revenue, cheques, promissory notes, trusts (''waqf''), startup companies, savings accounts, transactional accounts, pawning, loaning, exchange rates, bankers, money changers, ledgers, deposits, assignments, the double-entry bookkeeping system, and lawsuits.
Capable men who would lead well were preferred over an ineffectual direct heir, as there was no basis in the majority Sunni view that the head of state or governor should be chosen based on lineage alone.
It is primarily a religious/spiritual office, with the purpose of upholding, strengthening and spreading Islam and of maintaining the high spiritual and moral standards within the global community established by Muhammad - who was not merely a political leader but primarily a religious leader.
If a caliph does happen to bear governmental authority as a head of state, it is incidental and subsidiary in relation to his overall function as caliph which is applicable to believers transnationally and not limited to one particular state or political entity.
Consequently, these countries had their own, local, sultans or rulers who did not fully accept the authority of the Caliph.
They called for help and the movement was the result.
Thus the khalifa is designated neither necessarily by right (i.e.
Ibn Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah said: ''"All Muslims are partners in three things- in water, herbage and fire."''
On March 3, 1924, the first President of the Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, as part of Atatürk's Reforms, constitutionally abolished the institution of the caliphate.
However, the earlier Ottoman caliphs did not officially bear the title of caliph in their documents of state, inscriptions, or coinage.
Muhammad established his capital in Medina; after he died, it remained the capital during the Rashidun Caliphate, before Kufa was reportedly made the capital by Caliph Ali.
Al-Andalus followed the fate of Africa and all Islamic Iberia was under Almohad rule by 1172.
Muawiyah transformed the caliphate into a hereditary office, thus founding the Umayyad dynasty.
Originally based in Tunisia, the Fatimid dynasty extended their rule across the Mediterranean coast of Africa, and ultimately made Egypt the centre of their caliphate.
The principle of public or joint ownership has been drawn by Muslim jurists from the following hadith of Muhammad:
A summit was convened at Cairo in 1926 to discuss the revival of the Caliphate, but most Muslim countries did not participate and no action was taken to implement the summit's resolutions.
Its powers within Turkey were transferred to the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the parliament of the newly formed Turkish Republic.
The last representative of the line, Idris al-Wathiq, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269; the Marinids seized Marrakesh, ending the Almohad domination of the Western Maghreb.
The Sunni branch of Islam stipulates that, as a head of state, a caliph should be elected by Muslims or their representatives.
This helped Abd al-Rahman III gain prestige with his subjects, and the title was retained after the Fatimids were repulsed.
The group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn formed as an affiliate of Al-Qaeda network of Islamist militants during the Iraq War.
It is based on the claim that Muslims can prove that God exists and that the Qur'an is the word of God.
In the summer of 2014, the group launched the Northern Iraq offensive, seizing the city of Mosul.
The caliph was often known as ''Amir al-Mu'minin'' ( "Commander of the Believers").
Second, in Sad, 26, it addresses King David as God's ''khalifa ''and reminds him of his obligation to rule with justice.
There were a number of reasons including "that according to the classical authors, a caliph must be a member of the tribe of the Prophet (the Quraysh) ... moreover, caliphs ruled societies that the Islamists do not consider to have been Islamic (the Ottoman Empire)."
* The Nizari continue to have a living Imam; the current Imam is the Aga Khan.
Ismailis believe in the Imamate principle mentioned above, but they need not be secular rulers as well.
The Umayyad dynasty, which had survived and come to rule over Al-Andalus, reclaimed the title of Caliph in 929, lasting until it was overthrown in 1031.
They further argue that a caliph is ideally chosen by election or community consensus.
This caused a faction of approximately 4,000 people that would be known as the Kharijites, to abandon the fight.
According to Sunni Muslims, the first caliph to be called ''Amir al-Mu'minin'' was Abu Bakr, followed by Umar, the second of the Rashidun.
Many noted that this option is to be exercised only after factoring in the potential cost of life.
The Ahmadiyya caliphate has spanned over a century, seen five caliphs and continues to operate under this structure, with the caliph having overall authority for all religious and organizational matters.
This indicates an Ijma as-Sahaba of all of the Sahaba.
The empire fell apart and its parts were ruled for the next century by local dynasties.
If a khalifa does happen to bear governmental authority as a head of state, it is incidental and subsidiary in relation to his overall function as khalifa which is applicable to believers transnationally and not limited to one particular state.
Even though caliphs were thought to go back to Muhammad, they were not thought of as having the same prophetic power as he did.
After Hakeem Noor-ud-Din, the first caliph, the title of the Ahmadiyya caliph continued under Mirza Mahmud Ahmad, who led the community for over 50 years.
The movement to protect or restore the Ottomans gained force after the Treaty of Sèvres (August 1920) which imposed the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire and gave Greece a powerful position in Anatolia, to the distress of the Turks.
A number of Islamist political parties and mujahideen called for the restoration of the caliphate by uniting Muslim nations, either through political action (e.g., Hizb ut-Tahrir), or through force (e.g., al-Qaeda).
The job of adjudicating orthodoxy and Islamic law was left to mujtahids, legal specialists collectively called the Ulama.
Some Muslim countries, including Somalia, Indonesia and Malaysia, were never subject to the authority of a Caliphate , with the exception of Aceh, which briefly acknowledged Ottoman suzerainty.
As a result, the "Sulu Mohammedans ... refused to join the insurrectionists and had placed themselves under the control of our army, thereby recognizing American sovereignty."
The Rashidun caliphs, who directly succeeded Muhammad as leaders of the Muslim community, were chosen through ''shura, ''a process of community consultation that some consider loosely to be an early form of Islamic democracy.
A social transformation took place as a result of changing land ownership giving individuals of any gender, ethnic or religious background the right to buy, sell, mortgage, and inherit land for farming or any other purpose.
Al-Qaeda has as one of its clearly stated goals the re-establishment of a caliphate.
Geographically, the empire was divided into several provinces, the borders of which changed numerous times during the Umayyad reign.
The Fatimids established the Tunisian city of Mahdia and made it their capital city, before conquering Egypt, and building the city of Cairo there in 969.
Although the khalifa is elected it is believed that God himself directs the hearts of believers towards an individual.
In the above verse, the word ''Khulifa'' (the plural of ''Khalifa'') has been variously translated as "successors" and "ones who accede to power".
The Almohads continued to rule in northern Africa until the piecemeal loss of territory through the revolt of tribes and districts enabled the rise of their most effective enemies, the Marinid dynasty, in 1215.
Abu Bakr, the first successor of Muhammad, nominated Umar as his successor on his deathbed.
Some were locally oriented, mainstream political parties that had no apparent transnational objectives.
Uthman and Ali also were called by the same title, while the Shi'a consider Ali to have been the only truly legitimate caliph, of these four men.
Al-Qaeda has named its Internet newscast from Iraq "The Voice of the Caliphate".
Initially controlling Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, the Fatimid caliphs extended their rule for the next 150 years, taking Egypt and Palestine, before the Abbasid dynasty was able to turn the tide, limiting Fatimid rule to Egypt.
This period was characterized by a remarkable flourishing in technology, trade and culture; many of the masterpieces of al-Andalus were constructed in this period.
The rule of the Caliphate is considered as the heyday of Muslim presence in the Iberian peninsula, before it fragmented into various taifas in the 11th century.
It was only when the Ottoman Empire fell into a decline that the claim to caliphate was discovered by the sultans to have a practical use, since it gave them prestige among Sunni Muslims.
This period is known as the Fitna, or the first Islamic civil war.
Toward the end of the 19th century, it started to gain importance due to the decline of the Ottoman Empire, which was heavily defeated in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78.
However, creation of this foreign army and al-Mu'tasim's transfer of the capital from Baghdad to Samarra created a division between the caliphate and the peoples they claimed to rule.
Its former leader, Osama bin Laden, called for Muslims to "establish the righteous caliphate of our umma".
ISIL's claim to be the highest authority of Muslims has not been widely recognized beyond the territory it controls with 10 million people, and the group has been at war with armed forces including the Iraqi Army, the Syrian Army, the Free Syrian Army, Al-Nusra Front, Syrian Democratic Forces, and Iraqi Kurdistan's ''Peshmerga'' and People's Protection Units (YPG) along with a 60 nation coalition in its efforts to establish a ''de facto'' state on Iraqi and Syrian territory.
Many of these concepts were adopted and further advanced in medieval Europe from the 13th century onwards.
The Khalifatul Masih has overall authority for all religious and organisational matters and is bound to decide and act in accordance with the Qur'an and sunnah.
Jurists have argued by qiyas that the above restriction on privatization can be extended to all essential resources that benefit the community as a whole.
For information about Caliph the Mahdî, and his prophesied Deputy `Îsâ (Jesus), see "Mahdi", "Jesus in Islam", "Islamic eschatology" (Section Islamic eschatology#Major figures), and "Second Coming" (Section Second Coming#Islam).
Their time was marked by scientific, cultural and religious prosperity.
Founder Hassan al-Banna wrote about the restoration of the Caliphate.
Al-Juwayni argued that Islam is the goal of the ummah, so any ruler who deviates from this goal must be impeached.
Umar, the second caliph, was killed by a Persian named Piruz Nahavandi.
According to Noah Feldman, a law professor at Harvard University, the system of legal scholars and jurists responsible for the rule of law was replaced by the codification of Sharia by the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century:
They are also part of the chain of holders of the office of the Caliphate, as recognized by some Muslims.
The term ''caliph'' (), derives from the Arabic word '''' (, ), which means "successor", "steward", or "deputy" and has traditionally been considered a shortening of either the term ''khalifat Allah'' ("successor to God") or ''khalifat rasul Allah'' ("successor of the messenger of God").
In the 9th century, the Abbasids created an army loyal only to their caliphate, composed predominantly of Turkic Cuman, Circassian, and Georgian slave origin known as Mamluks.
minority sect of Islam and reject the legitimacy of the first 3 caliphs.
The Fatimid dynasty finally ended in 1171.
Candidates were usually, but not necessarily, from the same lineage as the deceased leader.
