Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party.
Expect to be called a demagogue, but don't be a demagogue.
"The words of a President have an enormous weight," he would later write, "and ought not to be used indiscriminately."
He signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming $4 million from expenditures, thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt.
While not completely opposed to the idea, Coolidge believed the League, as then constituted, did not serve American interests, and he did not advocate membership.
He returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, to forestall any questions about the authority of a notary public to administer the presidential oath.
The title of the DeForest film was ''President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds''.
I am equally determined to defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts and to maintain the authority and jurisdiction over her public officers where it has been placed by the Constitution and laws of her people."
Give administration a chance to catch up with legislation.
As president, Coolidge's reputation as a quiet man continued.
He left the administration's industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover, who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio.
But Coolidge found another way to connect with fellow citizens: he deposited savings with a variety of institutions.
The treaty did not achieve its intended result—the outlawry of war—but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II.
Coolidge won the popular vote by 2.5&nbsp;million over his opponents' combined total.
Shortly before his death, Coolidge confided to an old friend: "I feel I no longer fit in with these times."
Many believed that the split in the Republican party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency.
Coolidge's family had deep roots in New England; his earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge, emigrated from Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts.
A possibly apocryphal story has it a matron, seated next to him at a dinner, said to him, "I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you."
He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require; he believed property owners should bear much of the cost.
When the time came to select a vice presidential nominee, the bosses also made and announced their decision on whom they wanted – Sen. Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin – and then prematurely departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone to be chief justice.
By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $100 bonus to Massachusetts veterans.
In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy.
Elected in his own right in 1924, he gained a reputation as a small-government conservative, and also as a man who said very little, although having a rather dry sense of humor.
His response to the Boston Police Strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight and gave him a reputation as a man of decisive action.
But the possession of property carries the obligation to use it in a larger service...
A delegate from Oregon, Wallace McCamant, having read ''Have Faith in Massachusetts'', proposed Coolidge for vice president instead.
He spoke out against "race hatred" and "religious intolerance," saying that engaging in such actions would be an "injury" and not a "benefit" to the country:
After McNary-Haugen's defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the Curtis-Crisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm co-operatives in times of surplus; the bill did not pass.
However, most Congressional attempts to pass this legislation were filibustered by Southern Democrats.
With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898.
Expect to be called a stand-patter, but don't be a stand-patter.
"I do not believe we can do much about it."
He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle."
Calvin's death at age 16 from blood poisoning brought on by an infected blister "hurt him terribly," according to son John.
They also won in Tennessee, the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction.
Coolidge further stated the United States should assist and help immigrants who come to the country, and urged immigrants to reject "race hatreds" and "prejudices":
However, the act was unclear on whether the federal government or the tribal leaders retained tribal sovereignty.
File:Calvin Coolidge 1938 Issue-$5.jpg|Coolidge on a 1938 postage stamp
Harding ran a "front-porch" campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South, New York, and New England – his audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches.
While Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, conservatives across the nation had seen a rising star.
He is adulated among advocates of smaller government and ''laissez-faire''; supporters of an active central government generally view him less favorably, while both sides praise his stalwart support of racial equality.
In the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in western Massachusetts.
The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only one year.
That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers.
In 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session; Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin.
The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 in the person of Coolidge's Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover.
In 1907, he was elected to a second term, and in the 1908 session, Coolidge was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position.
Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited.
Coolidge received an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Bates College in Lewiston, Maine.
In 1926, the Senate eventually approved joining the Court (with reservations).
Henry Field had a pew in Edwards Church, and Grace was a member, but Coolidge only went along.
Coolidge's father remarried in 1891, to a schoolteacher, and lived to the age of eighty.
"Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution," he said in his veto message.
Coolidge and Dawes won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follette's home state.
In February 1927, Congress took up the McNary-Haugen bill again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it.
Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society; when asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, "Got to eat somewhere."
He was renominated in 1911, and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin.
Coolidge's primary initiative was the Kellogg–Briand Pact of 1928, named for Coolidge's Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg, and French foreign minister Aristide Briand.
His administration commissioned studies to improve programs for Native Americans.
"Whatever disorder has occurred", Gompers wrote, "is due to Curtis's order in which the right of the policemen has been denied…" Coolidge publicly answered Gompers's telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strike – and his response launched him into the national consciousness (quoted, above left).
The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City.
The only hope of perfecting human relationships is in accordance with the law of service under which men are not so solicitous about what they shall get as they are about what they shall give.
After all, '''the chief business of the American people is business'''.
Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge's presidency was relief for farmers.
Did he support these measures while president?
Coolidge's retirement was relatively short, as he died at the age of 60 in January 1933, less than two months before his direct successor, Herbert Hoover, left office.
it is probable that a press which maintains an intimate touch with the business currents of the nation is likely to be more reliable than it would be if it were a stranger to these influences.
If it be to help a powerful corporation better to serve the people, whatever the opposition, do that.
File:Sesquicentennial american independence half dollar commemorative obverse.jpg|Coolidge and Washington on the Sesquicentennial of American Independence commemorative half-dollar
Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding's death.
What they earn is theirs, no matter how small or how great.
He attributed the neologism to:
John became a railroad executive, helped to start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site.
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge.
In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board.
Coolidge also signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload.
'''''Telegram from Governor Calvin Coolidge to Samuel Gompers''' September 14, 1919.''
The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters, convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8.
On December 6, 1923, he was the first president whose address to Congress was broadcast on radio.
When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor.
U.S. President Ronald W. Reagan regarded Coolidge as his favorite 20th-century U.S. president because of Coolidge's belief in a more limited U.S. federal government.
Coolidge spoke in favor of the civil rights of African-Americans, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were "just as sacred as those of any other citizen" under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a "public and a private duty to protect those rights."
In December 1924, Coolidge delivered his second State of the Union address, in which he commended African-Americans for their advances, and stressed that their constitutional rights should be respected and protected:
A Republican lawyer from Vermont, Coolidge worked his way up the ladder of Massachusetts state politics, eventually becoming governor of that state.
Coolidge, tacitly but fully in support of Curtis' position, closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities.
On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South.
'''''President Calvin Coolidge's address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, Washington D.C.,''' January 25, 1925.''
On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to all American Indians, while permitting them to retain tribal land and cultural rights.
Speaking before a group of naturalized Americans of European background at the White House in October 1924, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they have "contributed much to making our country what it is."
The treaty, ratified in 1929, committed signatories—the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan—to "renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another."
Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader, and as a strict enforcer of law and order.
On June 2, 1924 Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States.
Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Harlan Fiske Stone in 1925.
To avoid the cost of law school, Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond & Field, and reading law with them.
The United States' occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti continued under his administration, but Coolidge withdrew American troops from the Dominican Republic in 1924.
Coolidge disdained regulation, and demonstrated this by appointing commissioners to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction.
While there, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman, a Congregational mystic, with a neo-Hegelian philosophy.
Coolidge attended Black River Academy and then Amherst College, where he distinguished himself in the debating class, as a senior joined the fraternity Phi Gamma Delta and graduated ''cum laude''.
When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15.
The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed just one month into Coolidge's term, and was generally well received in the country.
Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices.
After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn; he later said that "when he the son died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him."
Peters, concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority, and relieved Curtis of duty.
Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing the McNary-Haugen measure as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated.
The Republican Party was dominant in New England in Coolidge's time, and he followed Hammond's and Field's example by becoming active in local politics.
He kept Harding's able speechwriter Judson T. Welliver; Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925.
He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River and was often observed on the water by local boating enthusiasts.
Coolidge's mother was the daughter of a Plymouth Notch farmer.
Instead of manipulating prices, he favored instead Herbert Hoover's proposal to create profits by modernizing agriculture.
Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission.
McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one-year terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes.
While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S.
Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the nomination of the popular commerce secretary.
A few days later, on June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at Washington, D.C.'s Howard University, in which he thanked and commended African-Americans for their rapid advances in education and their contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in World War I, all while being faced with discrimination and prejudices at home:
Another ancestor, Edmund Rice, arrived at Watertown in 1638.
Although he did eventually name Secretary Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that Coolidge overall showed a lack of interest in federal flood control.
He appointed judges to various specialty courts as well, including Genevieve R. Cline, who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928.
This was the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency.
If it be to protect the rights of the weak, whoever objects, do it.
Stone was serving as dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general in 1924 to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding's Attorney General, Harry M. Daugherty.
The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish- and German Americans.
After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers' demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee.
While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish."
The suggestion caught on quickly with the masses starving for an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated.
Although a few of Harding's cabinet appointees were scandal-tarred, Coolidge retained all of them, out of an ardent conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president he was obligated to retain Harding's counselors and policies until the next election.
The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox, for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, for vice president.
Coolidge's speech was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio.
'''John Calvin Coolidge Jr.''' (; July 4, 1872 – January 5, 1933) was the 30th President of the United States (1923–29).
That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength."
Soon after, he was elected as the 29th vice president in 1920 and succeeded to the presidency upon the sudden death of Warren G. Harding in 1923.
On the other hand, Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation.
Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors.
Coolidge opposed McNary-Haugen, declaring that agriculture must stand "on an independent business basis," and said that "government control cannot be divorced from political control."
Each additional banker who held some of his money was an additional pair of eyes that would follow him, and likely be an additional vote.
He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court.
Coolidge died suddenly from coronary thrombosis at "The Beeches," at 12:45&nbsp;p.m., January 5, 1933.
Coolidge's supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns, encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor.
Senator Winthrop Murray Crane who controlled the western faction of the Massachusetts Republican Party; Crane's party rival in the east of the commonwealth was U.S.
His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge (1875–1890), died at the age of fifteen, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was eighteen.
He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in the Vermont House of Representatives as well as the Vermont Senate.
After 25 years he wrote of Grace, "for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces".
At his father's urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts to become a lawyer.
"Farmers never have made much money," said Coolidge, the Vermont farmer's son.
He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court.
In 1899, he declined renomination, running instead for City Solicitor, a position elected by the City Council.
He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force.
He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee.
Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
He dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled.
The Democrats' hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette Sr., a Republican Senator from Wisconsin, split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party.
John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born in Plymouth Notch, Windsor County, Vermont, on July 4, 1872, the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day.
Another key strategic alliance which Coolidge forged was with Guy Currier, who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm and broad circle of friends which Coolidge lacked, and which would have a lasting impact on his political career.
Although Coolidge was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75% alcohol or less, in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union, Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated.
Beach first mentioned the term "Coolidge effect" in publication in 1955, crediting one of his students with suggesting the term at a psychology conference.
The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920.
Coolidge was the leading vote-getter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall's eastern base of support.
Though his reputation underwent a renaissance during the Ronald Reagan administration, modern assessments of Coolidge's presidency are divided.
In a May 1926 speech delivered at Arlington to commemorate the U.S. military, Coolidge praised the linguistic, ethnic, and religious diversity of the U.S. population, citing it as an example of American exceptionalism.
Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations, but developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper and public servant.
Some have criticized Coolidge as an adherent of the laissez-faire ideology, which they claim led to the Great Depression.
when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting, as Coolidge did not like to be beholden to bankers or anyone else, for that matter.
The Senate failed to act; the United States never joined the World Court.
They were in the same crowd, boating, picnicking, and dancing&mdash;the younger ones of the Congregational Church.
Coolidge's taxation policy was that of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, the ideal that "scientific taxation"—lower taxes—actually increase rather than decrease government receipts.
Coolidge's second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio.
As his reputation as a hard-working and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services.
By 1927, only the wealthiest 2% of taxpayers paid any federal income tax.
Stone was Coolidge's fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican.
Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the elections that year.
He sent Dwight Morrow to Mexico as the American ambassador.
Don't hurry to legislate.
It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate.
"I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President," he once told Ethel Barrymore, "and I think I will go along with them."
His father, a notary public, administered the oath of office in the family's parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47&nbsp;a.m. on August 3, 1923; President Coolidge then went back to bed.
This committee recommended that the government conduct an in-depth investigation into reservation life (health, education, economics, justice, civil rights, etc.).
Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the scandals of his predecessor's administration, and left office with considerable popularity.
Coolidge's speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account; towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing his name for nomination to lieutenant governor.
In Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states; nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as administrative inspector and was a member of the governor's council.
Instead of vying for another term in the State House, Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired.
Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 61 judges to the United States district courts.
When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans-Atlantic flight, President Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and a sound-on-film record of the event exists.
Soon thereafter, however, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him.
On August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States.
They are profoundly concerned with buying, selling, investing and prospering in the world.
Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the party's U.S.
As a full-time elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton.
He made Custer State Park his "summer White House."
Coolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then propitious to his intervention, conferred with Crane's operative, William Butler, and then acted.
Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919.
He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing.
A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans that year was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt, and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft.
Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall.
It was the most subdued campaign since 1896, partly because of Coolidge's grief, but also because of his naturally non-confrontational style.
Coolidge did not believe that personally visiting the region after the floods would accomplish anything, and that it would be seen as mere political grandstanding.
At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the "Bread and Roses" strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts.
Although not an isolationist, Coolidge was reluctant to enter into foreign alliances.
Coolidge's great-great-grandfather, also named John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth Notch.
He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle – that a policeman does not strike.
