Although much of Calvin's work was in Geneva, his publications spread his ideas of a ''correctly'' Reformed church to many parts of Europe.
John Calvin and many Reformed theologians who followed him describe Christ's work of redemption in terms of three offices: prophet, priest, and king.
Those who apparently fall away either never had true faith to begin with (1 John 2:19), or, if they are saved but not presently walking in the Spirit, they will be divinely chastened (Hebrews 12:5–11) and will repent (1 John 3:6–9).
The term also occasionally appears in both theological and secular controversial contexts, where it usually connotes a negative opinion about some variety of theological determinism, predestination, or a version of Evangelical Christianity or Calvinism that is deemed by the critic to be unenlightened, harsh, or extreme.
The covenant of works is made with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
Contemporary Reformed theologians such as William Placher and Nancy Duff have criticized this view, claiming it makes God appear abusive or vindictive and sanctions violence by the strong against the weak.
On the Lord's supper, Westminster takes a position between Lutheran sacramental union and Zwinglian memorialism: "the Lord's supper really and indeed, yet not carnally and corporally, but spiritually, receive and feed upon Christ crucified, and all benefits of his death: the body and blood of Christ being then not corporally or carnally in, with, or under the bread and wine; yet, as really, but spiritually, present to the faith of believers in that ordinance as the elements themselves are to their outward senses."
Due to Calvin's missionary work in France, his programme of reform eventually reached the French-speaking provinces of the Netherlands.
To remedy this, Reformed Christians believe that God predestined some people to be saved.
The first is creation and providence, which is God's creating and continuing to work in the world.
In 1990, the Dutch Reformed Church document ''Church and Society'' maintained that although they were changing their stance on apartheid, they believed that within apartheid and under God's sovereign guidance, "...everything was not without significance, but was of service to the Kingdom of God."
In the 16th century, the Reformation gained many supporters in Eastern Hungary and Hungarian-populated regions in Transylvania.
However, contemporary theologians have been critical of aspects of Western views here as well.
John Calvin (1509–64), Heinrich Bullinger (1504–75), Wolfgang Musculus (1497–1563), Peter Martyr Vermigli (1500–62), and Andreas Hyperius (1511–64) belong to the second generation of Reformed theologians.
All Calvinists would affirm that the blood of Christ was sufficient to pay for every single human being ''IF'' it were God's intention to save every single human being.
These marks allowed the Reformed to identify the church based on its conformity to the Bible rather than the Magisterium or church tradition.
B. Warfield have termed it "an inconsistent and therefore unstable form of Calvinism."
In the same way, money can be made fruitful.
Sacraments are denoted "signs and seals of the covenant of grace."
Martin Luther and his successor Philipp Melanchthon were undoubtedly significant influences on these theologians, and to a larger extent later Reformed theologians.
The original Lord's Day service designed by John Calvin was a highly liturgical service with the Creed, Alms, Confession and Absolution, the Lord's supper, Doxologies, prayers, Psalms being sung, the Lords prayer being sung, Benedictions.
Others, such as those following the Scots Confession, include a third mark of rightly administered church discipline, or exercise of censure against unrepentant sinners.
Some contemporary Reformed theologians have moved away from the traditional language of one person in two natures, viewing it as unintelligible to contemporary people.
The visible church is the institutional body which contains both members of the invisible church as well as those who appear to have faith in Christ, but are not truly part of God's elect.
An early printed appearance of the T-U-L-I-P acronym is in Loraine Boettner's 1932 book, ''The Reformed Doctrine of Predestination''.
More recently, theologians have sought to reformulate the TULIP acronym to more accurately reflect the Canons of Dort.
The knowledge people have of God is different from that which they have of anything else because God is infinite, and finite people are incapable of comprehending an infinite being.
Baptism is only for those who "actually profess repentance towards God," and not for the children of believers.
Calvin did not live to see the foundation of his work grow into an international movement; but his death allowed his ideas to break out of their city of origin, to succeed far beyond their borders, and to establish their own distinct character.
Named after its formulator Moses Amyraut, this doctrine is still viewed as a variety of Calvinism in that it maintains the particularity of sovereign grace in the application of the atonement.
The doctrine holds that this purposeful influence of God's Holy Spirit cannot be resisted, but that the Holy Spirit, "graciously causes the elect sinner to cooperate, to believe, to repent, to come freely and willingly to Christ."
His doctrine of the priesthood of all believers raised the laity to the same level as the clergy.
However, sixteenth and seventeenth-century theologians developed a particular theological system called "covenant theology" or "federal theology" which many conservative Reformed churches continue to affirm today.
Liberal Reformed theologians such as Shirley Guthrie have argued that churches which have revised and rejected long-held theological beliefs are more faithful to the Reformed tradition than more conservative theologians because Reformed confessions are provisional and always open to revision.
Such a connection was advanced in influential works by R. H. Tawney (1880–1962) and by Max Weber (1864–1920).
In South Korea, Presbyterianism is the largest Christian denomination.
Those chosen receive salvation through Christ alone.
Sanctification, like justification, is by faith, because doing good works is simply living as the son of God one has become.
Leading divines, either Calvinist or those sympathetic to Calvinism, settled in England (Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, and Jan Łaski) and Scotland (John Knox).
These theologians have sought to bring attention to issues of environmental, economic, and political justice as areas of human life that have been affected by sin.
This and the Belgic Confession were adopted as confessional standards in the first synod of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1571.
* "Total depravity," also called "total inability," asserts that as a consequence of the fall of man into sin, every person is enslaved to sin.
Even more important than the liberal development of the Netherlands was the rise of modern democracy in England and North America.
The invisible church is the body of all believers, known only to God.
Reformed theologians such as Shirley Guthrie have proposed that rather than conceiving of God in terms of his attributes and freedom to do as he pleases, the doctrine of God is to be based on God's work in history and his freedom to live with and empower people.
Calvinism gained some popularity in Scandinavia, especially Sweden, but was rejected in favor of Lutheranism after the Synod of Uppsala in 1593.
The Boers and so-called Afrikaner Calvinists allegedly used a form of Calvinism and Kuyperian theology to justify apartheid in South Africa (see Afrikaner Calvinism).
Throughout the world, the Reformed churches operate hospitals, homes for handicapped or elderly people, and educational institutions on all levels.
For example, Karl Barth interpreted Christ's prophetic office in terms of political engagement on behalf of the poor.
They are often cited among the primary founders of the United States of America.
Neo-Calvinism, a form of Dutch Calvinism, is the movement initiated by the theologian and former Dutch prime minister Abraham Kuyper.
Barth's theology and that which follows him has been called "monocovenantal" as opposed to the "bi-covenantal" scheme of classical federal theology.
The remainder of the 16th century saw an explosion of confessional activity.
The biggest Reformed association is the World Communion of Reformed Churches with more than 80 million members in 211 member denominations around the world.
However, it is now rare to call Arminians a part of the Reformed tradition, as many see these two schools of thought as opposed, making the terms ''Calvinist'' and ''Reformed'' synonymous.
Others, including John Calvin, also including the right administration of the sacraments.
Reformed theologians affirm that the Bible is true, but differences emerge among them over the meaning and extent of its truthfulness.
Pierre Bayle, a Reformed Frenchman, also felt safer in the Netherlands than in his home country.
This sin was passed down to all mankind because all people are said to be in Adam as a covenantal or "federal" head.
Reformed theologians, along with other Protestants, believe salvation from punishment for sin is to be given to all those who have faith in Christ.
Another precondition for the rise of democracy in the Anglo-American world was the fact that Calvin favored a mixture of democracy and aristocracy as the best form of government (mixed government).
Reformed Christians have especially emphasized that Christ truly became human so that people could be saved.
Sanctification is the part of salvation in which God makes the believer holy, by enabling them to exercise greater love for God and for other people.
In it, God graciously offers salvation from death on condition of faith in God.
For some, the only mark is the pure preaching of the gospel of Christ.
Reformed Christians see the Christian Church as the community with which God has made the covenant of grace, a promise of eternal life and relationship with God.
A second covenant, called the covenant of grace, is said to have been made immediately following Adam and Eve's sin.
According to adherents.com the Reformed/Presbyterian/Congregational/United churches represent 75 million believers worldvide.
The former view, sometimes called "high Calvinism", argues that the Fall occurred partly to facilitate God's purpose to choose some individuals for salvation and some for damnation.
The five points were more recently popularized in the 1963 booklet ''The Five Points of Calvinism Defined, Defended, Documented'' by David N. Steele and Curtis C. Thomas.
People are not able to know anything about God except through this self-revelation.
Speculation about anything which God has not revealed through his Word is not warranted.
Especially large are those in Indonesia, Korea and Nigeria.
Further, the preaching of ministers about God is the very Word of God because God is considered to be speaking through them.
The Whigs' "perceptions of politics attracted widespread support in America because they revived the traditional concerns of a Protestantism that had always verged on Puritanism."
Through the influence of Karl Barth, many contemporary Reformed theologians have discarded the covenant of works, along with other concepts of federal theology.
The Baptist Confession describes the Lord's supper as "the body and blood of Christ being then not corporally or carnally, but spiritually present to the faith of believers in that ordinance," similarly to the Westminster Confession.
Reformed theologians use the concept of covenant to describe the way God enters fellowship with people in history.
This covenant is administered in different ways throughout the Old and New Testaments, but retains the substance of being free of a requirement of perfect obedience.
These two views vied with each other at the Synod of Dort, an international body representing Calvinist Christian churches from around Europe, and the judgments that came out of that council sided with infralapsarianism (Canons of Dort, First Point of Doctrine, Article 7).
He appreciated the advantages of democracy.
The doctrine is driven by the Calvinistic concept of the sovereignty of God in salvation and their understanding of the nature of the atonement.
As late as 1974, the majority of the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa was convinced that their theological stances (including the story of the Tower of Babel) could justify apartheid.
Calvin expressed himself on usury in a 1545 letter to a friend, Claude de Sachin, in which he criticized the use of certain passages of scripture invoked by people opposed to the charging of interest.
In the twentieth century Abraham Kuyper, Herman Bavinck, B.
Historical theologian Richard Muller, however, has argued that the Reformed tradition has historically maintained certain distinctive beliefs and practices despite confessional and theological diversity.
First-generation Reformed theologians include Huldrych Zwingli (1484–1531), Martin Bucer (1491–1551), Wolfgang Capito (1478–1541), John Oecolampadius (1482–1531), and Guillaume Farel (1489–1565).
The movement was first called ''Calvinism'' by Lutherans who opposed it, and many within the tradition would prefer to use the word ''Reformed''.
In accord with the belief that finite humans cannot comprehend infinite divinity, Reformed theologians hold that Christ's human body cannot be in multiple locations at the same time.
Faith is not purely intellectual, but involves trust in God's promise to save.
Reformed theologians affirm the historic Christian belief that Christ is eternally one person with a divine and a human nature.
Contemporary Reformed confessions such as the Barmen Confession and Brief Statement of Faith of the Presbyterian Church (USA) have avoided language about the attributes of God and have emphasized his work of reconciliation and empowerment of people.
Some define the tradition by a certain church polity, some by a set of essential beliefs, some by doctrinal themes and emphases in the tradition, some by a certain "habitus" or character, and some by a certain theological grammar.
In order to minimize the misuse of political power he suggested dividing it among several institutions in a system of checks and balances (separation of powers).
* "Irresistible grace," also called "efficacious grace", asserts that the saving grace of God is effectually applied to those whom he has determined to save (that is, the elect) and overcomes their resistance to obeying the call of the gospel, bringing them to a saving faith.
Despite the protestations of those who hold to a strict view of the regulative principle, today hymns and musical instruments are in common use, as are contemporary worship music styles with elements such as worship bands.
These colonies became safe havens for persecuted religious minorities, including Jews.
He was the first prominent philosopher who demanded tolerance for atheists.
Some Calvinists have summarized this as "The atonement is sufficient for all and efficient for the elect."
However the Reformed teaching is actually that while people continue to bear God's image and may do things that are outwardly good, their sinful intentions affect all of their nature and actions so that they are not wholly pleasing to God.
The Son (Christ) is held to be eternally begotten by the Father and the Holy Spirit eternally proceeding from the Father and Son.
Calvinism became the theological system of the majority in Scotland (see John Knox), the Netherlands (see William Ames, T. J. Frelinghuysen and Wilhelmus à Brakel) and parts of Germany (especially these adjacent to the Netherlands) in the Palatinate, Kassel and Lippe with the likes of Olevianus and his colleague Zacharias Ursinus.
According to Russell, thinking this way encourages Christians to interact in terms of fellowship rather than reciprocity.
Some of the major figures in this area are John Piper, Mark Driscoll, Al Mohler, Mark Dever, C. J. Mahaney, Joshua Harris, and Tim Keller.
Since the 19th century, however, some of the Reformed churches have modified their understanding of the regulative principle and make use of musical instruments, believing that Calvin and his early followers went beyond the biblical requirements and that such things are circumstances of worship requiring biblically-rooted wisdom, rather than an explicit command.
For Reformed Christians, such a belief denies that Christ actually became human.
In March 2009, ''Time'' magazine described the New Calvinism as one of the "10 ideas changing the world".
Enjoying self-rule they practiced separation of powers.
James Bratt has identified a number of different types of Dutch Calvinism: The Seceders—split into the Reformed Church "West" and the Confessionalists; and the Neo-Calvinists—the Positives and the Antithetical Calvinists.
In these parts, the Reformed nobles protected the faith.
Finally, Calvin taught that if worldly rulers rise up against God they should be put down.
The 1549 ''Consensus Tigurinus'' brought together those who followed Zwingli and Bullinger's memorialist theology of the Lord's supper, which taught that the supper simply serves as a reminder of Christ's death, and Calvin's view that the supper serves as a means of grace with Christ actually present, though spiritually rather than bodily.
Moreover, the Calvinist Dutch authorities allowed the printing of books that could not be published elsewhere, e.g.
Christ is believed to have died in place of the believer, who is accounted righteous as a result of this sacrificial payment.
In Christian theology, people are created good and in the image of God but have become corrupted by sin, which causes them to be imperfect and overly self-interested.
Therefore, justification is held to arise solely from God's free and gracious act.
It should be noted that these views were not universal and were condemned by many Calvinists outside South Africa.
He said that the walls and the roof of a house are barren, too, but it is permissible to charge someone for allowing him to use them.
These denominations and the Anglican Church were influenced by Calvin's theology in varying degrees.
Calvinism is named after John Calvin.
The stability and breadth of Reformed theology during this  period stand in marked contrast to the bitter controversy experienced by Lutherans prior to the 1579 Formula of Concord.
Michael Horton, however, has defended the covenant of works as combining principles of law and love.
Each of these theologians also understood salvation to be by grace alone, and affirmed a doctrine of particular election (the teaching that some people are chosen by God for salvation).
Karl Barth reinterpreted the Reformed doctrine of predestination to apply only to Christ.
Baptism is for infant children of believers as well as believers, as it is for all the Reformed except  Baptists and some Congregationalists.
This framework orders God's life with people primarily in two covenants: the covenant of works and the covenant of grace.
It is also echoed in the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It was influential in France, Lithuania and Poland before being mostly erased due to the counter-reformational activities taken up by the monarch in each country.
A 2011 report of the Pew Forum on Religious and Public Life estimated that members of Presbyterian or Reformed churches make up 7% of the estimated 801 million Protestants globally, or approximately 56 million people.
Because Adam and Eve broke the covenant by eating the forbidden fruit, they became subject to death and were banished from the garden.
They tend to support a decentralized political order resulting in laissez-faire capitalism.
Those who take this view believe the Bible to be the primary source of our knowledge of God, but also that some parts of the Bible may be false, not witnesses to Christ, and not normative for today's church.
The substance of the doctrine regarding worship is that God institutes in the Scriptures everything he requires for worship in the Church and that everything else is prohibited.
The movement declined in the 1990s and was declared dead in a 2008 ''Church History'' journal article.
God has chosen from eternity to extend mercy to those he has chosen and to withhold mercy from those not chosen.
Baptists also insist on immersion or dipping, in contradistinction to other Reformed Christians.
All three are distinct categories from Presbyterian or Reformed (7%) in this report.
Instead, theologians tend to emphasize Jesus' context and particularity as a first-century Jew.
Henry Dunant, a Reformed pietist, founded the Red Cross and initiated the Geneva Conventions.
Calvinists do not believe, however, that the atonement is limited in its value or power, but rather that the atonement is limited in the sense that it is intended for some and not all.
* "Unconditional election" asserts that God has chosen from eternity those whom he will bring to himself not based on foreseen virtue, merit, or faith in those people; rather, his choice is unconditionally grounded in his mercy alone.
Feminist theologian Letty Russell used the image of partnership for the persons of the Trinity.
The central assertion of these points is that God saves every person upon whom he has mercy, and that his efforts are not frustrated by the unrighteousness or inability of humans.
The other Reformed churches took over this system of church self-government which was essentially a representative democracy.
As the regulative principle is reflected in Calvin's own thought, it is driven by his evident antipathy toward the Roman Catholic Church and its worship practices, and it associates musical instruments with icons, which he considered violations of the Ten Commandments' prohibition of graven images.
They have, however, often reinterpreted the meaning of each of the offices.
Calvin's ''Institutes of the Christian Religion'' (1536–59) was one of the most influential theologies of the era.
The doctrine of justification by faith alone was a direct inheritance from Luther.
Instead, Barth argued that God always interacts with people under the covenant of grace, and that the covenant of grace is free of all conditions whatsoever.
People are not by nature inclined to love God, but rather to serve their own interests and to reject the rule of God.
The acronym was very cautiously if ever used by Calvinist apologists and theologians before the booklet by Steele and Thomas.
Toward the middle of the 16th century, the Reformed began to commit their beliefs to confessions of faith, which would shape the future definition of the Reformed faith.
Reformed theologians emphasize that this sinfulness affects all of a person's nature, including their will.
In this view, Christ is the revelation of God, and the scriptures witness to this revelation rather than being the revelation itself.
Those not chosen receive the just wrath that is warranted for their sins against God.
Traditionally, Reformed theologians have also followed the medieval tradition going back to the early church councils of Nicaea and Chalcedon on the doctrine of the Trinity.
However, detractors like B.
On this basis, many early Calvinists also eschewed musical instruments and advocated a cappella exclusive psalmody in worship, though Calvin himself allowed other scriptural songs as well as psalms, and this practice typified presbyterian worship and the worship of other Reformed churches for some time.
The Lapsarian controversy has a few vocal proponents on each side today, but overall it does not receive much attention among modern Calvinists.
Reformed theologians have proposed several interpretations of Reformed identity.
Christ is said to be a prophet in that he teaches perfect doctrine, a priest in that he intercedes to the Father on believers' behalf and offered himself as a sacrifice for sin, and a king in that he rules the church and fights on believers' behalf.
Their system denied that the call of the gospel to "repent and believe" is directed to every single person and that it is the duty of every person to trust in Christ for salvation.
In this way, he and his followers stood in the vanguard of resistance to political absolutism and furthered the cause of democracy.
The Seceders were largely infralapsarian and the Neo-Calvinists usually supralapsarian.
Reformed churches may exercise several forms of ecclesiastical polity, but most are presbyterian or congregationalist with some being episcopalian.
The United States Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution and (American) Bill of Rights initiated a tradition of human and civil rights that was continued in the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen and the constitutions of numerous countries around the world, e. g. Latin America, Japan, India, Germany, and other European countries.
It is historically held by Protestants to be the most important article of Christian faith, though more recently it is sometimes given less importance out of ecumenical concerns.
This is not to deny the fact that the Spirit's outward call (through the proclamation of the Gospel) can be, and often is, rejected by sinners; rather, it's that inward call which cannot be rejected.
Because Lutherans believe that Christ is bodily present in the Eucharist, they hold that Christ is bodily present in many locations simultaneously.
The aim of his political thought was to safeguard the rights and freedoms of ordinary men and women.
Many, but not all, Reformed theologians continue to make use of the threefold office as a framework because of its emphasis on the connection of Christ's work to Israel.
Most settlers in the American Mid-Atlantic and New England were Calvinists, including the English Puritans, the French Huguenots and Dutch settlers of New Amsterdam (New York), and the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians of the Appalachian back country.
Galileo's ''Discorsi''.
This view, that sin so dominates people that they are unable to avoid sin, has been called total depravity.
Christian Reconstructionism is a fundamentalist Calvinist theonomic movement that has remained rather obscure.
Baptists, Quakers, and Methodists are organized in a similar way.
While the phrases "totally depraved" and "utterly perverse" were used by Calvin, what was meant was the inability to save oneself from sin rather than being absent of goodness.
After the successful fight for independence from Spain (1579), the Netherlands, under Calvinist leadership, became the freest country in Europe.
This action of God gives everyone knowledge about God, but this knowledge is only sufficient to make people culpable for their sin; it does not include knowledge of the gospel.
While people are said to retain will, in that they willfully sin, they are unable not to sin because of the corruption of their nature due to original sin.
Revelation of God through Christ comes through two basic channels.
No single piece of our mental world is to be sealed off from the rest and there is not a square inch in the whole domain of human existence over which Christ, who is sovereign over all, does not cry: 'Mine!'
He also dismissed the argument (based upon the writings of Aristotle) that it is wrong to charge interest for money because money itself is barren.
The document demonstrates the diversity as well as unity in early Reformed theology.
Westminster speaks of "a sacramental relation, or a sacramental union, between the sign and the thing signified; whence it comes to pass that the names and effects of the one are attributed to the other."
The Westminster Confession of Faith limits the sacraments to baptism and the Lord's Supper.
Reformed Protestants generally subscribe to a particular view of the atonement called substitutionary atonement, which explains Christs death as a sacrificial payment for sin.
Some have also argued that Calvinism as a whole stresses the sovereignty or rule of God in all things including salvation.
Aware of the trial against Galileo, René Descartes lived in the Netherlands, out of reach of the Inquisition.
Founded by R. J. Rushdoony, the movement has had an important influence on the Christian Right in the United States.
In the nineteenth century, the churches that were based on Calvin's theology or influenced by it were deeply involved in social reforms, e.g.
There is significant latitude in Baptist congregations regarding the Lord's supper, and many hold the Zwinglian view.
This covenant extends to those under the "old covenant" whom God chose, beginning with Abraham and Sarah.
Drawing on the Eastern tradition, these Reformed theologians have proposed a "Social Trinity" where the persons of the Trinity only exist in their life together as persons-in-relationship.
The ideological basis of the American Revolution was largely provided by the radical Whigs, who had been inspired by Milton, Locke, James Harrington, Algernon Sidney, and other thinkers.
People gain knowledge of God from the Bible which cannot be gained in any other way.
Some of the largest Calvinist communions were started by 19th and 20th century missionaries.
The threefold office links the work of Christ to God's work in ancient Israel.
Kuyper wanted to awaken the church from what he viewed as its pietistic slumber.
Protestants do not hold there to be any other requirement for salvation, but that faith alone is sufficient.
