Traditionally, the Khmer people have a recorded information on ''Tra'' leaves.
The lines run from the capital to Sihanoukville on the southern coast, and from Phnom Penh to Sisophon (although trains often run only as far as Battambang).
The 2010 Anti-Corruption Law provided no protection to whistle-blowers, and whistle-blowers can be jailed for up to 6 months if they report corruption that cannot be proven.
This cliff marks the southern limit of the Dângrêk Mountains.
Burials, much richer than other types of finds, testify to improvement of food availability and trade (even on long distances: in the 4th century BC trade relations with India were already opened) and the existence of a social structure and labour organisation.
Legislative powers are shared by the executive and the bicameral Parliament of Cambodia, which consists of a lower house, the National Assembly (, ''rotsaphea'') and an upper house, the Senate (, ''preutsaphea'').
In 2010, the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces comprised about 102,000 active personnel (200,000 reserve).
Folk dances originated in the villages and are performed, for the most part, by the villagers for the villagers.
The International Labor Organization Country Office for Thailand, Cambodia and Lao PDR, has noted that the law has "several key concerns and gaps".
The Mekong and the Tonle Sap River, their numerous tributaries, and the Tonle Sap provided avenues of considerable length, including  navigable all year by craft drawing  and another  navigable to craft drawing .
Hun Sen has accumulated highly centralised power in Cambodia, including a ''praetorian guard'' that 'appears to rival the capabilities of the country's regular military units', and is allegedly used by Hun Sen to quell political opposition.'
Cambodia has been described by Human Rights Watch's Southeast Asian Director, David Roberts, as a "vaguely communist free-market state with a relatively authoritarian coalition ruling over a superficial democracy."
Land has been confiscated from hundreds of thousands of Cambodians over more than a decade for the purpose of self-enrichment and maintaining power of various groups of special interests.
"Those fish are so important for their livelihoods, both economically and nutritionally," said Gordon Holtgrieve, a professor at the University of Washington who researches Cambodia's freshwater fish and he points out that none of the dams that are either built or being built on the Mekong river "are pointing at good outcomes for the fisheries."
Other key habitats include the dry forest of Mondolkiri and Ratanakiri provinces and the Cardamom Mountains ecosystem, including Bokor National Park, Botum-Sakor National Park, and the Phnom Aural and Phnom Samkos wildlife sanctuaries.
The Chinese chronicles suggest that after Jayavarman I of Chenla died around 690, turmoil ensued which resulted in division of the kingdom into Land Chenla and Water Chenla which was loosely ruled by weak princes under the dominion of Java.
Southwest monsoons blow inland bringing moisture-laden winds from the Gulf of Thailand and Indian Ocean from May to October.
However, from 1970 until early 1972, the Cambodian conflict was largely one between the government and army of Cambodia, and the armed forces of North Vietnam.
Key concepts in Cambodian Buddhism include reincarnation, and religious activities are focused on acquiring ''bonn'' (Pali ''punna'', merit), and erasing ''kamm'' (Pali ''kamma'', karma), which, for Khmers, means the negative results accrued from past actions.
The degrading activities involves both the local population, Cambodian businesses and political authorities, as well as foreign criminal syndicates and many transnational corporations from all over the world.
Cambodia has a temperature range from  and experiences tropical monsoons.
This densely populated plain, which is devoted to wet rice cultivation, is the heartland of Cambodia.
Rice is the principal commodity.
Corruption affects the judiciary, the police and other state institutions.
Cambodia is expected to be free of land mines by 2020 but the social and economic legacy, including orphans and one in 290 people being an amputee, is expected to affect Cambodia for years to come.
In 1863 Cambodia became a protectorate of France which doubled the size of the country by reclaiming the north and west from Thailand.
These varieties had been collected in the 1960s.
Held at the end of the rainy season when the Mekong river begins to sink back to its normal levels allowing the Tonle Sap River to reverse flow, approximately 10% of Cambodia's population attends this event each year to play games, give thanks to the moon, watch fireworks, dine, and attend the boat race in a carnival-type atmosphere.
A law was necessary to rein in the country's unions, Van Sou Ieng said.
Specifically, the study found that poorer academic achievement among children were associated with parents holding stronger fatalistic beliefs (i.e., human strength cannot change destiny).
Recent improvements to internet connection technology and competition have resulted in lower prices.
Independent unions and employers remain as divided as ever.
As a result of its international relations, various charitable organisations have assisted with social, economic, and civil infrastructure needs.
By this time, the Khmer penchant for monument building had ceased.
Fear of renewed political instability and corruption within the government discourage foreign investment and delay foreign aid, although there has been significant aid from bilateral and multilateral donors.
The constitution of Cambodia promulgates free compulsory education for nine years, guaranteeing the universal right to basic quality education.
In 802 AD, Jayavarman II declared himself king, uniting the warring Khmer princes of Chenla under the name "Kambuja".
The first mention of Cambodia in European documents was in 1511 by the Portuguese.
There are 212 mammal species, 536 bird species, 240 reptile species, 850 freshwater fish species (Tonle Sap Lake area), and 435 marine fish species.
A pivotal event in Cambodian prehistory was the slow penetration of the first rice farmers from the north, which began in the late 3rd millennium BC.
They are taken care of by wrapping in cloth to protect from moisture and the climate.
Fertility is highest in Mondol Kiri and Rattanak Kiri Provinces, where women have an average of 4.5 children, and lowest in Phnom Penh where women have an average of 2.0 children.
The capital and largest city is Phnom Penh, the political, economic, and cultural centre of Cambodia.
Phnom Penh International Airport (Pochentong) in Phnom Penh is the second largest in Cambodia.
Besides the main interprovincial traffic artery connecting Phnom Penh with Sihanoukville, resurfacing a former dirt road with concrete / asphalt and implementation of 5 major river crossings by means of bridges have now permanently connected Phnom Penh with Koh Kong, and hence there is now uninterrupted road access to neighbouring Thailand and their vast road system.
The number of reported landmine casualties has sharply decreased, from 800 in 2005 to 111 in 2013 (22 dead and 89 injured).
Lack of a clear distinction between the courts and the executive branch of government also makes for a deep politicisation of the judicial system.
Prime Minister Hun Sen has vowed to rule until he is 74.
Following the Cambodian coup of 1970, the deposed king gave his support to his former enemies, the Khmer Rouge.
While per capita income remains low compared to most neighbouring countries, Cambodia has one of the fastest growing economies in Asia with growth averaging 6 percent over the last decade.
Companies deal with extensive red tape when obtaining licenses and permits, especially construction related permits, and that the demand for and supply of bribes are commonplace in this process.
The Senate has 61 seats, two of which are appointed by the king and two others by the National Assembly, and the rest elected by the commune councillors from 24 provinces of Cambodia.
Amongst the Cambodian population aged over 65, the female to male ratio is 1.6:1.
Cambodia gained independence in 1953.
Cambodia was once one of the most landmined countries in the world.
Key ingredients are kaffir lime, lemon grass, garlic, fish sauce, soy sauce, curry, tamarind, ginger, oyster sauce, coconut milk and black pepper.
Total Cambodian military spending stands at 3% of national GDP.
Male youth age (15–24 years) have a literacy rate of 89% compared to 86% for females.
Pol Pot was determined to keep his power and disenfranchise any enemies or potential threats, and thus increased his violent and aggressive actions against his people.
Most native Khmer scholars trace modern dance forms back to the time of Angkor, seeing similarities in the temple engravings of the period, while others hold that modern Khmer dance styles were learned (or re-learned) from Siamese court dancers in the 1800s.
The Khmer language is a member of the Mon–Khmer subfamily of the Austroasiatic language group.
Most visitors (51%) arrived through Siem Reap with the remainder (49%) through Phnom Penh and other destinations.
On 14 October 2004, King Norodom Sihamoni was selected by a special nine-member throne council, part of a selection process that was quickly put in place after the abdication of King Norodom Sihanouk a week prior.
not only Cambodia, every country has trade union law.
The name "Cambodia" is used most often in the Western world while "Kampuchea" is more widely used in the East.
''A Yai'' can be performed solo or by a man and woman and is often comedic in nature.
Some of the locally produced souvenirs include:
The English "Cambodia" is an anglicization of the French "Cambodge", which in turn is the French transliteration of the Khmer ''Kampuchea''.
The tourism industry is the country's second-greatest source of hard currency after the textile industry.
Despite adopting an 'Anti-Corruption Law' in 2010, corruption prevails throughout the country.
It encompasses the lake and nine provinces: Kampong Thom, Siem Reap, Battambang, Pursat, Kampong Chhnang, Banteay Meanchey, Pailin, Oddar Meanchey and Preah Vihear.
It is believed that the territory of Funan may have held the port known to Alexandrian geographer Claudius Ptolemy as "Kattigara".
Extending outward from this central region are transitional plains, thinly forested and rising to elevations of about  above sea level.
"Two decades of economic growth have helped make Cambodia a global leader in reducing poverty.
Between 1969 and 1973, Republic of Vietnam and US forces bombed Cambodia in an effort to disrupt the Viet Cong and Khmer Rouge.
The rate of deforestation in Cambodia is one of the highest in the world.
Seven reporters sustained minor injuries while at least two Cambodian protesters were hit by slingshot projectiles and hospitalised.
China is Cambodia's biggest source of foreign direct investment.
Almost all Cham in Cambodia are Muslims.
and many original master tapes from the period were lost or destroyed.
This remains a diplomatic sticking point with over one million ethnic Khmers (the Khmer Krom) still living in this region.
Across Cambodia, authorities routinely detain alleged drug users, homeless people, "street" children, sex workers, and people perceived to have disabilities in a "haphazard system of detention centers around the country".
The government plans to increase the quality of healthcare in the country by raising awareness of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases.
Recent artistic figures include singers Sinn Sisamouth and Ros Serey Sothea (and later Meng Keo Pichenda), who introduced new musical styles to the country.
asked Van Sou Ieng, chairman of the Garment Manufacturers Association in Cambodia (GMAC), adding that it was incomprehensible to expect an employer to negotiate a dispute with 25 different union leaders.
Phnom Penh, located at the junction of the Bassac, the Mekong, and the Tonle Sap rivers, is the only river port capable of receiving 8,000-ton ships during the wet season and 5,000-ton ships during the dry season.
He is a former Khmer Rouge member who defected.
However, the majority of these people escaped poverty only slightly: they remain highly vulnerable—even to small shocks—which could quickly bring them back into poverty.
However, in public Sihanouk refuted the US' right to use air strikes in Cambodia and on 26 March Prince Sihanouk said "these criminal attacks must immediately and definitively stop..." and on 28 March a press conference was held and Sihanouk appealed to the international media "I appeal to you to publicise abroad this very clear stand of Cambodia—that is, I will in any case oppose all bombings on Cambodian territory under whatever pretext."
Western sports such as basketball, volleyball, bodybuilding, field hockey, rugby union, golf, and baseball are gaining popularity.
The study further found that "length of residence" of parents in the community in which they stay predicted better academic achievement among their children.
Colloquially, Cambodians refer to their country as either ''Srok Khmer'' (), meaning "Khmer's Land", or the slightly more formal ''Prateh Kampuchea'' (), literally "Country of Kampuchea".
for the smaller towns and villages with less than 1,000 households.
The Lon Nol government in Phnom Penh surrendered on 17 April 1975, just five (5) days after the US mission evacuated Cambodia.
The most curious prehistoric evidence in Cambodia are the various "circular earthworks" discovered in the red soils near Memot and in the adjacent region of Vietnam in the latter 1950s.
Hun Sen and his government have seen much controversy.
"Impunity for perpetrators of human rights abuses and lack of an independent judiciary remained serious problems," Amnesty's 2012 Annual Report said.
Upper layers in the same site gave evidence of transition to Neolithic, containing the earliest dated earthenware ceramics in Cambodia
In Cambodia, some Iron Age settlements were found beneath Baksei Chamkrong and other Angkorian temples while circular earthworks, were found beneath ''Lovea'' a few kilometres north-west of Angkor.
Traditionally, education in Cambodia was offered by the wats (Buddhist temples), thus providing education exclusively for the male population.
An excavation at Phum Snay revealed 21 graves with iron weapons and cranial trauma which could point to conflicts in the past, possible with larger cities in Angkor.
The 1980s and 1990s also saw the rise in popularity of ''kantrum'', a music style of the Khmer Surin set to modern instrumentation.
Cambodia ranked among the worst places in the world for organised labour in the 2015 International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) Global Rights Index, landing in the category of countries with "no guarantee of rights".'
Plans for hydroelectric development in the region, by Laos in particular, pose a "real danger to the food supply of Vietnam and Cambodia.
The government made three unsuccessful attempts to enter into negotiations with the insurgents, but by 1974, the CPK were operating openly as divisions, and some of the NVA combat forces had moved into South Vietnam.
Cambodia is a member of La Francophonie.
Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the North Vietnamese attempt to overrun Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot's then second in command, Nuon Chea.
Native sports include traditional boat racing, buffalo racing, Pradal Serey, Khmer traditional wrestling and Bokator.
The  trial began in November 2011.
The new regime modelled itself on Maoist China during the Great Leap Forward, immediately evacuated the cities, and sent the entire population on forced marches to rural work projects.
Among 69 countries that have comparable data, Cambodia ranked fourth in terms of the fastest poverty reduction in the world from 2004–2008.
From a humble farming background, Hun Sen was just 33 when he took power in 1985, and is now in the company of other long ruling dictators such as Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe and Kazakhstan's Nursultan Nazarbayev'.
The foreign relations of Cambodia are handled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under Prak Sokhon.
"In Cambodia, landmines and exploded ordnance alone have caused 44,630 injuries between 1979 and 2013, according to the Cambodia Mine/UXO Victim Information System"
The Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports is responsible for establishing national policies and guidelines for education in Cambodia.
Some of those detention centres are ostensibly for drug treatment, while others are ostensibly for "social rehabilitation".
The poverty rate fell to 10 percent in 2013, and further reduction of poverty is expected for both urban and rural households throughout 2015–2016.
The Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia total more than 7,000 personnel.
Cambodia has two major ports, Phnom Penh and Sihanoukville, and five minor ones.
Being isolated in the highlands, the various Khmer Loeu groups were not Indianized like their Khmer cousins and consequently are culturally distant from modern Khmers and often from each other, observing many pre-Indian-contact customs and beliefs.
Cambodia's tourist souvenir industry employs a lot of people around the main places of interest.
Two of Cambodia's most acclaimed universities are based in Phnom Penh.
The Worldwide Fund for Nature recognises six distinct terrestrial ecoregions in Cambodia – the Cardamom Mountains rain forests, Central Indochina dry forest, Southeast Indochina dry evergreen forest, Southern Annamite Range rain forest, Tonle Sap freshwater swamp forest, and Tonle Sap-Mekong peat swamp forest.
Prehistoric artefacts are often found during mining activities in Ratanakiri.
Royal dances like the Apsara Dance are icons of the Cambodian culture as are the Mahori ensembles that accompany them.
Favouritism by government officials and impunity is commonplace.
In 1972, a constitution was adopted, a parliament elected, and Lon Nol became president.
The Communist insurgency inside Cambodia continued to grow, aided by supplies and military support from North Vietnam.
The lake is unusual: It all but disappears in the dry season and then "expands massively as water flow from the Mekong backs up when the rains come.
Bon Om Tuuk (Festival of Boat Racing), the annual boat rowing contest, is the most attended Cambodian national festival.
The Khmer Empire grew out of these remnants of Chenla becoming firmly established in 802 when Jayavarman II (reigned c790-850) declared independence from Java and proclaimed himself a Devaraja.
The supply of fish and fish products for food and trade in 2000 was 20 kilograms per person or 2&nbsp;ounces per day per person.
As the Vietnam War progressed, Sihanouk adopted an official policy of neutrality in the Cold War.
Formerly part of the Khmer Empire, the area had been controlled by the Vietnamese since 1698, with King Chey Chettha II granting Vietnamese permission to settle in the area decades before.
Since June, NGOs reported that authorities "abused at least 30 prisoners – 29 while in police custody and one in prison.
In this remote and largely uninhabited area, Phnom Aural, Cambodia's highest peak rises to an elevation of .
Disastrous flooding occurred in 2001 and again in 2002, with some degree of flooding almost every year.
In 1997, fearing the growing power of his co-Prime Minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Hun launched a coup, using the army to purge Ranariddh and his supporters.
Khmer classical dance is the form of stylised performance art established in the royal courts of Cambodia exhibited for both entertainment and ceremonial purposes.
In 2012 Credit Bureau Cambodia was established with direct regulatory oversight by the National Bank of Cambodia.
Upstream dams will imperil the fish stocks that provide the vast majority of Cambodia's protein and could also denude the Mekong River of the silt Vietnam needs for its rice basket."
The kingdom is a constitutional monarchy with Norodom Sihamoni, a monarch chosen by the Royal Throne Council, as head of state.
Most are urban dwellers, engaged primarily in commerce.
Moreover, household consumption increased by nearly 40 percent.
With increasing economic activity has come an increase in automobile and motorcycle use, though bicycles still predominate.
Cambodia's per capita income is rapidly increasing but is low compared to other countries in the region.
The country's minority groups include Vietnamese, Chinese, Chams, and 30 hill tribes.
Tourism has been one of Cambodia's triple pillar industries.
The cuisine is relatively unknown to the world compared to that of its neighbours Thailand and Vietnam.
The dances are performed by intricately costumed, highly trained men and women on public occasions for tribute, invocation or to enact traditional stories and epic poems such as Reamker, the Khmer version of the Ramayana.
Cambodia's extensive inland waterways were important historically in international trade.
A new Khmer capital was established at Oudong south of Longvek in 1618, but its monarchs could survive only by entering into what amounted to alternating vassal relationships with the Siamese and Vietnamese for the next three centuries with only a few short-lived periods of relative independence.
Important sociopolitical issues includes widespread poverty, pervasive corruption, lack of political freedoms, low human development, and a high rate of hunger.
The National Bank of Cambodia is the central bank of the kingdom and provides regulatory oversight to the country's banking sector and is responsible in part for increasing the foreign direct investment in the country.
Chinese-language newspaper Jianhua Daily quoted industry officials as saying that Cambodia will have three million foreign tourist arrivals in 2010 and five million in 2015.
In December 1967 Washington Post journalist Stanley Karnow was told by Sihanouk that if the US wanted to bomb the Vietnamese communist sanctuaries, he would not object, unless Cambodians were killed.
The EPI was established in 2001 by the World Economic Forum as a global gauge to measure how well individual countries perform in implementing the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals.
The indigenous ethnic groups of the mountains are known collectively as Montagnards or Khmer Loeu, a term meaning "Highland Khmer".
Sihanouk allowed the Vietnamese communists to use Cambodia as a sanctuary and a supply route for their arms and other aid to their armed forces fighting in South Vietnam.
Cambodian and Thai troops have clashed over land immediately adjacent to the Preah Vihear temple, leading to a deterioration in relations.
"Impunity enjoyed by the rich and powerful helps explain a lack of public trust in Cambodia's judicial and law enforcement institutions."
The lyrics usually have moral or religious theme.
The 1997 coup placed power solely in the hands of Prime Minister Hun Sen and the Cambodian People's Party, who remain in power .
It is classified as "world music" and combines Cambodian music with Western style rock.
Amnesty International currently recognises one prisoner of conscience in the country: 33-year-old land rights activist Yorm Bopha.
Pol Pot and Ieng Sary asserted their dominance over the Vietnamese-trained communists, many of whom were purged.
"Cyclo" (as hand-me-down French) or Cycle rickshaws are an additional option often used by visitors.
The US State Department report says "politicized and ineffective judiciary is one of the country's key human rights abuses."
Cambodian folk dance, often performed to mahori music, celebrates the various cultural and ethnic groups of Cambodia.
Rural Cambodians wear a krama scarf which is a unique aspect of Cambodian clothing.
The stability established following the conflict was shaken in 1997 by a coup d'état led by the co-Prime Minister Hun Sen against the non-communist parties in the government.
Around the 13th century, monks from Sri Lanka introduced Theravada Buddhism to Southeast Asia.
Cambodia has three commercial airports.
The 2013 election results were disputed by Hun Sen's opposition, leading to demonstrations in the capital.
Cambodia's primary forest cover fell from over 70% in 1969 to just 3.1% in 2007.
One of the largest challenges facing Cambodia is still the fact that the older population often lacks education, particularly in the countryside, which suffers from a lack of basic infrastructure.
As of 1987, only one passenger train per week operated between Phnom Penh and Battambang but a $141 million project, funded mostly by the Asian Development Bank, has been started to revitalise the languishing rail system that will "(interlink) Cambodia with major industrial and logistics centers in Bangkok and Ho Chi Minh City".
Journalists covering a protest over disputed election results in Phnom Penh on 22 September 2013 say they were deliberately attacked by police and men in plain clothes, with slingshots and stun guns.
Social dances are those performed by guests at banquets, parties or other informal social gatherings.
The hill tribe people in Cambodia were "hunted incessantly and carried off as slaves by the Siamese (Thai), the Anamites (Vietnamese), and the Cambodians."
Some delicacies are នំបញ្ចុក (Num Banh chok), អាម៉ុក (Amok), អាពីង (Ah Ping).
The minister of National Defense is General Tea Banh.
There exists sparse evidence for a Pleistocene human occupation of present-day Cambodia, which includes quartz and quartzite pebble tools found in terraces along the Mekong River, in Stung Treng and Kratié provinces, and in Kampot Province, although their dating is unreliable.
Some slight archaeological evidence shows communities of hunter-gatherers inhabited the region during Holocene: the most ancient archaeological discovery site in Cambodia is considered to be the cave of ''L'aang Spean'', in Battambang Province, which belongs to the Hoabinhian period.
The Indianized kingdom built monumental temples including Angkor Wat, now a World Heritage Site, and facilitated the spread of first Hinduism, then Buddhism to much of Southeast Asia.
The most distinctive geographical feature is the inundations of the Tonle Sap (Great Lake), measuring about  during the dry season and expanding to about  during the rainy season.
Between 2010 and 2012 the number of regulated banks and micro-finance institutions increased from 31 covered entities to over 70 individual institutions underlining the growth within the Cambodian banking and finance sector.
Cambodia's road traffic accident rate is high by world standards.
Cambodian red curry is also eaten with rice and rice vermicelli noodles.
While the violent ruptures of the 1970s and 1980s have passed, several border disputes between Cambodia and its neighbours persist.
In 2004, the number of road fatalities per 10,000 vehicles was ten times higher in Cambodia than in the developed world, and the number of road deaths had doubled in the preceding three years.
In a series of 1993 interviews of women about prostitution, three quarters of the interviewees found being a prostitute to be a norm and a profession they felt was not shameful having.
Forced land evictions by senior officials, security forces, and government-connected business leaders are commonplace in Cambodia.
Cambodian Buddhism is deeply pervaded by Hinduism, Tantrism, and native animism.
Khmer culture, as developed and spread by the Khmer empire, has distinctive styles of dance, architecture and sculpture, which have been exchanged with neighbouring Laos and Thailand throughout history.
The UN withdrew after holding elections in which around 90 percent of the registered voters cast ballots.
Hun Sen was a former Khmer Rouge commander who was originally installed by the Vietnamese and, after the Vietnamese left the country, maintains his strong man position by violence and oppression when deemed necessary.
Ranariddh was ousted and fled to Paris while other opponents of Hun Sen were arrested, tortured and some summarily executed.
In 2011 Cambodia's per capita income in PPP is $2,470 and $1,040 in nominal per capita.
Typically faster-paced than classical dance, folk dances display themes of the "common person" such as love, comedy or warding off evil spirits.
