The earliest clear evidence of occupation is the remains of a year-old farmstead discovered at the site of Fitzwilliam College.
Cambridge is at the heart of the high-technology Silicon Fen with industries such as software and bioscience and many start-up companies spun out of the university.
Typically the coldest night of the year at the Botanic Garden will fall to .
The city gained its second University in 1992 when Anglia Polytechnic became Anglia Polytechnic University.
degree, Higher National Diploma, Master's or PhD), (41.2% vs. 19.7%).
In 1209, Cambridge University was founded by students escaping from hostile townspeople in Oxford.
There is also a student-led egalitarian minyan which holds services on Friday evenings.
This latter project was controversial at the time.
The Beth Shalom Reform synagogue which previously met at a local school, has recently opened a purpose-built synagogue.
The Centre for Computing History, a museum dedicated to the story of the Information age, moved to Cambridge from Haverhill in 2013.
The festival has been organised by the city council since its inception in 1964.
Cambridge Swimming Club, Cambridge Dive team, and City of Cambridge Water Polo Club are all based at Parkside Swimming Pool.
Cambridge City F.C.
As well as being the home of the Cambridge Rules in football, Parker's Piece was used for first-class cricket matches from 1817 to 1864.
The town became a military centre, with an R.A.F.
The city is located in an area of level and relatively low-lying terrain just south of the Fens, which varies between  above sea level.
The A428 connects the city with Bedford and St Neots, and the A10 connects the city to King's Lynn to the north via Ely, and to central London to the south.
Pye Ltd evolved into several other companies including TETRA radio equipment manufacturer Sepura.
Described as one of the "most beautiful cities in the world" by Forbes in 2010, tourism generates over £300 million for the city's economy.
Coldhams Common, Stourbridge Common, Nine Wells, Byron’s Pool, West Pit, Paradise, Barnwell West, Barnwell East, and Logan’s Meadow.
The venue was opened in 2005 and hosts theatre, dance, live music and comedy The ADC Theatre is managed by the University of Cambridge, and typically has 3 shows a week during term time.
Such minimum temperatures and frost averages are typical for inland areas across much of southern and central England.
The town was thus historically surrounded by low lying wetlands that have been drained as the town has expanded.
It gave Cambridge monopoly of waterborne traffic and hithe tolls and recognised the borough court.
King's College Chapel, was begun in 1446 by King Henry VI.
There are also a number of venues within the colleges.
Settlements have existed around the Cambridge area since prehistoric times.
Cambridge was granted its city charter in 1951 in recognition of its history, administrative importance and economic success.
Few records survive but 16 of 40 scholars at Kings Hall died.
The absolute minimum temperature recorded at the Botanic Garden site was , recorded in February 1947, although a minimum of  was recorded at the now defunct observatory site in December 1879.
The Cambridge Science Festival, typically held annually in March, is the United Kingdom's largest free science festival.
Success returned to the club in the early 1990s when they won two successive promotions and reached the FA Cup quarter finals in both of those seasons, and in 1992 they came close to becoming the first English team to win three successive Football League promotions which would have taken them into the newly created FA Premier League.
Other major developments currently being constructed in the city are Darwin Green (formerly NIAB), and University-led developments at West Cambridge and North West Cambridge.
In 1068, two years after his conquest of England, William of Normandy built a castle on Castle Hill.
In 1643 control of the town was given by Parliament to Oliver Cromwell, who had been educated at Sidney Sussex College.
Started in 1977, the Cambridge Film Festival was held annually in July, but moved to September in 2008 to avoid a clash with the rescheduled Edinburgh Film Festival.
In addition, a much higher than average proportion of people have a high level qualification (e.g.
The city is represented in both codes of Rugby football.
Solo artist Boo Hewerdine is from Cambridge, as are drum and bass artists (and brothers) Nu:Tone and Logistics.
The political composition of the city council is currently:  25 Labour councillors, 14 Liberal Democrat, 2 independent  and one Conservative.
Cambridge & Coleridge Athletic Club is the city's track and field club, based at the University of Cambridge's Wilberforce Road track.
The city has no power stations, though a five-metre wind turbine, part of a Cambridge Regional College development, can be seen in King's Hedges.
Pink Floyd are the most notable band with roots in Cambridge.
The Cambridge Network keeps businesses in touch with each other.
City councillors now elect a mayor annually.
A layer of phosphatic nodules (coprolites) under the marl were mined in the 19th century for fertiliser.
The Strawberry Fair music and arts festival and Midsummer Fairs are held on Midsummer Common, and the annual Cambridge Beer Festival takes place on Jesus Green.
For example, 2000 firkins of butter were brought up the river every Monday from the agricultural lands to the North East, particularity Norfolk, to be unloaded in the town for road transportation to London.
More recently the temperature fell to  on 11 February 2012,  on 22 January 2013 and  on 20 December 2010.
After a brief housing in the University of Cambridge library, it moved to its current, purpose-built building on Trumpington Street in 1848.
Between 1975 and 1985 the Cambridge Poetry Festival was held binannually.
Formed in Cambridge in 1908 as Cambridge Town, the club were Southern Premier League champions in 1962-63, the highest they have finished in the English football pyramid.
The skyline is dominated by the last two buildings, along with the spire of the Our Lady and the English Martyrs Church, the chimney of Addenbrooke's Hospital and St John's College Chapel tower.
Other shopping arcades followed at Lion Yard, which housed a relocated Central Library for the city, and the Grafton Centre which replaced Victorian housing stock which had fallen into disrepair in the Kite area of the city.
averaged over the entire month) of any month at any location in the UK since records began; , at both the NIAB and Botanic Garden observing stations.
Many of these parks and buildings are owned or leased by university colleges, and the companies often have been spun out of the university.
The city is home to Cambridge United F.C., who play at the Abbey Stadium.
The city has one University Technical College, UTC Cambridge, opened September 2014.
For one week in May, on nearby Jesus Green, the annual Cambridge Beer Festival is held.
But they were beaten in the playoffs and another decline set in, which was completed in 2005 when they were relegated from the Football League and for the second time in 20 years narrowly avoided going out of business.
The Mumford Theatre is part of Anglia Ruskin University, and hosts shows by both student and non-student groups.
The library was reopened in September 2009, after having been closed for refurbishment for 33 months, more than twice as long as was forecast when the library closed for redevelopment in January 2007.
Bands who were formed in Cambridge include Clean Bandit, Henry Cow, Katrina and the Waves, The Soft Boys, Ezio Horace X, The Broken Family Band, Uncle Acid & the Deadbeats, and the pop-classical group King's Singers, who were formed at the University.
Microsoft has located its Microsoft Research UK offices in West Cambridge, separate from the main Microsoft UK campus in Reading, and also has an office on Station Road.
For electoral purposes the city is divided into 14 wards: Abbey, Arbury, Castle, Cherry Hinton, Coleridge, East Chesterton, King's Hedges, Market, Newnham, Petersfield, Queen Edith's, Romsey, Trumpington, and West Chesterton.
Evidence of more widespread Roman settlement has been discovered including numerous farmsteads and a village in the Cambridge district of Newnham.
Cambridge is home to two Real Tennis courts out of just 42 in the world at Cambridge University Real Tennis Club.
Like Cambridge, both have universities and are also similar in population; Heidelberg, Germany since 1965, and Szeged, Hungary since 1987.
The smaller Brookfields Hospital stands on Mill Road.
In 1382 a revised town charter effects a "diminution of the liberties that the community had enjoyed", due to Cambridge's participation in the Peasants' Revolt.
A Buddhist centre was opened in the former Barnwell Theatre on Newmarket Road in 1998.
The town itself escaped relatively lightly from German bombing raids, which were mainly targeted at the railway.
in 2013-14 and intend to construct a new ground outside the city, in Sawston.
Technology companies include Abcam, CSR, ARM Limited, CamSemi, Jagex and Sinclair.
Cambridge Royals Baseball Club compete in the British Baseball Federation in 2011.
Cambridge was granted a Royal Charter by King John in 1207, which permitted the appointment of a Mayor, although the first recorded Mayor, Harvey FitzEustace, served in 1213.
Housed within the city's 19th century former corn exchange building the venue was used for a variety of additional functions throughout the 20th century including tea parties, motor shows, sports matches and a music venue with temporary stage.
Snowfall accumulations are usually small, in part because of Cambridge's low elevation, and low precipitation tendency during transitional snow events.
There are three Quaker Meetings in Cambridge, located on Jesus Lane, Hartington Grove, and a Meeting called "Oast House" that meets in Pembroke College.
Founded in 1816 from the bequeathment and collections of Richard, Viscount FitzWilliam, the museum was originally located in the building of the Perse Grammar School in Free School Lane.
Since 2011, the Cambridgeshire Guided Busway has carried bus services into the centre of Cambridge from St Ives, Huntingdon, Peterborough and other towns and villages along the routes, operated by Stagecoach and Go Whippet.
Located in the driest region of Britain, Cambridge's rainfall averages around  per year, around half the national average, with some years occasionally falling into the semi-arid (under  of rain per year) category.
Before this, the absolute maximum was  set at the Botanic Garden in August 1990.
State schools are administered by Cambridgeshire County Council, which maintains 251 schools in total, 35 of them in Cambridge city.
July 2006 for example recorded the highest official mean monthly maximum (i.e.
2012 Mercury Prize winners Alt-J are based in Cambridge.
The building would become synonymous with Cambridge, and currently is used in the logo for the City Council.
The city council's headquarters are in the Guildhall, a large building in the market square.
There is a non-stop train to King's Cross every half-hour during off-peak hours, with a journey time of 45 minutes.
Like most cities, modern-day Cambridge has many suburbs and areas of high-density housing.
The University of Cambridge, founded in 1209 is one of the top five universities in the world.
The fort was bounded on two sides by the lines formed by the present Mount Pleasant, continuing across Huntingdon Road into Clare Street.
There are seven amateur cricket clubs within the city: Cambridge Granta, Camden, Cambridge St Giles, New Chesterton Institute, Fen Ditton, Romsey Town and Cherry Hinton.
Daniel Zeichner (Labour) was elected Member of Parliament (MP) at the 2015 general election, replacing Julian Huppert, a Liberal Democrat.
Cambridge Folk Festival, one of the largest festivals of folk music in the UK, is held annually in the grounds of Cherry Hinton Hall on the outskirts of the city.
Evidence exists that the invading Anglo-Saxons had begun occupying the area by the end of the century.
The town's river link to the surrounding agricultural land, and good road connections to London in the south meant Cambridge has historically served as an important regional trading post.
Cambridge is also known for the sporting events between the University of Cambridge and the University of Oxford, especially the rugby union Varsity Match and the Boat Race, though many of these do not take place within Cambridge.
Shallower parts of the Cam are used for recreational punting, a type of boating in which the craft is propelled by pushing against the river bed with a quant pole.
Singers Matthew Bellamy, of the rock band Muse, Tom Robinson, and Olivia Newton-John were born in the city.
Cambridge is twinned with two cities.
The Cambridge University constituency was abolished under 1948 legislation, and ceased at the dissolution of Parliament for the 1950 general election, along with the other university constituencies.
The Open University also has a presence in the city, with an office operating on Hills Road.
After the Viking period, the Saxons enjoyed a return to power, building churches such as St Bene't's Church, wharves, merchant houses and a mint, which produced coins with the town's name abbreviated to "Grant".
The town north of the river was severely affected being almost wiped out.
As a university town lying on fairly flat ground and with traffic congestion, Cambridge has the highest level of cycle use in the UK.
Wysing Arts Centre, one of the leading research centres for the visual arts in Europe, is associated with the city, though is located several miles west of Cambridge.
Live music venues hosting popular music in the city include the Cambridge Corn Exchange, Cambridge Junction and the Portland Arms.
The A service continues on to the railway station and Addenbrookes, before terminating at a new Park and Ride in Trumpington.
The theatre often has touring shows, as well as those by local companies.
With the arrival of the railway and associated employment came development of areas around the station, such as Romsey Town.
More than 40% of the workforce has a higher education qualification, more than twice the national average.
The parliamentary constituency of Cambridge covers most of the city.
The University of Cambridge used to have a seat in the House of Commons, Sir Isaac Newton being one of the most notable holders.
The chapel was built in phases by a succession of kings of England from 1446 to 1515, its history intertwined with the Wars of the Roses, and completed during the reign of King Henry VIII.
training centre and the regional headquarters for Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Hertfordshire, and Bedfordshire established during the conflict.
Cambridge's two universities, the collegiate University of Cambridge and the local campus of Anglia Ruskin University, serve around 30,000 students, by some estimates.
During the war Cambridge served as an evacuation centre for over 7,000 people from London, as well as for parts of the University of London.
It was moved to the Guildhall in 1862, and is now located in the Grand Arcade shopping centre.
British American Football League club Cambridgeshire Cats play at Coldham's Common.
Great St Mary's Church has the status of "University Church".
Each of the 14 wards also elects councillors to Cambridgeshire County Council.
The station was outside the town centre following pressure from the university to restrict travel by undergraduates.
The distinctive Round Church dates from this period.
The Fitzwilliam Museum is the city's largest, and is the lead museum of the University of Cambridge Museums.
Cambridge was also the home of Pye Ltd., founded in 1898 by W. G. Pye, who worked in the Cavendish Laboratory; it began by supplying the University and later specialised in wireless telegraphy equipment, radios, televisions and also defence equipment.
It is bordered by water meadows within the city such as Sheep's Green as well as residential development.
Cambridgeshire Constabulary provides the city's policing; the main police station is at Parkside, adjacent to the city's fire station, operated by Cambridgeshire Fire and Rescue Service.
Cambridge played a unique role in the invention of modern football: the game's first set of rules were drawn up by members of the University in 1848.
Cambridge has a number of churches, some of which form a significant part of the city's architectural landscape.
After nine years of non league football they returned to the Football League in 2014 by winning the Conference National playoffs.
Cambridge has two cycling clubs Team Cambridge and Cambridge Cycling Club.
Anglo-Saxon grave goods have been found in the area.
It hosts the Cambridge University Footlights Dramatic Club which has produced many notable figures in British comedy.
The Abu Bakr Jamia Islamic Centre on Mawson Road and the Omar Faruque Mosque and Cultural Centre in Kings Hedges serve the city's community of around 4,000 Muslims until a planned new mosque is built.
Because of its rapid growth in the 20th century, Cambridge has a congested road network.
The arrival of the Vikings was recorded in the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'' in 875.
The city centre of Cambridge is mostly commercial, historic buildings, and large green areas such as Jesus Green, Parker's Piece and Midsummer Common.
The last time this occurred was in 2011 with  of rain at the Botanic Gardens and  at the NIAB site.
Cambridge and its surrounds are sometimes referred to as Silicon Fen, an allusion to Silicon Valley, because of the density of high-tech businesses and technology incubators that have developed on science parks around the city.
The band's former songwriter, guitarist and vocalist Syd Barrett was born and lived in the city, and he and another founding member, Roger Waters, went to school together at Cambridgeshire High School for Boys.
Cambridge played a significant role in the early part of the English Civil War as it was the headquarters of the Eastern Counties Association, an organisation administering a regional East Anglian army, which became the mainstay of the Parliamentarian military effort before the formation of the New Model Army.
The museum has five departments: Antiquities; Applied Arts; Coins and Medals; Manuscripts and Printed Books; and Paintings, Drawings and Prints.
Other members of the University of Cambridge Museums are the Museum of Archaeaology and Anthropology, The Polar Museum, The Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences, Museum of Classical Archaeology, The Whipple Museum of the History of Science, and the University Museum of Zoology.
An Orthodox synagogue and Jewish student centre is located on Thompson's Lane, operated jointly by the Cambridge Traditional Jewish Congregation and the Cambridge University Jewish Society, which is affiliated to the Union of Jewish Students.
The Cambridge Shakespeare Festival is an eight-week season of open-air performances of the works of William Shakespeare, held in the gardens of various colleges of the university.
Regular flights to Jersey and European destinations such as Gothenburg operated until the end of January 2016 when all scheduled and charter traffic from the airport was halted.
The city also has a number of theological colleges training clergy for ordination into a number of denominations, with affiliations to both the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University.
were founded in 1923, and play in National League One at their home ground, Grantchester Road, in the southwest corner of the city.
The guided busway is currently being extended to cross Milton Road and join the new station.
The city is also represented in polo by Cambridge Polo Club, based in Barton, just outside the city.
The River Cam running through the city centre is used for boating.
The M11 motorway from east London terminates to the north-west of the city where it joins the A14, a major freight route which connects the port of Felixstowe on the east coast with the Midlands.
The Cambridge City Cemetery is located to the north of Newmarket Road.
The Romsey Town Rollerbillies play roller derby in Cambridge.
Cambridge is home to the internationally regarded Kettle's Yard gallery and the artist run organisations Aid and Abet, Cambridge Art Salon, and Changing Spaces.
Speedway racing was formerly staged at a greyhound stadium in Coldhams Lane.
Cambridge also often records the annual highest national temperature in any given year&nbsp;–  in July 2008 at NIAB and  in August 2007 at the Botanic Garden are two recent examples.
Although Royalist forces came within  of the town in 1644, the defences were never used and the garrison was stood down the following year.
The Cambridge Biomedical Campus, one of the largest biomedical research clusters in the world, is soon to be home to AstraZeneca, a hotel and the relocated Papworth Hospital.
Many other pupils from the Cambridge area attend Village Colleges, an educational institution unique to Cambridgeshire, which serve as secondary schools during the day and adult education centres outside of school hours.
The first town charter was granted by Henry I between 1120 and 1131.
By the 7th century, the town was less significant and described by Bede as a "little ruined city" containing the burial site of Etheldreda.
Today it exists primarily as an annual funfair with the vestige of a market attached and is held over several days around or close to midsummers day.
Typically the temperature will reach  or higher on over 25 days of the year over the 1981–2010 period, with the annual warmest day averaging  over the same period.
In recognition of this, the 3rd stage of the 2014 Tour de France started in the city, adjacent to Parker's Piece.
Rugby Union club Cambridge R.U.F.C.
Started in 1974, it is Britain's second largest beer festival outside London.
Conversely, 2012 was the wettest year on record, with  reported.
Cambridge is one of five districts within the county of Cambridgeshire, and is bordered on all sides by the mainly rural South Cambridgeshire district.
It was constructed around &nbsp;70 and converted to civilian use around 50 years later.
Independent schools in the city include The Perse School, Sancton Wood School, St Mary's School, Heritage School and The Leys School.
Cambridge also has its own airport; Cambridge Airport was used mainly by charter and training flights as well as to fly in aircraft for maintenance.
Fictionalised versions of Cambridge appear in Philippa Pearce's ''Tom's Midnight Garden'' and ''Minnow on the Say'', the city renamed as Castleford, and as the home of Tom Sharpe's fictional college in ''Porterhouse Blue''.
The city had previously elected a Labour MP from 1992 to 2005 and prior to this, usually elected a Conservative after the Second World War.
The eastern side followed Magrath Avenue, with the southern side running near to Chesterton Lane and Kettle's Yard before turning northwest at Honey Hill.
State provision in the further education sector includes Hills Road Sixth Form College, Long Road Sixth Form College, and Cambridge Regional College.
which again were first played on Parker's Piece.
(By Middle English, the settlement's name had changed to "Cambridge" and the lower stretches of the Granta changed their name to match.)
Cambridge Science Park, which is the largest commercial R&D centre in Europe, is owned by Trinity College; St John's is the landlord of St John's Innovation Centre.
After a legal dispute with their landlords, the club left their home ground in Cambridge in order to groundshare with fellow Southern League Premier club  Histon F.C.
Cambridge Handball Club compete in the men's England Handball National Super 8 League, and the women's South/East Regional League.
Owing to its low lying, inland, and easterly position within the British Isles, summer temperatures tend to be somewhat higher than areas further west, and often rival or even exceed those recorded in the London area.
The University of Cambridge's Cricket ground, Fenner's, is located in the city and is one of the home grounds for minor counties team Cambridgeshire CCC.
There is a Russian Orthodox church under the Diocese of Sourozh who worship at the chapel of Westcott House, and a Greek Orthodox church under the Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain.
The town market provided for trade in a wide variety of goods and annual trading fairs such as Stourbridge Fair and Midsummer Fair were visited by merchants from across the country.
Like the rest of the newly conquered kingdom, Cambridge fell under the control of the King and his deputies.
The software company Autonomy Corporation is located at the Business Park on Cowley Road.
Several fairs and festivals take place in Cambridge, mostly during the British summer.
A second station, Cambridge North, is under construction and is due to open in December 2016, having originally planned to open in March 2015.
Cambridge Local Authority District covers most of the City's urban area but some extends outside this into South Cambridgeshire District.
The University and its colleges are well known for rowing and the Cambridgeshire Rowing Association, formed in 1868, organises competitive rowing on the river outside of the University.
The entire city centre, as well as parts of Chesterton, Petersfield, West Cambridge, Newnham, and Abbey, are covered by an Air Quality Management Area, implemented to counter high levels of nitrogen dioxide in the atmosphere.
In 1962 Cambridge's first shopping arcade, Bradwell's Court, opened on Drummer Street, though this was demolished in 2006.
Following the Public Libraries Act 1850 the city's first public library, located on Jesus Lane, was opened in 1855.
Like the rest of Cambridgeshire it is part of the Anglican Diocese of Ely.
Cambridge has several bus services including routes linking five Park and Ride sites all of which operate seven days a week and are aimed at encouraging motorists to park near the city's edge.
They were elected to the Football League in 1970 and reached the Football League Second Division in 1978, although a serious decline in them in the mid 1980s saw them drop back down to the Football League Fourth Division and almost go out of business.
It became a major industry in the county, and its profits yielded buildings such as the Corn Exchange, Fulbourn Hospital and St. John's Chapel until the Quarries Act 1894 and competition from America ended production.
The rail link to London stimulated heavier industries, such as the production of brick, cement and malt.
