Since the late 1980s, Cameroon has been following programmes advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) to reduce poverty, privatise industries, and increase economic growth.
Major export markets include France, Italy, South Korea, Spain, and the United Kingdom.
Males and females that are 18 years of age up to 23 years of age and have graduated high school are eligible for military service.
The southern part of British Cameroons merged with it in 1961 to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon.
The South Province () lies on the Gulf of Guinea and the southern border.
In December 2014, a ''List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor'' issued by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs mentioned Cameroon among the countries that resorted to child labor in the production of cocoa.
Newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals.
Its characteristic vegetation is savanna scrub and grass.
Cameroon relies heavily on France for its defence, although military spending is high in comparison to other sectors of government.
Much of the country remains without reliable power supplies.
Cameroon's population is almost evenly divided between urban and rural dwellers.
The southern plateau rises northward to the grassy, rugged Adamawa Plateau.
Colonial-era writers such as Louis-Marie Pouka and Sankie Maimo were educated by European missionary societies and advocated assimilation into European culture as the means to bring Cameroon into the modern world.
The commercial bushmeat trade has now surpassed deforestation as the main threat to wildlife in Cameroon.
Transport in Cameroon is often difficult.
Cameroon has had a decade of strong economic performance, with GDP growing at an average of 4% per year.
Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials and vary from temporary wood-and-leaf shelters of nomadic Mbororo to the rectangular mud-and-thatch homes of southern peoples.
The president appoints judges at all levels.
This area has been delineated by the World Wildlife Fund as the Cameroonian Highlands forests ecoregion.
Reliance on agricultural exports makes Cameroon vulnerable to shifts in their prices.
Soils and climate on the coast encourage extensive commercial cultivation of bananas, cocoa, oil palms, rubber, and tea.
With the defeat of Germany in World War I, Kamerun became a League of Nations mandate territory and was split into French  and British Cameroons in 1919.
The southern rainforest has vast timber reserves, estimated to cover 37% of Cameroon's total land area.
Most agriculture is done at the subsistence scale by local farmers using simple tools.
Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced among some populations; according to a 2013 UNICEF report, 1% of women in Cameroon have undergone FGM.
Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982 and left power to his constitutional successor, Paul Biya.
Its currency is the CFA franc.
In the more peaceful British Cameroons, the question was whether to reunify with French Cameroun or join Nigeria.
Cameroon's legal system is largely based on French civil law with common law influences.
Muslims in Cameroon are divided into Sunnis (including Wahhabis), Shias, Ahmadis, Sufis, and non-denominational Muslims.
The Sao culture arose around Lake Chad c. AD 500 and gave way to the Kanem and its successor state, the Bornu Empire.
Prisons are overcrowded with little access to adequate food and medical facilities, and prisons run by traditional rulers in the north are charged with holding political opponents at the behest of the government.
Its average elevation is , and its average temperature ranges from  to  with high rainfall between April and October peaking in July and August.
Road banditry has long hampered transport along the eastern and western borders, and since 2005, the problem has intensified in the east as the Central African Republic has further destabilised.
France outlawed the most radical political party, the Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC), on 13 July 1955.
Cameroon's natural resources are very well suited to agriculture and arboriculture.
On 4 June 2014, AlertNet reported:
In the north, women tend to the home, and men herd cattle or work as farmers.
Cameroon is a member of both the Commonwealth of Nations and La Francophonie.
In the first months of 2014, thousands of refugees fleeing the violence in the Central African Republic arrived in Cameroon.
Like most societies, Cameroonian society is male-dominated, and violence and discrimination against women is common.
Ahidjo used the ongoing war with the UPC to concentrate power in the presidency, continuing with this even after the suppression of the UPC in 1971.
Cameroon is part of the Bank of Central African States (of which it is the dominant economy), the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa (UDEAC) and the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).
Cameroon became a German colony in 1884 known as Kamerun.
Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a colony".
In the south, the principal rivers are the Ntem, Nyong, Sanaga, and Wouri.
Estimates identify anywhere from 230 to 282 different folks and linguistic groups in Cameroon.
Endemic diseases include dengue fever, filariasis, leishmaniasis, malaria, meningitis, schistosomiasis, and sleeping sickness.
France integrated the economy of Cameroun with that of France and improved the infrastructure with capital investments and  skilled workers, modifying the system of forced labour.
Native traditional religions are practiced in rural areas throughout the country but rarely are practiced publicly in cities, in part because many indigenous religious groups are intrinsically local in character.
Meat and fish are popular but expensive additions, with chicken often reserved for special occasions.
The last parliamentary elections were held on 30 September 2013.
However, since the first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of police and gendarmes have been prosecuted for improper conduct.
International airports are located in Douala and Yaoundé, with a third under construction in Maroua.
33 Export beer is the official drink of the national soccer team and one of the most popular brands, joining Castel, Amstel, and Guinness.
Girls attend school less regularly than boys do because of cultural attitudes, domestic duties, early marriage, pregnancy, and sexual harassment.
Rail service runs from Kumba in the west to Bélabo in the east and north to Ngaoundéré.
The Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC) political party advocated independence, but was outlawed by France in the 1950s.
There is no conscription in Cameroon, but the government makes periodic calls for volunteers.
This is an arid region with sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.
Roadblocks often serve little other purpose than to allow police and gendarmes to collect bribes from travellers.
These leaders are charged with implementing the will of the president, reporting on the general mood and conditions of the regions, administering the civil service, keeping the peace, and overseeing the heads of the smaller administrative units.
Cameroon is one of the few tropical countries to have competed in the Winter Olympics.
Cameroon turned to foreign aid, cut government spending, and privatised industries.
The 1996 constitution establishes a second house of parliament, the 100-seat Senate, was established in April 2013 and is headed by a senate president who is the constitutional successor in case of untimely vacancy of the presidency.
Suspected witches are often subject to mob violence.
The government recognises the authority of traditional chiefs, fons, and lamibe to govern at the local level and to resolve disputes as long as such rulings do not conflict with national law.
German, the language of the original colonisers, has long since been displaced by French and English.
Rapids and waterfalls obstruct the southern rivers, but these sites offer opportunities for hydroelectric development and supply most of Cameroon's energy.
They are the most popular means of transportation followed by the rail service ''Camrail''.
The script was given to them by Sultan Ibrahim Njoya in 1896, and is taught in Cameroon by the Bamum Scripts and Archives Project.
The National Assembly elects the members of a nine-member High Court of Justice that judges high-ranking members of government in the event they are charged with high treason or harming national security.
According to the Cameroon government website, the fertility rate was 5.0 in 2004.
The German Empire claimed the territory as the colony of Kamerun in 1884 and began a steady push inland.
Cameroon is home to more than 1738 different linguistic groups.
Cameroon has a high level of religious freedom and diversity.
The quality of health care is generally low.
Cameroon's per-capita GDP (Purchasing power parity) was estimated as US$2,300 in 2008, one of the ten highest in sub-Saharan Africa.
Directly south of them are the Centre () and East ().
The major radio and television stations are state-run and other communications, such as land-based telephones and telegraphs, are largely under government control.
However, Ahidjo remained in control of the CNU and tried to run the country from behind the scenes until Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning.
The goals of dances range from pure entertainment to religious devotion.
In contrast, the Adamawa Plateau, southeastern Bénoué depression, and most of the South Cameroon Plateau are sparsely populated.
The British administered their territory from neighbouring Nigeria.
Tourist literature describes Cameroon as "Africa in miniature" because it exhibits all major climates and vegetation of the continent: coast, desert, mountains, rainforest, and savanna.
Makossa developed in Douala and mixes folk music, highlife, soul, and Congo music.
French and English are the official languages.
After World War II, writers such as Mongo Beti and Ferdinand Oyono analysed and criticised colonialism and rejected assimilation.
An irregular chain of mountains, hills, and plateaus known as the Cameroon range extends from Mount Cameroon on the coast—Cameroon's highest point at —almost to Lake Chad at Cameroon's northern border at 13°05'N.
Biya began his administration by moving toward a more democratic government, but a failed coup d'état nudged him toward the leadership style of his predecessor.
Almost 90,000 people have fled to neighbouring Cameroon since December and up to 2,000 a week, mostly women and children, are still crossing the border, the United Nations said.
Cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in Africa.
Its foreign policy closely follows that of its main ally, France (its former colonial ruler).
Freedom House ranks Cameroon as "not free" in terms of political rights and civil liberties.
This feature stretches from the western mountain area and forms a barrier between the country's north and south.
Cameroon has won four African Cup of Nations titles and the gold medal at the 2000 Olympics.
In the 1960s, Mongo Beti and other writers explored post-colonialism, problems of African development, and the recovery of African identity.
The Islamist jihadist group Boko Haram has been reported as operating in North Cameroon.
Breast ironing, a traditional practice that is prevalent in Cameroon, may affect girls' health.
Cuisine varies by region, but a large, one-course, evening meal is common throughout the country.
From here, Bantu migrations into eastern, southern, and central Africa are believed to have originated about 2,000 years ago.
The northern part of Cameroon was an important part of the Arab slave trade network.
Of these, 49,300 were from the Central African Republic (many driven west by war), 41,600 from Chad, and 2,900 from Nigeria.
The two most popular styles of music are makossa and bikutsi.
Bantu-speaking groups inhabit the coastal and equatorial zones, while speakers of Semi-Bantu languages live in the Western grassfields.
The divisions are further split into sub-divisions (), headed by assistant divisional officers ().
The Adamawa Plateau broadly bisects these into northern and southern divisions.
The country is located in Central and West Africa on the Bight of Bonny, part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean.
The high-quality clay of the western highlands is suitable for pottery and ceramics.
Traditional dances are highly choreographed and separate men and women or forbid participation by one sex altogether.
Those that do so are obliged 4 years of service.
Its soils are among Cameroon's most fertile, especially around volcanic Mount Cameroon.
At , Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country.
The English-speaking territories of Cameroon have grown increasingly alienated from the government, and politicians from those regions have called for greater decentralization and even secession (for example: the Southern Cameroons National Council) of the former British-governed territories.
The rest of Cameroon's energy comes from oil-powered thermal engines.
Kingdoms, fondoms, and chiefdoms arose in the west.
Nevertheless, large numbers of Cameroonians live in poverty as subsistence farmers.
On 21 August 1986, one of these, Lake Nyos, belched carbon dioxide and killed between 1,700 and 2,000 people.
Equatorial rainforest dominates this region, although its alternation between wet and dry seasons makes it is less humid than the coast.
Southern Cameroon is inhabited by speakers of Bantu and Semi-Bantu languages.
Dishes are often quite hot, spiced with salt, red pepper sauce, and Maggi.
Artists such as Anne-Marie Nzié developed it into a popular dance music beginning in the 1940s, and performers such as Mama Ohandja and Les Têtes Brulées popularised it internationally during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.
Cameroon possesses substantial mineral resources, but these are not extensively mined (see ''Mining in Cameroon'').
On 1 January 1960 French Cameroun gained independence from France under President Ahmadou Ahidjo.
The Bamum ethnic group of the West Region is largely Muslim.
Rarely has the assembly changed or blocked legislation proposed by the president.
The territory of present-day Cameroon was first settled during the Neolithic Era.
Both monogamous and polygamous marriage are practiced, and the average Cameroonian family is large and extended.
In addition, traditional faiths are practiced by many.
People from the overpopulated western highlands and the underdeveloped north are moving to the coastal plantation zone and urban centres for employment.
Unemployment was estimated at 30% in 2001, and about a third of the population was living below the international poverty threshold of US$1.25 a day in 2009.
The districts, administered by district heads (), are the smallest administrative units.
An estimated 70% of the population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 19.8% of GDP in 2009.
The government has taken measures to encourage tourism in the country.
Traditional healers remain a popular alternative to Western medicine.
These are headed by presidentially appointed divisional officers ().
A small number of Shuwa Arabs live near Lake Chad.
However, large areas of the forest are difficult to reach.
Worlddiplomacy.org states that "President Paul Biya is one of the longest servings heads of state in the world and as long as he remains in power, Cameroon will continue to steadily progress economically without much surprises".
Silverware is common, but food is traditionally manipulated with the right hand.
Doctors and nurses who were trained in Cameroon, emigrate because in Cameroon the payment is poor while the workload is high.
Shortly after independence, filmmakers such as Jean-Paul Ngassa and Thérèse Sita-Bella explored similar themes.
It is slightly larger than the nation of Sweden and comparable in size to Papua New Guinea.
Natural features include beaches, deserts, mountains, rainforests, and savannas.
Volcanism here has created crater lakes.
In February 2008, Cameroon experienced its worst violence in 15 years when a transport union strike in Douala escalated into violent protests in 31 municipal areas.
People from the North-West and South-West provinces are largely Protestant, and the French-speaking regions of the southern and western regions are largely Catholic.
The National Assembly makes legislation.
Performers such as Manu Dibango, Francis Bebey, Moni Bilé, and Petit-Pays popularised the style worldwide in the 1970s and 1980s.
They initiated projects to improve the colony's infrastructure, relying on a harsh system of forced labour, which was much criticised by the other colonial powers.
Woodcarvings and sculptures are especially common.
Muslims are most concentrated in the north, while Christians are concentrated primarily in the southern and western regions, but practitioners of both faiths can be found throughout the country.
Although attendance rates are higher in the south, a disproportionate number of teachers are stationed there, leaving northern schools chronically understaffed.
Bikutsi originated as war music among the Ewondo.
They sell their surplus produce, and some maintain separate fields for commercial use.
Portuguese sailors reached the coast in 1472.
In a typical performance, a chorus of singers echoes a soloist.
Cameroon is divided into five major geographic zones distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative features.
In 2007, Cameroon hosted a total population of refugees and asylum seekers of approximately 97,400.
Biya and his party have maintained control of the presidency and the National Assembly in national elections, which rivals contend were unfair.
Some performers sing complete songs by themselves, accompanied by a harplike instrument.
Factory-based industry accounted for an estimated 29.7% of GDP in 2009.
All local government officials are employees of the central government's Ministry of Territorial Administration, from which local governments also get most of their budgets.
Cameroon's western region is split into four smaller regions: the Littoral () and Southwest () regions are on the coast, and the Northwest () and West () regions are in the western grassfields.
This prompted a long guerrilla war and the assassination of the party's leader, Ruben Um Nyobé.
It waged war on French and UPC militant forces until 1971.
Cameroonian Pidgin English is the lingua franca in the formerly British-administered territories.
The regions are subdivided into 58 divisions (French ).
An economic crisis took effect in the mid-1980s to late 1990s as a result of international economic conditions, drought, falling petroleum prices, and years of corruption, mismanagement, and cronyism.
A typical dish is based on cocoyams, maize, cassava (manioc), millet, plantains, potatoes, rice, or yams, often pounded into dough-like fufu.
The northern peoples are Sudanese groups, who live in the central highlands and the northern lowlands, and the Fulani, who are spread throughout northern Cameroon.
The League of Nations mandates were converted into United Nations Trusteeships in 1946, and the question of independence became a pressing issue in French Cameroun.
Logging, largely handled by foreign-owned firms, provides the government US$60&nbsp;million a year in taxes (), and laws mandate the safe and sustainable exploitation of timber.
The country's neighbours are Nigeria and the Atlantic Ocean to the west; Chad to the northeast; the Central African Republic to the east; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo to the south.
In the northern regions, the locally dominant Fulani ethnic group is mostly Muslim, but the overall population is fairly evenly divided among Muslims, Christians, and followers of indigenous religious beliefs (called ''Kirdi'' ("pagan") by the Fulani).
Ahidjo pursued an economic policy of planned liberalism, prioritising cash crops and petroleum development.
Due to financial cuts in the health care system, there are few professionals.
The judiciary is officially divided into tribunals, the court of appeal, and the supreme court.
Indeed, the U.S. Department of Labor Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor reported that 56% of children aged 5 to 14 were working children and that almost 53% of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school.
Meanwhile, in the mid-1970s, filmmakers such as Jean-Pierre Dikongué Pipa and Daniel Kamwa dealt with the conflicts between traditional and post-colonial society.
The northern lowland region extends from the edge of the Adamawa to Lake Chad with an average elevation of .
Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons, ending forced labour altogether but angering the local natives, who felt swamped.
Although the national sex ratio is relatively even, these out-migrants are primarily males, which leads to unbalanced ratios in some regions.
Snacks are popular, especially in larger towns where they may be bought from street vendors.
In 1997, Cameroon established anti-corruption bureaus in 29 ministries, but only 25% became operational, and in 2012, Transparency International placed Cameroon at number 144 on a list of 176 countries ranked from least to most corrupt.
The three northernmost regions are the Far North (), North (), and Adamawa ().
Fishing employs 5,000 people and provides over 100,000 tons of seafood each year.
Inland on the South Cameroon Plateau, cash crops include coffee, sugar, and tobacco.
Early inhabitants of the territory included the Sao civilisation around Lake Chad and the Baka hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest.
Settled peoples who fled the Fulani caused a major redistribution of population.
President Biya's Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM) was the only legal political party until December 1990.
Traditional sports include canoe racing and wrestling, and several hundred runners participate in the  Mount Cameroon Race of Hope each year.
Breakfast consists of leftovers of bread and fruit with coffee or tea.
Except for the several relatively good toll roads which connect major cities (all of them one-lane) roads are poorly maintained and subject to inclement weather, since only 10% of the roadways are tarred.
The Cameroon national football team has been one of the most successful in Africa since its strong showing in the 1982 and 1990 FIFA World Cup.
Traditionally, music is transmitted orally.
Urban centres are particularly reliant on peasant agriculture for their foodstuffs.
Large cities have significant populations of both groups.
The president is selected by popular vote every seven years.
The South Cameroon Plateau rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of .
