Examples of transparent marine animals include a wide variety of larvae, including coelenterates, siphonophores, salps (floating tunicates), gastropod molluscs, polychaete worms, many shrimplike crustaceans, and fish; whereas the adults of most of these are opaque and pigmented, resembling the seabed or shores where they live.
Countershading is less often used for military camouflage, despite Second World War experiments that showed its effectiveness.
Counterillumination has rarely been used for military purposes.
In science fiction, ''Camouflage'' is a novel about shapeshifting alien beings by Joe Haldeman.
The flat-tail horned lizard similarly relies on a combination of methods: it is adapted to lie flat in the open desert, relying on stillness, its cryptic coloration, and concealment of its shadow to avoid being noticed by predators.
Hodson wrote that it would be more appropriate for the hot climate, and help make his troops "invisible in a land of dust".
The panels are heated and cooled to match either the vehicle's surroundings (crypsis), or an object such as a car (mimesis), when viewed in infrared.
The planes were fitted with forward-pointing lamps automatically adjusted to match the brightness of the night sky.
File:Biston betularia.png|Peppered moth caterpillars mimic twigs
A familiar example is the transparency of the lens of the vertebrate eye, which is made of the protein crystallin, and the vertebrate cornea which is made of the protein collagen.
Other structures cannot be made transparent, notably the retinas or equivalent light-absorbing structures of eyes — they must absorb light to be able to function.
For example, a cod can see prey that are 98 percent transparent in optimal lighting in shallow water.
In the American Civil War, rifle units such as the 1st United States Sharp Shooters (in the Federal army) similarly wore green jackets while other units wore more conspicuous colours.
Terrain-specific patterns have sometimes been developed but are ineffective in other terrains.
It is that the upper and undersides of animals such as sharks, and of some military aircraft, are different colours to match the different backgrounds when seen from above or from below.
File:Camouflaged crab.JPG|Crab camouflaged with algae
Non-military use of camouflage includes making cell telephone towers less obtrusive and helping hunters to approach wary game animals.
File:Wrap-around spider in the genus Dolophones (Family Araneidae) Camouflage View.JPG|Wrap-around spider ''Dolophones'' mimicking a stick
Mimesis is also employed by some predators and parasites to lure their prey.
He also explained the coloration of sea fish such as the mackerel: "Among pelagic fish it is common to find the upper surface dark-coloured and the lower surface white, so that the animal is inconspicuous when seen either from above or below."
Disruptive patterning, however, does not always achieve crypsis on its own, as an animal or a military target may be given away by factors like shape, shine, and shadow.
This camouflage is designed to obfuscate the vehicle's visual lines, and is used along with padding, covers, and decals.
After the Second World War, radar made camouflage generally less effective, though coastal boats are sometimes painted like land vehicles.
In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with weapons such as the Baker rifle made personal concealment in battle essential.
File:Hooded Grasshopper (Teratodus monticollis) W IMG 0525.jpg|Hooded grasshopper ''Teratodus monticollis'', superbly mimics a leaf with a bright orange border
Automotive manufacturers often use patterns to disguise upcoming products.
The male is still mostly in winter plumage
Self-shadowing makes an animal appear darker below than on top, grading from light to dark; countershading 'paints in' tones which are darkest on top, lightest below, making the countershaded animal nearly invisible against a suitable background.
Finally, some structures are visible for a reason, such as to lure prey.
Most of the methods contribute to crypsis, helping to hide against a background; but mimesis and motion dazzle protect without hiding.
File:Hyastenus elatus.jpg|This decorator crab has covered its body with sponges.
Ship camouflage was occasionally used in ancient times.
File:Jumping spider with prey.jpg|Jumping spider: a disruptively camouflaged invertebrate predator
The film-maker Geoffrey Barkas ran the Middle East Command Camouflage Directorate during the 1941–1942 war in the Western Desert, including the successful deception of Operation Bertram.
An animal that is commonly thought to be dazzle-patterned is the zebra.
Hunters of game have long made use of camouflage in the form of materials such as animal skins, mud, foliage, and green or brown clothing to enable them to approach wary game animals.
Thayer was roundly mocked for these views by critics including Teddy Roosevelt.
However, a simulation study by Martin How and Johannes Zanker in 2014 suggests that when moving, the stripes may confuse observers, such as mammalian predators and biting insects, by two visual illusions: the wagon-wheel effect, where the perceived motion is inverted, and the barberpole illusion, where the perceived motion is in a wrong direction.
However, he overstated the case in the 1909 book ''Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom'', arguing that "All patterns and colors whatsoever of all animals that ever preyed or are preyed on are under certain normal circumstances obliterative" (that is, cryptic camouflage), and that "Not one 'mimicry' mark, not one 'warning color'...&nbsp;nor any 'sexually selected' color, exists anywhere in the world where there is not every reason to believe it the very best conceivable device for the concealment of its wearer", and using paintings such as ''Peacock in the Woods'' (1907) to reinforce his argument.
Vegetius (c. 360–400 AD) says that "Venetian blue" (sea green) was used in the Gallic Wars, when Julius Caesar sent his ''speculatoria navigia'' (reconnaissance boats) to gather intelligence along the coast of Britain.
This enabled them to approach much closer to a target – within 3,000&nbsp;yards (2,700&nbsp;metres) – before being seen.
But one method, motion dazzle, requires rapidly moving bold patterns of contrasting stripes.
However, insects such as hoverflies and dragonflies use motion camouflage: the hoverflies to approach possible mates, and the dragonflies to approach rivals when defending territories.
Military uniforms, too, generally resemble their backgrounds; for example khaki uniforms are a muddy or dusty colour, originally chosen for service in South Asia.
The principle of varying coloration either rapidly or with the changing seasons has military applications.
However, adult giraffes move about to gain the best view of an approaching predator, relying on their size and ability to defend themselves, even from lions, rather than on camouflage.
At medium depths at sea, light comes from above, so a mirror oriented vertically makes animals such as fish invisible from the side.
File:M05 snow pattern.jpg|2007 2-colour snow variant of Finnish Defence Forces M05 pattern
Other armies soon followed them.
In fish, the change is controlled by the brain, which sends signals directly to the chromatophores, as well as producing hormones.
He wrote that "the scattered green spots upon the under surface of the wings might have been intended for a rough sketch of the small flowerets of the plant an umbellifer, so close is their mutual resemblance."
File:European Cuckoo Mimics Sparrowhawk.jpg|Cuckoo adult mimics sparrowhawk, giving female time to lay eggs parasitically
File:SS Platanenmuster Sommer.jpg|1937 summer variant of Waffen SS ''Flecktarn'' Plane tree pattern
Disruptive patterning is common in military usage, both for uniforms and for military vehicles.
In aerial photographs, the countershaded gun was essentially invisible.
File:Øvelse på Evjemoen Tropp 4.2 - camouflage nettings.jpg|Camouflage netting is draped away from a military vehicle to reduce its shadow.
File:Thayers ships.jpg|Countershaded ship and submarine in Thayer's 1902 patent application
File:Giraffe mother and calf (cropped).jpg|Conspicuous giraffe mother can defend herself, but calf hides for much of day, relying on its camouflage.
Crypsis means making the animal or military equipment hard to see (or to detect in other ways, such as by sound or scent).
Gelatinous planktonic animals are between 50 and 90 percent transparent.
While Cott was more systematic and balanced in his view than Thayer, and did include some experimental evidence on the effectiveness of camouflage, his 500-page textbook was, like Thayer's, mainly a natural history narrative which illustrated theories with examples.
File:Battle of Lake Khasan-Camouflaged soviet tanks.jpg|Soviet tanks under netting dressed with vegetation, 1938
Conspicuousness can also be reduced by siting masts near or actually on other structures.
Another early source is a 15th-century French manuscript, ''The Hunting Book of Gaston Phebus'', showing a horse pulling a cart which contains a hunter armed with a crossbow under a cover of branches, perhaps serving as a hide for shooting game.
English zoologist Hugh Cott encouraged the use of techniques including countershading, but despite his authority on the subject, failed to persuade the British authorities.
The presence of bold skin markings does not in itself prove that an animal relies on camouflage, as that depends on its behaviour.
Jamaican Maroons are said to have used plant materials as camouflage in the First Maroon War (c. 1655–1740).
Many moths show industrial melanism, including the peppered moth which has coloration that blends in with tree bark.
The nymph of the predatory masked bug uses its hind legs and a 'tarsal fan' to decorate its body with sand or dust.
File:Flecktarn.jpg|Modern German Flecktarn 1990, developed from a 1938 pattern, a non-digital pattern which works at different distances
It uses about 1000 hexagonal panels to cover the sides of a tank.
Cott built on Thayer's discoveries, developing a comprehensive view of camouflage based on "maximum disruptive contrast", countershading and hundreds of examples.
Most forms of camouflage are ineffective when the camouflaged animal or object moves, because the motion is easily seen by the observing predator, prey or enemy.
Visual crypsis can be achieved in many different ways, such as by living underground or by being active only at night, as well as by a variety of methods of camouflage.
The English zoologist Hugh Cott's 1940 book ''Adaptive Coloration in Animals'' corrected Thayer's errors, sometimes sharply: "Thus we find Thayer straining the theory to a fantastic extreme in an endeavour to make it cover almost every type of coloration in the animal kingdom."
Disruptive patterns use strongly contrasting, non-repeating markings such as spots or stripes to break up the outlines of an animal or military vehicle, or to conceal telltale features, especially the eyes, as in the common frog.
In the ocean, the leafy sea dragon sways mimetically, like the seaweeds amongst which it rests, as if rippled by wind or water currents.
Max Dupain, Sydney Ure Smith and William Dobell were among the members of the group, which worked at Bankstown Airport, RAAF Base Richmond and Garden Island Dockyard.
In April 1917, when German U-boats were sinking many British ships with torpedoes, the marine artist Norman Wilkinson devised dazzle camouflage, which paradoxically made ships more visible but harder to target.
Similar principles can be applied for military purposes, for instance when a sniper wears a ghillie suit designed to be further camouflaged by decoration with materials such as tufts of grass from the sniper's immediate environment.
File:Cuckoo Eggs Mimicking Reed Warbler Eggs.JPG|Cuckoo eggs mimicking smaller eggs, in this case of reed warbler
Examples include the leopard's spotted coat, the battledress of a modern soldier, and the leaf-mimic katydid's wings.
In 1919, the attendants of a "dazzle ball", hosted by the Chelsea Arts Club, wore dazzle-patterned black and white clothing.
The small Amazon river fish ''Microphilypnus amazonicus'' and the shrimps it associates with, ''Pseudopalaemon gouldingi'', are so transparent as to be "almost invisible"; further, these species appear to select whether to be transparent or more conventionally mottled (disruptively patterned) according to the local background in the environment.
More recently, fashion designers have often used camouflage fabric for its striking designs, its "patterned disorder" and its symbolism.
In Australia, artists were also prominent in the Sydney Camouflage Group, formed under the chairmanship of Professor William John Dakin, a zoologist from Sydney University.
In the First World War, the French army formed a camouflage corps, led by Lucien-Victor Guirand de Scévola, employing artists known as ''camoufleurs'' to create schemes such as tree observation posts and covers for guns.
Disruptive patterns may use more than one method to defeat visual systems such as edge detection.
The cuckoo's egg itself mimics the eggs of the host species, reducing its chance of being rejected.
File:Phrynosoma mcallii.jpg|The flat-tail horned lizard's body is flattened and fringed to minimise its shadow.
Bombers and night fighters were often black, while maritime reconnaissance planes were usually white, to avoid appearing as dark shapes against the sky.
Simple techniques such as changing uniforms and repainting vehicles for winter have been in use since the Second World War.
Silvering is found in other marine animals as well as fish.
The resemblance is sufficient to make small birds take action to avoid the apparent predator.
The majority of camouflage methods aim for crypsis, often through a general resemblance to the background, high contrast disruptive coloration, eliminating shadow, and countershading.
File:HMS President - geograph.org.uk - 659583.jpg|Armed WW1 Q-ship lured enemy submarines by mimicking a merchantman
The first genuinely digital camouflage pattern was the Canadian CADPAT, issued to the army in 2002, soon followed by the American MARPAT.
Counterillumination was made obsolete by radar, and neither diffused lighting camouflage nor Yehudi lights entered active service.
It is also found in nest structures; some eusocial wasps, such as ''Leipomeles dorsata'', build a nest envelope in patterns that mimic the leaves surrounding the nest.
For example, a caddis fly larva builds a decorated case and lives almost entirely inside it; a decorator crab covers its back with seaweed, sponges and stones.
His experiments showed that swallowtailed moth pupae were camouflaged to match the backgrounds on which they were reared as larvae.
File:Pla camo.svg|Main (4-colour woodland) variant of Chinese People's Liberation Army Type 99 pattern, c. 2006
File:B-24J-55-CO_(cropped).jpg|Forward-looking counterillumination camouflage was trialled in B-24 Liberators from 1943 onwards.
The first British Army unit to adopt khaki uniforms was the Corps of Guides at Peshawar, when Sir Harry Lumsden and his second in command, William Hodson introduced a "drab" uniform in 1848.
The ships were painted entirely in bluish-green wax, with sails, ropes and crew the same colour.
As of 2011, motion dazzle had been proposed for military vehicles, but never applied.
The bold stripes of the zebra have been claimed to be disruptive camouflage, background-blending and countershading.
The development of military camouflage was driven by the increasing range and accuracy of infantry firearms in the 19th century.
Some military textiles and vehicle camouflage paints also reflect infrared to help provide concealment from night vision devices.
Adult comb jellies and jellyfish obey the rule, often being mainly transparent.
Methods may be applied on their own or in combination.
File:CamouflagedAustralian9.2inchHowitzerYpres1917.jpeg|Siege howitzer camouflaged against observation from the air, 1917
File:Hoverfly August 2007-8.jpg|Male ''Syritta pipiens'' hoverflies use motion camouflage to approach females
Hugh Cott was chief instructor; the artist camouflage officers, who called themselves ''camoufleurs'', included Steven Sykes and Tony Ayrton.
Camouflage is a soft-tissue feature that is rarely preserved in the fossil record, but rare fossilised skin samples from the Cretaceous period show that some marine reptiles were countershaded.
When this species is threatened, it makes itself look as much like a rock as possible by curving its back, emphasizing its three-dimensional shape.
File:Katydid camouflaged in basil plant.jpg|Bright green katydid has the colour of fresh vegetation.
In the open ocean, where there is no background, the principal methods of camouflage are transparency, silvering, and countershading, while the ability to produce light is among other things used for counter-illumination on the undersides of cephalopods such as squid.
Other regiments in India soon adopted the khaki uniform, and by 1896 khaki drill uniform was used everywhere outside Europe; by the Second Boer War six years later it was used throughout the British Army.
In mimesis (also called ''masquerade''), the camouflaged object looks like something else which is of no special interest to the observer.
File:Vietnam War protest in Washington DC April 1971.jpg|Camouflage clothing in an anti-war protest, 1971
For example, the nematocysts (stinging cells) of the transparent siphonophore ''Agalma okenii'' resemble small copepods.
File:British dpm2.jpg|British Disruptive Pattern Material, issued to special forces in 1963 and universally by 1968
For example, during the Battle of Kursk, General Katukov, the commander of the Soviet 1st Tank Army, remarked that the enemy "did not suspect that our well-camouflaged tanks were waiting for him.
Cott takes the example of the larva of the blotched emerald moth, which fixes a screen of fragments of leaves to its specially hooked bristles, to argue that military camouflage uses the same method, pointing out that the "device is ... essentially the same as one widely practised during the Great War for the concealment, not of caterpillars, but of caterpillar-tractors, gun battery positions, observation posts and so forth."
Each chromatophore contains pigment of only one colour.
For example, a flower mantis mimics a particular kind of flower, such as an orchid.
As we later learned from prisoners, we had managed to move our tanks forward unnoticed".
"Diffused lighting camouflage" was trialled by Canada's National Research Council during the Second World War.
In his ''Origin of Species'', Darwin wrote:
In fish and frogs, colour change is mediated by the type of chromatophores known as melanophores that contain dark pigment.
Some marine animals such as jellyfish have gelatinous bodies, composed mainly of water; their thick mesogloea is acellular and highly transparent.
For example, he painted two rail-mounted coastal guns, one in conventional style, one countershaded.
The word is used more figuratively in works of literature such as Thaisa Frank's collection of stories of love and loss, ''A Brief History of Camouflage''.
File:USS Duluth (CL-87).jpg|USS ''Duluth'' in naval camouflage Measure 32, Design 11a, one of many dazzle schemes used on warships
Soldiers often wrongly viewed camouflage netting as a kind of invisibility cloak, and they had to be taught to look at camouflage practically, from the enemy observer's point of view.
File:Mitchell 180 Sqn RAF in especially camouflaged hangar Belgium 1944.jpg|A Luftwaffe aircraft hangar built to resemble a street of village houses, Belgium, 1944
The coloration of these insects evolved between 1860 and 1940 to match the changing colour of the tree trunks on which they rest, from pale and mottled to almost black in polluted areas.
The female cuckoo then has time to lay her egg in their nest without being seen to do so.
The skins of cephalopods such as the octopus contain complex units, each consisting of a chromatophore with surrounding muscle and nerve cells.
Some animals actively seek to hide by decorating themselves with materials such as twigs, sand, or pieces of shell from their environment, to break up their outlines, to conceal the features of their bodies, and to match their backgrounds.
Field sports such as driven grouse shooting conceal hunters in hides (also called blinds or shooting butts).
On a longer timescale, animals like the Arctic hare, Arctic fox, stoat, and rock ptarmigan change their coat colour (by moulting and growing new fur or feathers) from brown or grey in the summer to white in the winter; the Arctic fox is the only species in the dog family to do so.
File:CADPAT digital camouflage pattern (Temperate Woodland variant).jpg|CADPAT was the first pixellated digital camouflage pattern to be issued, in 2002.
The title refers to the Utopian Arcadia of poetry and art, and the ''memento mori'' Latin phrase ''Et in Arcadia ego'' which recurs in Hamilton Finlay's work.
The book explained how disruptive camouflage worked, using streaks of boldly contrasting colour, paradoxically making objects less visible by breaking up their outlines.
The use of radar since the mid-20th century has largely made camouflage for fixed-wing military aircraft obsolete.
Therefore, sufficient transparency for camouflage is more easily achieved in deeper waters.
File:Rock Ptarmigan (Lagopus Muta).jpg|Rock ptarmigan, changing colour in springtime.
A contemporary study in 1800 by the English artist and soldier Charles Hamilton Smith provided evidence that grey uniforms were less visible than green ones at a range of 150 yards.
Some animals, such as chameleons and octopuses, are capable of actively changing their skin pattern and colours, whether for camouflage or for signalling.
At the same time in Australia, zoologist William John Dakin advised soldiers to copy animals' methods, using their instincts for wartime camouflage.
Cott suggests this follows the more general rule that animals resemble their background: in a transparent medium like seawater, that means actually being transparent.
The Soviet Union's Red Army created the comprehensive doctrine of ''Maskirovka'' for military deception, including the use of camouflage.
The skins, pigmented with dark-coloured eumelanin, reveal that both leatherback turtles and mosasaurs had dark backs and light bellies.
Some authors have argued that adult giraffes are cryptic, since when standing among trees and bushes they are hard to see at even a few metres' distance.
Among vertebrates numerous species of parrots, iguanas, tree-frogs, and the green tree-snake are examples".
The female mimics a sparrowhawk.
The term ''camouflage'' probably comes from ''camoufler'', a Parisian slang term meaning ''to disguise'', and may have been influenced by ''camouflet'', a French term meaning ''smoke blown in someone's face''.
The body of a shark or the fuselage of an aircraft is not gradated from light to dark to appear flat when seen from the side.
File:Insect camouflage PP08338.png|Flower mantis lures its insect prey by mimicking a ''Phalaenopsis'' orchid blossom
File:Podargus papuensis - Daintree River.jpg|Papuan frogmouth resembles a broken branch.
The power of aerial observation and attack led every warring nation to camouflage targets of all types.
Some species of butterflies, such as the speckled wood, ''Pararge aegeria'', minimise their shadows when perched by closing the wings over their backs, aligning their bodies with the sun, and tilting to one side towards the sun, so that the shadow becomes a thin inconspicuous line rather than a broad patch.
The English zoologist John Graham Kerr, artist Solomon J. Solomon and the American artist Abbott Thayer led attempts to introduce scientific principles of countershading and disruptive patterning into military camouflage, with limited success.
On these, the nymph spreads an inner layer of fine particles and an outer layer of coarser particles.
The overall mirror effect is achieved with many small reflectors, all oriented vertically.
This conveniently makes them buoyant, but it also makes them large for their muscle mass, so they cannot swim fast, making this form of camouflage a costly trade-off with mobility.
In Wilkinson's own words, dazzle was designed "not for low visibility, but in such a way as to break up her form and thus confuse a submarine officer as to the course on which she was heading".
Modern artists such as Ian Hamilton Finlay have used camouflage to reflect on war.
As in the First World War, artists were pressed into service; for example, the surrealist painter Roland Penrose became a lecturer at the newly founded Camouflage Development and Training Centre at Farnham Castle, writing the practical ''Home Guard Manual of Camouflage''.
Some animals, such as the horned lizards of North America, have evolved elaborate measures to eliminate shadow.
Camouflage themes recur in modern art, and both figuratively and literally in science fiction and works of literature.
Motion dazzle distorts speed perception and is most effective at high speeds; stripes can also distort perception of size (and so, perceived range to the target).
The design of a pattern effective in all terrains has proved elusive.
File:Armoured personnel carriers, Eriboll - geograph.org.uk - 1316295.jpg|"Shape, shine, shadow" make these 'camouflaged' military vehicles easily visible.
On land, artists such as André Mare designed camouflage schemes and observation posts disguised as trees.
A different explanation is implied by the fact that young giraffes are far more vulnerable to predation than adults: more than half of all giraffe calves die within a year, and giraffe mothers hide their calves, which spend much of the time lying down in cover while their mothers are away feeding.
Predators like the leopard use disruptive camouflage to help them approach prey, while potential prey like the Egyptian nightjar use it to avoid detection by predators.
The camera-type eye of vertebrates and cephalopods must be completely opaque.
In frogs, the change is controlled relatively slowly, mainly by hormones.
This tactic has occasionally been used in warfare, for example with heavily armed Q-ships disguised as merchant ships.
However, transparency is difficult for bodies made of materials that have different refractive indices from seawater.
Camouflage has been a topic of interest and research in zoology for well over a century.
The elimination of shadow was identified as a principle of military camouflage during the Second World War.
Most forms of camouflage are made ineffective by movement: a deer or grasshopper may be highly cryptic when motionless, but instantly seen when it moves.
For example, although giraffes have a high contrast pattern that could be disruptive coloration, the adults are extremely conspicuous when in the open.
Beddard did however briefly mention other methods, including the "alluring coloration" of the flower mantis and the possibility of a different mechanism in the orange tip butterfly.
By controlling chromatophores of different colours, cephalopods can rapidly change their skin patterns and colours.
There are two layers of bristles (trichomes) over the body.
A further complication for fish with bodies that are rounded in cross-section is that the mirrors would be ineffective if laid flat on the skin, as they would fail to reflect horizontally.
The latter has light-producing organs (photophores) scattered all over its underside; these create a sparkling glow that prevents the animal from appearing as a dark shape when seen from below.
In particular the replacement of the inaccurate musket with the rifle made personal concealment in battle a survival skill.
File:Six-Color Desert Pattern.jpg|US "Chocolate Chip" Six-Color Desert Pattern developed in 1962, widely used in Gulf War
Philostratus (c. 172–250 AD) wrote in his ''Imagines'' that Mediterranean pirate ships could be painted blue-gray for concealment.
For instance, tree-dwelling parakeets are mainly green; woodcocks of the forest floor are brown and speckled; reedbed bitterns are streaked brown and buff; in each case the animal's coloration matches the hues of its habitat.
File:Perfect Camouflage (Caterpillar on teakwood branch).jpg|A caterpillar's fringe of bristles conceals its shadow.
Similarly, some ground-nesting birds including the European nightjar select a resting position facing the sun.
The marine hatchetfish is extremely flattened laterally, leaving the body just millimetres thick, and the body is so silvery as to resemble aluminium foil.
At sea, merchant ships and troop carriers were painted in dazzle patterns that were highly visible, but designed to confuse enemy submarines as to the target's speed, range, and heading.
