It consists of Yucatán and Tehuantepec moist forests, containing high and medium growth semi-deciduous forests and seasonally flooded low height semi-deciduous forests.
This is up from just under 90,000 in 2005.
Politically, it is divided into eleven municipalities: Calkiní, Calakmul, Campeche, Candelaria, Champotón, Ciudad del Carmen, Escárcega, Hecelchakán, Hopelchén, Palizada and Tenabo.
Wildlife is dominated by bird and reptile species such as storks, pelicans, ducks, seagulls, lizards, turtles and water snakes.
This caused discontentment in the city and fomented insurgent tendencies.
The university offers twenty three bachelor's degrees, and eight graduate degrees.
Its façade is of worked stone with two levels marked off by two grooved pilasters.
It is separated from the Gulf of Mexico only by the Isla del Carmen.
Sixty three percent of the population profess the Catholic faith as of 2010.
Carnival was introduced in 1582.
In September 1821, the city of Campeche proclaimed its adherence to the Plan of Iguala and the new Independent government of Mexico, forcing out its last Spanish governor a month later.
The San Diego Apóstol Church in Nunkiní, Calkiní was built in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
This is followed by Chol with 10,412, Tzeltal with 1,900 and Q'anjob'al with 1,557.
Average annual temperature is 26C with highs up to 36C in the summer and lows of 17C in the winter.
Most industries are small with little financing for technology and growth.
It survived the Mexican Revolution until its workers abandoned it in the 1940s.
Calakmul is located in the interior rainforest of the state in a biosphere named after it near the Guatemala border.
In 1864, insurgents defeated the imperial army in Hecelchakán and in 1867, they retook Campeche to regain the state’s independence.
This oil was discovered by a fisherman named Rudesindo Cantarell in 1971, who reported an oil slick.
More fighting came with the outbreak of the Caste War, in 1847, an indigenous rebellion that took place in Campeche and the rest of the Yucatán.
It suffered more than twenty one major pirate attacks in the colonial era.
The church and former monastery of San Francisco de Asís was begun in the 16th century by the Franciscans in Hecelchakán.
There was some improvement in the state’s economy starting in the 1950s when fishing and timber industries became more developed and there was better communications between the state and Mexico City.
During the planting season in early May, archeologist Antonio Benavides noticed that the setting sun illuminates a stucco mask hanging one of the pyramid’s rooms.
Overall in the state, running water, garbage collection and electricity is available in over 80% of homes, but sewerage in only a third.
Its temples were mostly dedicated to ancestor worship encircling the palaces of the elite in the center.
This oil lies off the coast of the state, in a shallow water section of the Gulf of Mexico called the Sonda de Campeche.
However, these hills are separated by large expanses of lower flat land.
By 1688, the annual event featured orchestras and in 1815, formal dances called “saraos” were organized which originally were held only in the homes of the elite.
Mérida’s trade with Havana continued but Campeche’s trade with Mexico City was cut off.
The Isla de Jaina is one of the best preserved archeological sites in the state because of its location on an island on the coast, surrounded by estuaries and mangroves.
Other important bridges exist in Champotón, Candelaria and Palizada.
An early important site is Edzna, located near the city of Campeche in a region known as los Chenes.
Hacienda Tankuché was dedicated to raising dyewood (palo de tinte) but changed later to henequen.
The River region is located in the southwest of the state, named after the various rivers that flow here, mostly emptying into the Laguna de Términos.
Campeche oil and gas production accounts for 37% of Mexico’s total with crude oil alone accounting for 76% in absolute numbers.
It was attacked and its owner killed in the raid by Laurens de Graaf in 1685.
During the colonial period, the city was a rich and important port, but declined after Mexico’s Independence.
The state is in the tropics with a humid climate with a defined rainy and relatively dry season from late winter to early spring.
In the winter, storms from the north called “nortes” can bring colder dry air from the area of the United States.
However, to survive in the hot and humid environment, the Europeans also adapted a number of Maya products such as hammocks for sleeping and storing drinking water in hollow gourds.
Regional dishes include cochinita pibil, beans with pork, pork with achiote, panuchos, empanadas, chanchanes, chocolomo, tamales, shark tacos, pickled vines, seafood such as many species of fish, shrimp, octopus and crustaceans.
The formation of the state began with the city, which was founded in 1540 as the Spanish began the conquest of the Yucatán Peninsula.
The first educational institution in the state was located in the former monastery of San José in the city of Campeche, founded by the Jesuits in 1756 called the Colegio Clerical de San José.
Other important crops include jalapeño chili peppers, watermelon, sugar cane and various tropical and non-tropical fruit bearing trees, especially citrus and mango .
In the late summer, there are sometimes hurricanes.
During the Mexican Revolution, Manuel Castilla Brito took up arms in Campeche in support of Francisco I. Madero.
In Ciudad del Carmen, they include La Maniagua, Bahamita, Sabancuy, Playa Caracol and Playa Norte, Isla de Pájaros.
The Calakmul Reserve was created in 1989 over 723,185 hectares.
Campeche has three main protected areas: The Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, the Laguna de Términos Reserve and the Los Petenes Biosphere Reserve with total an area of 1,810,597 hectares.
As of 2015, the state has a total population of 899,931.
The main wildlife species in the state are the jaguar, ocelot, puma, deer, wild boar, raccoon, hare, ring-tailed cat and spider monkey.
In 1804, the port was closed due to the war between Spain and England.
From the 19th century until the latter 20th, the state’s economy was dependent on agriculture, fishing, logging and salt mining.
This name was changed to the current one in 1989.
It also includes the savannah area and an area called Los Chenes, where natural wells called cenotes are common.
The Spanish introduced sugar cane and other crops in the area, starting in the 1540s, but the main value of the area was the port of Campeche, established in 1540 where the old Maya village used to be.
Campeche was the more liberal of the two, and supported the 1824 Mexican Constitution which established a Federal Republic.
Sheep and goats are raised sparsely all over the state, depending on local vegetation.
Prevailing winds are from the northwest from November to March, from the north between September and October, from the southeast from June to August and from the south in April and May.
Campeche was one of the most important ports in New Spain.
The lagoon is ringed by smaller lakes and forms the most important lake-lagoon system in the country.
In 1811, the port of Sisal was opened in what is now the State of Yucatán, taking much of the city’s business.
Campeche does not have metal deposits but it does have deposits of building stone, such as sandstone, marble and limestone, sand, gravel, lime, clay and other minerals.
(turimsoenc) Cheese was mostly likely influenced by pirate with queso de bola related to Dutch cheese making traditions.
The Universidad Autónoma de Campeche was founded in 1957 by the state to systematize higher education in the state as its first major university.
Most commerce with entities outside of Campeche is in seafood, agricultural and forestry products.
These generally take advantage of the local rivers, springs and cenotes.
This hacienda was a site of one of the bloodiest battles of the Caste War.
(mediofisico) In the south of the municipality of Champotón begin a series of rolling hills known as the Sierra Alta or Puuc, which extend northeast to Bolonchen and then into the state of Yucatán.
The Cathedral of Campeche is from the 16th century.
The reserve extends over 382 hectares in the municipalities of Campeche, Tenabo, Hecelchakan and Calkini.
The main Maya cities were Edzna, Xtampak, and later Calakmul and Becán.
The wildlife is dependent on a varied and complex system of fresh and brackish water.
However, there is a very large discrepancy between highly paid oil workers, mostly coming from out of state and locals who do not work for PEMEX .
Later in the 19th century, events in the streets for the masses became popular, with the various neighborhoods of the city organizing their own events.
The church marks the spot where the first mass was held on mainland America.
The largest religious festival in the state is Carnival in the city of Campeche.
In 1917, Campeche wrote its current constitution.
Mestizo is mostly of Spanish origin with some indigenous additions and the other is called Maya and is almost purely indigenous.
Other sites include Can-mayab-mul in Nunkiní, Xculhoc in Hecelchakán, Chunan-tunich, Xtampak, Hochob, Pak-chén and Dzebilnocac in Hopelchén, El Tigre in Candelaria, La Xoch and Chun Cedro in Tenabo and Becán in Calakmul.
The worst pirate attack occurred in 1685, when Laurens de Graaf sacked the city of Campeche and the surrounding haciendas for over thirty days, killing about a third of the area’s population.
The Mamantel River empties into the Laguna de Panlau.
These were sent to the city of Tikal in exchange for ritualistic adornment for the site.
In 1955, the University of Campeche was founded  and a state system of middle schools was begun.
Most of the attacks were at the port of Campeche, but Champontón also suffered significant attacks in 1644 and 1672.
The most recently created municipality is Candelaria in 1998.
Much of Campeche’s territory is filled with various archeological sites, almost all of which are Mayan.
Calakmal is estimated to have been populated around 1000 BCE with its height at around 600 In 695 CE, Calakmul was conquered by Tikal and the city fell into decline.
The Asunción church in Dzitbalché was constructed in the 18th century, with a pointed arch doorway, choral window and bell-gable.
Opened in 1965, it served about 100,000 passengers in 2009.
The Mountain region is in the north and east of the state consisting of two chains of low hills called the Dzibalchen and Sierra Alta.
He renamed it San Lázaro.
While still rich in wildlife, much has been decimated because of agriculture and exploitation of forest resources destroying habitat as well as uncontrolled hunting.
In Campeche, these  beaches include Mar Azul, San Lorenzo and Playa Bonita.
The most important crop is corn, followed by rice and sorghum.
The average number of years of schooling for those over age 15 is 8.5, which means that most finish middle school.
They also include more risqué dances such as those called la Culebra, Los Papagayos and la Contradanza de los Palitos which have Afro-Caribbean influence .
The coast region consists of the entire coastline of the state and a strip of shallow water just offshore called the Sonda de Campeche with coral reefs and low islands called cays.
Many of these haciendas have been turned into hotels, spas and other tourist attractions.
The conquest of Campeche and the rest of the Yucatán Peninsula began in earnest in 1540, under Francisco de Montejos, senior and junior .
The institution operated out of several buildings until the mid-1960s, when the Ciudad Universitaria campus was built, and named the Universidad del Sudeste.
The Museo Fuerte de San Miguel is located on one of the Campeche’s old forts.
Rainforest areas subdivide into a number of types which include perennial tall tree rainforest, semi perennial tall tree rainforest, deciduous medium height tree rainforest, semi deciduous medium height tree rainforest, deciduous low height tree rainforest and semi perennial low height tree rainforest.
The Laguna de Términos Reserve includes the lagoon and the area surrounding it with an area of 705,017 hectares.
The church and former monastery of San Luis Obispo is located in Calkiní, built in the 17th century of stone, wood and metal over a former Mayan temple.
These have only an average altitude of between forty and sixty meters with some reaching 100 meters.
During the colonial era, it was a commercial port equal to Havana and Cartagena even though piracy was a constant threat.
There are many bird species including the chachalaca, ducks, quail, pelican, toucan, buzzard and many more.
The economic boom tripled the population of the city of Campeche in ten years, and nearly doubled that of Ciudad del Carmen, which before was only a small fishing village.
The Spanish built a European-based colonial city here and as it became rich, it was filled with large mansions.
The Guadalupe Church in Bécal, Calkiní was built in the 18th century.
Campeche was part of the province of Yucatán but split off in the mid-19th century, mostly due to political friction with the city of Mérida.
Forestry, including the extraction of precious tropical hardwoods, remains an important economic activity despite the degradation of many of the state’s forests.
The capital was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO .
Commerce and services account for 33.2% of the state’s GDP.
During one of these 150 men took over one of the main forts of Campeche and demanded a political union consisting of it, Champotón and Isla del Carmen.
These Menonnites came in the 1980s from the Mennonite settlements which were founded in 1922 and 1924 in the states of Chihahua and Durango, partly via Zacatecas.
The Chumpán River is an isolated river formed by the union of various streams.
Some foods have been reinvented.
Federal Highway 180 is the main thoroughfare in the state, running along the coast from the Tabasco state border connecting Ciudad del Carmen and Campeche with Mérida in Yucatán state.
It also includes a number of precious tropical hardwoods such as red cedar, mahogany, ciricote (cordia dodecandra) and guayacán (guialum sanctum).
The facade is simple with a bell-gable and there remains only one of its original Baroque altarpieces, which was made in the 16th century.
Commercial fishing is mostly done along the coast, with shrimp being the most valuable catch, followed by crustaceans and mollusks.
The Mexican Constitution of 1857 completely broke the schism between Campeche and Mérida with various rebellions breaking out.
The effect also happens in August, during harvest and it is believed to be related to the asking and receiving of abundant crops.
It continued to operate until the Mexican Revolution and today it is home to the Hotel de Gran Turismo.
Other settlements in the west of the peninsula expressed its desire to be partition with these areas as a new state.
Only 3.3% of the state’s land is used for raising crops due to the soil composition.
Average annual rainfall varies between 900 and 2000&nbsp;mm.
In the 1990s, a number of textile mills of the “maquiladora” type were opened in the state.
In Champotón, they are Acapulquito, Costa Blanca, Payucán and Sihoplaya.
Hacienda San José Carpizo is in the Champotón municipality, founded in 1871 by José María Carpizo Sánchez and was one of the most important on the Yucatán Peninsula, raising cattle.
Temple II is tallest at 50&nbsp;m high.
The State Office of Cultural Heritage Sites and Monuments bought abandoned properties to restore them for use as museums, schools, theaters and a library.
The state capital, also called Campeche, was declared a World Heritage Site in 1997.
This and foreign pressure to pay debts, forced the Yucatan to formally reintegrate into Mexico in 1849.
Fourteen percent of these speakers do not speak Spanish.
This prompted far more extensive fortification with numerous forts and a wall around the city that measured 2,560 meters in an irregular polygon shape.
One is papak’sul, or papadzul, which was made with beans and chili peppers.
In 1975, the first oil platform, called Chac Number One began operations.
It continued operating until the Mexican Revolution.
Hernandez de Cordoba died of his wounds from this battle, prompting the Spanish to call this bay the “Bahía de Mala Pelea” (Bay of the Bad Fight) .
One notable economic fair outside of the city is the “Jipi” Sombrero Festival in Bécal in April and May.
These include seventeen teachers’ colleges and twenty eight other institutions of higher education.
Most of the surface is of sedimentary rock much of which is from marine origin.
This is mostly done in the coast reason, where most of the economy outside of oil production relies on fishing and the building and repair of fishing boats.
There are two main types of cuisine.
The state has about five hundred businesses dedicated to tourism, about half of which are restaurants, a little less than a quarter bars and a similar number of handcraft shops.
Most land is owned as community property under the ejido system (61%).
The hottest and most humid areas of the state are along the coast between the Laguna de Términos and the northern border.
After 1685, the city’s main fortifications were begun taking 24 years to complete.
The Campeche airport, officially named Ing.
In these brackish waters have developed a number of aquatic species such as sea bass, small sharks, crabs, oysters, turbles, and storks.
The rest of the states streams flow only in the rainy season.
There other areas of these rolling hills, near the city of Campeche with main ones known as Maxtum, Boxol and El Morro.
However, the production of oil has brought environmental problems to the area, especially fishing yields, as well as internal strife between locals and newcomers.
The commerce sector of the economy is mostly traditional with small establishments catering to local or regional needs.
Its most important building is the Pyramid of the Five Stories, built as its name implies.
The state has over 1800 schools from preschool to university level.
The rivers in the south and southwest belong to various basins, with the largest being the Grijalva-Usumacinta to which the Candelaria, Chumpán and Mamantal Rivers belong.
The site extends over 70&nbsp;km² and was one of the largest cities of Mesoamerica.
It receives fresh water from most of Campeche’s rivers as well as salt water from the Gulf.
Other important religious festivals include Candlemas (Candelaria) in Hool, Champotón and Campeche, feast day of Our Lady of Mount Carmen in Ciudad del Carmen, feast day of Saint Joachim in Palizada, and the feast day of Saint Roman in Campeche, the feast of San Isidro Labrador in Calkiní in May, the feast of the Cristo Negro in San Román, Day of the Dead in all of the state, feast of the Holy Cross in Sabancuy, Carmen in May, feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmen in Ciudad del Carmen in July and the feast of the Señor de la Salud in Hecelchakán in April.
Despite losing most of its land in the Revolution, its henequen mill continued to operate until the 1980s.
While most sites are in the interior rainforest of the state, there are fifty five archeological sites on the coast alone, mostly remnants of small villages.
There is also aquatic vegetation.
Hacienda Santa Cruz is between Campeche and Calkiní in the Nunkiní community.
It was discovered in the 1920s and excavated in the 1940s.
Most of the beaches frequented by visitors are in the municipalities of Campeche, Champotón and Ciudad del Carmen.
Mining, mostly oil production, accounts for 52.8% of the state’s GDP.
Hacienda Uayamón is near the city of Campeche with origins in the 16th century.
The Usumacinta also flows in the state but it tends to change course frequently and occasionally divides into branches.
The secondary sector of the economy (mining, construction, and industry) is almost entirely concentrated in the coastal area of the state in the municipalities of Campeche, Ciudad del Carmen and Champotón.
Hacienda Blanca Flor is located in Hecelchakán outside Campeche.
This system connects to the Sabancuy estuary to the northeast.
Notable elevations include Cerro Champerico (), Cerro los Chinos (), Cerro El Ramonal (), Cerro El Doce () and Cerro El Gavilán ().
The east branch of this river is also called the Palizada River, which has the largest volume although it is narrow.
The state's executive power rests in the governor of Campeche and the legislative power rests in the Congress of Campeche which is a unicameral legislature composed of 35 deputies.
The Nuestra Señora del Carmen Church in Ciudad del Carmen was built in the 18th century.
Another important find came in the 1990s.
The town of Pomuch in the municipality of Hecelchakán is known for its bread and has a type named after it.
The site has been heavily looted by grave robbers.
The shoreline has thirty seven commercial and military docks.
Campeche remained a wealthy and important port until the early 19th century, when a number of events brought on decline.
It was one of the most important ceremonial centers in the pre Classic Maya period (300-900CE).
Campeche is one of the least known and unrated colonial cities in Mexico, mostly bypassed by those visiting more famous destinations in the Yucatan peninsula.
Away from the coast, these rainforests are interspersed with savannah areas and along the coast are accompanied by areas with sand dunes, mangrove wetlands and estuaries.
This led to the establishment of smaller settlements and a mixing of the Maya and Chontal people in the south of the state, which had commercial ties to the central highland cultures of Mexico.
As of 2010, the most commonly spoken indigenous language spoken in the state is Maya, with 71,852 speakers.
In 1824, Campeche’s representative proposed that the peninsula be divided into two states: Mérida and Campeche but this was not accepted.
The Candelaria River forms in Petén, Guatemala and runs north-south and empties into the Laguna de Pargos.
Yucatán independence did not solve the peninsula’s internal political problems.
The presence of PEMEX is the main force behind the building and maintenance of port infrastructure.
Over sixty five percent of the territory is exploited for forestry products, with over 25% used for grazing, with only 3.3% used for agriculture and about 5.5% used for other purposes such as human settlements.
The city’s historic buildings are protected by decree to keep them from being destroyed or altered by the growth of the city.
He moved onto the territory of Chakanputon (today Champotón) where he and his men were attacked by the warriors of this dominion.
Environmentally, the state is divided into four major regions.
The state has thirty four traditional public markets .
The state has a number of colonial era churches.
