According to the 2006 census, the country's largest self-reported ethnic origin is Canadian (accounting for 32% of the population), followed by English (21%), French (15.8%), Scottish (15.1%), Irish (13.9%), German (10.2%), Italian (4.6%), Chinese (4.3%), First Nations (4.0%), Ukrainian (3.9%), and Dutch (3.3%).
However, as a whole, Canada is in theory a cultural mosaic—a collection of several regional, aboriginal, and ethnic subcultures.
Seven of Canada's eight largest metropolitan areas – Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Ottawa, Calgary, Edmonton and Winnipeg – have franchises in the National Hockey League (NHL) while Quebec City had the Quebec Nordiques until they relocated to Colorado in 1995.
In Quebec, cultural identity is strong, and many commentators speak of a culture of Quebec that is distinct from English Canadian culture.
Canada is a participant in the International Space Station (ISS), and is a pioneer in space robotics, having constructed the Canadarm, Canadarm2 and Dextre robotic manipulators for the ISS and NASA's Space Shuttle.
The federal Cabinet also appoints justices to superior courts in the provincial and territorial jurisdictions.
Canada is a federal parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy, with Queen Elizabeth II being the head of state.
Multiculturalism is often cited as one of Canada's significant accomplishments, and a key distinguishing element of Canadian identity.
Canada's ethnic and cultural diversity are reflected in its literature, with many of its most prominent modern writers focusing on ethnic life.
Since then, Canada has been an advocate for multilateralism, making efforts to resolve global issues in collaboration with other nations.
The eruption produced a  lava flow, and, according to Nisga'a legend, blocked the flow of the Nass River.
The list of historical parties with elected representation is substantial.
The Supreme Court of Canada is the highest court and final arbiter and has been led since 2000 by the Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin (the first female Chief Justice).
Though referred to as having seven members, five artists—Lawren Harris, A. Y. Jackson, Arthur Lismer, J. E. H. MacDonald, and Frederick Varley—were responsible for articulating the Group's ideas.
In all, over a million Canadians served in the armed forces during World War II and approximately 42,000 were killed and another 55,000 were wounded.
Canada's federal government practices official bilingualism, which is applied by the Commissioner of Official Languages in consonance with Section 16 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Federal Official Languages Act English and French have equal status in federal courts, parliament, and in all federal institutions.
In 2001, Canada deployed troops to Afghanistan as part of the US stabilization force and the UN-authorized, NATO-led International Security Assistance Force.
They were joined briefly by Frank Johnston, and by commercial artist Franklin Carmichael.
Later that year, the name of national holiday was changed from Dominion Day to Canada Day.
The Charter guarantees basic rights and freedoms that usually cannot be over-ridden by any government—though a notwithstanding clause allows the federal parliament and provincial legislatures to override certain sections of the Charter for a period of five years.
In August 2007, Canada's territorial claims in the Arctic were challenged after a Russian underwater expedition to the North Pole; Canada has considered that area to be sovereign territory since 1925.
Canada's Ministry of Natural Resources provides statistics regarding its major exports; the country is a leading exporter of zinc, uranium, gold, nickel, aluminum, steel, iron ore, coking coal and lead.
Since the 1950s, works of Inuit art have been given as gifts to foreign dignitaries by the Canadian government.
Although more than 85 percent of French-speaking Canadians live in Quebec, there are substantial Francophone populations in New Brunswick, Alberta, and Manitoba; Ontario has the largest French-speaking population outside Quebec.
Canada and the United States share the world's longest undefended border, co-operate on military campaigns and exercises, and are each other's largest trading partner.
Canada acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1976.
Between 2001 and 2006, the visible minority population rose by 27.2 percent.
Canada is geologically active, having many earthquakes and potentially active volcanoes, notably Mount Meager, Mount Garibaldi, Mount Cayley, and the Mount Edziza volcanic complex.
There are also fresh-water glaciers in the Canadian Rockies and the Coast Mountains.
In 1534, French explorer Jacques Cartier explored the Saint Lawrence River, where, on July 24, he planted a  cross bearing the words "Long Live the King of France" and took possession of the territory (known as the colony of Canada) in the name of King Francis I.
The Canadian economy boomed during the war as its industries manufactured military materiel for Canada, Britain, China, and the Soviet Union.
From the 16th to the early 18th century "Canada" referred to the part of New France that lay along the St. Lawrence River.
New immigrants settle mostly in major urban areas such as Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver.
Golf, tennis, baseball, skiing, cricket, volleyball, rugby union, Australian Rules Football, soccer and basketball are widely played at youth and amateur levels, but professional leagues and franchises are not widespread.
Canada has been inhabited for millennia by various Aboriginal peoples.
The Canadian public as-well as the major political parties support the current level of immigration.
Using its spending powers, the federal government can initiate national policies in provincial areas, such as the Canada Health Act; the provinces can opt out of these, but rarely do so in practice.
The territorial legislatures also differ structurally from their provincial counterparts.
Canadian visual art has been dominated by figures such as Tom Thomson – the country's most famous painter – and by the Group of Seven.
Canada was a founding member of the United Nations and has membership in the World Trade Organization, the G20 and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
Canada currently employs a professional, volunteer military force of 92,000 active personnel and approximately 51,000 reserve personnel.
Canada's population density, at , is among the lowest in the world.
These attempts reached a climax in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with forced integration and relocations.
Calixa Lavallée wrote the music, which was a setting of a patriotic poem composed by the poet and judge Sir Adolphe-Basile Routhier.
Canada's border with the United States is the world's longest land border.
The primary characteristics of Canadian humour are irony, parody, and satire.
Law enforcement, including criminal courts, is officially a provincial responsibility, conducted by provincial and municipal police forces.
Canada has a well-developed media sector, but its cultural output; particularly in English films, television shows, and magazines, is often overshadowed by imports from the United States.
Historically, Canada has been influenced by British, French, and aboriginal cultures and traditions.
Immigration now resumed at a higher level, with over 960,000 arrivals from Britain 1815-50.
Canada is additionally one of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products; the Canadian Prairies are one of the most important global producers of wheat, canola, and other grains.
Patriotic music in Canada dates back over 200 years as a distinct category from British patriotism, preceding the first legal steps to independence by over 50 years.
Between 1990 and 2008, the population increased by 5.6 million, equivalent to 20.4 percent overall growth.
The roots of organized sports in Canada date back to the 1770s.
Canada assumed control of Rupert's Land and the North-Western Territory to form the Northwest Territories, where the Métis' grievances ignited the Red River Rebellion and the creation of the province of Manitoba in July 1870.
Since the adoption of section 23 of the Constitution Act, 1982, education in both English and French has been available in most places across Canada.
By 2007, almost one in five (19.8%) were foreign-born, with nearly 60 percent of new immigrants coming from Asia (including the Middle East).
Out of approximately 625,000 Canadians who served in World War I, some 60,000 were killed and another 172,000 were wounded.
This angered many residents of the Thirteen Colonies, fuelling anti-British sentiment in the years prior to the 1775 outbreak of the American Revolution.
The legal and policy framework within which Canada and First Nations operate was further formalized in 2005, through the First Nations–Federal Crown Political Accord.
As a result, the preservation of a distinctly Canadian culture is supported by federal government programs, laws, and institutions such as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC), the National Film Board of Canada (NFB), and the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC).
The Canadian Music Hall of Fame established in 1976 honours Canadian musicians for their lifetime achievements.
Atlantic Canada possesses vast offshore deposits of natural gas, and Alberta also hosts large oil and gas resources.
The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia by way of the Bering land bridge and arrived at least 15,000 years ago, though increasing evidence suggests an even earlier arrival.
The radical Front de libération du Québec (FLQ) ignited the October Crisis with a series of bombings and kidnappings in 1970 and the  Parti Québécois was elected in 1976, organizing an unsuccessful referendum on sovereignty-association in 1980.
The mandatory school age ranges between 5–7 to 16–18 years, contributing to an adult literacy rate of 99 percent.
Canada's culture draws influences from its broad range of constituent nationalities, and policies that promote a "just society" are constitutionally protected.
Canadian troops played important roles in many key battles of the war, including the failed 1942 Dieppe Raid, the Allied invasion of Italy, the Normandy landings, the Battle of Normandy, and the Battle of the Scheldt in 1944.
A multitude of languages are used by Canadians, with English and French (the official languages) being the mother tongues of approximately 60% and 20% of Canadians respectively.
Many towns in northern Canada, where agriculture is difficult, are sustainable because of nearby mines or sources of timber.
While a variety of theories have been postulated for the etymological origins of ''Canada'', the name is now accepted as coming from the St. Lawrence Iroquoian word ''kanata'', meaning "village" or "settlement".
The term ''Dominion'' is also used to distinguish the federal government from the provinces, though after the Second World War the term ''federal'' had replaced ''dominion''.
Canada is the world's eleventh-largest economy , with a nominal GDP of approximately US$1.79 trillion.
At the same time, Quebec underwent profound social and economic changes through the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s, giving birth to a modern nationalist movement.
The aboriginal population at the time of the first European settlements is estimated to have been between 200,000 and two million, with a figure of 500,000 accepted by Canada's Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.
The signing of the Oregon Treaty by Britain and the United States in 1846 ended the Oregon boundary dispute, extending the border westward along the 49th parallel.
'''Canada''' (; French: ) is a country in the northern half of North America.
However, in most rural areas and some urban areas, policing responsibilities are contracted to the federal Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
As this was the first UN peacekeeping mission, Pearson is often credited as the inventor of the concept.
Canada seeks to expand its ties to Pacific Rim economies through membership in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC).
Attempts to accommodate Quebec nationalism constitutionally through the Meech Lake Accord failed in 1990.
Of these, only the Cree, Inuktitut and Ojibway languages have a large enough population of fluent speakers to be considered viable to survive in the long term.
Government policies such as publicly funded health care, higher taxation to redistribute wealth, the outlawing of capital punishment, strong efforts to eliminate poverty, strict gun control, and the legalization of same-sex marriage are further social indicators of Canada's political and cultural values.
Canada's strong attachment to the British Empire and Commonwealth led to major participation in British military efforts in the Second Boer War, World War I and World War II.
Canada is one of the few developed nations that are net exporters of energy.
From the late 18th century, European Canadians encouraged Aboriginals to assimilate into their own culture.
Some of these cultures had collapsed by the time European explorers arrived in the late 15th and early 16th centuries and have only been discovered through archeological investigations.
The first Canadian Army units arrived in Britain in December 1939.
Canada is a Commonwealth realm member of the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie, and part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G8, the Group of Ten, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education.
Citizens have the right, where there is sufficient demand, to receive federal government services in either English or French and official-language minorities are guaranteed their own schools in all provinces and territories.
The Canadian music industry is the sixth largest in the world producing internationally renowned composers, musicians and ensembles.
A period of redress is underway, which started with the appointment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada by the Canadian government.
The country's 2014 trade surplus totalled C$5.1&nbsp;billion, compared with a C$46.9&nbsp;billion surplus in 2008.
In 2011, 23.9% declared no religious affiliation, compared to 16.5% in 2001.
The country is officially bilingual at the federal level.
Canada is sparsely populated, the majority of its land territory being dominated by forest and tundra and the Rocky Mountains; about four-fifths of the country's population of 36 million people live near the southern border, and the population is about four-fifths urbanized.
The desire for responsible government resulted in the abortive Rebellions of 1837.
Its ten provinces and three territories extend from the Atlantic to the Pacific and northward into the Arctic Ocean, covering , making it the world's second-largest country by total area and the fourth-largest country by land area.
The majority of Canada has a cold or severely cold winter climate, but southerly areas are warm in summer.
It re-established the French language, Catholic faith, and French civil law there.
Canada has placed emphasis on equality and inclusiveness for all its people.
Cartier later used the word ''Canada'' to refer not only to that particular village, but the entire area subject to Donnacona (the chief at Stadacona); by 1545, European books and maps had begun referring to this small region along the St Lawrence River as ''Canada''.
In the 1980s, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's Progressive Conservatives abolished the NEP and changed the name of FIRA to ''Investment Canada'', to encourage foreign investment.
Despite another Conscription Crisis in Quebec in 1944, Canada finished the war with a large army and strong economy.
These treaties are agreements with the Canadian Crown-in-Council, administered by Canadian Aboriginal law, and overseen by the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development.
The Great Seal of Canada is a governmental seal used for purposes of state, being set on letters patent, proclamations and commissions, for representatives of the Queen and for the appointment of cabinet ministers, lieutenant governors, senators, and judges.
Some of the most common non-official first languages include Chinese (mainly Cantonese; 1,072,555 first-language speakers), Punjabi (430,705), Spanish (410,670), German (409,200), and Italian (407,490).
In the mid-1990s, Jean Chrétien's Liberal government began to post annual budgetary surpluses, and steadily paid down the national debt.
In 1583, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, by the royal prerogative of Queen Elizabeth I, founded St. John's, Newfoundland, as the first North American English colony.
In common with many other developed countries, Canada is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age.
Widely debated oil pipeline proposals, in particular, are hoped to increase exports of Canadian oil reserves to China.
Canada is religiously diverse, encompassing a wide range of beliefs and customs.
The Constitution of Canada is the supreme law of the country, and consists of written text and unwritten conventions.
Another 16.2 percent of the population belonged to a non-aboriginal visible minority.
Thomson's career painting Canadian landscapes spanned a decade up to his death in 1917 at age 39.
The federal government and many Canadian industries have also started to expand trade with emerging Asian markets, in an attempt to diversify exports; Asia is now Canada's second-largest export market after the United States.
Average winter and summer high temperatures across Canada vary from region to region.
The 1783 Treaty of Paris recognized American independence and ceded the newly added territories south (but not north) of the Great Lakes to the new United States.
In 2014, Canada's exports totalled over C$528 billion, while its imported goods were worth over $523&nbsp;billion, of which approximately $349&nbsp;billion originated from the United States, $49&nbsp;billion from the European Union, and $35&nbsp;billion from China.
By December 2012, Statistics Canada reported a population of over 35 million, signifying the fastest growth rate of any G8 nation.
Canada's judiciary plays an important role in interpreting laws and has the power to strike down Acts of Parliament that violate the constitution.
In noncoastal regions, snow can cover the ground for almost six months of the year, while in parts of the north snow can persist year-round.
Other popular and professional spectator sports in Canada include curling, Canadian football and rugby league; the latter is played professionally in the Canadian Football League (CFL) and League 1 (Toronto Wolfpack).
Canada has the longest coastline in the world, with a total length of ; additionally, its border with the United States is the world's longest land border, stretching .
Furthermore, the Toronto Stock Exchange is the seventh largest stock exchange in the world by market capitalization, listing over 1,500 companies with a combined market capitalization of over US$2 trillion .
Since the end of the last glacial period, Canada has consisted of eight distinct forest regions, including extensive boreal forest on the Canadian Shield.
There are 11 Aboriginal language groups, composed of more than 65 distinct dialects.
To ensure the stability of government, the governor general will usually appoint as prime minister the person who is the current leader of the political party that can obtain the confidence of a plurality in the House of Commons.
The Paleo-Indian archeological sites at Old Crow Flats and Bluefish Caves are two of the oldest sites of human habitation in Canada.
Canada joined the Organization of American States (OAS) in 1990 and hosted the OAS General Assembly in 2000 and the 3rd Summit of the Americas in 2001.
The national anthem of Canada, "O Canada", was originally commissioned by the Lieutenant Governor of Quebec, the Honourable Théodore Robitaille, for the 1880 St. Jean-Baptiste Day ceremony, and was officially adopted in 1980.
The Canada&nbsp;– United States Free Trade Agreement (FTA) of 1988 eliminated tariffs between the two countries, while the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) expanded the free-trade zone to include Mexico in 1994.
General elections must be called by the governor general, either on the advice of the prime minister, or if the government loses a confidence vote in the House.
On the east and west coasts, average high temperatures are generally in the low 20s °C (70s °F), while between the coasts, the average summer high temperature ranges from , with temperatures in some interior locations occasionally exceeding .
The leader of the party with the second-most seats usually becomes the Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition and is part of an adversarial parliamentary system intended to keep the government in check.
Canada has one of the highest per-capita immigration rates in the world, driven mainly by economic policy and, to a lesser extent family reunification.
The Canadian Space Agency operates a highly active space program, conducting deep-space, planetary, and aviation research, and developing rockets and satellites.
Canada's federal debt was estimated to total $566.7&nbsp;billion for the fiscal year 2010–11, up from $463.7&nbsp;billion in 2008–09.
The 1977 Charter of the French Language established French as the official language of Quebec.
Canada is home to the world's northernmost settlement, Canadian Forces Station Alert, on the northern tip of Ellesmere Island – latitude 82.5°N – which lies  from the North Pole.
Among the colonists of New France, ''Canadiens'' extensively settled the Saint Lawrence River valley and Acadians settled the present-day Maritimes, while fur traders and Catholic missionaries explored the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Mississippi watershed to Louisiana.
A second referendum followed in 1995, in which sovereignty was rejected by a slimmer margin of 50.6 to 49.4 percent.
The Queen' s image appears on $20 bank notes, and on the obverse of all current Canadian coins.
Five parties had representatives elected to the federal parliament in the 2015 election: the Liberal Party of Canada who currently form the government, the Conservative Party of Canada who are the Official Opposition, the New Democratic Party, the Bloc Québécois, and the Green Party of Canada.
The Canadas were the main front in the War of 1812 between the United States and Britain.
In 1919, Canada joined the League of Nations independently of Britain, and the 1931 Statute of Westminster affirmed Canada's independence.
The English established additional colonies in Cupids and Ferryland, Newfoundland, beginning in 1610.
New Brunswick was split from Nova Scotia as part of a reorganization of Loyalist settlements in the Maritimes.
The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada (accounting for 6.1% of Canadians), followed by Anglicans (5.0%), and Baptists (1.9%).
The Prime Minister's Office (PMO) is thus one of the most powerful institutions in government, initiating most legislation for parliamentary approval and selecting for appointment by the Crown, besides the aforementioned, the governor general, lieutenant governors, senators, federal court judges, and heads of Crown corporations and government agencies.
Secularization has been growing since the 1960s.
Since 1925, Canada has claimed the portion of the Arctic between 60° and 141°W longitude, but this claim is not universally recognized.
Canada has since served in over 50 peacekeeping missions, including every UN peacekeeping effort until 1989, and has since maintained forces in international missions in Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, and elsewhere; Canada has sometimes faced controversy over its involvement in foreign countries, notably in the 1993 Somalia Affair.
Nearly 6.8 million Canadians listed a non-official language as their mother tongue.
The Automotive Products Trade Agreement of 1965 opened Canada's borders to trade in the automobile manufacturing industry.
The most densely populated part of the country is the Quebec City&nbsp;– Windsor Corridor, situated in Southern Quebec and Southern Ontario along the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.
French explorer Samuel de Champlain arrived in 1603 and established the first permanent European settlements at Port Royal (in 1605) and Quebec City (in 1608).
In 1997, the Supreme Court ruled that unilateral secession by a province would be unconstitutional and the Clarity Act was passed by parliament, outlining the terms of a negotiated departure from Confederation.
In 2011, Canadian forces participated in the NATO-led intervention into the Libyan civil war, and also became involved in battling the Islamic State insurgency in Iraq in the mid-2010s.
The leading sources of immigrants to Canada were China, the Philippines and India.
Volunteers sent to the Western Front later became part of the Canadian Corps, which played a substantial role in the Battle of Vimy Ridge and other major engagements of the war.
Canada nevertheless has an independent foreign policy, most notably maintaining full relations with Cuba since, and declining to officially participate in the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
These included the explosion of Air India Flight 182 in 1985, the largest mass murder in Canadian history; the École Polytechnique massacre in 1989, a university shooting targeting female students; and the Oka Crisis of 1990, the first of a number of violent confrontations between the government and Aboriginal groups.
Aboriginal peoples in present-day Canada include the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis, the latter being a mixed-blood people who originated in the mid-17th century when First Nations and Inuit people married European settlers.
The maple leaf is depicted on Canada's current and previous flags, and on the Arms of Canada.
The Cabinet of Liberal Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier fostered continental European immigrants settling the prairies and Alberta and Saskatchewan became provinces in 1905.
Provincial legislatures are unicameral and operate in parliamentary fashion similar to the House of Commons.
Canadian humour is an integral part of the Canadian Identity and is reflected in its folklore, literature, music, art and media.
The country invests heavily in tertiary education (more than 20 000 USD per student).
The Great Depression in Canada during the early 1930s saw an economic downturn, leading to hardship across the country.
Canada's approach to governance emphasizing multiculturalism, which is based on selective immigration, social integration, and suppression of far right politics, has wide public support.
The vastness of the Athabasca oil sands and other assets results in Canada having a 13% share of global oil reserves, comprising the world's third-largest share after Venezuela and Saudi Arabia.
Canada does have one Major League Baseball team, the Toronto Blue Jays, one professional basketball team, the Toronto Raptors, three Major League Soccer teams and four National Lacrosse League teams.
In 1898, during the Klondike Gold Rush in the Northwest Territories, parliament created the Yukon Territory.
Peace came in 1815; no boundaries were changed.
Provinces have more autonomy than territories, having responsibility for social programs such as health care, education, and welfare.
According to a 2012 report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Canada is the most educated country in the world; the country ranks first worldwide in the number of adults having tertiary education, with 51 percent of Canadian adults having attained at least an undergraduate college or university degree.
The volcanic eruption of the Tseax Cone in 1775 was among Canada's worst natural disasters, killing 2,000 Nisga'a people and destroying their village in the Nass River valley of northern British Columbia.
Canada is recognized as a middle power for its role in international affairs with a tendency to pursue multilateral solutions.
The Arms of Canada is closely modelled after the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom with French and distinctive Canadian elements replacing or added to those derived from the British version.
There are also clusters of Acadians in southwestern Nova Scotia, on Cape Breton Island, and through central and western Prince Edward Island.
Constitutionally, an election may be held no more than five years after the preceding election, although the Canada Elections Act currently limits this to four years with a fixed election date in October.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 granted full autonomy and the Constitution Act, 1982, ended all legislative ties to the UK, as well as adding a constitutional amending formula and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
According to Statistics Canada, visible minority groups could account for a third of the Canadian population by 2031.
The first known attempt at European colonization began when Norsemen settled briefly at L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland around 1000 AD.
Canadians also identify with the country's health care institutions, peacekeeping, the National park system and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Canada's official national sports are ice hockey and lacrosse.
Canada's three territories also have legislatures, but these are not sovereign and have fewer constitutional responsibilities than the provinces.
Most notably, a series of eleven treaties known as the Numbered Treaties were signed between Aboriginals in Canada and the reigning Monarch of Canada between 1871 and 1921.
Canada's federal structure divides government responsibilities between the federal government and the ten provinces.
In addition, Canada's net foreign debt rose by $41 billion to $194 billion in the first quarter of 2010.
Common law prevails everywhere except in Quebec, where civil law predominates.
Canada is a developed country and has the tenth highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the ninth highest ranking in the Human Development Index.
Canada is a mixed economy, ranking above the US and most western European nations on the Heritage Foundation's index of economic freedom, and experiencing a relatively low level of income disparity.
Canada's national symbols are influenced by natural, historical, and Aboriginal sources.
Canada also maintains historic ties to the United Kingdom and France and to other former British and French colonies through Canada's membership in the Commonwealth of Nations and the Francophonie.
This paved the way for British colonies on Vancouver Island (1849) and in British Columbia (1858).
The Group were painters with a nationalistic and idealistic focus, who first exhibited their distinctive works in May 1920.
However, Canada is unusual among developed countries in the importance of its primary sector, in which the forestry and petroleum industries are two of the most prominent components.
