Earlier states (for example the Philistines and Tyrians in the case of Judah and Samaria, for the second route, and Judah and Israel for the third route) tried generally unsuccessfully to control the interior trade.
The dyes may have been named after their place of origin.
In the north, the cities of Yamkhad and Qatna were hegemons of important confederacies, and it would appear that biblical Hazor was the chief city of another important coalition in the south.
Saint Augustine also mentions that one of the terms the seafaring Phoenicians called their homeland was "Canaan".
The etymology is uncertain.
The entire region (including all Phoenician/Canaanite and Aramean states, together with Israel, Philistia and Samarra) was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire during the 10th and 9th centuries BC, and would remain so for three hundred years until the end of the 7th century BC.
Egyptian power in Canaan thus suffered a major setback when the Hittites (or Hatti) advanced into Syria in the reign of Amenhotep III, and became even more threatening in that of his successor, displacing the Amorites and prompting a resumption of Semitic migration.
''Canaan'' (, ''Chanaán'') is used only three times in the New Testament: twice in Acts of the Apostles when paraphrasing Old Testament stories, and once in the exorcism of the Syrophoenician woman's daughter.
Egyptian forces penetrated into Moab and Ammon, where a permanent fortress garrison (Called simply "Rameses") was established.
It has been suggested that the Patriarchal tales of the Bible reflect such social forms.
He was followed by Adad-nirari I (1295–1275&nbsp;BC) who continued expansion to the northwest, mainly at the expense of the Hittites and Hurrians, conquering Hittite territories such as Carchemish and beyond.
Provide my messenger with safe entry into Egypt"
It is by far the most frequently used ethnic term in the Bible.
* AT 154 (unpublished)
One analysis shows that the majority were, however, Hurrian (a non-Semitic-speaking group from Asia Minor who spoke a language isolate), though there were a number of Semites and even some Kassite and Luwian adventurers amongst their number.
* EA 162: Letter to Aziru: "You yourself know that the king does not want to go against all of Canaan when he rages"
The earliest ''bonafide'' Egyptian report of a campaign to "Mentu", "Retchenu" and "Sekmem" (Shechem) is the Sebek-khu Stele dated to the reign of Senusret III (ca.
Canaanite civilization was a response to long periods of stable climate interrupted by short periods of climate change.
A separate Akkadian-infused Eastern Aramaic is still spoken by the existing Assyrians of Iraq, Iran, northeast Syria and southeast Turkey.
Abd-Ashirta and his son Aziru, at first afraid of the Hittites, afterwards made a treaty with their king, and joining with the Hittites, attacked and conquered the districts remaining loyal to Egypt.
The biblical history has become increasingly problematic as the archaeological and textual evidence supports the idea that the early Israelites were in fact themselves Canaanites.
At this time the Canaanite area seemed divided between two confederacies, one centred upon Megiddo in the Jezreel Valley, the second on the more northerly city of Kadesh on the Orontes River.
* EA 8: Letter from Burna-Buriash II to Akhenaten, explaining that his merchants "were detained in Canaan for business matters", robbed and killed "in Hinnatuna of the land of Canaan" by the rulers of Acre and Shamhuna, and asks for compensation because "Canaan is your country"
The latter story is told by both Matthew and Mark; Matthew uses the term ''Chananaia'' (Χαναναία), where Mark calls the woman ''Syrophoenician'' (Συροφοινίκισσα).
In the 6th century BC, Hecataeus of Miletus affirms that Phoenicia was formerly called '''χνα''', a name that Philo of Byblos subsequently adopted into his mythology as his eponym for the Phoenicians: "Khna who was afterwards called Phoinix".
References to Canaanites are also found throughout the Amarna letters of Pharaoh Akenaton circa 1350&nbsp;BC.
Pharaoh Horemhab campaigned against ''Shasu'' (Egyptian = "wanderers") or living in nomadic pastoralist tribes, who had moved across the Jordan to threaten Egyptian trade through Galilee and Jezreel.
In the Bible, the renaming of Land of Canaan as the Land of Israel marks the Israelite conquest of the Promised Land.
Sumerian references to the ''Mar.tu'' ("tent dwellers", later ''Amurru'', i.e.
Scholars connect the name ''Canaan'' with '''', ''Kana'an'', the general Northwest Semitic name for this region.
Additional unpublished references to Kinahnum in the Mari letters refer to the same episode.
* EA 110: Letter of Rib-Hadda: "No ship of the army is to leave Canaan"
Canaan first appears as one of Noah's grandsons during the narrative known as the Curse of Ham, in which Canaan is cursed with perpetual slavery because his father Ham had "looked upon" the drunk and naked Noah.
* EA 151: Letter from Abimilku to the Pharaoh: "The king, my lord wrote to me: 'write to me what you have heard from Canaan'."
Some scholars have suggested that this implies an original meaning of "lowlands", in contrast with Aram, which would then mean "highlands", whereas others have suggested it meant "the subjugated" as the name of Egypt's province in the Levant, and evolved into the proper name in a similar fashion to Provincia Nostra (the first Roman colony north of the Alps, which became Provence).
Evidently, the Amorites played a significant role in the early history of Canaan.
16 references are known in Egyptian sources, from the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt onwards.
A letter from Mutu-bisir to Shamshi-Adad I (c. 1809 – 1776 BC) of the Old Assyrian Empire (2025-1750 BC) has been translated: "It is in Rahisum that the brigands (habbatum) and the Canaanites (Kinahnum) are situated".
Among the migrant ancient Semitic-speaking peoples who appear to have settled in the region were the Amorites, who had earlier controlled Babylonia.
Amorite dynasties also came to dominate in much of Mesopotamia, including in Larsa, Isin and founding the state of Babylon in 1894&nbsp;BC.
It first occurs in Greek in the writings of Hecataeus as ''Khna'' (Χνᾶ).
Should the cities band together and retaliate, a neighbouring state intervene or should the chieftain suffer a reversal of fortune, allies would fall away or intertribal feuding would return.
One of the earliest settlements in the region was at Jericho in Canaan.
From the mid 14th century BC through to the 11th century BC, much of Canaan (particularly the north, central and eastern regions of Syria and the north western Mediterranean coastal regions) fell to the Middle Assyrian Empire, and both Egyptian and Hittite influence waned as a result.
Abdi-heba's principal trouble arose from persons called Iilkili and the sons of Labaya, who are said to have entered into a treasonable league with the Habiri.
See Ebla-Biblical controversy for further details.
Archaeological attestation of the name ''Canaan'' in Ancient Near Eastern sources is almost exclusively during the period in which the region was a colony of the New Kingdom of Egypt (16th − 11th century BC), with usage of the name almost disappearing following the Late Bronze Age collapse (ca.
9:10, 24:8, 12, etc., we are told of two great Amorite kings residing at Heshbon and Ashteroth, east of the Jordan.
Namyawaza, for instance, whom Itakkama (see above) accused of disloyalty, wrote thus to the Pharaoh,
By the time of the Second Temple, "Canaanite" in Hebrew had come to be not an ethnic designation, so much as a general synonym for "merchant", as it is interpreted in, for example, Job 40:30, or Proverbs 31:24.
Ghassulian itself developed from the Circum-Arabian Nomadic Pastoral Complex, which in turn developed from a fusion of their ancestral '''Natufian''' and Harifian cultures with Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) farming cultures, practicing animal domestication, during the 6200&nbsp;BC climatic crisis which led to the '''Agricultural Revolution'''/Neolithic Revolution in the Levant.
Quoting fragments attributed to Sanchuniathon, he relates that Byblos, Berytus and Tyre were among the first cities ever built, under the rule of the mythical Cronus, and credits the inhabitants with developing fishing, hunting, agriculture, shipbuilding and writing.
In Egyptian inscriptions, ''Amar'' and ''Amurru'' (Amorites) are applied strictly to the more northerly mountain region east of Phoenicia, extending to the Orontes.
However, in other passages such as Gen. 15:16, 48:22, Josh.
Canaan was also of significant geopolitical importance in the Late Bronze Age Amarna period as the area where the spheres of interest of the Egyptian, Hittite, Mitanni and Assyrian Empires converged.
Canaan and the Canaanites are mentioned some 160 times in the Hebrew Bible, mostly in the Pentateuch and the books of Joshua and Judges.
Lebanon, in northern Canaan, bordered by the Litani river to the watershed of the Orontes River, was known by the Egyptians as upper Retjenu.
Tel Kabri contains the remains of a Canaanite city from the Middle Bronze Age (2000–1550 B.C.).
Archaeological excavations of a number of sites, later identified as Canaanite, show that prosperity of the region reached its apogee during this Middle Bronze Age period, under leadership of the city of Hazor, at least nominally tributary to Egypt for much of the period.
The collapse of the Akkadian Empire in 2154&nbsp;BC saw the arrival of peoples using Khirbet Kerak Ware pottery, coming originally from the Zagros Mountains (in modern Iran) east of the Tigris.
In Gen. 14:7 ''f''., Josh.
Some believe the "Habiru" signified generally all the nomadic tribes known as "Hebrews", and particularly the early Israelites of the period of the "judges", who sought to appropriate the fertile region for themselves.
Periods of rapid climate change generally saw a collapse of this mixed Mediterranean farming system; commercial production was replaced with subsistence agricultural foodstuffs; and transhumance pastoralism became a year-round nomadic pastoral activity, whilst tribal groups wandered in a circular pattern north to the Euphrates, or south to the Egyptian delta with their flocks.
'''Mari letters''' (ca.
This was described as being built in ''Pa-Canaan'', a geographical reference whose meaning is disputed, with suggestions that it may refer to the city of Gaza or to the entire Egyptian-occupied territory in the south west corner of the Near East.
Upon his death, the Amorites were driven from Assyria, but remained masters of Babylonia until 1595&nbsp;BC, when they were ejected by the Hittites.
From 110 BC, the Hasmoneans extended their authority over much of the region, creating a Judean-Samaritan-Idumaean-Ituraean-Galilean alliance.
(near Hamath), reported this to the Pharaoh, who seems to have sought to frustrate his attempts.
Further economic development would see the creation of a third trade route from Eilath, Timna, Edom (Seir), Moab, Ammon and thence to the Aramean states of Damascus and Palmyra.
In 586&nbsp;BC, the Israelites in turn lost the land to the Babylonians.
Nevertheless, Thutmose III reported a new and troubling element in the population.
The king of Jerusalem, Abdi-Heba, reported to the Pharaoh,
During the period from c. 900–330 BC, the dominant empires of the Neo-Assyrians and Achaemenid Persians make no mention of Canaan.
The letters are written in the official and diplomatic East Semitic Akkadian language of Assyria and Babylonia, though "Canaanitish" words and idioms are also in evidence.
These "proto-Canaanites" were in regular contact with the other peoples to their south such as Egypt, and to the north Asia Minor (Hurrians, Hattians, Hittites, Luwians) and Mesopotamia (Sumer, Akkad, Assyria), a trend that continued through the Iron Age.
The other Ugarit reference, KTU 4.96, shows a list of traders assigned to royal estates, of which one of the estates had three Ugaritans, an Ashdadite, an Egyptian and a Canaanite.
Numbers 34:2 includes the phrase "the land of Canaan as defined by its borders."
* EA 109: Letter of Rib-Hadda: "Previously, on seeing a man from Egypt, the kings of Canaan fled before him, but now the sons of Abdi-Ashirta make men from Egypt prowl about like dogs"
An Amorite chieftain named Sumu-abum founded Babylon as an independent city-state in 1894 BC.
Whether the term may also include other related ancient Semitic-speaking peoples such as the Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites is uncertain.
Tablets found in the Hurrian city of Nuzi in the early 20th century appear to use the term ''Kinahnu'' as a synonym for red or purple dye, laboriously produced by the Kassite rulers of Babylon from murex shells as early as 1600&nbsp;BC, and on the Mediterranean coast by the Phoenicians from a byproduct of glassmaking.
The semi-fictional ''Story of Sinuhe'' describes an Egyptian officer, Sinuhe conducting military activities in the area of "Upper Retchenu" and "Finqu" during the reign of Senusret I (ca.
Abimilku describes in response what has happened in eastern Cilicia (Danuna), the northern coast of Syria (Ugarit), in Syria (Qadesh, Amurru, and Damascus) as well as in Sidon.
Later on, ''Amurru'' became the Assyrian/Akkadian term for the interior of south as well as for northerly Canaan.
All are towns, except for three lands including Canaan
Akizzi, governor of Katna (Qatna?)
'''Amarna letters'''
All these princes, however, maligned each other in their letters to the Pharaoh, and protested their own innocence of traitorous intentions.
the books of Joshua, Judges, 1st & 2nd Samuel, 1st & 2nd Kings.
The reign of Amenhotep III, as a result was not quite so tranquil for the Asiatic province, as Habiru/'Apiru contributed to greater political instability.
In the Hebrew Bible, the ''Amorites'' are mentioned in the ''Table of Peoples'' (Gen. 10:16–18a).
Ebla and Amorites at Hazor, Kadesh (Qadesh-on-the-Orontes), and elsewhere in Amurru (Syria) bordered Canaan in the north and northeast.
The Horites formerly of Mount Seir were implied to be Canaanite (Hivite), although unusually there is no direct confirmation of this in the narrative.
Apparently this restless warrior found his death at the siege of Gina.
Purple cloth became a renowned Canaanite export commodity which is mentioned in Exodus.
The Habiru seem to have been more a social class than an ethnic group.
In Egyptian campaign accounts, the term Djahi was used to refer to the watershed of the Jordan river.
In the centuries preceding the appearance of the biblical Hebrews, parts of Canaan and southwestern Syria became tributary to the Egyptian Pharaohs, although domination by the Egyptians was sporadic, and not strong enough to prevent frequent local rebellions and inter-city struggles.
During the periods of the collapse of Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia and the First Intermediate Period of Egypt, the Hyksos invasions and the end of the Middle Bronze Age in Assyria and Babylonia, and the Late Bronze Age collapse, trade through the Canaanite area would dwindle, as Egypt, Babylonia, and to a lesser degree Assyria, withdrew into their isolation.
Canaanites were described as living  "by the sea, and along by the side of the Jordan" (Numbers 33:51; Joshua 22:9), and was especially identified with Phoenicia (Isaiah 23:11).
These narratives of the Former Prophets are also "part of a larger work, called the Deuteronomistic History".
A Middle Assyrian letter during the reign of Shalmaneser I includes a reference to the "travel to Canaan" of an Assyrian official.
* EA 131: Letter of Rib-Hadda: "If he does not send archers, they will take Byblos and all the other cities, and the lands of Canaan will not belong to the king.
After the near collapse of the Battle of Kadesh, Rameses II had to campaign vigorously in Canaan to maintain Egyptian power.
The Hurrians based in Northern Mesopotamia, who spoke a language isolate, were initially regarded by Bible scholars as akin to the Horites, though this is no longer the case.
John N. Oswalt notes that "Canaan consists of the land west of the Jordan and is distinguished from the area east of the Jordan."
'''Hattusa letters'''
Canaanite culture apparently developed ''in situ'' from the earlier Ghassulian chalcolithic culture, which pioneered the Mediterranean agricultural system typical of the Canaanite region, which comprised intensive subsistence horticulture, extensive grain growing, commercial wine and olive cultivation and transhumance pastoralism.
The Philistines, while an integral part of the Canaanite milieu, do not seem to have been ethnic Canaanites, and were listed in the Table of Nations as descendants of Misraim; the Arameans, Moabites, Ammonites, Midianites and Edomites were also considered fellow descendants of Shem or Abraham, and distinct from generic Canaanites/Amorites.
An alternative suggestion put forward by Ephraim Avigdor Speiser in 1936 derives the term from Hurrian ''Kinahhu'', purportedly referring to the colour purple, so that ''Canaan'' and ''Phoenicia'' would be synonyms ("Land of Purple").
It is notable because the predominant extra-Canaanite cultural influence is Minoan; Minoan-style frescoes decorate the palace.
1:19 ''f''., 27, 44, we find them located in the southern mountain country, while in Num.
Jonathan Tubb states that the term ''ga-na-na'' "may provide a third millennium reference to ''Canaanite''" while at the same time stating that the first certain reference is in the 18th century BC.
1194&nbsp;BC) is said to have built a temple to the god Amen to receive tribute from the southern Levant.
The Egyptians, then under a Nubian Dynasty, made a failed attempt to regain a foothold in the region, but were vanquished by the Assyrians, leading to an Assyrian invasion and conquest of Egypt and the destruction of the Kushite Empire.
Eventually, the prosperity of this trade would attract more powerful regional neighbours, such as Ancient Egypt, Assyria, the Babylonians, Persians, Ancient Greeks and Romans, who would control the Canaanites politically, levying tribute, taxes and tariffs.
Occasionally, tribal chieftains would emerge, raiding enemy settlements and rewarding loyal followers from the spoils or by tariffs levied on merchants.
However, according to Robert Drews, Speiser's proposal has generally been abandoned.
Secondary Canaanite cities would develop in this region.
The fall of later Canaanite civilization occurred with the incorporation of the area into the Greco-Roman world (as Iudaea province), and after Byzantine times, into the Muslim Arab and proto-Muslim Umayyad Caliphate.
to "''Ka-n-'-na''".
However, the term was rarely used to describe the ''Shasu''.
As markets redeveloped, new trade routes that would avoid the heavy tariffs of the coast would develop from Kadesh Barnea, through Hebron, Lachish, Jerusalem, Bethel, Samaria, Shechem, Shiloh through Galilee to Jezreel, Hazor and Megiddo.
The name 'Phoenicia' is connected with the Greek word for "purple", apparently referring to the same product, but it is difficult to state with certainty whether the Greek word came from the name, or ''vice versa''.
(Ugarit may be included among these Amoritic entities.)
An early explanation derives the term from the Semitic root '''' "to be low, humble, subjugated".
* EA 137: Letter of Rib-Hadda: "If the king neglects Byblos, of all the cities of Canaan not one will be his"
The references suggest that during this period the term was familiar to the region's neighbors on all sides, although it has been disputed to what extent such references provide a coherent description of its location and boundaries, and regarding whether the inhabitants used the term to describe themselves.
The name "Canaanites" (''kana`nīm, chanani'') is attested, many centuries later, as the endonym of the people later known to the Ancient Greeks from c. 500 BC as '''Phoenicians''', and following the emigration of Canaanite speakers to Carthage, was also used as a self-designation by the Punics (''chanani'')  during Late Antiquity.
The Hebrew Bible lists borders for the land of Canaan.
After a popular uprising against his rule, Idrimi was forced into exile with his mother's relatives to seek refuge in "the land of Canaan", where he prepared for an eventual attack to recover his city.
The purple cloth of Tyre in Phoenicia was well known far and wide and was associated by the Romans with nobility and royalty.
The earliest settlements were seasonal, but, by the Bronze Age, had developed into large urban centres.
One Amorite king of Babylonia, Hammurabi (1792–1750&nbsp;BC) founded the first Babylonian Empire, which lasted only as long as his lifetime.
There is circumstantial evidence linking Hadrian with the name change, although the precise date is not certain, and the interpretation of some scholars that the name change may have been intended "to complete the dissociation with Judaea" is disputed.
The Greek term ''Phoenicia'' is first attested in the first two works of Western literature, Homer's ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey''.
Early Canaanite civilization was characterized by small walled market towns, surrounded by peasant farmers growing a range of local horticultural products, along with commercial growing of olives, grapes for wine, and pistachios, surrounded by extensive grain cropping, predominantly wheat and barley.
By the Early Bronze Age other sites had developed, such as Ebla (where an East Semitic language, Eblaite, was spoken), which by ca.
* AT 181: A list of 'Apiru people with their origins.
The known references are:
It was found in 1973 in the ruins of Mari, an Assyrian outpost at that time in Syria.
The English term ''Canaan'' (pronounced  since c. AD 1500, due to the Great Vowel Shift) comes from the Hebrew  (''knʿn''), via Greek  ''Khanaan'' and Latin ''''.
When the climates stabilized, trade would resume firstly along the coast in the area of the Philistine and Phoenician cities.
While the Hebrew Bible contrasts the Canaanites ethnically from the Ancient Israelites, modern scholars Jonathan Tubb and Mark Smith have theorized the kingdoms of Israel and Judah to be a subset of Canaanite culture, based on their archaeological and linguistic interpretations.
* EA 367: "Hani son (of) Mairēya, "chief of the stable" of the king in Canaan"
The Greeks also popularized the term ''Palestine'', named after the Greek Philistines or the Aegean Pelasgians, for roughly the region of Canaan, excluding Phoenicia, with Herodotus' first recorded use of ''Palaistinê'', ca.
2300&nbsp;BC was incorporated into the Mesopotamia-based Akkadian Empire of Sargon the Great and Naram-Sin of Akkad (biblical Accad).
In the Amarna letters (circa 1350&nbsp;BC), some of which were sent by governors and princes of Canaan to their Egyptian overlord Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV) in the 14th century BC, are found, beside ''Amar'' and ''Amurru'' (Amorites), the two forms ''Kinahhi'' and ''Kinahni'', corresponding to ''Kena'' and ''Kena'an'' respectively, and including Syria in its widest extent, as Eduard Meyer has shown.
'''Ashur tablets'''
Although Habiru  (a Sumerian ideogram glossed as "brigand" in Akkadian), and sometimes '''' (an Akkadian word) had been reported in Mesopotamia from the reign of the Sumerian king, Shulgi of Ur III, their appearance in Canaan appears to have been due to the arrival of a new state based in Asia Minor to the north of Assyria based upon Maryannu aristocracy of horse-drawn charioteers, associated with the Indo-Aryan rulers of the Hurrians, known as Mitanni.
Strong's Concordance describes the term ''Chananaia'' as "in Christ's time equivalent to Phoenician".
Powerful Assyrian kings forced tribute on Caananite states and cities from north, east and central Syria as far as the Mediterranean.
* EA 30: Letter from Tushratta: "To the kings of Canaan...
Whether the term Kinahnum refers to people from a specific region or rather people of "foreign origin" has been disputed, such that Robert Drews states that the "ﬁrst certain cuneiform reference" to Canaan is found on the Alalakh statue of King Idrimi (below).
The Amarna Letters and other cuneiform documents use '''', while other sources of the Egyptian New Kingdom mention numerous military campaigns conducted in ''''.
During these periods, Canaanites profited from their intermediary position between the ancient civilizations of the Middle East—Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia (Sumer, Akkad, Assyria, Babylonia), the Hittites, and Minoan Crete—to become city states of merchant princes along the coast, with small kingdoms specializing in agricultural products in the interior.
1290&nbsp;BC) is said to have conquered these ''Shasu,'' Semitic-speaking nomads living just south and east of the Dead Sea, from the fortress of Taru (Shtir?)
* AT 48: A contract with a Canaanite hunter
Assyrian emperor-kings such as Ashurnasirpal, Adad-nirari II, Sargon II, Tiglath-Pileser III, Esarhaddon, Sennacherib and Ashurbanipal came to dominate Canaanite affairs.
Evidence of this cycle of agriculture is found in the Gezer calendar and in the biblical cycle of the year.
Similarly, Zimrida, king of Sidon (named 'Siduna'), declared, "All my cities which the king has given into my hand, have come into the hand of the Habiri."
All are towns, except for Canaan
Much of the modern knowledge about Canaan stems from archaeological excavation in this area at sites such as Tel Hazor, Tel Megiddo, and Gezer.
* EA 148: Letter from Abimilku to the Pharaoh: "The king has taken over the land of the king for the 'Apiru.
The city, the most important of the cities in the Western Galilee during that period, had a palace at its center.
The archives of Ebla show reference to a number of biblical sites, including Hazor, Jerusalem, and as a number of people have claimed, to Sodom and Gomorrah mentioned in Genesis as well.
They successfully defeated the Egyptians, who had belatedly attempted to aid their former masters, the Assyrians, and then remained in the region in an attempt to regain a foothold in the Near East.
1:34, etc., the name ''Amorite'' is regarded as synonymous with "Canaanite"—only "Amorite" is never used for the population on the coast.
* Three topographical lists
These five books of the Old Testament canon give the narrative of the Israelites after the death of Moses and Joshua leading them into Canaan.
* KBo I 15+19: Ramesses II letter to Hattusili III, describing Ramesses' visit to the "land of Canaan on his way to Kinza and Harita
It remained so until in 332 BC it was conquered by the Greeks under Alexander the Great, later to fall to Rome in the late 2nd century BC, and then Byzantium, until the Arab Islamic invasion and conquest of the 7th century AD.
Amorite) country West of the Euphrates date from even earlier than Sargon, at least to the reign of the Sumerian king, Enshakushanna of Uruk, and one tablet credits the early Sumerian king Lugal-anne-mundu with holding sway in the region, although this tablet is considered less credible because it was produced centuries later.
Arik-den-ili (c. 1307–1296&nbsp;BC), consolidated Assyrian power in the Levant, he defeated and conquered ancient Semitic-speaking peoples of the so-called Ahlamu group.
Habiru or (in Egyptian) 'Apiru, are reported for the first time.
The Late Bronze Age state of Ugarit (at Ras Shamra in Syria) is considered quintessentially Canaanite archaeologically, even though its Ugaritic language does not belong to the Canaanite language group proper.
* Papyrus Harris After the collapse of the Levant under the so-called "Peoples of the Sea" Ramesses III (ca.
In Biblical usage, the name was confined to the country west of the Jordan.
Tel Kabri is the only Canaanite city that can be excavated in its entirety because after the city was abandoned, no other city was built over its remains.
* AT 188: A list of Muskenu people with their origins.
Harvest in early summer was a season when transhumance nomadism was practiced—shepherds staying with their flocks during the wet season and returning to graze them on the harvested stubble, closer to water supplies in the summer.
The Judean (Jewish, see Ioudaioi) control over the wider area resulted in it also becoming known as Judaea, a term that had previously only referred to the smaller region of the Judean Mountains, the allotment of the Tribe of Judah and heartland of the former Kingdom of Judah.
May the king ask his commissioner, who is familiar with Canaan"
This trend continued under Tukulti-Ninurta I (1244–1208&nbsp;BC) and after a hiatus, Tiglath-Pileser I (1115–1077&nbsp;BC) who conquered the Arameans of northern Syria, and thence he proceeded to conquer Damascus and the Canaanite/Phoenician cities of (Byblos), Sidon, Tyre and finally Arvad.
In vain did Rib-Hadda send touching appeals for aid to the distant Pharaoh, who was far too engaged in his religious innovations to attend to such messages.
Four references are known from Hattusa:
:"Behold, I and my warriors and my chariots, together with my brethren and my , and my Suti ?9 are at the disposal of the (royal) troops to go whithersoever the king, my lord, commands."
This polarity, between coastal towns and agrarian hinterland, was illustrated in Canaanite mythology by the struggle between the storm god, variously called Teshub (Hurrian) or Ba'al Hadad (Semitic Amorite/Aramean) and Ya'a, Yaw, Yahu or Yam, god of the sea and rivers.
Augustine also records that the rustic people of Hippo in North Africa retained the Punic self-designation ''Chanani''.
God later promises the land of Canaan to Abraham, and eventually delivers it to descendants of Abraham, the Israelites.
These seem to have been mercenaries, brigands or outlaws, who may have at one time led a settled life, but with bad-luck or due to the force of circumstances, contributed a rootless element of the population, prepared to hire themselves to whichever local mayor, king or princeling prepared to undertake their support.
The Kingdom of Judah was forced to pay tribute to Assyria.
The borders are then delineated in Numbers 34:3–12.
This mirrors later usage in later books of the Hebrew Bible, such as at the end of the Book of Zechariah, where it is thought to refer to a class of merchants or to non-monotheistic worshippers in Israel or neighbouring Sidon and Tyre, as well as in its single independent usage in the New Testament, where it is alternated for "Syrophoenician" in two parallel passages.
Often in such periods, thorough overgrazing would result in a climatic collapse and a repeat of the cycle (e.g., PPNB, Ghassulian, Uruk, and the Bronze Age cycles already mentioned).
''"Heth"'', representing the Hittites, is a son of Canaan.
Other areas such as northern Canaan and northern Syria came to be ruled by the Assyrians during this period.
Western Aramaic, one of the two lingua francas of Canaanite civilization, is still spoken in a number of small Syrian villages, whilst Phoenician Canaanite disappeared as a spoken language in about 100&nbsp;AD.
:"If (Egyptian) troops come this year, lands and princes will remain to the king, my lord; but if troops come not, these lands and princes will not remain to the king, my lord."
Oswalt then goes on to say that in Scripture Canaan "takes on a theological character" as "the land which is God's gift" and "the place of abundance".
