As the city has a high proportion of public servants, the Commonwealth Government contributes the largest percentage of Gross State Product and is the largest single employer in Canberra, although no longer the majority employer.
The growth and development of Canberra were hindered by the World Wars and the Great Depression, which exacerbated a series of planning disputes and the ineffectiveness of a procession of bodies that were created in turn to oversee the development of the city.
In the 1860s, the name was reported by Queanbeyan newspaper owner John Gale to be an interpretation of the  name 'nganbra' or 'nganbira', meaning "hollow between a woman's breasts", and referring to the Sullivans Creek floodplain between Mount Ainslie and Black Mountain.
Canberra has numerous sporting ovals, golf courses, skate parks, and swimming pools that are open to the public.
* Molonglo Valley, development began in 2010, 13 suburbs planned.
Other significant annual sporting events include the Canberra Marathon and the City of Canberra Half Ironman Triathlon.
Deane's Transit Group provides bus services between Canberra and nearby areas of New South Wales through their Transborder Express (Murrumbateman and Yass) and Deane's Buslines (Queanbeyan) brands.
In addition to local sporting leagues, Canberra has a number of sporting teams that compete in national and international competitions.
Light snow falls only once or twice per year, and it is usually not widespread and quickly dissipates.
As the seat of the government of Australia, Canberra is the site of Parliament House, the official residence of the Monarch's representative the Governor-General, the High Court and numerous government departments and agencies.
''BMA Magazine'' first went to print in 1992; the inaugural edition featured coverage of the Nirvana Nevermind tour.
A light rail line is proposed to link the CBD with the northern district of Gungahlin.
Stonefest was a large annual festival, for some years one of the biggest festivals in Canberra.
There are also several community operated stations.
* Tuggeranong, settled in 1974, 18 suburbs
Griffin's proposal had an abundance of geometric patterns, including concentric hexagonal and octagonal streets emanating from several radii.
The highest recorded maximum temperature is variously reported as  on 1 February 1968, or as  at Acton on 11 January 1939.
On 9&nbsp;May&nbsp;1988, a larger and permanent Parliament House was opened on Capital Hill as part of Australia's bicentenary celebrations, and the Commonwealth Parliament moved there from the Provisional Parliament House, now known as Old Parliament House.
St John's churchyard contains the earliest graves in the district.
Canberra has a daily newspaper, ''The Canberra Times'', which was established in 1926.
publisher=National Library of Australia}}
The Australian federal government retains some influence over the ACT government.
The assembly consists of 17 members, elected from three districts using proportional representation.
He fired two ministers charged with the development of the city for poor performance.
By this time, Griffin had revised his plan, overseen the earthworks of major avenues, and established the Glenloch Cork Plantation.
Rail Study, was published by the Department of Infrastructure and Transport on 11 April 2013.
Property prices are relatively high, in part due to comparatively restrictive development regulations.
The Queanbeyan River joins the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate just within the ACT.
The original plans for Canberra included proposals for railed transport within the city, however none eventuated.
The districts were settled in the following chronological order:
By early 2010, it was apparent that though it had reduced waste going to landfill, the ACT initiative's original 2010 target for absolutely zero landfill waste would be delayed or revised to meet the reality.
As almost all of the ACT's population lives in Canberra, political trends for both areas are closely aligned.
There are three light industrial areas: the suburbs of Fyshwick, Mitchell and Hume.
In January, the warmest month, the average high is approximately ; however, in July, the coldest month, the average high is only about .
ACTION, the government-operated bus service, provides public transport throughout the city.
Power was first supplied from a thermal plant built in 1913, near the Molonglo River, but this was finally closed in 1957.
The ACT is independent of any state to prevent any one state from gaining an advantage by hosting the seat of Commonwealth power.
The Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) and the Royal Military College, Duntroon are located in the inner-northern suburb of Campbell.
The Prime Minister, Stanley Bruce, had officially taken up residence in The Lodge a few days earlier.
Some limited local renewable power is produced via a hydro generator on the main water supply pipeline for Canberra at Mount Stromlo and methane plants at waste landfill sites at Belconnen and Mugga Lane.
Canberra's districts are generally connected by parkways—limited access dual carriageway roads with speed limits generally set at a maximum of .
Canberra is less humid than the nearby coastal areas.
Outside Canberra, the Australian Capital Territory has no settlements larger than a village.
Some projects planned for that time, including Roman Catholic and Anglican cathedrals, were never completed.
The new policy has provoked significant opposition.
The lakes stretch from east to west and divided the city in two; a land axis perpendicular to the central basin stretches from Capital Hill—the eventual location of the new Parliament House on a mound on the southern side—north northeast across the central basin to the northern banks along Anzac Parade to the Australian War Memorial.
There have been persistent calls for constraints on development to be liberalised.
Canberra maintains sister-city relationships with both Nara, Japan and Beijing, China.
An ACT Government survey conducted in late 2010 found that Canberrans walk an average of 26&nbsp;minutes each day.
A  gauge construction railway was built in 1923 between the Yarralumla brickworks and the provisional Parliament House; it was later extended to Civic, but the whole line was closed in May 1927.
* Woden Valley, first settled in 1964, 12 suburbs
People who have been charged with offences are tried either in the ACT Magistrates Court or for more severe offences, the ACT Supreme Court.
The ACT member could only vote on matters directly affecting the territory.
The traffic cameras installed in Canberra include fixed red-light and speed cameras and point-to-point speed cameras; together they bring in revenue of approximately $11&nbsp;million per year in fines.
News organisations are represented in the "press gallery", a group of journalists who report on the national parliament.
Canberra is about three hours by road from Sydney on the Federal Highway (National Highway 23), which connects with the Hume Highway (National Highway 31) near Goulburn, and seven hours by road from Melbourne on the Barton Highway (National Highway 25), which joins the Hume Highway at Yass.
Expansion AFL club Greater Western Sydney Giants commenced a partnership with Canberra in 2012 will play three home games at Manuka Oval each season until at least 2021.
The Albert Hall was the city's first performing arts venue, opened in 1928.
The area is not very windy and the breeze is at its strongest from August to November.
Rates of assault and sexual assault (60.2 per 100,000 persons) are also below the national average (80.2 per 100,000).
There are currently no wind-power generators in Canberra, but several have been built or are being built or planned in nearby New South Wales, such as the 140.7 megawatt Capital Wind Farm.
Several Government departments, together with public servants, were moved to Canberra from Melbourne following the war.
Canberra was often derisively described as "several suburbs in search of a city".
The ACT Government was the first jurisdiction in Australia to enact legislation to regulate the service.
The festival is held in Canberra Nara Park on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin.
The organisers of the event have a strong environmental standpoint, promoting and using green energy, "green catering", sustainable paper, the conservation and saving of water.
Both House of Representatives seats have mostly been held by Labor, usually by comfortable margins.
Canberra's annual Floriade festival features a large display of flowers every Spring in Commonwealth Park.
The ban was introduced by the ACT Government in an effort to make Canberra more sustainable.
Although the Googong Dam is located in New South Wales, it is managed by the ACT government.
The urban environs of the city of Canberra straddle the Ginninderra plain, Molonglo plain, the Limestone plain, and the Tuggeranong plain (Isabella's Plain).
This event coincided with a heatwave across south-eastern Australia, during which the temperature in Canberra reached 108.5 degrees on 11 January.
Street names typically follow a particular theme; for example, the streets of Duffy are named after Australian dams and reservoirs, the streets of Dunlop are named after Australian inventions, inventors and artists and the streets of Page are named after biologists and naturalists.
It is unusual among Australian cities, being an entirely planned city outside of any state, similar to Washington, D.C. in the United States, or Brasília in Brazil.
Most town centres have facilities for a community theatre and a cinema, and they all have a library.
The municipal axis became the location of Constitution Avenue, which links City Hill in Civic Centre and both Market Centre and the Defence precinct on Russell Hill.
Whereas the ACT has federally been dominated by Labor, the Liberals have been able to gain some footing in the ACT Legislative Assembly, and were in government for just over eight of the Assembly's 25-year history, mostly during a period of six and half years from 1995 and 2001, when Labor won power.
The median weekly rent paid by Canberra residents is higher than rents in all other states and territories.
The best known teams are the Canberra Raiders and the Brumbies who play rugby league and rugby union respectively; both have been champions of their leagues.
The majority of Australia's team members and medallists at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney were AIS graduates.
Canberra Day is a public holiday observed in the ACT on the second Monday in March to celebrate the founding of Canberra.
A new National Library was constructed within the Parliamentary Triangle, followed by the High Court and the National Gallery.
The Alexander Maconochie Centre was officially opened on 11 September 2008 by then Chief Minister Jon Stanhope.
In May 2012, the unemployment rate in Canberra was 3.4% which was lower than the national unemployment rate of 5.1%.
The straight edge of the circular segment that formed the central basin of Lake Burley Griffin was perpendicular to the land axis and designated the water axis, and it extended northwest towards Black Mountain.
It is also the location of many social and cultural institutions of national significance, such as the Australian War Memorial, Australian National University, Royal Australian Mint, Australian Institute of Sport, National Gallery, National Museum and the National Library.
According to ''The Canberra Times'' in March&nbsp;2014, Canberra's cyclists are involved in an average of four reported collisions every week.
After the ceremony, bureaucratic disputes hindered Griffin's work; a Royal Commission in 1916 ruled his authority had been usurped by certain officials.
The event is also smoke-free.
The total cost for construction was $130&nbsp;million.
The ACT was given its first federal parliamentary representation in 1949, when it gained a seat in the House of Representatives, the Division of Australian Capital Territory.
Between 1996 and 2001, 61.9% of the population either moved to or from Canberra, which was the second highest mobility rate of any Australian capital city.
The Molonglo then flows into the Murrumbidgee north-west of Canberra, which in turn flows north-west toward the New South Wales town of Yass.
As the European presence increased, the indigenous population dwindled, mainly from disease such as smallpox and measles.
There are two religious university campuses in Canberra: Signadou in the northern suburb of Watson is a campus of the Australian Catholic University; St Mark's Theological College in Barton is part of the secular Charles Sturt University.
Snow is rare in the CBD (central business district), but the surrounding areas get annual snowfall through winter and often the snow-capped mountains can be seen from the CBD—the last significant snowfall in the city centre was in 1968.
In most districts, discrete residential suburbs are bounded by main arterial roads with only a few residential linking in, to deter non-local traffic from cutting through areas of housing.
Several historic homes are open to the public: Lanyon and Tuggeranong Homesteads in the Tuggeranong Valley, Mugga-Mugga in Symonston, and Blundells' Cottage in Parkes all display the lifestyle of the early European settlers.
It is a two-hour drive on the Monaro Highway (National Highway 23) to the ski fields of the Snowy Mountains and the Kosciuszko National Park.
Tertiary level vocational education is also available through the multi-campus Canberra Institute of Technology.
The European population in the Canberra area continued to grow slowly throughout the 19th century.
However, the outer areas of the city, built later, are not laid out geometrically.
There are also teams that participate in national competitions in netball, field hockey, ice hockey, cricket and baseball.
The city's design was influenced by the garden city movement and incorporates significant areas of natural vegetation that have earned Canberra the title of the "bush capital".
The urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of districts, town centres, group centres, local suburbs as well as other industrial areas and villages.
It has an elevation of approximately  AHD; the highest point is Mount Majura at .
In February 2004 there were 140 schools in Canberra; 96 were operated by the government and 44 were private.
The Canberra Vikings represent the city in the National Rugby Championship and finished second in the 2015 season.
In contrast, other capital cities in Australia have substantially less green space.
As at May 2013, 45% of ACT residents (25–64) had a level of educational attainment equal to at least a bachelor's degree, significantly higher that the national average of 29%.
The average Canberran was responsible for 13.7 tonnes of greenhouse gases in 2005.
They affected 2,386 and 968 people (637 and 258 per 100,000 persons respectively).
Canberra United FC represents the city in the W-League, the national women's association football league, and were champions in the 2011–12 season.
"Nganbra" or "Nganbira" could readily have been anglicised to the name "Canberry", as the locality soon become known to European settlers.
Homicide and related offences—murder, attempted murder and manslaughter, but excluding driving causing death and conspiracy to murder—affect 1.6 per 100,000 persons, which is below the national average of 2.0 per 100,000.
Prior to this the Melbourne-based AFL team the Kangaroos played some home games at Manuka Oval until July 2006.
An alternative definition has been claimed by numerous local commentators over the years, including Ngunnawal Elder, Don Bell, whereby "Canberra" or "Nganbra/Nganbira" means "woman's breasts" and is the Indigenous name for the two mountains, Black Mountain and Mount Ainslie, which lie almost opposite each other.
Calvary Private Hospital in Bruce and Healthscope's National Capital Private Hospital in Garran are also major healthcare providers.
is the capital city of Australia.
the most common crimes in the ACT are property related crimes, unlawful entry with intent and motor vehicle theft.
Canberra gets 100.4 clear days annually.
Aerial Capital Group enjoyed monopoly status until the arrival of Cabxpress in 2007.
advocating Canberra to every member of the Commonwealth's seven state and federal parliaments.
As a result, some schools closed during the 2006–08 period, while others were merged; the creation of combined primary and secondary government schools will proceed over the next decade.
Water sports like sailing, rowing, dragon boating and water skiing are held on Canberra's lakes.
The former RAAF Fairbairn, adjacent to the Canberra Airport was sold to the operators of the airport, but the base continues to be used for RAAF VIP flights.
Following the move of the Kangaroos' alternative home ground to Carrara in Queensland, Melbourne and the Western Bulldogs played some home games at Manuka Oval from 2007 against the Sydney Swans.
The district's change from a rural area in New South Wales to the national capital started during debates over Federation in the late 19th century.
The lowest recorded minimum temperature was  on the morning of 11 July 1971.
Planning approval is being sought for the 7 megawatt OneSun Capital solar farm at Uriarra and the 13 megawatt Mugga Lane Solar Park at Hume.
* Canberra Central, mostly settled in the 1920s and 1930s, with expansion up to the 1960s, 25 suburbs
Canberra has two large public hospitals, the approximately 600-bed Canberra Hospital—formerly the Woden Valley Hospital—in Garran and the 174-bed Calvary Public Hospital in Bruce.
Most locals only speak English at home (77.8%); other languages spoken at home include Mandarin, Italian, Vietnamese, Cantonese and Spanish.
Popular cultural events include the National Folk Festival, the Royal Canberra Show, the Summernats car festival, Enlighten festival, the National Multicultural Festival in February and the ''Celebrate Canberra'' festival held over 10 days in March in conjunction with Canberra Day.
The AIS has been operating since 1981 and has achieved significant success in producing elite athletes, both local and international.
Established in 1946, the ANU has always had a strong research focus and is ranked among the leading universities in the world and the best in Australia by ''The Times Higher Education Supplement'' and the Shanghai Jiao Tong World University Rankings.
An 1830s map of the region by Major Mitchell indeed does mark the Sullivan's Creek floodplain between these two mountains as "Nganbra".
On 11 March 2014, the last day of the centennial year, the Canberra Centenary Column was unveiled in City Hill.
The ALP and the Liberal Party have always held one Senate seat each.
Recent immigrants have arrived from countries in East and South Asia.
Many of the new suburbs were named after Australian politicians, such as Barton, Deakin, Reid, Braddon, Curtin, Chifley and Parkes.
The AIS is a specialised educational and training institution providing coaching for elite junior and senior athletes in a number of sports.
In 2012 the ACT Government legislated greenhouse gas targets to reduce its emissions by 40&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent from 1990 levels by 2020, 80&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent by 2050, with no net emissions by&nbsp;2060.
In an international design competition conducted by the Department of Home Affairs, on 24&nbsp;May&nbsp;1911, the design by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin was chosen for the city, and in 1913 Griffin was appointed Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction and construction began.
The national government also retains a level of control over the Territory Assembly through the provisions of the ''Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988''.
The NSW government ceded the Federal Capital Territory (as it was then known) to the federal government.
Both teams play their home games at Canberra Stadium, which is the city's largest stadium and was used to hold group matches in soccer for the 2000 Summer Olympics and in rugby union for the 2003 Rugby World Cup.
The National Capital Development Commission (NCDC), formed in 1957 with executive powers, ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin—the centrepiece of Griffin's design—and construction was completed in&nbsp;1964 after four years of work.
The median age is 34 years, and only 10.7% of the population is aged over 65 years.
A number of creeks, including Jerrabomberra and Yarralumla Creeks, flow into the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee.
Government housing projects were undertaken to accommodate the city's growing population.
Thunderstorms occur mostly between October and April, owing to the effect of summer and the mountains.
Canberra Airport is, as of September 2013, designated by the Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development as a restricted use designated international airport.
At midday on&nbsp;12&nbsp;March&nbsp;1913, the city was officially given its name by Lady Denman, the wife of Governor-General Lord Denman, at a ceremony at Kurrajong Hill, which has since become Capital Hill and the site of the present Parliament House.
The city's accommodation was not nearly sufficient to house the 1,250 delegates, and a tent city had to be set up on the banks of the Molonglo River.
The median house price in Canberra as of September 2009 was $511,820, lower than only Sydney among capital cities of more than 100,000 people, having surpassed Melbourne and Perth since 2005.
As at January 2014 the median unit rent in Canberra was $410 per week and median housing rent was $460, making the city the third most expensive in the country.
A resident of Canberra is known as a "Canberran".
In 1996 Canberra became the first city in the world to set a vision of no waste, proposing an ambitious target of 2010 for completion.
The site of Canberra was selected for the location of the nation's capital in 1908 as a compromise between rivals Sydney and Melbourne, Australia's two largest cities.
Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue were to run from the southern side from Capital Hill to City Hill and Market Centre on the north respectively, and they formed the western and eastern edges of the central basin.
The Chief Minister is elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and selects colleagues to serve as ministers alongside him or her in the Executive, known informally as the cabinet.
Development in Canberra has been closely regulated by government, both through planning processes and the use of crown lease terms that have tightly limited the use of parcels of land.
Menzies remained in office for over a decade, and in that time the development of the capital sped up rapidly.
Electricity for Canberra mainly comes from the national power grid through substations at Holt and Fyshwick (via Queanbeyan).
ACTEW Corporation owns Canberra's two wastewater treatment plants, located at Fyshwick and on the lower reaches of the Molonglo River.
That way each hill would be covered with a single, primary color which represented its spiritual value.
The ACT government announced in 2013 that it was raising the target for electricity consumed in the ACT to be supplied from renewable sources to 90% by 2020.
Courts such as a Small Claims Tribunal and a Family Court exist for civil law actions and other non-criminal legal matters.
A DAB+ digital radio trial is also currently in operation, it simulcasts some of the AM/FM stations, and also provides several digital only stations (DAB+ Trial Listing).
The completion of the lake finally laid the platform for the development of Griffin's Parliamentary Triangle.
It was the original performance venue for theatre groups such as the Canberra Repertory Society.
Canberra's railway station is in the inner south suburb of Kingston.
The native forest in the Canberra region was almost wholly eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes.
ADFA teaches military undergraduates and postgraduates and includes UNSW@ADFA, a campus of the University of New South Wales; Duntroon provides Australian Army officer training.
Anthropologist Norman Tindale suggested the principal group occupying the region were the Ngunnawal people, while the Ngarigo lived immediately to the south of the ACT, the Wandandian to the east, the Walgulu also to the south, Gandangara people to the north, and Wiradjuri to the north west.
Since then, plantations have been expanded, with the benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment, and the forests are also popular recreation areas.
Over time his attitude changed from one of contempt to that of championing its development.
There are two local taxi companies.
It announced in February 2015 that three wind farms in Victoria and South Australia would supply 200 megawatts of capacity; these are expected to be operational by 2017.
The area enclosed by the three avenues was known as the Parliamentary Triangle, and formed the centrepiece of Griffin's work.
The headquarters of many Australian Public Service agencies are located in Canberra, and Canberra is also host to several Australian Defence Force establishments, most notably the Australian Defence Force headquarters and , which is a naval communications centre that is being converted into a tri-service, multi-user depot.
Following the first election on 4&nbsp;March&nbsp;1989, a 17-member Legislative Assembly sat at temporary offices at 1&nbsp;Constitution Avenue, Civic, on 11&nbsp;May&nbsp;1989.
The strategy aimed to achieve a waste-free society by 2010, through the combined efforts of industry, government and community.
''The Canberra Times'' described it as "a signal event ... in the history of this, the world's youngest capital city".
Canberra is also home to the Barassi International Australian Football Youth Tournament.
Canberra has one of the highest rates of active travel of all Australian major cities, with 7.1&nbsp;per&nbsp;cent of commuters walking or cycling to work in 2011.
Other notable early settlers included the inter-related Murray and Gibbes families, who owned the Yarralumla estate—now the site of the official residence of the Governor-General of Australia—from the 1830s through to 1881.
Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was at least  from Sydney, with Melbourne to be the temporary seat of government (but not referred to as the "capital") while the new capital was built.
The city has 10 aged care facilities.
As a result of low unemployment and substantial levels of public sector and commercial employment, Canberra has the highest average level of disposable income of any Australian capital city.
On census night in 2011, approximately 44% of ACT residents described themselves as Christian, the most common denominations being Catholic and Anglican; 29% described themselves as having no religion.
Parts of Canberra were engulfed by bushfires on 18 January 2003 that killed four people, injured 435, and destroyed more than 500 homes and the major research telescopes of Australian National University's Mount Stromlo Observatory.
The two main tertiary institutions are the Australian National University (ANU) in Acton and the University of Canberra (UC) in Bruce, with over 10,500 and 8,000 full-time-equivalent students respectively.
The city's main industry is public administration and safety, which accounted for 29.8% of Gross Territory Product in 2011–12 and employed 33.9% of Canberra's workforce.
As Australia's capital, Canberra is the most important centre for much of Australia's political reportage and thus all the major media, including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, the commercial television networks, and the metropolitan newspapers maintain local bureaus.
Although the Australian Capital Territory is now self-governing, the Commonwealth Government retains some influence through the National Capital Authority.
Canberra Airport provides direct domestic services to Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Gold Coast and Perth, with connections to other domestic centres.
The Canberra Museum and Gallery in the city is a repository of local history and art, housing a permanent collection and visiting exhibitions.
Canberra has a relatively dry continental climate by Australian standards; under Köppen-Geiger classification it has an oceanic climate (Cfb).
