Most nations use rapid-fire cannon on light vehicles, replacing a more powerful, but heavier, tank gun.
The following terms refer to the components or aspects of a classical western cannon (c. 1850) as illustrated here.
File:Malik E Maidan.jpg|Malik E Maidan, was effectively utilized in the favor of the Deccan sultanates, and was the largest cannon operated during the Battle of Talikota.
While there is no minimum bore for autocannons, they are generally larger than machine guns, typically 20&nbsp;mm or greater since World War II and are usually capable of using explosive ammunition even if it isn't always used.
By the 16th century, cannon were made in a great variety of lengths and bore diameters, but the general rule was that the longer the barrel, the longer the range.
Both the Germans and Japanese mounted cannon to fire upwards and forwards for use against heavy bombers, with the Germans calling guns so-installed ''Schräge Musik'' .
Sixty-eight super-sized bombards referred to as Great Turkish Bombards were used by Mehmed II to capture Constantinople in 1453.
Like small arms, cannon are a descendant of the fire lance, a gunpowder-filled tube attached to the end of a spear and used as a flamethrower in China.
He ordered Joachim Murat to bring the guns from the Sablons artillery park; the Major and his cavalry fought their way to the recently captured cannon, and brought them back to Napoleon.
However, cast iron cannon have a tendency to burst without having shown any previous weakness or wear, and this makes them more dangerous to operate.
On each side of the cannon, three soldiers stood, to ram and sponge the cannon, and hold the ladle.
During the Battle of the Bulge, however, the fuses became known as the American artillery's "Christmas present" for the German army because of their effectiveness against German personnel in the open, when they frequently dispersed attacks.
Giuseppe Sarti is believed to be the first composer to orchestrate real cannon in a musical work.
The cannon was more effective against armour so they were increasingly used during the course of World War II, and newer fighters such as the Hawker Tempest usually carried two or four versus the six .50 Browning machine guns for US aircraft or eight to twelve M1919 Browning machine guns on British aircraft.
Before loading, the cannon would be cleaned with a wet sponge to extinguish any smouldering material from the last shot.
Most modern cannon are similar to those used in the Second World War, although the importance of the larger calibre weapons has declined with the development of missiles.
The decoy cannon were painted black at the "muzzle", and positioned behind fortifications to delay Union attacks on those positions.
A '''cannon''' (plural: ''cannon'' or ''cannons'') is any piece of artillery that uses gunpowder or other usually explosive-based propellants to launch a projectile.
During the Napoleonic Wars, a British gun team consisted of five gunners to aim it, clean the bore with a damp sponge to quench any remaining embers before a fresh charge was introduced, and another to load the gun with a bag of powder and then the projectile.
The charge loaded, the fourth would prick the bagged charge through the vent hole, and fill the vent with powder.
File:Bidar-Fort-Large-Gun.png|Large cannon in Bidar fort.
When referring to cannon, the term ''gun'' is often used incorrectly.
In what follows, the words ''near'', ''close'', and ''behind'' will refer to those parts towards the thick, closed end of the piece, and ''far'', ''front'', ''in front of'', and ''before'' to the thinner, open end.
A coat of polyurethane may also be painted over the wax sealant, to prevent the wax-coated cannon from attracting dust in outdoor displays.
** The ''knob'' which is the small spherical terminus of the piece;
Even with this many animals pulling, they still moved at a walking pace.
Realizing that iron was more difficult to pierce with breech-loaded cannon, Armstrong designed rifled muzzle-loading guns, which proved successful; ''The Times'' reported: "even the fondest believers in the invulnerability of our present ironclads were obliged to confess that against such artillery, at such ranges, their plates and sides were almost as penetrable as wooden ships."
During this period autocannons became available and several fighters of the German ''Luftwaffe'' and the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service were fitted with 20mm cannon.
These could be operated by three men, and pulled by only two horses.
As any explosive charge will dissipate in all directions equally, the thickest portion of the cannon is useful for containing and directing this force.
Cannon recovered from the sea are often extensively damaged from exposure to salt water; because of this, electrolytic reduction treatment is required to forestall the process of corrosion.
In the modern era, the term ''cannon'' has fallen into decline, replaced by "guns" or "artillery" if not a more specific term such as "mortar" or "howitzer", except for in the field of aerial warfare, where it is often used as shorthand for autocannon.
As a result, field artillery became more viable, and began to see more widespread use, often alongside the larger cannon intended for sieges.
Battered by cannon fire, and low on morale, Tilly's men broke ranks and fled.
These new defences became known as "star forts", after their characteristic shape which attempted to force any advance toward it directly into the firing line of the guns.
Better powder had been developed by this time as well.
Orban, a Hungarian cannon engineer, is credited with introducing the cannon from Central Europe to the Ottomans.
Better gunpowder, cast-iron projectiles (replacing stone), and the standardization of calibres meant that even relatively light cannon could be deadly.
One shipwreck in Shandong had a cannon dated to 1377 and an anchor dated to 1372.
In the 1770s, cannon operation worked as follows: each cannon would be manned by two gunners, six soldiers, and four officers of artillery.
File:Jaivan Cannon 2.jpg|Jaivan Cannon: World's largest cannon on wheels, patronized by Muhammad Shah and cast by Jai Singh II.
Similar cannon were also used at the Siege of Calais, in the same year, although it was not until the 1380s that the "ribaudekin" clearly became mounted on wheels.
Still in use today, the M198 is, in turn, being slowly replaced by the M777 Ultralightweight howitzer, which weighs nearly half as much and can be more easily moved.
There was a some debate in the RAF as to whether the greater number of possible rounds being fired from a machine gun, or a smaller number of explosive rounds from a cannon was preferable.
The thickest, strongest, and closed part of the cone is located near the explosive charge.
After this process, cannon on display may be protected from oxygen and moisture by a wax sealant.
In some guns, this element is replaced with a wide ring and is called a ''muzzle band''.
His book acknowledged mathematicians such as Robert Recorde and Marcus Jordanus as well as earlier military writers on artillery such as Niccolò Tartaglia and Thomas Malthus.
Around this time also came the idea of aiming the cannon to hit a target.
** The ''base ring'' forms a ring at the widest part of the entire cannon at the nearest end of the reinforce just before the ''cascabel''.
The United States Navy tested guns by measuring them, firing them two or three times—termed "proof by powder"—and using pressurized water to detect leaks.
The cannon is then washed in deionized water to remove the electrolyte, and is treated in tannic acid, which prevents further rust and gives the metal a bluish-black colour.
''Cannons'' is more common in North America and Australia, while ''cannon'' as plural is more common in the United Kingdom.
In the 1593 Siege of Pyongyang, 40,000 Ming troops deployed a variety of cannon to bombard an equally large Japanese army.
They have mechanisms to automatically load their ammunition, and therefore have a higher rate of fire than artillery, often approaching, or, in the case of rotary autocannons, even surpassing the firing rate of a machine gun.
Cannon have been used extensively in fighter aircraft since World War II, and in place of machine guns on land vehicles.
Improvements during the war in regards to rate of fire allowed the cannon to displace the machine gun almost entirely.
* The '''cascabel:''' This is that portion of the cannon behind the reinforce(s) and behind the ''base ring''.
Around the same period, the Byzantine Empire began to accumulate its own cannon to face the Ottoman threat, starting with medium-sized cannon  long and of 10&nbsp;in calibre.
In Europe, one of the first mentions of gunpowder use appears in a passage found in Roger Bacon's ''Opus Maius'' and ''Opus Tertium'' in what has been interpreted as being firecrackers.
Byzantine strategists did not have the money to invest in this technology.
One of the most powerful guns to see service in World War II, it was capable of destroying any Allied tank at very long ranges.
Star forts soon replaced castles in Europe, and, eventually, those in the Americas, as well.
While both types of gun were effective against wooden ships, neither had the capability to pierce the armour of ironclads; due to reports of slight problems with the breeches of the Armstrong gun, and their higher cost, the older muzzle-loaders were selected to remain in service instead.
As they were not effective at breaching the newer fortifications resulting from the development of cannon, siege engines—such as siege towers and trebuchets—became less widely used.
In 1944, the 8.8&nbsp;cm KwK 43 and many variations, entered service with the Wehrmacht, and was used as both a tank main gun, and as the PaK 43 anti-tank gun.
Cannon were crucial in Napoleon Bonaparte's rise to power, and continued to play an important role in his army in later years.
This is followed by a layer of wadding (often nothing more than paper), and then the cannonball itself.
The Battle of Arnemuiden, fought on 23 September 1338, was the first naval battle using artillery, as the English ship ''Christofer'' had three cannon and one hand gun.
It was during this period, the Middle Ages, that cannon became standardized, and more effective in both the anti-infantry and siege roles.
While still a relatively rarely-used weapon, cannon were employed in increasing numbers during the war.
Cannon were used by Ming dynasty forces at the Battle of Lake Poyang.
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden emphasized the use of light cannon and mobility in his army, and created new formations and tactics that revolutionized artillery.
Niccolò Machiavelli wrote, "There is no wall, whatever its thickness that artillery will not destroy in only a few days."
In any case, the formula claimed to have been decrypted is not useful for firearms use or even firecrackers, burning slowly and producing mostly smoke.
The Florentine Giovanni Villani recounts their destructiveness, indicating that by the end of the battle, "the whole plain was covered by men struck down by arrows and cannon balls."
The Mamluks had certainly acquired siege cannon by the 1360s, and possibly as early as 1320.
The German army had the advantage here as they began the war with many more howitzers than the French.
The older and more-stable forms of cannon were muzzle-loading as opposed to breech-loading— in order to be used they had to have their ordnance packed down the bore through the muzzle rather than inserted through the breech.
Meanwhile, German tanks were continuously upgraded with better main guns, in addition to other improvements.
Gunners controlled the range of their cannon by measuring the angle of elevation, using a "gunner's quadrant."
One example is the American  wrought-iron, muzzle-loading rifle, or Griffen gun (usually called the 3-inch Ordnance Rifle), used during the American Civil War, which had an effective range of over .
Finally, against infantry he pioneered the use of canister shot - essentially a tin can filled with musket balls.
They acquired their own cannon, and laid siege to the Byzantine capital again, in 1422, using "falcons", which were short but wide cannon.
Innovations continued, notably the German invention of the mortar, a thick-walled, short-barrelled gun that blasted shot upward at a steep angle.
Wheeled gun carriages and trunnions became common, and the invention of the limber further facilitated transportation.
The Chinese infantry took heavy casualties, and were forced to retreat.
*** The ''swell of the muzzle'' refers to the slight swell in the diameter of the piece at the very end of the chase.
The lower tier of 17th-century English ships of the line were usually equipped with demi-cannon, guns that fired a  solid shot, and could weigh up to .
At 45 degrees, the ball had the utmost range: about ten times the gun's level range.
The guns were, therefore, easier to handle, and also required less than half as much gunpowder, allowing fewer men to crew them.
Carronades were manufactured in the usual naval gun calibres, but were not counted in a ship of the line's rated number of guns.
Adolphus's army was also the first to use a cartridge that contained both powder and shot which sped up reloading, increasing the rate of fire.
Autocannons may be capable of a very high rate of fire, but ammunition is heavy and bulky, limiting the amount carried.
"Single firing" was first used to ignite the fuse, where the bomb was placed with the fuse down against the cannon's propellant.
Historically, logs or poles have been used as decoys to mislead the enemy as to the strength of an emplacement.
This weapon, and others similar, were used by both the French and English during the Hundred Years' War, when cannon saw their first real use on the European battlefield.
When Danican's poorly trained men attacked, on 13 Vendémiaire, 1795 — 5 October 1795, in the calendar used in France at the time — Napoleon ordered his cannon to fire grapeshot into the mob, an act that became known as the "whiff of grapeshot".
The first autocannon were developed during World War I as anti-aircraft guns, and one of these - the Coventry Ordnance Works "COW 37 mm gun" was installed in an aircraft but the war ended before it could be given a field trial and never became standard equipment in a production aircraft.
Cannon was widely known as the earliest form of a gun and artillery, before early firearms were invented.
''Gun'' specifically refers to a type of cannon that fires projectiles at high speeds, and usually at relatively low angles; they have been used in warships, and as field artillery.
Chinese soldiers fighting under the Mongols appear to have used hand cannon in Manchurian battles during 1288, a date deduced from archaeological findings at battle sites.
They continued to be installed as an adjunct to machine guns rather than as a replacement, as the rate of fire was still too low and the complete installation too heavy.
Western cannon during the 19th century became larger, more destructive, more accurate, and could fire at longer range.
This coarse powder had pockets of air between grains, allowing fire to travel through and ignite the entire charge quickly and uniformly.
In ''The Art of War'', Niccolò Machiavelli observed that "It is true that the arquebuses and the small artillery do much more harm than the heavy artillery."
His ''Te Deum'' celebrates the Russian victory at Ochakov (1789) with the firing of a real cannon and the use of fireworks, to heighten the martial effect of the music.
One of the earliest rifled cannon was the breech-loading Armstrong Gun—also invented by William George Armstrong—which boasted significantly improved range, accuracy, and power than earlier weapons.
The fourth gunner pressed his thumb on the vent hole, to prevent a draught that might fan a flame.
Joseph Needham suggests that the proto-shells described in the ''Huolongjing'' may be among the first of their kind.
The overture is properly performed using an artillery section together with the orchestra, resulting in noise levels requiring musicians to wear ear protection.
The onset of trench warfare after the first few months of World War I greatly increased the demand for howitzers, as they were more suited at hitting targets in trenches.
The superior cannon of the Western world brought them tremendous advantages in warfare.
As it could be towed, the M198 was selected to be the successor to the World War II–era cannon used at the time, and entered service in 1979.
In the latter half of the 17th century, the French engineer Vauban introduced a more systematic and scientific approach to attacking gunpowder fortresses, in a time when many field commanders "were notorious dunces in siegecraft."
Cannon fire is also frequently used annually in presentations of the ''1812'' on the American  Independence Day, a tradition started by Arthur Fiedler of the Boston Pops in 1974.
Although severely outnumbered, the Swedes were able to fire between three and five times as many volleys of artillery, and their infantry's linear formations helped ensure they didn't lose any ground.
Modern artillery is used in a variety of roles, depending on its type.
The "Quaker gun trick" was used by Colonel William Washington's Continentals, during the American Revolutionary War; in 1780, approximately 100 Loyalists surrendered to them, rather than face bombardment.
Cannon vary in calibre, range, mobility, rate of fire, angle of fire, and firepower; different forms of cannon combine and balance these attributes in varying degrees, depending on their intended use on the battlefield.
The word has been used to refer to a gun since 1326 in Italy, and 1418 in England.
Not until 1650 was it accidentally discovered that double-lighting was superfluous as the heat of firing would light the fuse.
One of the best known examples of such a piece is another Russian work, Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ''1812 Overture''.
The tendency to create larger calibre cannon during the World Wars has reversed since.
The most successful (or least unsuccessful) was the SPAD 12 Ca.1 with a single 37mm Puteaux mounted to fire between the cylinder banks and through the propeller boss of the aircraft's Hispano-Suiza 8C.
Ahmad Y. al-Hassan argues that these manuscripts are copies of earlier manuscripts and reported on hand-held cannon being used by the Mamluks at the Battle of Ain Jalut in 1260.
* '''The reinforce:'''  This portion of the piece is frequently divided into a ''first reinforce'' and a ''second reinforce'', but in any case is marked as separate from the chase by the presence of a narrow circular ''reinforce ring'' or ''band'' at its foremost end.
The oldest surviving gun, known as the Heilongjiang hand cannon and dated to no later than 1290, is 34&nbsp;cm long with a muzzle bore diameter of .
Demi-cannon were capable of firing these heavy metal balls with such force that they could penetrate more than a metre of solid oak, from a distance of , and could dismast even the largest ships at close range.
Bronze has several characteristics that made it preferable as a construction material: although it is relatively expensive, does not always alloy well, and can result in a final product that is "spongy about the bore", bronze is more flexible than iron and therefore less prone to bursting when exposed to high pressure; cast iron cannon are less expensive and more durable generally than bronze and withstand being fired more times without deteriorating.
The Hispano-Suiza HS.404, Oerlikon 20&nbsp;mm cannon, MG FF, and their numerous variants became among the most widely used autocannon in the war.
Fathullah Shirazi, a Persian-Indian who worked for Akbar the Great in the Mughal Empire, developed a volley gun in the 16th century.
This  calibre gun was used by the Germans against Paris and could hit targets more than  away.
cannon, as with machine guns, were generally fixed to fire forwards (mounted in the wings, in the nose or fuselage, or in a pannier under either); or were mounted in gun turrets on heavier aircraft.
Another notable effect of cannon on warfare during this period was the change in conventional fortifications.
In England cannon were being used to besiege various fortified buildings during the English Civil War.
Cannon did not have sights, therefore, even with measuring tools, aiming was still largely guesswork.
File:Tippu's cannon.jpg|Cannon used by Tipu Sultan's forces at the battle of Srirangapatna.
Such tactics were successfully used by the French, for example, at the Battle of Friedland, when sixty-six guns fired a total of 3,000 roundshot and 500 rounds of grapeshot, inflicting severe casualties to the Russian forces, whose losses numbered over 20,000 killed and wounded, in total.
By the early 20th century, infantry weapons had become more powerful, forcing most artillery away from the front lines.
The cannon fire simulates Russian artillery bombardments of the Battle of Borodino, a critical battle in Napoleon's invasion of Russia, whose defeat the piece celebrates.
Nearly all modern fighter aircraft are armed with an autocannon and they are also commonly found on ground-attack aircraft.
Mortars were useful for sieges, as they could hit targets behind walls or other defences.
The backward motion of the cannon as its projectile leaves the bore is termed its recoil and the effectiveness of the cannon can be measured in terms of how much this response can be diminished, though obviously diminishing recoil through increasing the overall mass of the cannon means decreased mobility.
Some cannon made during this time had barrels exceeding  in length, and could weigh up to .
A certain amount of windage allows the ball to fit down the bore, though the greater the windage the less efficient the propulsion of the ball when the gunpowder is ignited.
As the battlefield was muddy, recoil caused cannons to bury themselves into the ground after firing, resulting in slow rates of fire, as more effort was required to move them back into an adequate firing position; also, roundshot did not ricochet with as much force from the wet earth.
In military usage, a gun is a cannon with a high muzzle velocity and a flat trajectory, useful for hitting the sides of targets such as walls, as opposed to howitzers or mortars, which have lower muzzle velocities, and fire indirectly, lobbing shells up and over obstacles to hit the target from above.
The projectile fired from the Armstrong gun could reportedly pierce through a ship's side, and explode inside the enemy vessel, causing increased damage, and casualties.
Among the first generals to recognize that artillery was not being used to its full potential, Napoleon often massed his cannon into batteries and introduced several changes into the French artillery, improving it significantly and making it among the finest in Europe.
Until then there was no more than one cannon for every thousand infantrymen on the battlefield but Gustavus Adolphus increased the number of cannon sixfold.
Despite the drawbacks, sustained artillery fire proved deadly during the engagement, especially during the French cavalry attack.
After the Middle Ages most large cannon were abandoned in favour of greater numbers of lighter, more maneuverable pieces.
Two field batteries fired directly upon a battalion of Chinese infantry; the Marines were forced to brace themselves against their howitzers, as they had no time to dig them in.
In his 1341 poem, ''The Iron Cannon Affair'', one of the first accounts of the use of gunpowder artillery in China, Xian Zhang wrote that a cannonball fired from an eruptor could "pierce the heart or belly when it strikes a man or horse, and can even transfix several persons at once."
** The ''neck'', a short, narrow piece of metal holding out the knob; and
Used to great effect in anti-aircraft projectiles, proximity fuses were fielded in both the European and Pacific Theatres of Operations; they were particularly useful against V-1 flying bombs and kamikaze planes.
A small bronze cannon unearthed in Loshult, Scania in southern Sweden is considered to be one of the earliest surviving European guns.
The carronade, although initially very successful and widely adopted, disappeared from the Royal Navy in the 1850s after the development of wrought-iron-jacketed steel cannon by William George Armstrong and Joseph Whitworth.
In World War I, the majority of combat fatalities were caused by artillery; they were also used widely in World War II.
Eventually, the paper and bamboo of which fire lance barrels were originally constructed came to be replaced by metal.
This was called "spiking the cannon".
Other historians urge caution regarding claims of Islamic firearms use in the 1204–1324 period as late medieval Arabic texts used the same word for gunpowder, ''naft'', that they used for an earlier incendiary naphtha.
By the end of the 18th century, principles long adopted in Europe specified the characteristics of the Royal Navy's cannon, as well as the acceptable defects, and their severity.
The first metal cannon was the ''pot-de-fer''.
This cannon found more use with the Dutch, who learned to shoot bombs filled with powder from them.
He used these batteries to break his opponent's infantry line, while his cavalry would outflank their heavy guns.
It has been disputed at which point flame-projecting cannon were abandoned in favour of missile-projecting ones, as words meaning either ''incendiary'' or ''explosive'' are commonly translated as ''gunpowder''.
Systems with multiple barrels, such as a rotary autocannon, can have rates of fire of more than several thousand rounds per minute.
The two parts were screwed together using levers to facilitate moving it.
This cannon was renowned for its sturdiness, reliability, firepower, flexibility, relatively lightweight, and range of .
In addition, new technologies and tactics were developed, making most defences obsolete; this led to the construction of star forts, specifically designed to withstand artillery bombardment though these too (along with the Martello Tower) would find themselves rendered obsolete when explosive and armour piercing rounds made even these types of fortifications vulnerable.
These claims have been disputed by historians of science.
By World War I, all of the major powers were experimenting with aircraft mounted cannon; however their low rate of fire and great size and weight precluded any of them from being anything other than experimental.
For example, the Panzer III was originally designed with a 37&nbsp;mm gun, but was mass-produced with a 50&nbsp;mm cannon.
Nuclear artillery was experimented with, but was abandoned as impractical.
The first cannon in Europe were in use in Iberia by the mid-13th century.
Nevertheless, carronades were used in the American Civil War.
Instead of the finely ground powder used by the first bombards, powder was replaced by a "corned" variety of coarse grains.
The Second World War sparked new developments in cannon technology.
Despite the change to indirect fire, cannon proved highly effective during World War I, directly or indirectly causing over 75% of casualties.
Cannon in general have the form of a truncated cone with an internal cylindrical bore for holding an explosive charge and a projectile.
From the 13th to 15th centuries cannon armed Chinese ships also travelled throughout Southeast Asia.
To counter the threat of the Russian T-34s, another, more powerful 50&nbsp;mm gun was introduced, only to give way to a larger 75&nbsp;mm cannon, which was in a fixed mount as the StuG III, the most-produced German World War II armoured fighting vehicle of any type.
The typical rate of fire for a modern autocannon ranges from 90 to 1,800 rounds per minute.
The first definite use of artillery in the region was against the Ottoman siege of Constantinople, in 1396, forcing the Ottomans to withdraw.
Another is the smoothbore 12-pounder Napoleon, which originated in France in 1853 and was widely used by both sides in the American Civil War.
A few of these featured cannon batteries, such as the Tudors' Device Forts, in England.
Large cannon known as bombards ranged from three to five feet in length and were used by Dubrovnik and Kotor in defence in the later 14th century.
They were used in Russia around 1380, though they were used only in sieges, often by the defenders.
Both are used in the close air support role.
The span of the reinforce also includes the following:
The carronade was adopted by the Royal Navy in 1779; the lower muzzle velocity of the round shot when fired from this cannon was intended to create more wooden splinters when hitting the structure of an enemy vessel, as they were believed to be more deadly than the ball by itself.
Anti-tank guns were also tremendously improved during the war: in 1939, the British used primarily 2&nbsp;pounder and 6&nbsp;pounder guns.
The combined firepower from both turrets will give a ''Zumwalt''-class destroyer the firepower equivalent to 18 conventional M198 howitzers.
Cannon in the 20th and 21st centuries are usually divided into sub-categories and given separate names.
The first documented battlefield use of fire lances took place in 1132 when Chen Gui used them to defend De'an from attack by the Jurchen Jin.
When over 25,000 royalists led by General Danican assaulted Paris, Paul François Jean Nicolas, vicomte de Barras was appointed to defend the capital; outnumbered five to one and disorganized, the Republicans were desperate.
It dates from the early-mid 14th century, and is currently in the Swedish History Museum in Stockholm.
''Cannon'' is derived from the Old Italian word ''cannone'', meaning "large tube", which came from Latin ''canna'', in turn originating from the Greek κάννα (''kanna''), "reed", and then generalized to mean any hollow tube-like object; cognate with Akkadian term ''qanu'' and  Hebrew ''qāneh'', meaning "tube" or "reed".
