Cannabis for industrial uses is valuable in tens of thousands of commercial products, especially as fibre ranging from paper, cordage, construction material and textiles in general, to clothing.
Finally, the tertiary psychoactive effects of the drug cannabis, can include an increase in heart rate and hunger, believed to be caused by 11-OH-THC, a psychoactive metabolite of THC produced in the liver.
In North America cannabis, in the form of hemp, was grown for use in rope, clothing and paper.
Normal cognition is restored after approximately three hours for larger doses via a smoking pipe, bong or vaporizer.
''Indica'' designates shorter, bushier plants adapted to cooler climates and highland environments.
Within these two subspecies, Small and Cronquist described ''C.
The cannabis was presumably employed by this culture as a medicinal or psychoactive agent, or an aid to divination.
Lamarck based his description of the newly named species on plant specimens collected in India.
as a wild or escaped variety of low-intoxicant ''Cannabis'', and ''C.
Common side effects include dizziness, feeling tired, vomiting, and hallucinations.
Karl W. Hillig, a graduate student in the laboratory of long-time ''Cannabis'' researcher Paul G. Mahlberg at Indiana University, conducted a systematic investigation of genetic, morphological, and chemotaxonomic variation among 157 ''Cannabis'' accessions of known geographic origin, including fiber, drug, and feral populations.
It also is a useful source of foodstuffs (hemp milk, hemp seed, hemp oil) and biofuels.
sativa'' as prohibited materials.
At the time, the XY system was the only known system of sex determination.
These varieties were assumed to have sex chromosome composition XX.
Male flowers are normally borne on loose panicles, and female flowers are borne on racemes.
''sativa'', and ''C.
''Ruderalis'' is the informal name for the short plants that grow wild in Europe and central Asia.
In 1924, Russian botanist D.E.
File:Cannabis hemp sativa (left) indica (right).png|Micrograph ''C.
For Schultes, this was a reversal of his previous interpretation that ''Cannabis'' is monotypic, with only a single species.
This excessive splitting of ''C.
sativa'' proved too unwieldy, and never gained many adherents.
To satisfy the UN Narcotics Convention, some cannabis strains have been bred to produce minimal levels of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the principal psychoactive constituent.
Heterosomes were not observed in analyzed individuals of monoecious "Kentucky" hemp, nor in an unidentified German cultivar.
indica'' as separate species.
The defense attorneys were not often successful in winning their case, because the intent of the law was clear.
''indica'' was primarily selected for drug production.
Industrial hemp products are made from cannabis plants selected to produce an abundance of fiber.
The leaves are palmately compound or digitate, with serrate leaflets.
"While we have no evidence of the use of ephedra among the steppe tribes, we have already seen that they did share in the cultic use of hemp, a practice that ranged from Romania east to the Yenisei River from at least the 3rd millennium BC onwards where its use was later encountered in the apparatus for smoking hemp found at Pazyryk."
Settlements which date from ''c''.
Professors William Emboden, Loran Anderson, and Harvard botanist Richard E. Schultes and coworkers also conducted taxonomic studies of ''Cannabis'' in the 1970s, and concluded that stable morphological differences exist that support recognition of at least three species, ''C.
Although overall cannabinoid production is influenced by environmental factors, the THC/CBD ratio is genetically determined and remains fixed throughout the life of a plant.
The authors assigned fiber/seed landraces and feral populations from Europe, central Asia, and Asia Minor to ''C.
(consisting of cultivated plants), and ''C.
Cannabis has long been used for hemp fibre, for hemp oils, for medicinal purposes, and as a recreational drug.
Sometimes the vein will actually pass tangent to the notch, but often it will pass by at a small distance, and when that happens a spur vein (occasionally a pair of such spur veins) branches off and joins the leaf margin at the deepest point of the notch.
In Buddhism, cannabis is generally regarded as an intoxicant and may be a hindrance to development of meditation and clear awareness.
''Cannabis'' was one of the first plant species to be karyotyped; however, this was in a period when karyotype preparation was primitive by modern standards (see History of Cytogenetics).
Clay pipes at William Shakespeare's Stratford-upon-Avon garden may contain cannabis, indicating that Shakespeare may have been a cannabis smoker.
It has been suggested that the presence of monoecy can be used to differentiate licit crops of monoecious hemp from illicit drug crops.
Near the head and foot of the shaman was a large leather basket and wooden bowl filled with 789g of cannabis, superbly preserved by climatic and burial conditions.
indica'' as separate species, but not ''C.
sativa'' or a separate species, and proposed ''C.
Rastafarians tend to be among the biggest consumers of modern Cannabis use.
At the top of a flowering plant, this number again diminishes to a single leaflet per leaf.
This is a contentious issue because there is no universally accepted definition of a species.
Dioecious varieties are preferred for drug production, where the female flowers are used.
Since then, many different types of sex determination systems have been discovered, particularly in plants.
''Cannabis'', like many organisms, is diploid, having a chromosome complement of 2n=20, although polyploid individuals have been artificially produced.
However, ''sativa'' strains often produce monoecious individuals, probably as a result of inbreeding.
Most strains of ''Cannabis'' are short day plants, with the possible exception of ''C.
As a drug it usually comes in the form of dried flower buds (marijuana), resin (hashish), or various extracts collectively known as hashish oil.
''Cannabis'' is first referred to in Hindu Vedas between 2000 and 1400 BCE, in the ''Atharvaveda''.
The scientific debate regarding taxonomy has had little effect on the terminology in widespread use among cultivators and users of drug-type ''Cannabis''.
sativa'' is tall and laxly branched with relatively narrow leaflets, ''C.
Dioecy is relatively uncommon in the plant kingdom, and a very low percentage of dioecious plant species have been determined to use the XY system.
Additional ''Cannabis'' species were proposed in the 19th century, including strains from China and Vietnam (Indo-China) assigned the names ''Cannabis chinensis'' Delile, and ''Cannabis gigantea'' Delile ex Vilmorin.
Several other research groups have reported identification of male-associated markers using RAPD and AFLP.
He is thought to have belonged to the Jushi culture recorded in the area centuries later in the ''Hanshu'', Chap 96B.
One widely applied criterion for species recognition is that species are "groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups."
Long-term effects of cannabis are not clear.
However, if a large amount is taken orally the effects may last much longer.
The question of whether heteromorphic sex chromosomes are indeed present is most conveniently answered if such chromosomes were clearly visible in a karyotype.
It is related to the Persian ''kanab'', the English ''canvas'' and possibly even to the English ''hemp'' (Old English '''').
''spontanea'' (= ''C.
Globally, in 2013, 60,400 kilograms of cannabis were produced legally.
(consisting of wild or feral plants).
Elders of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church, a religious movement founded in the United States in 1975 with no ties to either Ethiopia or the Coptic Church, consider ''Cannabis'' to be the Eucharist, claiming it as an oral tradition from Ethiopia dating back to the time of Christ.
Primary psychoactive effects include a state of relaxation, and to a lesser degree, euphoria from its main psychoactive compound, tetrahydrocannabinol.
indica'' as having poorer fiber quality than ''C.
Various compounds, including hashish and hash oil, are extracted from the plant.
as a wild or escaped variety of the high-intoxicant type.
Enterprising attorneys for the defense in a few drug busts argued that the seized ''Cannabis'' material may not have been ''C.
Several studies of Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and other types of genetic markers have been conducted on drug and fiber strains of ''Cannabis'', primarily for plant breeding and forensic purposes.
''ruderalis'' Janisch, and ''Cannabis ruderalis'' Janisch, as alternative names.
In his doctoral dissertation published the same year, Hillig stated that principal components analysis of phenotypic (morphological) traits failed to differentiate the putative species, but that canonical variates analysis resulted in a high degree of discrimination of the putative species and infraspecific taxa.
Since the early 1970s, ''Cannabis'' plants have been categorized by their chemical phenotype or "chemotype", based on the overall amount of THC produced, and on the ratio of THC to CBD.
The psychoactive effects of ''cannabis'' are known to have a biphasic nature.
2200–1700 BCE in the Bactria and Margiana contained elaborate ritual structures with rooms containing everything needed for making drinks containing extracts from poppy (opium), hemp (cannabis), and ephedra (which contains ephedrine).
indica'', and (tentatively) ''C.
The first genome sequence of ''Cannabis'', which is estimated to be 820 Mb in size, was published in 2011 by a team of Canadian scientists.
Linnaeus was familiar with European hemp, which was widely cultivated at the time.
They also commented that these analyses confirm the continuity of the ''Cannabis'' gene pool throughout the studied accessions, and provide further confirmation that the genus comprises a single species, although theirs was not a systematic study ''per se''.
There are 483 identifiable chemical constituents known to exist in the cannabis plant, and at least 85 different cannabinoids have been isolated from the plant.
In September 2005, New Scientist reported that researchers at the Canberra Institute of Technology had identified a new type of ''Cannabis'' based on analysis of mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA.
More recently, Sakamoto and various co-authors have used RAPD to isolate several genetic marker sequences that they name Male-Associated DNA in ''Cannabis'' (MADC), and which they interpret as indirect evidence of a male chromosome.
''kafiristanica'' (Vav.)
Based on studies of sex reversal in hemp, it was first reported by K. Hirata in 1924 that an XY sex-determination system is present.
He considered the genus to be monotypic, having just a single species that he named ''Cannabis sativa'' L. (L. stands for Linnaeus, and indicates the authority who first named the species).
Cannabis is an annual, dioecious, flowering herb.
Cannabidiol (CBD), which has no psychotropic effects by itself (although sometimes showing a small stimulant effect, similar to caffeine), attenuates, or reduces the higher anxiety levels caused by THC alone.
As a result of intensive selection in cultivation, ''Cannabis'' exhibits many sexual phenotypes that can be described in terms of the ratio of female to male flowers occurring in the individual, or typical in the cultivar.
In 1940, Russian botanists Serebriakova and Sizov proposed a complex classification in which they also recognized ''C.
However, the serration vein originates from lower down the central vein of the leaflet, typically opposite to the position of, not the first notch down, but the next notch.
A PCR-based method for the detection of female-associated DNA polymorphisms by genotyping has been developed.
The X:A system was first described in Drosophila spp in 1925.
"At a very early period the Chinese recognized the ''Cannabis'' plant as dioecious", and the (c. 3rd century BCE) ''Erya'' dictionary defined ''xi'' 枲 "male ''Cannabis''" and ''fu'' 莩 (or ''ju'' 苴) "female ''Cannabis''".
Whether the drug and non-drug, cultivated and wild types of ''Cannabis'' constitute a single, highly variable species, or the genus is polytypic with more than one species, has been a subject of debate for well over two centuries.
In modern times novel applications and improvements have been explored with modest commercial success.
The first pair of leaves usually have a single leaflet, the number gradually increasing up to a maximum of about thirteen leaflets per leaf (usually seven or nine), depending on variety and growing conditions.
Ainsworth describes sex determination in the genus as using "an X/autosome dosage type".
Soon thereafter, Schaffner disputed Hirata's interpretation, and published results from his own studies of sex reversal in hemp, concluding that an X:A system was in use and that furthermore sex was strongly influenced by environmental conditions.
''Cannabis sativa'' cultivars are used for fibers due to their long stems; Sativa varieties may grow more than six metres tall.
Hemp is stronger and longer-lasting than cotton.
In 2004, Hillig and Mahlberg published a chemotaxonomic analysis of cannabinoid variation in their ''Cannabis'' germplasm collection.
indica'' as separate species.
The term ''hemp'' is used to name the durable soft fiber from the ''Cannabis'' plant stem (stalk).
''Cannabis'' aficionados recognize three distinct types based on such factors as morphology, native range, aroma, and subjective psychoactive characteristics.
Dutch ''Cannabis'' researcher E.P.M.
He also concluded there is little support to treat ''C.
In 1785, noted evolutionary biologist Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck published a description of a second species of ''Cannabis'', which he named ''Cannabis indica'' Lam.
The two cannabinoids usually produced in greatest abundance are cannabidiol (CBD) and/or Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but only THC is psychoactive.
''Cannabis'' normally has imperfect flowers, with staminate "male" and pistillate "female" flowers occurring on separate plants.
His (c. 440 BCE) ''Histories'' records, "The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed presumably, flowers, and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Grecian vapour-bath can exceed; the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy."
sativa'' at this time, but more research on wild and weedy populations is needed because they were underrepresented in their collection.
However, cannabis withdrawal symptoms are typically mild and are never life-threatening.
Subdioecy (the occurrence of monoecious individuals and dioecious individuals within the same population) is widespread.
Secondary psychoactive effects, such as a facility for philosophical thinking, introspection and metacognition have been reported among cases of anxiety and paranoia.
The authors hypothesized that the two subspecies diverged primarily as a result of human selection; ''C.
Sufis have used ''Cannabis'' in a spiritual context since the 13th century CE.
However, physical barriers to gene exchange (such as the Himalayan mountain range) might have enabled ''Cannabis'' gene pools to diverge before the onset of human intervention, resulting in speciation.
In most cases where the XY system is found it is believed to have evolved recently and independently.
sativa'' subspecies into 13 varieties, including four distinct groups within subspecies ''culta''.
File:Cannabis sativa radix profile.png|Root system side view
The ''Cannabis'' genus was first classified using the "modern" system of taxonomic nomenclature by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, who devised the system still in use for the naming of species.
After 24 hours to a few days, minuscule psychoactive effects may be felt, depending on dosage, frequency and tolerance to the drug.
Old Akkadian ''qunnabtu'', Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian ''qunnabu'' were used to refer to the plant meaning "a way to produce smoke."
''Cannabis'' is used for a wide variety of purposes.
The Cannabis plant has a history of medicinal use dating back thousands of years across many cultures.
ruderalis'' is short, branchless, and grows wild in central Asia.
In 1545 cannabis spread to the western hemisphere where Spaniards imported it to Chile for its use as fiber.
Laws prohibiting ''Cannabis'' in the United States and Canada specifically named products of ''C.
In dioecious plants where sex chromosomes have not been identified, markers for maleness indicate either the presence of sex chromosomes which have not been distinguished by cytological methods or that the marker is tightly linked to a gene involved in sex determination."
Attorneys on both sides recruited botanists to provide expert testimony.
Concerns including memory and cognition problems, risk of addiction, schizophrenia in young people, and the risk of children taking it by accident.
Short-term use increases both minor and major adverse effects.
de Meijer and coworkers described some of their RAPD studies as showing an "extremely high" degree of genetic polymorphism between and within populations, suggesting a high degree of potential variation for selection, even in heavily selected hemp cultivars.
Tiny samples of ''Cannabis'' plants also can be identified with precision by microscopic examination of leaf cells and similar features, but that requires special expertise and equipment.
However, everyday use of Cannabis can in some cases be correlated with psychological withdrawal symptoms such as irritability and insomnia, and evidence could suggest that if a user experiences stress, the likeliness of getting a panic attack increases because of an increase of THC metabolites.
Non-drug plants produce relatively low levels of THC and high levels of CBD, while drug plants produce high levels of THC and low levels of CBD.
Although monoecious plants are often referred to as "hermaphrodites", true hermaphrodites (which are less common) bear staminate and pistillate structures on individual flowers, whereas monoecious plants bear male and female flowers at different locations on the same plant.
Janichevsky concluded that ruderal ''Cannabis'' in central Russia is either a variety of ''C.
Serebriakova and Sizov split the two ''C.
sativa'' they recognized two subspecies: ''C.
When plants of these two chemotypes cross-pollinate, the plants in the first filial (F1) generation have an intermediate chemotype and produce similar amounts of CBD and THC.
''Sativa'' is the most widespread variety, which is usually tall, laxly branched, and found in warm lowland regions.
Many countries regulate limits for psychoactive compound (THC) concentrations in products labeled as hemp.
sativa'' (left), ''C.
The plant is believed to have originated in the mountainous regions northwest of the Himalayas.
The word ''cannabis'' is from Greek  ('''') (see Latin ''''), which was originally Scythian or Thracian.
The lower leaf pairs usually occur in an opposite leaf arrangement and the upper leaf pairs in an alternate arrangement on the main stem of a mature plant.
Narrow-leaflet and wide-leaflet drug accessions, southern and eastern Asian hemp accessions, and feral Himalayan populations were assigned to ''C.
However, ''hemp'' can refer to any industrial or foodstuff product that is not intended for use as a drug.
It is also known as hemp, although this term is often used to refer only to varieties of ''Cannabis'' cultivated for non-drug use.
Another paper in the series on chemotaxonomic variation in the terpenoid content of the essential oil of ''Cannabis'' revealed that several wide-leaflet drug strains in the collection had relatively high levels of certain sesquiterpene alcohols, including guaiol and isomers of eudesmol, that set them apart from the other putative taxa.
Ainsworth commented on these findings, stating,"It is not surprising that male-associated markers are relatively abundant.
It is not unusual, however, for individual plants to bear both male and female flowers.
In ancient Germanic culture, ''Cannabis'' was associated with the Norse love goddess, Freya.
Breeders, seed companies, and cultivators of drug type ''Cannabis'' often describe the ancestry or gross phenotypic characteristics of cultivars by categorizing them as "pure indica", "mostly indica", "indica/sativa", "mostly sativa", or "pure sativa".
In modern times the Rastafari movement has embraced ''Cannabis'' as a sacrament.
Environmental sex determination is known to occur in a variety of species.
This classification was based on several factors including interfertility, chromosome uniformity, chemotype, and numerical analysis of phenotypic characters.
In 2005, Hillig published a genetic analysis of the same set of accessions (this paper was the first in the series, but was delayed in publication), and proposed a three-species classification, recognizing ''C.
The oldest written record of cannabis usage is the Greek historian Herodotus's reference to the central Eurasian Scythians taking cannabis steam baths.
Hillig concluded that the patterns of genetic, morphological, and chemotaxonomic variation support recognition of ''C.
sativa'', but greater utility as an inebriant.
Cannabinoids, terpenoids, and other compounds are secreted by glandular trichomes that occur most abundantly on the floral calyxes and bracts of female plants.
Many plants have been selectively bred to produce a maximum of THC (cannabinoids), which is obtained by curing the flowers.
''Cannabis'' plants produce a unique family of terpeno-phenolic compounds called cannabinoids, some of which produce the "high" one experiences from consuming marijuana.
This means that on its way from the midrib of the leaflet to the point of the serration, the vein serving the tip of the serration passes close by the intervening notch.
Various forms of the drug cannabis exist, including extracts such as hashish and hash oil which, because of appearance, are more susceptible to adulterants when left unregulated.
Classical Greeks and Romans were using cannabis, while in the Middle East, use spread throughout the Islamic empire to North Africa.
Dioecious "Kentucky" hemp was assumed to use an XY mechanism.
Populations that are physiologically capable of interbreeding, but morphologically or genetically divergent and isolated by geography or ecology, are sometimes considered to be separate species.
In the early 20th century, the single-species concept was still widely accepted, except in the Soviet Union where ''Cannabis'' continued to be the subject of active taxonomic study.
Other organized religions founded in the 20th century that treat ''Cannabis'' as a sacrament are the THC Ministry, Cantheism, the Cannabis Assembly and the Church of Cognizance.
Many populations have been described as sexually labile.
''sativa'' was presumably selected for traits that enhance fiber or seed production, whereas ''C.
The name ''Cannabis indica'' was listed in various Pharmacopoeias, and was widely used to designate ''Cannabis'' suitable for the manufacture of medicinal preparations.
Molecular analytical techniques developed in the late 20th century are being applied to questions of taxonomic classification.
By the 10th century CE, it has been suggested that it was referred to by some in India as "food of the gods".
Ainsworth reviews that treatment with auxin and ethylene have feminizing effects, and that treatment with cytokinins and gibberellins have masculinizing effects.
They used gas chromatography to determine cannabinoid content and to infer allele frequencies of the gene that controls CBD and THC production within the studied populations, and concluded that the patterns of cannabinoid variation support recognition of ''C.
According to other researchers, no modern karyotype of ''Cannabis'' had been published as of 1996.
Since the 1920s, a number of sex determination models have been proposed for ''Cannabis''.
This taxonomic interpretation was embraced by ''Cannabis'' aficionados who commonly distinguish narrow-leafed "sativa" drug strains from wide-leafed "indica" drug strains.
Like the Rastafari, some modern Gnostic Christian sects have asserted that ''Cannabis'' is the Tree of Life.
In 1976, Canadian botanist Ernest Small and American taxonomist Arthur Cronquist published a taxonomic revision that recognizes a single species of ''Cannabis'' with two subspecies: ''C.
''kafiristanica'' Vav., and ruderal populations in Europe to ''C.
The leaves have a peculiar and diagnostic venation pattern that enables persons poorly familiar with the plant to distinguish a cannabis leaf from unrelated species that have confusingly similar leaves (see illustration).
The New Scientist story, which was picked up by many news agencies and web sites, indicated that the research was to be published in the journal ''Forensic Science International''.
Many researchers have suggested that sex in ''Cannabis'' is determined or strongly influenced by environmental factors.
Cannabinoids are under preliminary research for their potential to affect stroke or children's epilepsy.
According to Schultes' and Anderson's descriptions, ''C.
indica'' is shorter, conical in shape, and has relatively wide leaflets, and ''C.
Hemp has been used by many civilizations, from China to Europe (and later North America) during the last 12,000 years.
As is common in serrated leaves, each serration has a central vein extending to its tip.
However, they did not divide ''C.
