Priests are required by canon law to pray the entire Divine Office each day while permanent deacons are required to pray the morning and evening hours.
The texts for this cycle are found in the ''Lenten Triodion'', the ''Pentecostarion'', the ''Octoechos'' and also, because the daily Epistle and Gospel readings are determined by this cycle, the ''Gospel Book'' and ''Apostle Book''.
In the succeeding revision, the character of Matins was changed to an Office of Readings so that it could be used at any time of the day as an office of Scriptural and hagiographical readings.
The usage among the Oriental Orthodox Churches and the Assyrian Church of the East and of their Eastern Catholic counterparts all differ from each other and from other rites.
These are services of a similar structure to, but briefer than, the hours.
* '''Vespers''' (sunset) commemorates the taking down of Christ from the Cross.
Liturgies published by immigrant Lutheran communities in North America were based at first on the Book of Common Prayer.
It was he who expounded the concept in Christian prayer of the inseparability of the spiritual life from the physical life.
The Malabar Rite has largely adopted the Roman Calendar, and several Roman days have been added to that of the Chaldean Catholics.
* the ''Fast of the Ninevites'' (seventy days before Easter)
The practice among religious communities varies according to their rules and constitutions.
Lutheran worship books usually include orders for Morning and Evening Prayer as well as Compline.
Former Anglicans worshiping in Roman Catholic parishes of the Pastoral Provision and the Personal Ordinariates maintain the Anglican flavor of the Daily Office using the Book of Divine Worship, an adaptation of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer approved for Anglican Use Catholics in 2003.
In the East, the development of the Divine Services shifted from the area around Jerusalem to Constantinople.
The Order of St. Helena published the ''St.
The years are numbered, not from the birth of Christ, but from the Seleucid era (year 1 = 311 B.C.
The fixed-hour prayers came to be known as the "Divine Office" (office coming from the Latin word for duty).
In particular, St. Theodore the Studite (c. 758 – c. 826) combined a number of influences from the Byzantine court ritual with monastic practices common in Asia Minor, and added thereto a number of hymns composed by himself and his brother Joseph (see Typicon for further details).
Although some of them without doubt gained in literary style, nevertheless, to the regret of many, they also lost something of their old charm of simplicity and fervour."
* '''None''' (3 p.m.) commemorates the death of Christ on the Cross.
In England and other Anglican provinces, service books now include four offices:
Symbolizes Christ’s Crucifixion.
The Chaldean Easter coincides with that of the Eastern Orthodox Church, as the Julian Calendar is used to calculate Easter.
Canon C.26 stipulates that "Every clerk (cleric) in Holy Orders is under obligation, not being let (prevented) by sickness or some other urgent cause, to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer...." In other Anglican provinces, the Daily Office is not a canonical obligation but is strongly encouraged.
The portions of each of the Gospels from the narration of the Resurrection through the end are divided into eleven readings which are read on successive Sundays at matins; there are hymns sung at Matins that correspond with that day's Matins Gospel.
** Midafternoon prayer (None)
Also, there are Inter-Hours for the First, Third, Sixth and Ninth Hours.
'''Liturgy of the Hours (ICEL)'''
The Coptic equivalent of the Byzantine ''Horologion'' is the Agpeya.
Between 2005 and 2006, Collins republished ''The Divine Office'' and its various shorter editions with a new cover.
In the Orthodox Church, the canonical hours may be referred to as the '''divine services''', and the ''book of hours'' is called the ''horologion'' ().
Also, there are fixed texts for each day of the week are in the ''Horologion'' and ''Priest's Service Book'' (''e.g.
Pope Urban VIII made further changes, including "a profound alteration in the character of some of the hymns.
Associated with the Eternity of God, the Incarnation of Christ, and his Resurrection from the dead.
Each canonical office begins and ends with a ''qawmo'', a set of prayers that includes the Lord's Prayer.
These selections are found in the 'Proper of Seasons' (for Advent, Christmas, Lent and Easter), and the 'Proper of Saints' (for feast days of the Saints).
The Syriac Orthodox Book of Hours is called the ''Shhimo'', "simple prayer."
This hour is also read during fasting days.
The cycle of the ''Octoechos'' continues through the following great lent, so the variable parts of the lenten services are determined by both the preceding year's and the current year's dates of Easter.
By the 14th century, the breviary contained the entire text of the canonical hours.
* Evening Prayer, corresponding to Vespers.
The Liberal Catholic Church, and many groups in the Liberal Catholic movement, also use a simple version of the Western canonical hours, said with various scripture reading and collects.
* '''Third Hour''' or ''Tloth sho`in'' prayer (Terce, 9 a.m.)
The translation must have been made very early, evidently before the division in the church over Chalcedon, before the influence of Constantinople over the Antiochian Rite had begun.
Other Anglo-Catholics use the Roman Catholic ''Liturgy of the Hours'' (U.S.) or ''Divine Office'' (U.K.).
After the people returned to Judea, the prayer services were incorporated into Temple worship as well.
Both books are intended for ecumenical use and can be used with any daily lectionary.
The Book of Common Prayer (1928) of the Episcopal Church in the USA also restored the office of Prime, although it has not appeared in later revisions.
Every one of the Hours follows the same basic outline:
The Hours of the Liberal Rite consist of: Lauds, Prime, Sext, Vespers, and Complin.
Those of Mar Zaya and the Virgins are nearly obsolete.
In 1995, the Episcopal Church (United States) published the ''Contemporary Office Book'' in one volume with the complete psalter and all readings from the two-year Daily Office lectionary.
In addition to these public prayers, there are also private prayers prescribed for both monastics and laypersons; in some monasteries, however, these are read in church.
By 60 AD, the Didache, the oldest known liturgical manual for Christians, recommended disciples to pray the Lord's Prayer three times a day; this practice found its way into the canonical hours as well.
** Midmorning prayer (Terce)
Symbolizes Christ’s burial, asks God for a quiet night and a peaceful sleep.
The '''Sixth Hour''' (noon) Dedicated to God the Father.
The canons of the Church of England and some other Anglican provinces require clergy to read Morning and Evening Prayer daily, either in public worship or privately.
** Midday prayer (Sext)
For secular (non-monastic) clergy and lay people, the fixed-hour prayers were by necessity much shorter, though in many churches, the form of the fixed-hour prayers became a hybrid of secular and monastic practice (sometimes referred to as 'cathedral' and 'monastic' models).
Until comparatively recently Mattins and Evensong were the principal Sunday services in most Anglican churches, sung to settings by composers both ancient and modern.
The traditional structure of Matins and Evensong in most Anglican prayer books reflects the intention by the reforming Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, to return to the office's older roots as the daily prayer of parish churches.
In each office, the psalms and canticle are framed by antiphons, and each concludes with the traditional Catholic doxology.
It consists of three watches, corresponding to the three stages of Christ's prayer in the Garden of Gethsemane (  ).
Also, one of the defining moments of the early Church, the decision to include Gentiles among the community of believers, arose from a vision Peter had while praying at noontime ().
holy communion, baptism, etc.
While Evensong with its musical repertory spanning five centuries continues to play an important role in Anglican worship, the eucharist has replaced Morning Prayer as the principal service on Sunday mornings in most Anglican parishes and cathedrals.
His successor, Pope John XXIII, made a further revision in 1960.
* In the morning: Night, Morning and Sunrise Services
In recent years, under the impact of the liturgical movement, Lutheran churches have restored the historic form of the Western office.
Its psalter—an inclusive-language revision of the psalter from the 1979 American Book of Common Prayer—also includes a collect for each psalm.
* Night Prayer, or Compline.
The daily offices have always had an important place in Anglican spirituality.
During the Babylonian Exile, when the Temple was no longer in use, the first synagogues were established, and the services (at fixed hours of the day) of Torah readings, psalms, and hymns began to evolve.
So, a sort of list developed called the breviary, which gave the format of the daily office and the texts to be used.
Similarly, Evening Prayer incorporated both the Magnificat from Vespers and the Nunc Dimittis from Compline.
These include Morning and Evening Prayers and prayers (and, in Russia, canons) to be prayed in preparation for receiving the Eucharist.
Commemorations on the Fixed Cycle depend upon the day of the calendar year, and also, occasionally, specific days of the week that fall near specific calendar dates, ''e.g.
* An excerpt from the Holy Gospel
In the West, St. Benedict in his famous Rule modeled his guidelines for the prayers on the customs of the basilicas of Rome.
There are numerous small differences in practice according to local custom; but the overall order is the same among Byzantine Rite monasteries, although parish and cathedral customs vary rather more so by locale.
* Prayer During the Day, conflating the lesser hours of Terce, Sext, and None.
** Monday, Tuesday, Thursday: Peace Service
The West Syrian Rite, used in Syria by the Syriac Orthodox (Jacobites) and Catholic Syrians is in its origin simply the old rite of Antioch in the Syriac language.
The All Saints Sisters of the Poor also use an elaborated version of the Anglican Daily Office.
Also, as the rite evolved in sundry places, different customs arose; an essay on some of these has been written by Archbishop Basil Krivoshein and is posted on the web.
The '''Typica''' is served whenever the Divine Liturgy is not celebrated at its usual time, ''i.e.
The '''Peace Service''' (after sunset) Dedicated to the Holy Spirit.
On ferias and "Memorials" Psalm 146 is said after Psalm 148, and on ferias Psalm 1:1–18, comes at the end of the psalms.
In 2007, Liturgy Training Publications released the new Mundelein Psalter, which provided the complete Morning, Evening and Night Prayers from ICEL's translation set to chant tones.
* Lord Have Mercy is then chanted 41 times (representing the 39 lashes Christ received before the crucifixion, plus one for the spear in His side, plus one for the crown of thorns)
* Volume III: Weeks 1 to 17 of the Year
The present arrangement provides for seven ''hulali'' at each ferial night service, ten on Sundays, three on "Memorials", and the whole Psalter on Feasts of the Lord.
This practice is believed to have been passed down through the centuries from the Apostles, with different practices developing in different places.
The psalms are taken from the 1963 Grail Psalms, while the Scriptural readings and canticles are taken from various versions of the Bible, including the Revised Standard Version, the Jerusalem Bible, the Knox Bible, the Good News Bible, and the New English Bible.
* Shorter Morning & Evening Prayer – comprising the Psalter for Morning, Evening and Night prayers and a selection of texts from the liturgical seasons and feasts
By the fourth century, the elements of the canonical hours were more or less established.
In some monastic communities and Anglo-Catholic parishes, the officiant wears surplice or alb, stole and cope when Evensong is celebrated solemnly.
As is noted above, the canonical hours stemmed from Jewish prayer.
Macdonald, the biographer of The Rt.
Most Anglican monastic communities use a Daily Office based on the Book of Common Prayer or on Common Worship but with additional antiphons and devotions.
Some prayer books also include a selection of prayers and devotions specifically for family use.
* Morning & Evening Prayer – comprising the complete Morning, Evening and Night prayers from the Divine Office
The Council itself abolished the office of Prime, and envisioned a manner of distributing the psalms over a period of more than 1 week.
Today, even in monasteries, the services are grouped together: Vespers and Compline are said together; Matins and Prime are said together; and the Third, Sixth and Ninth Hours are said together; resulting in three times of prayer each day.
In the Church of England, the publication in 2005 of ''Daily Prayer'', the third volume of Common Worship, adds "Prayer During the Day" to the services for Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer and Compline, and adds a selection of antiphons and responsories for the seasons of the Church Year.
In ancient times all nine services were offered every day, especially in monasteries.
Pope Pius XII also began reforming the Roman Breviary, allowing use of a new translation of the Psalms and establishing a special commission to study a general revision, with a view to which all the Catholic bishops were consulted in 1955.
The official title is ''Officium Divinum, Liturgia Horarum iuxta Ritum Romanum, editio typica altera''.
* Volume I: Advent & Christmastide
The commemorations on the Paschal Cycle (Moveable Cycle) depend upon the date of Pascha (Easter).
When East Syrian monasteries existed (which is no longer the case) seven hours of prayer were the custom in them, and three ''hulali'' (sections) of the Psalter were recited at each service.
The Franciscans sought a one-volume breviary for their friars to use during travels, so the order adopted the ''Breviarium Curiae'', but  substituting the Gallican  Psalter for the Roman.
Since his time, every edition of the Book of Common Prayer has included the complete psalter, usually arranged to be read over the course of a month.
Eventually, these sacrifices moved from the Tabernacle to the Temple built by Solomon in Jerusalem.
All clerics are free to use the Liturgy of the Hours or the traditional Roman Breviary, according to the ''motu proprio'' Summorum Pontificum, to fulfill this obligation.
By the time of the Roman Empire, the Jews (and eventually early Christians) began to follow the Roman system of conducting the business day in scheduling their times for prayer.
The 1989 New Zealand Prayer Book provides different outlines for Mattins and Evensong on each day of the week, as well as "Midday Prayer," "Night Prayer," and "Family Prayer."
Building on the recitation of psalms and canticles from scripture, the Church has added (and, at times, subtracted) hymns, hagiographical readings, and other prayers.
"Moses" and the "Dedication" have only four weeks each.
''The Divine Office'' is translated by a commission set up by the Episcopal Conferences of England and Wales, Australia and Ireland.
In addition to Morning and Evening Prayer there is a complete service for Compline.
At the evening service there is a selection of from four to seven psalms, varying with the day of the week, and also a ''Shuraya'', or short psalm, with generally a portion of Psalm 118, varying with the day of the fortnight.
Antiphons and litanies are provided for the seasons of the church year.
Symbolizes Christ’s descent into Hell and liberation of the righteous from torments.
Symbolizes Eve’s original tasting the forbidden fruit and eventual liberation from condemnation through Jesus Christ.
Furthermore, the period over which the entire Psalter is recited has been expanded from one week to four.
The Midnight Office is seldom served in parishes churches except at the Paschal Vigil as the essential office wherein the burial shroud is removed from the tomb and carried to the altar.
Both these editions are based on the Latin 1971 ''editio typica''.
The cycle of canonical hours is largely monastic, primarily composed of psalm readings.
The Sundays are generally named after the ''Shawu'a'' in which they occur, "Fourth Sunday of Epiphany", "Second Sunday of the Annunciation ", etc., though sometimes the name changes in the middle of a ''Shawu'a''.
This "sacrifice of praise" began to be substituted for the sacrifices of animals.
* In the morning: Night and Morning Services together
The year is divided into periods of about seven weeks each, called ''Shawu'i''; these are Advent (called ''Subara'', "Annunciation"), Epiphany, Lent, Easter, the Apostles, Summer, "Elias and the Cross", "Moses", and the "Dedication" (''Qudash idta'').
* Invitatory (not an hour properly called, but the introduction to the first hour said on the current day, whether it be the Office of Readings or Morning Prayer).
On days when the Liturgy may be celebrated at its usual hour, the Typica follows the sixth hour (or matins, where the custom is to serve the Liturgy then) and the Epistle and Gospel readings for the day are read therein; otherwise, on aliturgical days or when the Liturgy is served at vespers, the Typica has a much shorter form and is served between the ninth hour and vespers.
Since 1985, with the publication of the second typical edition of the Latin liturgical books, the Latin hymns of the Roman Office were once again restored to their pre-Urban revision.
The texts for this cycle are found in the ''Menaion''.
* '''Morning''' or ''Saphro'' prayer (Prime, 6 a.m.)
The Council of Trent, in its final session on 4 December 1563, entrusted the reform of the Breviary to the Pope.
'', the Sunday before the Exaltation of the Cross.
The prayers could be prayed individually or in groups.
The ''Liturgy of the Hours'' is translated by the International Commission on English in the Liturgy (ICEL).
As monasticism spread, the practice of specified hours and liturgical formats began to develop and become standardized.
The '''Ninth Hour''' (3:00&nbsp;p.m.) Dedicated to God the Son.
* '''Midnight''' or ''Lilyo'' prayer (Matins)
* '''Ninth Hour''' or ''Tsha` sho`in'' prayer (None, 3 p.m.)
* '''Compline''' (9 p.m. – before bedtime) commemorates the burial of Christ, the Final Judgment.
Some Anglo-Catholics use the Anglican Breviary, an adaptation of the Pre-Vatican II Roman Rite and the Sarum Rite in the style of Cranmer's original Book of Common Prayer, along with supplemental material from other western sources, including a common of Octaves, a common of Holy Women, and other material.
The Alexandrian Rite is observed by the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria and the Coptic Catholic Church.
* Introduction, which includes the Lord’s Prayer
* Volume I: Advent, Christmastide & Weeks 1–9 of the Year
On 9 July 1568, Pope Pius V, the successor of the Pope who closed the Council of Trent, promulgated an edition, known as the Roman Breviary, with his Apostolic Constitution ''Quod a nobis'', imposing it in the same way in which, two years later, he imposed his Roman Missal and using language very similar to that in the bull ''Quo primum'' with which he promulgated the Missal, regarding, for instance, the perpetual force of its provisions, the obligation to use the promulgated text in all places, and the total prohibition of adding or omitting anything, declaring in fact: "No one whosoever is permitted to alter this letter or heedlessly to venture to go contrary to this notice of Our permission, statute, ordinance, command, precept, grant, indult declaration, will decree and prohibition.
A translation is published by Catholic Book Publishing Corp. under the title ''The Liturgy of the Hours'' in four volumes, arranged according to the liturgical seasons of the Church year.
Should anyone, however, presume to commit such an act, he should know that he will incur the wrath of Almighty God and of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul."
were said in Greek, were, as a matter of course, translated into Syriac for common use.
* the Office of Readings (formerly Matins), major hour
In early times it was the continuation of the Peace Service.
* Morning prayer (Lauds), major hour
Both ''Evangelical Lutheran Worship'' published by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada as well as the ''Lutheran Service Book'' of the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod provide daily offices along with a complete psalter.
In western Catholicism, canonical hours may also be called ''offices'', since they refer to the official set of prayer of the Roman Catholic Church that is known variously as the ''divine office'' (from the Latin ''officium divinum'' meaning "divine service" or "divine duty"), and the ''opus Dei'' (meaning in Latin, "work of God").
During Great Lent, all of the services are offered on weekdays (except Saturday and Sunday) according to the following schedule:
The prayers at the service ask for God’s help towards feeble human nature.
Hence the book of the Divine Office is called ''Qdham u wathar'', or at full length ''Kthawa daqdham wadhwathar'', the "Book of Before and After".
For the sake of simplicity, Cranmer also eliminated responsories and antiphons, although these have been restored in many contemporary Anglican prayer books.
The East Syrian liturgical Calendar is unique.
The book which contains the hymns which constitute the substance of the musical system of Armenian liturgical chant is the ''Sharagnots'' (see Armenian Octoechos), a collection of hymns known as ''Sharakan''.
Since the early 20th century, revised editions of the Book of Common Prayer or supplemental service books published by Anglican churches have often added offices for midday prayer and Compline.
Helena Breviary'' (New York: Church Publishing) in 2006 with a revised psalter eliminating male pronouns in reference to God.
* Daytime prayer, which can be one or all of
* Daily Prayer – comprising the complete Divine Office, except for the Office of Readings
Various cycles of the liturgical year influence the manner in which the materials from the liturgical books (above) are inserted into the daily services:
The Roman breviary is now published under the title ''Liturgia Horarum''.
In accordance with Psalm 119:164, “Seven times in the day have I praised Thee for Thy judgments, O Righteous One,” the Syriac Orthodox Church observes seven services of prayer each day:
As Christianity began to separate from Judaism, the practice of praying at fixed times continued.
The '''Evening Service''' (before sunset) Dedicated to God the Son.
At the end of the office, the Nicene Creed is recited.
'', when there is a vesperal Liturgy or no Liturgy at all.
The modern Liturgy of the Hours usage focuses on three major hours and from two to four minor hours:
'', dismissals) and the Kathismata (selections from the ''Psalter'') are governed by the weekly cycle in conjunction with the season.
* '''Sext''' (noon) commemorates the Passion of Christ.
No doubt as soon as Christian communities arose in the rural areas of Syria the prayers which in the cities (Antioch, Jerusalem, etc.)
:Vespers and Compline are both read before the Liturgy during Lent and the Fast of Nineveh.
Catholic Truth Society published Prayer During the Day in 2009.
At present the following services are conducted in churches daily for the majority of the year:
* '''Terce''' (9 a.m.) commemorates Christ's trial before Pilate, the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.
* Volume III: Weeks of the Year (6–34).
It provides for the eight historical offices in one volume, but does not include the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary, which was bound along with many editions of the ''Breviarium Romanum''.
The Franciscans gradually spread this breviary throughout Europe.
* In the evening: Evening Service
The Fast of the Ninevites commemorates the repentance of Nineveh at the preaching of Jonas, and is carefully kept.
their usage varies with local custom, but generally they are used only during the Nativity Fast, Apostles Fast, and Dormition Fast on days when the lenten alleluia replaces "God is the Lord" at matins, which may be done at the discretion of the ecclesiarch when the Divine Liturgy is not celebrated.
The full cycle of services are usually served only in monasteries, cathedrals, and other katholika.
* Prayer of "Holy Holy Holy..." and Lord's Prayer
''Book of Common Worship Daily Prayer'', published in 1994 by Westminster John Knox Press, includes the daily offices from The Book of Common Worship of 1993, the liturgy of the Presbyterian Church USA.
The current liturgical books for the celebration of the Hours in Latin are those of the '' editio typica altera'' (second typical edition) promulgated in 1985.
The Order of the Holy Cross and Order of St. Helena published ''A Monastic Breviary'' (Wilton, Conn.: Morehouse-Barlow) in 1976.
The '''Third Hour''' (9:00&nbsp;a.m.) Dedicated to the Holy Spirit.
In addition to the distribution of almost the whole Psalter over a four-week cycle, the Church also provides appropriate hymns, readings, psalms, canticles and antiphons, for use in marking specific celebrations in the Roman Calendar, which sets out the order for the liturgical year.
With the Cluniac reforms of the 11th century there was a new emphasis on liturgy and the canonical hours in the reformed Benedictine priories with the Abbey of Cluny at their head.
