As was common in English cities in the Middle Ages, Canterbury employed a town band known as the Waits.
In 597, Pope Gregory the Great sent Augustine to convert its King Æthelberht to Christianity.
In 1978 its range of courses began to expand into other subjects, and in 1995 it was given the power to become a University college.
People born in Canterbury include the detective Edmund Reid, Christopher Marlowe, TV presenter Fiona Phillips, actor Thomas James Longley, BBC Radio 6 Music presenter Gideon Coe, former ITV News journalist, television presenter and BBC Radio 3 presenter Katie Derham, airline entrepreneur Sir Freddie Laker, boy singer and actor Joseph McManners, comic book artist Jack Lawrence, and actor Orlando Bloom.
The coastal towns of Herne Bay and Whitstable are  to the north, and Faversham is  to the northwest.
Canterbury is associated with several saints from this period who lived in Canterbury:
Six of these seats are held by the Liberal Democrats, four by the Conservatives and one by Labour.
With one million visitors per year, it is one of the most visited places in the country.
The most devastating raid was on 1 June 1942 during the Baedeker Blitz.
The reggae/ska musician Judge Dread played his last gig at the Penny Theatre.
North Lane Station was the southern terminus of the Canterbury and Whitstable Railway between 1830 and 1846.
The Waits were disbanded by the city authorities in 1641 for 'misdemeanors' but were reinstated in 1660 when they played for the visit of King Charles II on his return from exile.
Other musical groups include the Canterbury Singers (also founded in 1953), Cantemus, and the City of Canterbury Chamber Choir.
Canterbury Christ Church University was founded as a teacher training college in 1962 by the Church of England.
The University of Kent has a Symphony Orchestra, a University Choir, a Chamber Choir, and a University Concert Band and Big Band.
The University for the Creative Arts is the oldest higher education institution in the city, having been founded in 1882 by Thomas Sidney Cooper as the Sidney Cooper School of Art.
Canterbury is by-passed by the A2 London to Dover Road.
In 2005 it was granted full university status, and  it had around 15,000 students.
Before the end of the war, architect Charles Holden drew up plans to redevelop the city centre, but locals were so opposed that the Citizens' Defence Association was formed and swept to power in the 1945 municipal elections.
The Westgate is now a museum relating to its history as a jail.
* Saint Adrian of Canterbury
Canterbury district retains approximately 4,761&nbsp;businesses, up to 60,000&nbsp;full and part-time employees and was worth £1.3&nbsp;billion in 2001.
The medieval St Margaret's Church now houses the "The Canterbury Tales", in which life-sized character models reconstruct Geoffrey Chaucer's stories.
Tourism contributes £258m to the Canterbury economy and has been a "cornerstone of the local economy" for a number of years; Canterbury Cathedral alone generates over one million visitors a year.
It is about  from the M25 London orbital motorway, and  from central London by road.
The rioters' trial the following year led to a Kent revolt against the Parliamentarian forces, contributing to the start of the second phase of the war.
Between 1999 and 2005, the Whitefriars Shopping Centre underwent major redevelopment.
Canterbury Cathedral is the Mother Church of the Anglican Communion and seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Modern additions include the Marlowe Theatre and the St Lawrence Ground, home of the Kent County Cricket Club.
Besides the two theatres, theatrical performances take place at several areas of the city, for instance the cathedral and St Augustine's Abbey.
Canterbury East, the more central of the two stations, was opened by the London, Chatham and Dover Railway on 9 July 1860.
It also runs a website giving daily updated news and events for the city.
Remembering the destruction caused by the Danes, the inhabitants of Canterbury did not resist William the Conqueror's invasion in 1066.
The city centre contains many timber-framed 16th and 17th century houses, however there are far fewer than there were before the Second World War, as many were damaged during the Baedecker Blitz.
Canterbury RFC were founded in 1926 and became the first East Kent club to achieve National League status and currently play in the fourth tier, National League 2 South.
By 1820 the city's silk industry had been killed by imported Indian muslins; its trade was thereafter mostly limited to hops and wheat.
The Canterbury Choral Society gives regular concerts in Canterbury Cathedral, specialising in the large-scale choral works of the classical repertory.
The ''Herne Bay Times'' has reported that the Heritage at Risk Register includes 19 listed buildings in Canterbury which need urgent repair but for which the council has insufficient funds.
In April 2008, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Rowan Williams, controversially made a strong speech arguing that salary caps should be implemented to curb the pay of the rich in an attempt to manage the growth of the economy.
Canterbury Prison was opened in 1808 just outside the city boundary.
It includes a wide range of musical events ranging from opera and symphony concerts to world music, jazz, folk, etc., with a Festival Club, a Fringe and Umbrella events.
A regular music and dance venue is the Westgate Hall.
Punts and rowed river boats are available for hire in Canterbury.
After the conversion, Canterbury, being a Roman town, was chosen by Augustine as the centre for his episcopal see in Kent, and an abbey and cathedral were built.
However, Canterbury surrendered peacefully to the Parliamentarians after their victory at the Battle of Maidstone.
Canterbury West is served by high speed (56 minutes) trains to London St. Pancras, slower stopping services to London Charing Cross and London Victoria as well as by trains to Ramsgate and Margate.
Harbledown, Wincheap and Hales Place are suburbs of the city.
A high-speed train service to London St Pancras via Ashford International started on 13 December 2009.
The Marlowe Theatre was completely rebuilt and reopened in October 2011.
The city gave its name to a musical genre known as the Canterbury Sound or Canterbury Scene, a group of progressive rock, avant-garde and jazz musicians established within the city during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
The Roman settlement of '''Durovernum Cantiacorum''' ("Kentish Durovernum") occupied the location of an earlier British town whose ancient British name has been reconstructed as *'''Durou̯ernon''' ("Stronghold by the Alder Grove"), although the name is sometimes supposed to have derived from various British names for the Stour.
The Marlowe Theatre is also used for many musical performances, such as Don McLean in 2007, and Fairport Convention in 2008.
In 1413 Henry IV became the only sovereign to be buried at the cathedral.
Mary Tourtel, the creator of Rupert Bear, and the Victorian animal painter who taught her, Thomas Sidney Cooper.
St Thomas of Canterbury Church is the only Roman Catholic church in the city and contains relics of Thomas Becket.
The transmitter is based at the University of Kent, offering a good coverage of the city.
The Marlowe Theatre can be seen from many points throughout the city centre, considering it is the only modern and tall structure.
The London, Chatham, and Dover arrived in 1860; the competition and cost-cutting between the lines was resolved by merging them as the South Eastern and Chatham in 1899.
By the 17th century, Canterbury's population was 5,000; of whom 2,000 were French-speaking Protestant Huguenots, who had begun fleeing persecution and war in the Spanish Netherlands in the mid-16th century.
Ninety-five percent of residents were recorded as white; the largest minority group was recorded as Asian, at 1.8% of the population.
The Canterbury and Whitstable Railway, the world's first passenger railway, was opened in 1830; bankrupt by 1844, it was purchased by the South Eastern Railway, which connected the town to its larger network in 1846.
Population growth in Canterbury since 1901
The city's secondary grammar schools are Barton Court Grammar School, Simon Langton Grammar School for Boys and Simon Langton Girls' Grammar School; all of which in 2008 had over 93% of their pupils gain five or more GCSEs at grades A* to C, including English and maths.
The hourly National Express 007 coach service to and from Victoria Coach Station, which leaves from the main bus station, is typically scheduled to take two hours.
These wards have eleven of the fifty seats on the Canterbury City Council.
This makes the district the second largest economy in Kent.
The Old Synagogue, now the King's School Music Room, is one of only two Egyptian Revival synagogues still standing.
In 1647, during the English Civil War, riots broke out when Canterbury's puritan mayor banned church services on Christmas Day.
St Martin's Mill is the only surviving mill out of the six known to have stood in Canterbury.
In 1787 all the gates in the city wall, except for Westgate—the city jail—were demolished as a result of a commission that found them impeding to new coach travel.
St. Augustine established a school shortly after his arrival in Canterbury in 597, and it is from this that the King’s School grew.
Former Olympic gold medal winner Sean Kerly also a member of the club.
There are records of payments to the Waits starting from 1402, though they probably existed earlier than this.
In 2011 a third junction was constructed, linking the A28 to the northbound A2; this leaves just the A2 southbound exit missing, but since this would cut across the Park & Ride car park and meet the A28 at an already complicated junction, it is not expected to be added in the near term.
Canterbury used to be served by two other stations.
One of the earliest named composers associated with Canterbury Cathedral was Leonel Power, who was appointed master of the new Lady Chapel choir formed in 1438.
Chaucer College is an independent college for Japanese and other students within the campus of the University of Kent.
Between 1830 and 1900, the city's population grew from 15,000 to 24,000.
Despite being counted as one of the 28 cities of Sub-Roman Britain, it seems that after the Romans left Britain in 410 Durovernum Cantiacorum was abandoned except by a few farmers and gradually decayed.
CSR 97.4FM, an acronym for "Community Student Radio", broadcasts on 97.4FM from studios at both the University of Kent and Canterbury Christ Church University.
This pilgrimage provided the framework for Geoffrey Chaucer's 14th-century collection of stories, ''The Canterbury Tales''.
Independent secondary schools include Kent College, St Edmund's School and, what is the oldest school in England, the King's School.
The Roman Museum houses an ''in situ'' mosaic pavement dating from around 300 AD.
Notable alumni of the University of Kent include comedian Alan Davies, singer Ellie Goulding, newspaper editor Rosie Boycott, actor Tom Wilkinson, and Booker Prize winning novelist Kazuo Ishiguro, and actor Chris Simmons.
The University of Kent has hosted concerts by bands including Led Zeppelin and The Who.
The station is run by a collaboration of education establishments in the city including the two universities.
* Saint Anselm of Canterbury
This newspaper covers the East Kent area and has a circulation of about 25,000.
The Stour is navigable on the tidal section to Fordwich, although above this point canoes and other small craft can be used.
The ''Canterbury Extra'' is owned by the KM Group and also has a circulation of about 55,000.
The ''Canterbury Times'' is owned by the Daily Mail and General Trust and has a circulation of about 55,000.
A second wave of Danish attacks began in 991, and in 1011 the cathedral was burnt and Archbishop Alphege was killed in 1012.
Sudbury is still remembered annually by the Christmas mayoral procession to his tomb at Canterbury Cathedral.
Over the years, with band membership changes and new bands evolving, the term has been used to describe a musical style or subgenre, rather than a regional group of musicians.
In 1620 Robert Cushman negotiated the lease of the Mayflower at 59 Palace Street for the purpose of transporting the Pilgrims to America.
After the interval, the members sang catches and glees from the club's extensive music library (now deposited at the Cathedral Archives in Canterbury).
The Kings School in Canterbury is one of the top public schools in the United Kingdom, regularly featuring in the top ten most expensive school fees lists.
The previous incarnation of the club folded in 2001.
The city is on the River Stour or Great Stour, flowing from its source at Lenham north-east through Ashford to the English Channel at Sandwich.
Nearby villages include Rough Common, Sturry and Tyler Hill.
Many are still standing, including the "Old Weaver's House" used by the Huguenots.
The rest either had no religion, an alternative religion, or did not state their religion.
William immediately ordered a wooden motte-and-bailey castle to be built by the Roman city wall.
The oldest surviving Tudor theatre in Canterbury is now the Shakespeare, formerly known as Casey's.
Some very notable Canterbury bands were Soft Machine, Caravan, Matching Mole, Egg, Hatfield and the North, National Health, Gilgamesh, Soft Heap, Khan, Camel and In Cahoots.
It was built in 1817 and worked until 1890; it is now a house conversion.
Eurolines coaches run from the bus station to London and Paris.
''yourcanterbury'' is published by KOS Media, which also prints the popular county paper Kent on Sunday.
The old Marlowe Theatre was located in St Margaret's Street and housed a repertory theatre.
KMFM Canterbury broadcasts on 106FM.
Canterbury has a high per capita GDP, it is higher than the Kent average of $42,500 at $51,900 making it one of the wealthiest towns in the South East.
The Canterbury Festival takes place over two weeks in October each year in Canterbury and the surrounding towns.
During the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the city's priory, nunnery and three friaries were closed.
The ruins of the Norman Canterbury Castle and St Augustine's Abbey are both open to the public.
In November 2012, Rowan Williams was awarded Freedom of the City for his work as Archbishop of Canterbury between 2003 and 2012.
Another famous visitor was Mahatma Gandhi, who came to the city
Previously based in the city, the station's studios and presenters were moved to Ashford in 2008.
The City Council has invested heavily in Park and Ride systems around the City's outskirts and there are three sites: at Wincheap, New Dover Road and Sturry Road.
The other main road through Canterbury is the A28 from Ashford to Ramsgate and Margate.
Canterbury Hockey Club is one of the largest clubs in the country and both men's 1st XI and women's 1st XI compete in the England Hockey League.
A journey of pilgrims to his shrine served as the frame for Geoffrey Chaucer's 14th century classic ''The Canterbury Tales''.
The rest of the abbey was dismantled over the next 15&nbsp;years, although part of the site was converted to a palace.
During the Second World War, 10,445&nbsp;bombs dropped during 135 separate raids destroyed 731 homes and 296 other buildings in the city, including the missionary college and Simon Langton Girls' Grammar Schools, and 115&nbsp;people were killed.
The city has been occupied since Paleolithic times and served as the capital of the Celtic Cantiaci and Jute Kingdom of Kent.
The registered unemployment rate as of September 2011 stands at 5.7%.
Compared with the rest of England, the city had an above-average proportion of foreign-born residents, at around 12%.
The city's theatre and concert hall is the Marlowe Theatre named after Christopher Marlowe, who was born in the city in Elizabethan times.
Formerly called the University of Kent at Canterbury, it was founded in 1965, with a smaller campus opened in 2000 in the town of Chatham.
Canterbury Heritage Museum houses many exhibits - including the Rupert Bear Museum.
There is also a substantial student population, brought about by the presence of the University of Kent, Canterbury Christ Church University, the University for the Creative Arts, and the Girne American University&nbsp;Canterbury campus.
The town's new importance led to its revival, and trades developed in pottery, textiles, and leather.
A ring road was constructed in stages outside the city walls some time afterwards to alleviate growing traffic problems in the city centre, which was later pedestrianised.
Sporting activities for the public are provided at the Kingsmead Leisure Centre, which has a  swimming pool and a sports hall for football, basketball, and badminton.
At 10,000, Canterbury had the 10th largest population in England; by the early 16th century, the population had fallen to 3,000.
Between 1378 and 1402, the wall was virtually rebuilt, and new wall towers were added.
Canterbury is a popular tourist destination: consistently one of the most-visited cities in the United Kingdom, the city's economy is heavily reliant upon tourism.
Surviving structures from the Roman times include Queningate, a blocked gate in the city wall, and the Dane John Mound, once part of a Roman cemetery.
A modern early music group called The Canterbury Waits has revived the name.
Labour won 28.7% of the vote, Liberal Democrats 21.1%, the Green Party 3.2%, United Kingdom Independence Party 1.9%, and the Legalise Cannabis Alliance 0.7%.
Canterbury remains, however, a relatively small city in terms of geographical size, when compared with other British cities.
By 1770, the castle had fallen into disrepair, and many parts of it were demolished during the late 18th century and early 19th century.
Of those aged&nbsp;16–74 in the city, 27% had a higher education qualification, higher than the 20% national average.
The Dane John Gardens were built beside the mound in the 18th century, and a memorial was placed on the mound's summit.
There are several theatre groups based in Canterbury, including the University of Kent Students' Union's T24 Drama Society, The Canterbury Players and Kent Youth Theatre.
Canterbury has two railway stations, called Canterbury West and Canterbury East (despite both stations being west of the city centre:  is to the northwest and  is to the southwest).
The redeveloped Marlowe Theatre is (at the time of writing) the largest theatre in the region, offering touring productions and concerts.
In 1974 it lost its status as the smallest county borough in England, after the Local Government Act 1972, and came under the control of Kent County Council.
Canterbury is located at  (51.275, 1.087) in east Kent, about  east-southeast of London.
Canterbury also hosts the annual Lounge On The Farm festival in July, which mainly sees performances from rock, indie and dance artists.
Unemployment in the city has dropped significantly since 2001 owing to the opening of the Whitefriars shopping complex which introduced thousands of job opportunities.
were both born and lived in the city.
A windmill was on the mound between 1731 and 1839.
The Canterbury area has been inhabited since prehistoric times.
The company run local routes in the city as well as long distance services.
Lower Paleolithic axes, and Neolithic and Bronze Age pots have been found in the area.
There are plans to build direct access sliproads to and from the London directions of the A2 where it meets the congested Wincheap (at present there are only slips from the A28 to and from the direction of Dover) to allow more direct access to Canterbury from the A2, but these are currently subject to local discussion.
In 1448 Canterbury was granted a City Charter, which gave it a mayor and a high sheriff; the city still has a Lord Mayor and Sheriff.
Over the next 100&nbsp;years, an Anglo-Saxon community formed within the city walls, as Jutish refugees arrived, possibly intermarrying with the locals.
Both stations are operated by Southeastern.
The city's economy benefits mainly from significant economic projects such as the Canterbury Enterprise Hub, Lakesview International Business Park and the Whitefriars retail development.
The city became a county corporate in 1461, and later a county borough under the Local Government Act 1888.
After the murder of Archbishop Thomas Becket at the cathedral in 1170, Canterbury became one of the most notable towns in Europe, as pilgrims from all parts of Christendom came to visit his shrine.
In 672, the Synod of Hertford gave the see of Canterbury authority over the entire English Church.
Nelson Wellesley Fogarty (1871–1933) was the first Bishop of Damaraland (Namibia) from 1924 to 1933.
His final words were "Let's hear it for the band."
At the 2005 general election, the Conservatives won a majority of 7,471 and 44.4% of the vote in the Canterbury constituency.
In 1994 the tour passed through, and in 2007 it held the finish for Stage 1.
The medieval church of St Alphege became redundant in 1982 but had a new lease of life as the Canterbury Urban Studies Centre, later renamed the Canterbury Environment Centre; the building is used by the King's School.
(Medieval variants of the Roman name include ''Dorobernia'' and ''Dorovernia''.)
In 1504 the cathedral's main tower, the Bell Harry Tower, was completed, ending 400&nbsp;years of building.
It employed an orchestra to assist in performances in the first half of the evening.
Services from London Victoria stop at Canterbury East (journey time around 88 minutes) and continue to Dover.
The civil parish of Thanington Without is to the southwest; the rest of the city is unparished.
Tertiary sands overlain by London clay form St. Thomas's Hill and St. Stephen's Hill about a mile northwest of the city centre.
It changed its name to the ''Kentish Gazette'' in 1768 and is still being published, claiming to be the country's second oldest surviving newspaper.
Canterbury, along with Whitstable and Herne Bay, is in the City of Canterbury local government district.
Thomas Becket's shrine in the Cathedral was demolished and all the gold, silver and jewels were removed to the Tower of London, and Becket's images, name and feasts were obliterated throughout the kingdom, ending the pilgrimages.
During the 1970-80's the Canterbury 'Odeon' now the site of the 'New Marlow' played host to many of the Punk and new wave bands of the era including, The Clash, The Ramones, Blondie, Sham69, Magazine, XTC, Dr Feelgood, Elvis Costello and The Attractions, and The Stranglers.
The Romans rebuilt the city, with new streets in a grid pattern, a theatre, a temple, a forum, and public baths.
The programme includes musicals, drama, ballet, contemporary dance, classical orchestras, opera, children's shows, pantomime, stand-up comedy and concerts.
The grave of author Joseph Conrad, in Canterbury Cemetery at 32 Clifton Gardens, is a Grade II listed building.
He was baptised in the city's St George's Church, which was destroyed during the Second World War.
Residents of the city had an average age of 37.1&nbsp;years, younger than the 40.2 average of the district and the 38.6&nbsp;average for England.
The city's cathedral became a major focus of pilgrimage following the 1170 martyrdom of Thomas Becket.
In the late 3rd century, to defend against attack from barbarians, the Romans built an earth bank around the city and a wall with seven gates, which enclosed an area of .
in October 1931; he met Hewlett Johnson, then Dean of Canterbury.
, it had around 20,000 students.
Augustine thus became the first Archbishop of Canterbury.
The City receives BBC One South East and ITV Meridian from the main transmitter at Dover, and a local relay situated at Chartham.
The premiere of ''Murder in the Cathedral'' by T. S. Eliot took place at Canterbury Cathedral.
Of the 17,536 households, 35% were one-person households, 39% were couples, 10% were lone parents, and 15% other.
Canterbury received its own radio station in CTFM, now KMFM Canterbury, in 1997.
The group runs a special 'Unibus' service, with the buses running on 100% bio fuel from the city centre to the University of Kent.
During the First World War, a number of barracks and voluntary hospitals were set up around the city, and in 1917 a German bomber crash-landed near Broad Oak Road.
Services are held at the cathedral three or more times a day.
Occupied by the Jutes, it became known in Old English as '''Cantwareburh''' ("Kentish Stronghold"), which developed into its present name.
It is currently produced as a paid-for newspaper produced by the KM Group, based in nearby Whitstable.
Canterbury was the terminus of the Canterbury and Whitstable Railway (known locally as the Crab and Winkle line) which was a pioneer line, opened on 3 May 1830, and closed in 1953.
In 2000, during the redevelopment, a major archaeological project was undertaken by the Canterbury Archaeological Trust, known as the Big Dig, which was supported by Channel Four's ''Time Team''.
Canterbury City F.C.
