This reduces fishing to the basics – a pole and a few lures.
Provincetown, therefore, despite being the Cape's northernmost town, was the furthest "down" that one could travel.
Peter Pan Bus Lines also runs long distance service to T.F.
However, there is no tangible support of the presence of Norse voyagers in Cape Cod, and the view is not generally accepted by archaeologists or historians.
The storm knocked out power to tens of thousands of Cape Cod residents, some for up to two weeks.
The race is  long, which is a non-standard distance.
In the late twentieth century, as the Cape began drawing more vacationers and artists on retreat, the nautical nomenclature and potential confusion over directions have gradually been giving way to the simpler "Outer Cape", although the older terms are still used by some local residents.
Active freight service remains in the Upper Cape area in Sandwich and in Bourne, largely due to a trash transfer station located at Joint Base Cape Cod along the Bourne-Falmouth rail line.
The entire town of Provincetown, at the extreme tip of the Cape, is a spit consisting largely of deposited marine sediment that was eroded and transported from farther south along the shore.
(Theodore Roosevelt used Marconi's equipment for this transmission.)
Then, in 1923, an initial four teams met in Hyannis and started a successful federation along the lines of the present league.
Another specialized school is the Penikese Island School, located in the Elizabeth Islands off southwestern Cape Cod, which serves struggling and troubled teenage boys.
The Cape has upwards of sixty public beaches, many of which offer parking for non-residents for a daily fee (in summer).
Nearby, in what is now Eastham, they had their first encounter with Native Americans.
However, Cape Cod falls below the  threshold, as the warmest month, July, averages around .
Going further, some say Provincetown is the curled hand, or fist, with Race Point and Wood End at its knuckles, and Long Point at the fingertips.
Cape Cod was a landmark for early explorers.
The festival features local, regional, and national talent, along with food, arts, and family-friendly activities.
Farmers grazed their cattle on the grassy dunes of coastal Massachusetts, only to watch "in horror as the denuded sands 'walked' over richer lands, burying cultivated fields and fences."
The documentary ''Natives of the Narrowland'' (1993), narrated by actress Julie Harris, shows the history of the Wampanoag people through Cape Cod archaeological sites.
Most "Cape Codders" – residents of "The Cape" – refer to all land on the mainland side of the canal as "off-Cape."
As the ice began to melt, the sea began to rise.
Cape Cod is the home of the Cape Cod Cubs, a new junior league hockey team that is based out of Hyannis at the new community center being built on Bearses Way.
Barnstable High School also boasts one of the country's best high school drama clubs which were awarded a contract by Warner Bros. to create a documentary in webisode format based on their production of ''The Wizard of Oz''.
This is a park encompassing the site of the first two-way transoceanic radio transmission from the United States.
When so much of Earth's water was locked up in massive ice sheets, the sea level was lower.
When one traveled to the east, one went down the longitudinal scale (toward zero at Greenwich, England).
By about 18,000 years ago, the ice sheet had retreated past Cape Cod.
The two parallel road bridges are four miles apart, with the Bourne Bridge to the west, and the Sagamore to the east.
In 1961, a significant portion of this coastline, already slated for housing subdivisions, was made a part of the Cape Cod National Seashore by President John F. Kennedy.
It may have been the "Promontory of Vinland" mentioned by the Norse voyagers (985–1025).
Once every five or six years, a tropical storm, accompanied by very high and potentially damaging winds and heavy rain, will strike the region.
The final town to be established on the Cape was Bourne in 1884, breaking off from Sandwich.
This protection erodes the Cape's shoreline at the expense of its cliffs, while protecting towns from Fairhaven to Marshfield.
From 1988, Amtrak and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation increased service to a daily frequency, until service ended in 1996.
The settlers heated by fires, and it took 10 to 20 cords (40 to 80 m³) of wood to heat a home, so they cleared most of Cape Cod of timber early on.
The Bourne and Barnstable girls' volleyball teams are two of the best teams in the state and Barnstable is considered one of the best programs in the country.
Geologists say that due to erosion, the Cape will be completely submerged by the sea within several thousand years.
The Cape has nine amateur baseball franchises playing within Barnstable County in the Cape Cod Baseball League.
Giovanni da Verrazzano approached it from the south in 1524.
President Grover Cleveland maintained a summer home in the Gray Gables section of Bourne.
The present Cape Cod Canal was slowly developed from 1870 to 1914.
Additionally, prevailing fair weather winds (generally out of the southwest) have been used as the basis for directional descriptions by European settlers and their descendants in eastern North America.
This chapter is the first and only high school chapter in the world to be a part of this organization and has received much recognition within the Los Angeles broadcasting industry as a result.
Cape Cod contains three institutions of higher education.
There are 27 public, daily-fee golf courses and 15 private courses on Cape Cod.
MLB scouts frequent the games in the summer, looking for stars of the future.
For instance, much of Eastham was planted to wheat.
Indeed, there have been more than 1,000 wrecks between Truro and Wellfleet alone, including that of the ''Whydah Gally''.
The end of each summer is marked with the running of the Falmouth Road Race, held on the third Saturday in August.
* Lower Cape: Long Point Light, Wood End Light, Race Point Light, Highland Light, Nauset Light, Three Sisters of Nauset, Mayo Beach Light, Billingsgate Island Light, Chatham Light, Monomoy Point Light, Stage Harbor Light
In 1525, Portuguese explorer Estêvão Gomes called it Cabo de la Arenas while sailing under the Spanish crown.
On Cape Cod, sea level rose roughly  per millennium between 6,000 and 2,000 years ago.
Nauset, Barnstable, and Martha's Vineyard are also state hockey powerhouses.
The third is Bridgewater State University, which recently opened a satellite campus in South Yarmouth in January 2015.
In 1996, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts allowed the creation of a "Cape & Islands" registration plate.
In that analogy, the southern portion of the Cape represents the ''"upper arm"'', Chatham the elbow, and the north-south portion is the ''"lower arm"'', or forearm.
Soccer on Cape Cod is represented by the Cape Cod Crusaders, playing in the USL Premier Development League (PDL) based in Hyannis.
By 6,000 years ago, the sea level was high enough to start eroding the glacial deposits that the vanished continental ice sheet had left on Cape Cod.
While this destroys land in some places, it creates land elsewhere, most noticeably in marshes where sediment is deposited by flowing water.
Cape Cod's aquifer consists of six hydrologically independent lenses from which all the towns on the Cape obtain drinking water (except Falmouth, which got 43.5% of its 2015 water from Long Pond).
In 1916, a third attempt at league play barely got off the ground.
In 1602, Bartholomew Gosnold named the tip Cape Cod, the surviving term and the ninth oldest English place-name in the U.S. Samuel de Champlain charted its sand-silted harbors in 1606, and Henry Hudson landed there in 1609.
(The Cape's unique shape brought a new paradox along with the automobile and highway system: when driving "down Cape" on US Route 6 ''"eastbound"'', the final 30 miles from Orleans to Provincetown takes one in nearly every direction ''except'' east.)
The Highland Light, then  from the ocean, was moved  to the west, and the Nauset Light, a mere  from the ocean, was moved  west.
The Forbes family-owned Naushon Island was first purchased by John Murray Forbes.
Its elevation ranges from  at its highest point, at the top of Pine Hill, in the Bourne portion of Joint Base Cape Cod, down to sea level.
Walter Cronkite narrated a 17-minute documentary in 2005 about the history of the Chatham Station.
Provincetown at the tip of Cape Cod berths the original East Coast whale watching fleet (Dolphin Fleet) who patrol the Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary.
This erosion causes the washout of beaches and the destruction of the barrier islands; for example, the ocean broke through the barrier island at Chatham during Hurricane Bob in 1991, allowing waves and storm surges to hit the coast with no obstruction.
One is that the terms derive from early nautical navigation.
A channel from Massachusetts Bay to Buzzards Bay is shown on Southack's map of 1717.
Cape Cod's coastline has been called an "ocean graveyard" from Chatham to Provincetown, a mere fifty-mile stretch of sea containing over 3,000 shipwrecks, due to its dangerously hidden and constantly moving shoals located just off-shore.
Bed and breakfasts or vacation houses are often used for lodging.
Cape Cod is connected to the mainland by a pair of canal-spanning highway bridges, the Bourne and Sagamore that were constructed in the 1930s (replacing a 1912 drawbridge).
The town of Barnstable has Trinity Christian Academy, Cape Cod Academy, St. Francis Xavier Preparatory School, and Pope John Paul II High School.
Many businesses specifically target summer visitors, although the "on season" has been expanding somewhat in recent years due to Indian Summer, reduced lodging rates, the number of people visiting the Cape after Labor Day who have no school-age children, and the elderly—reducing the true "off season" to six or seven months.
Finally, in 1963, the league became a wholly summer collegiate circuit sanctioned by the National Collegiate Athletic Association with some Major Leagues financial support.
By voter registration numbers, Democrats outnumber Republicans by less in the three counties than in the whole of Massachusetts, to varying degrees.
Beaches—both public and private—are easily accessible.
Cape Cod in particular is a popular retirement area; 27.8% of the population of Barnstable County is 65 years old or older., and the average age of residents is the highest of any area in New England.
Bourne won the state title in 2003 and 2007, and Barnstable has won 12 Division 1 state titles in the past 13 years and has won the state title the three years in a row (2011–2013).
Green Airport in Providence, Rhode Island; New York City; and service between Logan Airport, Boston South Station, and Woods Hole.
Strong Category 2 storms, such as Hurricane Carol of 1954 and Hurricane Bob of 1991 also caused considerable damage.
In 1974, the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribal Council was formed to articulate the concerns of those with Native American ancestry.
As the years passed, local players were moved aside by outside college stars.
Consequently, many subtropical indicator plant species typically found in more southerly latitudes are grown there, including ''Camellias'', ''Ilex opaca'', ''Magnolia grandiflora'' and ''Albizia julibrissin''.
The second is Massachusetts Maritime Academy in the village of Buzzards Bay.
Indeed, most agencies, including the Cape Cod Commission and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), treat the Cape as an island with regard to disaster preparedness, groundwater management, and the like.
All of the other towns elect a 5-member Board of Selectmen as the executive policy-setting board, and utilize Town Meetings as their legislative body.
Three years later - in 1913 - another Cape Cod Baseball League organized.
One of the biggest barrier islands in the world, Cape Cod shields much of the Massachusetts coastline from North Atlantic storm waves.
Mashpee High School is home to the Mashpee Chapter of SMPTE, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers.
In 2011, four high school football teams from the Cape won state championships in their respective divisions; Dennis-Yarmouth (Division 2A), Bourne (Division 3A), Mashpee (Division 4), and Nantucket (Division 5).
Barnstable and Harwich have each sent multiple players to Division 1 colleges for baseball.
Several prominent families have established compounds or estates on the larger islands, making these islands some of the wealthiest resorts in the Northeast, yet they retain much of the early merchant trading and whaling culture.
Each summer, the Naukabout Music Festival is held at the Barnstable County Fair Grounds located in East Falmouth, typically during the first weekend of August.
No longer in "official" use over the ensuing decades, the name came to mean all of the land east of the Manomet and Scusset rivers – essentially along the line that became the Cape Cod Canal.
The Atlantic Ocean is to the east of Cape Cod, and to the southwest of the Cape is Buzzards Bay.
Two highway bridges cross the Cape Cod Canal: the Sagamore Bridge and the Bourne Bridge.
The water surrounding Cape Cod moderates winter temperatures nearly enough to extend the humid subtropical climate zone to what could be its northernmost limit in eastern North America, as the majority of Cape Cod is in USDA hardiness zone 7a.
They helped the Pilgrims, who arrived in the fall of 1620, survive at their new Plymouth Colony.
They planted familiar crops, but these were unsuited to Cape Cod's thin, glacially derived soils.
The Cape developed as a large fishing and whaling center as a result, and also because of its geographic position.
In 1914, he began construction of a new transatlantic wireless receiver station in Chatham and a companion transmitter station in Marion.
From mid June until October, additional local routes are added in Falmouth and Provincetown.
The February 2013 nor'easter produced winds in excess of  and dropped over  of snow on some parts of Cape Cod.
Most of Cape Cod's lighthouses are operated by the U.S. Coast Guard, with some exceptions such as the Nauset Light, which was relinquished by the Coast Guard in 1996 and is now operated maintained by the Nauset Light Preservation Society under the auspices of Cape Cod National Seashore.
It draws about 10,000 runners to the Cape and showcases the finest runners in the world (mainly for the large purse that the race is able to offer).
He named Martha's Vineyard Claudia, after Claude of France, the wife of Francis I of France.
He was killed later in the same journey, and is said to have been returned to this spot for burial.
The highest temperature ever recorded on Cape Cod was  in Provincetown, and the lowest temperature ever was  in Barnstable.
Sturgis offers the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme in their junior and senior year and is open to students from as far as Plymouth.
In 1976 the Cape schools and districts petitioned the Massachusetts Legislature to create an educational collaborative, the Cape Cod Collaborative, to facilitate cooperation and efficiency in providing gifted and talented, and special needs programs.
This came to be known as a Cape Cod style lighthouse, yet today, the only fully intact specimens are on the West Coast.
The bridges form a bottleneck, resulting in traffic backups of several miles during the tourist season - especially going on-cape at the beginning of the weekend and off-cape at the end of the weekend.
While the bar in Falmouth Heights is now the British Beer Company, the race still starts at the front door of the Cap'n Kidd in Woods Hole and now finishes at the beach in Falmouth Heights.
Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority operates a year-round public bus system comprising three long distance routes and a local bus in Hyannis and Barnstable Village.
That is, one would be traveling "down wind" to the east with a westerly wind at one's back.
Dunes on the outer Cape became more common, and many harbors filled in with eroded soils.
The town is home to the Cape's most attended art museum, the Provincetown Art Association and Museum.
Improved rail transportation made the towns of the Upper Cape accessible to Bostonians, such as Bourne and Falmouth.
CCRTA also operates Barnstable County's ADA-required paratransit (dial-a-ride) service, under the name "B-Bus."
Contamination with industrial chemicals and pharmaceutical drugs from septic systems is a concern.
Initially, sea level rose quickly, about  per 1,000 years, but then the rate declined.
The Cape's fifteen towns developed slowly, aside from Barnstable (1639), Sandwich (1637), and Yarmouth (1639).
Another bike path, the Shining Sea Bikeway, was built over abandoned tracks between Woods Hole and Falmouth in 1975, and in 2008 the  rail line between Falmouth and North Falmouth was removed and the right-of-way converted into an extension of the Shining Sea Bikeway.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the Northeastern mercantile elite built many large, shingled "cottages" along Buzzards Bay.
There are many theories to explain the apparent paradox.
A stairway to the lantern room was accessible only from the top floor of the house.
The creation of the canal separated the majority of the peninsula from the mainland, effectively turning it into an island.
Much of the east-facing Atlantic seacoast of Cape Cod consists of wide, sandy beaches.
Barnstable, the most populated municipality on Cape Cod, is the only one to have adopted a city form of government, whose legislative body is an elected 13-member council.
This region is historically and collectively known by naturalists as the Outer Lands.
The Cape is home to the Cape Cod Frenzy, a team in the American Basketball Association.
Each summer, in cooperation with the Massachusetts Maritime Academy, it operates a gifted and talented science based program for students from around the Cape.
In 1986, Amtrak operated a seasonal service in the summer from New York City to Hyannis called the ''Cape Codder''.
One is the Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Harwich, and the other is Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical High School in Bourne.
Limited service is also provided to Buzzards Bay and from there to North Falmouth.
By 1950, forests had recovered to an extent not seen since the 18th century.
The Cape Cod Bay side of the Cape, from Sandwich to Provincetown, has numerous harbors, saltwater creeks, and shoals that hold bait fish and attract the larger game fish, such as striped bass, bluefish and bluefin tuna.
Cape Cod extends  into the Atlantic Ocean, with a breadth of between , and covers more than  of shoreline.
Harwich has also won three state titles since 1996 (1996, 2006, 2007).
Most of Cape Cod's geological history involves the advance and retreat of the Laurentide ice sheet in the late Pleistocene geological era and the subsequent changes in sea level.
The paucity of vegetation was worsened by the raising of merino sheep that reached its peak in New England around 1840.
It remained that way for 125 years, until the "Precinct of Cape Cod" was incorporated as the Town of Provincetown.
In the late 20th century, tourists and owners of second homes began visiting the Cape more and more in the spring and fall, softening the definition of the high season and expanding it somewhat.
Highland Light (or Cape Cod Light) is the oldest and tallest of these, and remains as one of a number of working lighthouses on Cape Cod and the Islands.
Geologically speaking, Cape Cod is quite young, having been laid down some 16,000 to 20,000 years ago.
Consequently, the sediment and sand from the beaches is being washed away and deposited elsewhere.
Precipitation on Cape Cod and the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket is the lowest in the New England region, averaging slightly less than  a year (most parts of New England average ).
This is due to storm systems which move across western areas, building up in mountainous regions, and dissipating before reaching the coast where the land has leveled out.
Along with the Cape Cod Baseball League and the new Junior Hockey League team, the Cape Cod Islanders, many high school players are being recruited as well.
They understood the principles of sustainable forest management, and were known to light controlled fires to keep the underbrush in check.
About once every 11 or 12 years a hurricane brings damaging winds and storm surges to the region.
The best known colloquial explanation, however, is that the shape of the peninsula as it appears on maps and charts resembles that of a human arm.
Beginning in 1797, lighthouses were erected to serve as beacons to warn ships of the danger.
Truro's bayside beaches used to be a petrified forest, before it became a beach.
High school football teams on the Cape have also recently become successful and the region has also become a hot-spot for college recruiting.
The early industrial revolution occurred through much of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, but it mostly bypassed Cape Cod due to a lack of significant water power in the area.
Other notable storms include the Gale of 1815, which would likely have been rated a strong hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale, and the so-called "Perfect Storm" of October 31, 1991.
The campus will also offer Certificate Programs in Business and Social Work.
In 1996, both the Highland Light and Nauset Light were moved because they were each at risk of being lost to the encroaching seas.
Cape Cod's climate is also notorious for a delayed spring season, being surrounded by an ocean which is still cold from the winter; however, it is also known for an exceptionally mild fall season (Indian summer), thanks to the ocean remaining warm from the summer.
Notable Category 1 storms include Hurricane Edna of 1954 (shortly following Hurricane Carol) and Hurricane Donna of 1960, also Hurricane Irene in 2011, and Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
One of the most popular fishing spots on the East Coast is the Cape Cod Canal.
However, Like other smaller Massachusetts cities, Barnstable retained its "Town of Barnstable" moniker.
It ranked 28th in the country and 1st in the state of Massachusetts in the 2009 edition and ranked 43rd and 55th in the 2008 and 2007 edition, respectively.
* Upper Cape: Nobska Light, Wing's Neck Light (privately owned), and Cleveland Ledge Light (also private).
Exceptions to this include Dennis-Yarmouth Regional High School located in Yarmouth, which serves the two towns in its name, Monomoy Regional High School, located in Harwich and serving that town as well as Chatham, and Nauset Regional High School in Eastham, which serves the towns of Brewster, Orleans, Eastham, Wellfleet, Truro, and Provincetown.
Riverview School is located in East Sandwich and is a special co-ed boarding school which serves students as old as 22 who have learning disabilities.
It was protected from private development and preserved for public use.
The Cape Cod Canal, completed in 1916, connects Buzzards Bay to Cape Cod Bay; its creation shortened the trade route between New York and Boston by .
Cape Cod has been the home of the Wampanoag Native American people for many centuries.
They petitioned the federal government in 1975 and again in 1990 for official recognition of the Mashpee Wampanoag as a tribe.
To the south of Cape Cod lie Nantucket Sound; Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard, both large islands; and the mostly privately owned Elizabeth Islands.
To this day, on nearby Martha's Vineyard, "Up Island" is the western section and "Down Island" is to the east.
By 1800, much of Cape Cod's firewood had to be transported by boat from Maine.
The canal cuts  roughly across the base of the peninsula, though small portions of the Cape Cod towns of Bourne and Sandwich lie on the mainland side of the canal.
Many kettle ponds – clear, cold lakes – were formed and remain on Cape Cod as a result of the receding glacier.
Captain John Smith noted it on his map of 1614, and at last the Pilgrims entered the "Cape Harbor" and – contrary to the popular myth of Plymouth Rock – made their first landing near present-day Provincetown on November 11, 1620.
Because of the influence of the Atlantic Ocean, temperatures are typically a few degrees cooler in the summer and a few degrees warmer in the winter.
Therefore, the climate may be better characterized as either a maritime climate or a humid continental climate (particularly on the northern coast of the upper and mid cape, which is somewhat sheltered from the cooler onshore wind to the south).
The name "Cape Cod", as it was first used in 1602, applied only to the very tip of the peninsula.
The Cape also contains two vocational high schools.
Those sediments that instead moved south created the islands and shoals of Monomoy.
Cape Cod and the Islands are part of a continuous archipelagic region consisting of a thin line of islands stretching west to include Long Island, in New York.
Those reworked sediments that moved north went to the tip of Cape Cod.
Many of Cape Cod's earliest lighthouses featured a light tower that was attached directly to – and centered on the roof of – the keeper's dwelling.
By roughly 15,000 years ago, it had retreated past southern New England.
The service is primarily tourist-oriented and includes a dinner train over a scenic route between Hyannis and the Cape Cod Canal lasting about 2½ hours round trip.
However, the first Cape Cod League formed in Sandwich in 1910.
So while other parts of the Cape have dwindled from the action of the waves, these parts of the Cape have grown through the deposition of sediment in just the last 6,000 years.
The federal government purchased it in 1928.
Massachusetts Maritime Academy is the oldest continuously operating maritime college in the United States.
Other notable residents of Cape Cod have included actress Julie Harris, US Supreme Court justice Louis Brandeis, figure skater Todd Eldredge, composer and radio personality Canary Burton, and novelists Norman Mailer and Kurt Vonnegut.
Provincetown was a group of huts until the 18th century.
Although Cape Cod's weather is typically more moderate than inland locations, there have been occasions where Cape Cod has dealt with the brunt of extreme weather situations (such as the Blizzard of 2005 and Hurricane Bob).
Barnstable High School is the largest high school and is known for its girls' volleyball team which have been state champions a total of 12 times.
One of the publicly accessible Elizabeths is the southernmost island in the chain, Cuttyhunk, with a year-round population of 52 people.
