The port is a hub for ships in the southern Atlantic: it is located along one of the busiest shipping corridors in the world.
Since 1994, the city has struggled with problems such as drugs, a surge in violent drug-related crime and more recently gang violence.
There are over 7,000 species in cultivation at Kirstenbosch, including many rare and threatened species of the Cape Floristic Region.
The Cape Town International Airport was among the winners of the World Travel Awards for being Africa's leading airport.
Cape Town has a well-developed higher system of public universities.
Cape Town's most popular sports by participation are cricket, association football, swimming, and rugby union.
It has over 21,000 students and has an MBA programme that is ranked 51st by the Financial Times in 2006.
Cape Town was also the location of several of the matches of the FIFA 2010 World Cup including a semi-final, held in South Africa.
Until recently quite rural, the population of the area is growing quickly as new coastal developments proliferate and larger plots are subdivided to provide more compact housing.
There are also many private schools, both religious and secular, in Cape Town.
The primary focus of Cape Town Tourism is to represent Cape Town as a tourist destination.
Cape Town is located at latitude 33.55° S (approx.
Cape Town International Airport serves both domestic and international flights.
Of those residents who were asked about their first language, 35.7% spoke Afrikaans, 29.8% spoke Xhosa and 28.4% spoke English.
File:Cape of good hope.JPG|Cape of Good Hope
They take part in the Supersport and Standard Bank Cup Series.
It becomes a multiple-carriageway at-grade road from the intersection with  the R44 onwards.
In addition, Western Province players (along with some from Wellington's Boland Cavaliers) comprise the Stormers in the Southern Hemisphere's Super Rugby competition.
Britain captured Cape Town in 1795, but the Cape was returned to the Dutch by treaty in 1803.
Unfortunately, rapid population growth and urban sprawl has covered much of these ecosystems with development.
At the same time, the economy has surged to unprecedented levels due to the boom in the tourism and the real estate industries.
Cape Town has direct flights to most cities in South Africa as well as a number of international destinations.
However, the M3 splits from the N2 and runs to the south along the eastern slopes of Table Mountain, connecting the City Bowl with Muizenberg.
The main vegetation type is endangered Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos,  but critically endangered Peninsula Granite Fynbos, Peninsula Shale Renosterveld and Afromontane forest occur in smaller portions on the mountain.
This area includes the neighbourhoods of Mitchell's Plain, Athlone,  Elsie's River, Hanover Park, Bishop Lavis, Manenberg, Strandfontein, Gugulethu, Nyanga, Langa, and Khayelitsha.
Cape Town receives 3,100 hours of sunshine per year.
Cape Town suffers from the worst traffic congestion in South Africa.
From the 1950s the area became home to people the apartheid government designated as non-White and has been described by some as 'Apartheid's dumping ground'.
The most notable companies headquartered in the city are food and fashion retailer Woolworths, supermarket chain Pick n Pay Stores and Shoprite, New Clicks Holdings Limited, fashion retailer Foschini Group, isp MWEB, Mediclinic International,etv, multi-national mass media giant Naspers, and financial services giant Sanlam.
The Cape Town region generally, with its Mediterranean climate, extensive coastline, rugged mountain ranges, coastal plains, inland valleys and semi-desert fringes, has much in common with Southern California.
The service use high floor articulated and standard size buses in dedicated busways, low floor articulated and standard size buses on the N2 Express service, and smaller 9m Optare buses in suburban and inner city areas.
This enormous species diversity is mainly because the city is uniquely located at the convergence point of several different soil types and micro-climates.
Cape Town quickly outgrew its original purpose as the first European outpost at the Castle of Good Hope, becoming the economic and cultural hub of the Cape Colony.
The Northern Suburbs are Afrikaans-speaking, and include Bellville, Kanonberg, Bothasig, Brooklyn, Burgundy Estate, Durbanville, Edgemead, Elsie's River, Factreton, Goodwood, Kensington, Maitland, Monte Vista, Panorama, Parow, Richwood, Thornton, Table View, and Welgemoed.
The Helderberg consists of Somerset West, Strand, Gordons Bay and a few other towns.
The seven seated Toyota Avanza are the most popular with larger Taxi companies.
The M5 splits from the N1 further east than the M3, and links the Cape Flats to the CBD.
In the late 16th century, Portuguese, French, Danish, Dutch and English ships regularly stopped over in Table Bay en route to the Indies.
The city is famous for its harbour, for its natural setting in the Cape Floristic Region, as well as for such well-known landmarks as Table Mountain and Cape Point.
The team is the result of an amalgamation of the Western Province Cricket and Boland Cricket teams.
In 1910, Britain established the Union of South Africa, which unified the Cape Colony with the two defeated Boer Republics and the British colony of Natal.
Except for a section between Rondebosch and Newlands that has at-grade intersections, this route is a highway.
It is home to a total of 19 different vegetation types, of which several are completely endemic to the city and occur nowhere else in the world.
Cape Town has Olympic aspirations: in 1996, Cape Town was one of the five candidate cities shortlisted by the IOC to launch official candidatures to host the 2004 Summer Olympics.
The city has several well-known natural features that attract tourists, most notably Table Mountain, which forms a large part of the Table Mountain National Park and is the back end of the City Bowl.
37.9% have a computer, and 49.3% have access to the Internet (either through a computer or a cellphone).
Cape Point is recognised as the dramatic headland at the end of the Cape Peninsula.
These teams are Ajax Cape Town, which formed as a result of the 1999 amalgamation of the Seven Stars and the Cape Town Spurs and newly promoted Chippa United.
Total annual rainfall in the city averages .
The Atlantic Seaboard lies west of Cape Town and Table Mountain, and is characterised by its beaches, cliffs, promenade and hillside communities.
Independent News and Media publishes the major English language papers in the city, the ''Cape Argus'' and the ''Cape Times''.
Cape Town is served by three public universities: the University of Cape Town (UCT), the University of the Western Cape (UWC) and the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT).
The new university offers education primarily in English, although one may take courses in any of South Africa's official languages.
The SABC (South African Broadcasting Corporation) has a small presence in the city, with satellite studios located at Sea Point.
''Vukani'', based in the Cape Flats, is published in Xhosa.
In cricket, the Cape Cobras represent Cape Town at the Newlands Cricket Ground.
Nobel Square in the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront features statues of South Africa's four Nobel Peace Prize winners: Albert Luthuli, Desmond Tutu, F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela.
With the high demand for transport by the working class of South Africa, minibus taxis are often filled over their legal passenger allowance.
It is a highway as far as the interchange with the M68 at Ottery, before continuing as an at-grade road.
The N7 originates from the N1 at Wingfield Interchange near Edgemead.
94.9% of households have regular refuse collection service.
Several companies offer tours of the Cape Flats, a mostly Coloured township, and Khayelitsha, a mostly black township.
In the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814, Cape Town was permanently ceded to Britain.
The Koeberg Nuclear Power Station is located within this area and maximum housing density regulations are enforced in much of the area surrounding the nuclear plant.
The Cape Town Cycle Tour is the world's largest individually timed cycle raceand the first event outside Europe to be included in the International Cycling Union's Golden Bike Series.
Cape Town was home to many leaders of the anti-apartheid movement.
In the five years preceding 2014 Cape Town GDP grew at an average of 3.7% a year.
In 2004 this Region, including Kirstenbosch, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
In 2011 the city's GDP was US$56.8&nbsp;billion with a GDP per capita of US$15,721.
These geographic features in part divide the city into several commonly known groupings of suburbs (equivalent to districts outside South Africa), many of which developed historically together and share common attributes of language and culture.
It is also the top-ranked university in Africa, being the only African university to make the world's Top 200 university list at number 146.
Much of the produce is handled through the Port of Cape Town or Cape Town International Airport.
Minibuses are generally owned and operated in fleets.
Other notable companies include Belron (vehicle glass repair and replacement group operating worldwide), CapeRay (develops, manufactures and supplies medical imaging equipment for the diagnosis of breast cancer), Ceres Fruit Juices (produces fruit juice and other fruit based products), Coronation Fund Managers (third-party fund management company), ICS (was one of the largest meat processing and distribution companies in the world), Vida e Caffè (chain of coffee retailers), Capitec Bank (commercial bank in the Republic of South Africa).
Simon's Town Harbour on the False Bay coast of the Cape Peninsula is the main operational base of the South African Navy.
This provincial department is divided into seven districts; four of these are "Metropole" districtsMetropole Central, North, South, and Eastwhich cover various areas of the city.
The Western Cape is an important tourist region in South Africa; the tourism industry accounts for 9.8% of the GDP of the province and employs 9.6% of the province's workforce.
There are about a thousand-meter taxis in Cape Town.
Most are at-grade roads.
The public Cape Peninsula University of Technology was formed on 1 January 2005, when two separate institutions – Cape Technikon and Peninsula Technikon – were merged.
The City of Cape Town works closely with Cape Town Tourism to promote the city both locally and internationally.
Little is known of the history of the region's first residents, since there is no written history from the area before it was first mentioned by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias in 1486.
Due to the city's unique geography, it is possible to visit several different beaches in the same day, each with a different setting and atmosphere.
In 2014, Cape Town was named the best place in the world to visit by both the American ''New York Times'' and the British ''Daily Telegraph''.
24.8% of the population is under the age of 15, while 5.5% is 65 or older.
It is the second most populous urban area in South Africa, after Johannesburg.
This is due to its good climate, natural setting, and well-developed infrastructure.
Cape Dutch style, which combines the architectural traditions of the Netherlands, Germany, France and Indonesia, is most visible in Constantia, the old government buildings in the Central Business District, and along Long Street.
Cape Town has also become a popular study abroad destination for many international college students.
Whale watching is popular amongst tourists: southern right whales and humpback whales are seen off the coast during the breeding season (August to November) and Bryde's whales and killer whale can be seen any time of the year.
Located in a CI Biodiversity hotspot as well as the unique Cape Floristic Region, the city of Cape Town has one of the highest levels of biodiversity of any equivalent area in the world.
The R310 originates from Muizenberg and runs along the coast, to the south of Mitchell's Plain and Khayelitsha, before veering north-east, crossing the N2 west of Macassar, and exiting the metro heading to Stellenbosch.
An older at-grade road, the R101, runs parallel to the N1 initially, before veering south at Bellville, to join the N2 at Somerset West via the suburbs of Kuils River and Eerste River.
In 2010, over 1.5&nbsp;million international tourists visited the area.
Golden Arrow Bus Services operates scheduled bus services throughout the Cape Town metropolitan area.
It was built in 1796 and restored in 1935 and again in 1995.
Cape Town is also one terminus of the luxury tourist-oriented Blue Train as well as the five-star Rovos Rail.
The discovery of diamonds in Griqualand West in 1867, and the Witwatersrand Gold Rush in 1886, prompted a flood of immigrants to South Africa.
The annual Cape Town Minstrel Carnival, also known by its Afrikaans name of ''Kaapse Klopse'', is a large minstrel festival held annually on 2 January or ''"Tweede Nuwe Jaar"'' (Afrikaans: Second New Year).
It is possible to either drive or hike up Signal Hill for closer views of the City Bowl and Table Mountain.
Its vegetation consists predominantly of several different types of the unique and rich Cape Fynbos.
Meter cabs are mostly used by tourists and are safer to use than minibus taxis.
the time between buses on the same route) range from 3 mins to 20 mins in peak times to 60 minutes during quiet off-peak periods.
Surfing is popular and the city hosts the Red Bull Big Wave Africa surfing competition every year.
File:Table Mountain from harbour.jpg|Table Mountain from the harbour
A thin strip of cloud, known colloquially as the "tablecloth", sometimes forms on top of the mountain.
Public primary and secondary schools in Cape Town are run by the Western Cape Education Department.
As a proportion of GDP the agriculture and manufacturing sectors have declined whilst finance, business services, transport and logistics have grown reflecting the growth in specialised services sectors of the local economy.
Water temperatures range greatly, between  on the Atlantic Seaboard, to over  in False Bay.
Other renovations include several large new parking garages, a revamped domestic departure terminal, a new Bus Rapid Transit system station and a new double-decker road system.
File:Cape-Town-taxi-rank.jpg|Taxi rank above Cape Town railway station
Cape Town was also a host city to the 2010 FIFA World Cup from 11 June to 11 July 2010, further enhancing its profile as a major events city.
In summer, False Bay water averages slightly over , with  a common high.
Their rates vary from R8 per kilometre to about R15 per kilometre.
The Eastern Suburbs lie southeast of the Afrikaans-speaking neighbourhoods in the Northern Suburbs, beyond the airport, and notably are the site of several new subsidized housing projects and are also Afrikaans-speaking.
In rugby union, Cape Town is the home of the Western Province side, who play at Newlands Stadium and compete in the Currie Cup.
The average annual household income is R161,762.
Bokradio (98.9&nbsp;MHz FM) is an Afrikaans music station.
Cape Town, like most South African cities, uses Metropolitan or "M" routes for important intra-city routes, a layer below National (N) roads and Regional (R) routes.
The district takes its name from the imposing Helderberg Mountain, which is Afrikaans for "clear mountain", and culminates at a height of 1137m as The Dome.
File:Cape Town N2.jpg|N2 highway, entering the City Bowl
In 2004, it handled 3,161 ships and 9.2&nbsp;million tonnes of cargo.
Tiny remnants of critically endangered or near extinct plants often survive on road sides, pavements and sports fields.
School students from Langa, Gugulethu and Nyanga in Cape Town reacted to the news of protests against Bantu Education in Soweto in June 1976 and organised gatherings and marches which were met with resistance from the police.
While the Atlantic Seaboard averages annual water temperatures barely above that of coastal California around , the False Bay coast is much warmer, averaging between  annually.
Most major shipbuilding companies have offices and manufacturing locations in Cape Town.
The Cape Peninsula, which lies entirely within the city of Cape Town, has the highest concentration of threatened species of any continental area of equivalent size in the world.
As the seat of the National Parliament it is also the legislative capital of the country.
On Robben Island, a former penitentiary island  from the city, many famous political prisoners were held for years.
Suffrage was established according to the non-racial, but sexist Cape Qualified Franchise.
The city has several notable cultural attractions.
Reaching the top of the mountain can be achieved either by hiking up, or by taking the Table Mountain Cableway.
This is similar to water temperatures in much of the Northern Mediterranean (for example Nice).
With the highest number of successful Information Technology companies in Africa, Cape Town is an important centre for the industry on the continent.
Conflicts between the Boer republics in the interior and the British colonial government resulted in the Second Boer War of 1899–1902, which Britain won.
Association football, which is better known as ''soccer'' in South Africa, is also popular.
Cape Town Tourism receives a portion of its funding from the City of Cape Town while the remainder is made up of membership fees and own-generated funds.
It connects Cape Town to Paarl and the major cities in the interior - Bloemfontein, Johannesburg, Pretoria and Zimbabwe.
Constantia not only offers a luscious suburban living lifestyle, but also attracts tourists for its well known wine farms and Cape Dutch architecture.
There are over 70 peaks above  within Cape Town's official city limits.
Large companies that operate fleets of cabs can be reached by phone and are cheaper than the single operators that apply for hire from taxi ranks and  Victoria and Alfred Waterfront.
e.tv has a greater presence, with a large complex located at Longkloof Studios in Gardens.
Two clubs from Cape Town play in the Premier Soccer League (PSL), South Africa's premier league.
Cape Town's urban geography is influenced by the contours of Table Mountain, its surrounding peaks, the Durbanville Hills, and the expansive lowland region known as the Cape Flats.
The Southern Suburbs hug along the eastern slopes of Table Mountain, southeast of the city centre.
Of those aged between 5 and 25, 67.8% are attending an educational institution.
, it is the 10th most populous city in Africa and home to 64% of the Western Cape's population.
The Metrorail network consists of 96 stations throughout the suburbs and outskirts of Cape Town.
Minibus taxis are the standard form of transport for the majority of the population who cannot afford private vehicles.
91.4% of households have a flush toilet or chemical toilet, while 4.5% still use a bucket toilet.
In November 2013, Cape Town was voted the best global city in ''The Daily Telegraph'''s annual Travel Awards.
Metrorail operates a commuter rail service in Cape Town and the surrounding area.
The N1 runs ENE as a highway through Edgemead, Parow, Bellville, and Brackenfell.
Though the Cape's water ranges from cold to mild, the difference between the two sides of the city is dramatic.
Many of these residents were relocated to the Cape Flats and Lavender Hill.
This is due in large part to substantial financial contributions made to these institutions by both the public and private sector.
This wind is caused by a high-pressure system which sits in the South Atlantic to the west of Cape Town, known as the South Atlantic High.
File:MostertsMill.jpg|Mostert's Mill
The city is divided into 111 electoral wards; each ward directly elects one member of the council, whilst the other 110 councillors are elected by a system of party-list proportional representation.
Cape Town has a long tradition as a port city.
Growing at an annual rate of 8.5% and an estimated worth of R77&nbsp;billion in 2010 nationwide the IT industry in Cape Town is becoming increasingly important to the city's economy.
In the local government elections of 18 May 2011, the Democratic Alliance (DA) won an outright majority, taking 135 of the 221 council seats.
Boulders Beach near Simon's Town is known for its colony of African penguins.
Formerly multi-racial suburbs of Cape Town were either purged of unlawful residents or demolished.
His speech heralded the beginning of a new era for the country, and the first democratic election, was held four years later, on 27 April 1994.
The Executive Mayor and Executive Deputy Mayor are chosen by the city council.
The city is a manufacturing base for several multi-national companies including, Johnson & Johnson, GlaxoSmithKline, Levi Strauss & Co., Adidas, Bokomo Foods, and Nampak.
In one of the most famous moments marking the end of apartheid, Nelson Mandela made his first public speech since his imprisonment,  from the balcony of Cape Town City Hall hours after being released on 11 February 1990.
Many of the city's suburbs lie on the large plain called the Cape Flats, which extends over  to the east and joins the peninsula to the mainland.
The only complete windmill in South Africa is Mostert's Mill, Mowbray.
Naspers, the largest media conglomerate in South Africa, publishes ''Die Burger'', the major Afrikaans language paper.
It runs north, initially as a highway, but becoming an at-grade road from the  intersection with the M5 (Potsdam Rd) onwards.
West of Wynberg lies Constantia which, in addition to being a wealthy neighbourhood, is a notable wine-growing region within the City of Cape Town.
82.1% of households have a refrigerator, 87.3% have a television and 70.1% have a radio.
Table Mountain has an unusually rich biodiversity.
The ''Shosholoza Meyl'' is the passenger rail operations of Spoornet and operates two long-distance passenger rail services from Cape Town: a daily service to and from Johannesburg via Kimberley and a weekly service to and from Durban via Kimberley, Bloemfontein and Pietermaritzburg.
Competing teams of minstrels parade in brightly coloured costumes, performing Cape Jazz, either carrying colourful umbrellas or playing an array of musical instruments.
The airport's cargo facilities are also being expanded and several large empty lots are being developed into office space and hotels.
The Atlantic Seaboard has some of the most expensive real estate in South Africa particularly on Nettleton and Clifton Roads in Clifton, Ocean View Drive and St Leon Avenue in Bantry Bay, Theresa Avenue in Bakoven and Fishermans Bend in Llandudno.
The area includes the central business district of Cape Town, the harbour, the Company's Garden, and the residential suburbs of De Waterkant, Devil's Peak, District Six, Zonnebloem, Gardens, Bo-Kaap, Higgovale, Oranjezicht, Schotsche Kloof, Tamboerskloof, University Estate, Vredehoek, Walmer Estate and Woodstock.
The local media infrastructure remains primarily in Johannesburg.
Afrikaans language community newspapers include the ''Landbou-Burger'' and the ''Tygerburger''.
Race-based legislation such as the Group Areas Act and pass laws either forced non-white people out of more central urban areas designated for white people and into government-built townships in the Flats or made living in the area illegal, forcing many people designated as Black into informal settlements elsewhere in the Flats.
The University of Cape Town also runs its own radio station, UCT Radio (104.5&nbsp;MHz FM).
Cape Town TV is a local TV station, supported by numerous organisation and focusing mostly on documentaries.
Winter, which lasts from the beginning of June to the end of August, may see large cold fronts entering for limited periods from the Atlantic Ocean with significant precipitation and strong north-westerly winds.
It is also a busy container port, second in South Africa only to Durban.
Until the Witwatersrand Gold Rush and the development of Johannesburg, Cape Town was the largest city in South Africa.
File:Kirstenbosch - View from the Botanical Gardens.jpg|Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden
This area has mixed languages but is predominantly English-speaking, and includes, from north to south, Rondebosch, Pinelands, Newlands, Mowbray, Observatory, Bishopscourt, Claremont, Wynberg, Plumstead, Hout Bay, Ottery, and Bergvliet.
The Dutch Republic being transformed in Revolutionary France's vassal Batavian Republic, Great Britain moved to take control of its colonies.
It forms part of the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipality.
Many tourists also visit Cape Town's beaches, which are popular with local residents.
Both the University of Cape Town and Stellenbosch University are leading universities in South Africa.
Both coasts are equally popular, although the beaches in affluent Clifton and elsewhere on the Atlantic Coast are better developed with restaurants and cafés, with a strip of restaurants and bars accessible to the beach at Camps Bay.
The N2 continues east along the coast, linking Cape Town to the coastal cities of Port Elizabeth, East London and Durban.
A number of school buildings were burnt down.
Although essential, these taxis are often poorly maintained and are frequently not road-worthy.
These taxis make frequent unscheduled stops to pick up passengers, which can cause accidents.
South Africa's largest naval base is located at Simon's Town harbour as well as Boulders Beach, the site of a large colony of African penguins
